Jacob Hinz
Orono
LD 1770
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and distinguished members of the 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry Committee, my name is Jacob Hinz, a student
at the University of Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D.
1770, An Act to Improve Pesticides Sales and Use Data Collection and Accessibility 
by the State.
Farmers have argued in past iterations of this proposal that this bill would make them 
take too much time out of their schedule to file a report. The system I'm advocating 
for would make it easy for pesticide users to fill out a report on their phone, computer,
or on a single piece of paper. All the work required in this process would be checking 
and filling boxes with the information they already have. 
Besides that, Maine law already dictates that commercial pesticide applicators have to
keep records regarding pesticide application for two years and allow the Board of 
Pesticides Control to inspect the records only upon request. Writing and maintaining 
these records is already government-mandated homework, so I see this bill as simply 
telling pesticide applicators to turn in their homework. Of course, information that 
should remain confidential will be as the bill “allows a pesticide dealer, commercial 
applicator or commercial agricultural producer to request that the board designate 
proprietary information as confidential.”
I believe this bill is especially necessary as it only makes sense to me that we should 
keep a record of how we poison our environment through the use of pesticides. Not 
all pesticides are the same, and some substances used in pesticides are more 
poisonous to humans than others. Maine already has a history of unknowingly 
poisoning our environment with PFAs substances used in pesticides. PFAs used in 
pesticides, when sprayed, are dispersed into the environment, air, water, and ground 
and can lead to liver damage, thyroid disease, obesity, fertility issues, and cancer. 
Maine has already passed a law banning PFA use by 2030, meaning this toxic 
substance is still being used in Maine today. I think it would benefit our public health 
if PFAs and other pesticide substances were tracked and recorded in a public record 
so that their effects can be studied and understood by researchers outside of the 
pesticide industry. Keeping a public record makes this information more accessible to 
all researchers and can help point out trends that may lead to more effective and less 
damaging usage of pesticides.
Other arguments against this bill are that it would be too expensive to build this 
system. I believe the long-term cost of health problems that arise from public 
ignorance of our state’s pesticide usage will be an even greater burden on the public. 
It’s not inexpensive for people to deal with lifelong health problems caused by PFAs. 
The chemical industry knew PFAs were toxic as far back as the 60s, and in the 80s 
discovered a correlation between cancer and PFAs and kept the research hidden from 
the public. The studies linking PFAs to elevated cancer rates weren't uncovered by the
public until 2001 in discovery during a class-action lawsuit against DuPont. The 
historical usage of DDT is another example and points to a pattern showing why we 
need a public record that acts as an anti-trust measure. It’s not usually in the financial 
interest of pesticide companies to disclose private research on how the chemicals in 
pesticides we use may be poisoning us. So developing this public record at the state 
level will help make Mainers safer from being unwittingly poisoned by pesticides. 
Apart from a record-keeping initiative, this bill can be seen as a proactive measure to 
help prevent public problems caused by pesticide use.
So I urge the committee to pass LD 1770 and help improve the infrastructure of 
Maine’s pesticide usage.
Sincerely,
Jacob Hinz
