N6 Fo <<*\ T /- 
so ° 
Maine Farm Bureau Association 
MAINE FARM BUREAU 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1770 AN ACT TO IMPROVE PESTICIDES 
SALES AND USE DATA COLLECTION AND ACCESSIBILITY BY THE STATE 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and distinguished Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry: 
My name is Julie Am Smith and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Farm 
Bureau Association. We are a non-proﬁt, non-partisan grassroots state-wide membership 
organization that was formed in 1951 to speak as the collective voice of the thousands of farmers 
throughout Maine. Each year, our farmer-members meet to discuss, decide and prioritize policy 
for our organization. I am honored to be here today as the collective voice of those farmers. 
This Committee is well aware of the challenges agricultural producers in Maine face every day. 
The bill, as written, increases regulatory demands and business risk. These are burdens that are 
unnecessary and unreasonable to the farmers that are already struggling to put food on our plates, 
so we ask the committee to strongly oppose LD 1770. 
While We applaud Rep. Osher’s interest in collecting data for her research, allowing the general 
public to data mine conﬁdential business information without any oversight or requirement for 
integrity is a signiﬁcant threat to the future of farming in Maine. As we saw with the PFAS map, 
public perception can quickly destroy farming businesses. Farms that were lauded for providing 
food when grocery store shelves were empty were shunned after the map that identiﬁed 
addresses of applicants for land spreading of sludge was published, despite the fact that many of 
those applicants spread at a different site. Just the possibility of PF AS contamination cost many 
farmers signiﬁcant income, even though imported food had equal possibility of being 
contaminated. We vehemently oppose the creation of a database that has the potential to identify 
conﬁdential and proprietary business practices. If researchers want data, it should be provided by 
the farmer with written consent and assurance that the data will be kept conﬁdential. If the 
database is public, there is no way to ensure data will be used in a responsible and ethical 
manner. 
We further object to legislative committees outside of the Department where the Board of 
Pesticides is housed being provided the opportunity to report out legislation based on a report 
regarding state policy and pesticide sales and use rates. We strongly believe that the staff of the 
Board of Pesticides Control has the education, skill, capacity and authority to investigate any 
issues with pesticide use and would identify any statutory changes that were necessary, and this 
committee would act on those necessary changes. 
With regard to the requirement of a report regarding pesticide sales and use rates, we are deeply 
concerned that the incredible number of variables, including severe weather events, labor 
availability, product availability and periodic formulaic changes make it impossible to quantify 
sales and use trends. Conditions that require the use of a pesticide or herbicide in one year may 
not exist the following three years, which would skew the analysis. No two years are ever 
identical and we need to trust the BPC and the farmers to utilize education and experience to 
4 Gabriel Drive Suite l, Augusta, Maine 04330 
(207) 622-41 1 1 // www.mainefarmbureau.com // info@mainefarmbureau.com
make decisions that are best for crop protection and not allow skewed data to createa 
misperception that pesticides are being misused or overused. 
Finally, we object to the requirement of reporting via an online database exclusively. There are 
many farms in Maine that do not have access to high-speed internet, making uploading 
information challenging if not impossible. 
We believe the current reporting requirements are adequate and any data analysis needs to be 
conducted by the experienced staff of the Board of Pesticide Control in a controlled and 
conﬁdential manner. We strongly urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass. 
Thank you for your time and service to the people of Maine. I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have. 
4 Gabriel Drive Suite 1, Augusta, Maine 04330 
(207) 622-4111 // WwW.mainefarmbureau.com // info@mainefarmbureau.c0m
