May 2, 2023  
 
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry:  
 
We, the undersigned Maine potato producers , write to you to voice our opposition of LD1770: 
An Act to Improve Pesticides Sales and Use Data Collection and Accessibility by the State. We 
collectively represent all sectors of the Maine potato industry  – tablestock, processing and seed.  
 
The chemica ls we use are highly regulated on a Federal and State level ; these products are approved 
by the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) and registered by the Maine Board of Pesticide 
Control ( BPC ) for the approved application use in Maine. As licensed applic ators, we are already 
required to keep records of all pesticide use and report that to the BPC  annually . This bill will just 
create additional burdens and redundancy in paperwork for our farm s.  
 
We also have great apprehension  in regards to the confidenti ality of the information after it has been 
submitted. As the bill states, the agricultural producer may request the information be made 
confidential, but it is at the discretion of the board to determine if it will be treated as such. Our 
industry does our  best to be stewards of the land, because if we are not, there is no land to plant our 
crops and we will be out of business. We actively look at ways to reduce pesticide use and the 
chemicals we use are needed formulas , in only the amount necessary and by label,  to mitigate the risk 
of losing a crop . With the great lack of public education on pesticide needs, uses, regulations, etc. 
having all of this information being in a public facing forum is a great concern.   
 
We apologize that we are not able to attend these hearings in person, but due to this b eing a busy time 
of year for the potato industry with planting starting soon, we hope you can understand our position 
on needing to be on our farms.  
 
We ask that you please  support Maine agriculture by not adding additional burdens on our family 
farms and  vote ought not to pass on LD1770.  
 
Thank you,  
Ayotte Farms; Hamlin  
Bartlett Farms;  Littleton  
Bell Brothers, Inc.; Mars Hill  
Bradstreet Family Farms; Bridgewater  
Corey Farms; Monticello  
County Super Spuds; Mars Hill  
Crane Brothers; Exeter  
Hemphill F arms ; Mapleton  
Miller Farms, LLC; Houlton  
Three Oak Farms; Sherman  
Smith Farms; Mapleton  
Seed Pro Inc.; Crystal  
Henderson Farms;  Littleton  
Treeland Farms; Hodgdon  
LaBrie Farms LLC; St. Agatha  
Fitzpatrick Peabody Farms; Houlto n Blackstone Farms, Caribou  
White Farms; Washburn  
Flewelling Farms; Easton  
Double G Farms; Blaine  
LaJoie Growers; Van Buren  
Whited Farms; Bridgewater  
Griffeth Farms; Caribou  
Guerrette Farms; Caribou  
Hagan Farms; Houlton  
Irving Farms; Caribou  
Porter Farms; Mapleton  
Kingsbury Family Farm LLC; Mars Hill  
Marquis Farms; Van Buren  
Campbell Family Farms; Littleton  
Crown Farms; Presque Isle  
Wright Farms, Littleton  
Blackstone Seed Growers LLC; Caribou
Double B Farms; Bridgewater  
Staples Farms; Presque Isle  
   
