 
 
Thank you to Chair Ingwersen and Chair Pluecker, and the distinguished members of the Select Joint 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry for the opportunity to speak today.  My name is 
Michael DeForge, and I live in South Berwick. I’m speaking to you all today in opposition to LD 1770, “An 
Act to Improve Pesticides Sales and Use Data Collection and Accessibility by the State”. I am concerned 
about my customers’ information and my own becoming available to any member of the public through 
this database. 
• As a license dealer, I’m deeply concerned about information relating to customers becoming public. 
This legislation would require me to submit addresses where products were applied, which may or 
may not be published publicly, depending on the Board of Pesticides decision.  
o Considering this would be an entirely new online database, I’m not confident that the 
information, even information determined as confidential, would be protected.  
• The Board of Pesticides does not have the bandwidth to review the thousands of requests that will 
come in from applicators and pesticide dealers for their reporting information to be confidential. 
• I do not believe that the measures proposed in LD 1770 were meant to be malicious to individuals 
who chose to use pesticides to treat pests on the farm, or around their homes or the golf courses 
they maintain but the reporting database would be overly burdensome on pesticide dealers and 
applicators.  
o For example, the information that pesticide dealers must include online is not likely to be 
categorized as confidential, so our names and the products we purchase will be public 
knowledge, and our business information is just one google search away.  
▪ We might lose customers due to the stigma of using pesticides and that it will be 
public record of use on their address.  
o  Reporting monthly this amount of information and level of detail would require additional 
staff and resources to comply with, at a time when margins are tight, and labor is hard to 
find.  
▪ Across the state, businesses are struggling to find individuals to fill open roles. This 
additional recordkeeping would require additional staff to comply. We can’t fill 
positions that are open now, let alone fill a new position.  
o Imagine requiring this for every over-the-counter medicine or prescription in the state, the 
compliance requirements would increase costs and hamper access to medicine.  
o There’s already been examples of my customers dealing with harassment from others when 
they have the sign posted on the lawn noting that there was an application done. For 
example, I have customers accused or applying something they have clearly not based on 
what was posted on the property.  This encounter became very heated by the accusatorial 
person and they had to be taken off the property. 
o This legislation could make an already passionate topic much more volatile.  Being able to 
google this information could lead to people that are not experts in pesticides and 
applications into confrontations with licensed pesticide applicators. 
• The development and maintenance of an online pesticide sales and use database would be costly, 
and I don’t believe this is an appropriate use of our state’s funds.  
• Additional reporting requirements by the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry and 
BPC to the legislature would be duplicative and burdensome for these bodies who are already 
challenged from a personnel and resources standpoint to keep pace with the other reporting 
requirements.  
 
 
 
• I am concerned about my customers’ information and my own becoming available to any 
member of the public through this database.  
• I am also concern with being targeted with confrontation because I am a dealer of all golf 
course supplies which include pesticides. 
• Furthermore, I would like to say the golf course superintendents, farmers and people that work 
in the green space industry are stewards of the environment.  We all want what everyone else 
wants.  For example, we want clean water, clean soil and clean air just like mostly everyone.  
What we do does not jeopardize that.  In fact, if you look at the science this industry not only 
promotes it but delivers on it as well.  It is time to stop villainizing people and industries that 
use pesticides and understand why they are used and how it helps the green industry. 
• Finally, I am concerned about the ability of our state to fund and support a secure pesticide 
reporting database online. It is not appropriate to consider the creation of a secure pesticide 
reporting database online without a fiscal note. This would be an enormous lift on the 
Department and would be added onto the already full plate at the Board of Pesticides. Pesticide 
dealers and applicators already keep detailed records. The Committee should be focusing time 
and resources elsewhere. I ask that the Committee vote NO on LD 1770. Thank you for your 
time.    
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Michael DeForge 
South Berwick, Maine 
