 
Testimony  
Patrick Vaillancourt  
Owner, Northern Turf Management  
May 1st, 202 3 
Opposed to LD 1 770 
“An Act to Improve Pesticides Sales and Use Da ta Collection and Accessibility by 
the State ” 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and members of the joint standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Patrick Vaillancourt and I am the 
owner/operator of Northe rn Turf Management, a specialty turf and plant health care company in 
Cyr Plantation, ME. I am opposed to LD 1 770 “An Act to Improve Pesticides Sales and Use Da ta 
Collection and Accessibility by the State ”  
 
I have been in the turf and ornamental health care industry since 2012, with a BS degree in 
Environmental Horticulture from the University of Maine and an AS degree in Turfgrass 
Management from the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Stockbridge School of  Agriculture.  
 
This bill looks to place more unnecessary burden on the licensed applicator, not to mention 
also the Board of Pesticides Control who would have to try to enforce these measures. The Board 
does a great job, but is in no way equipped to handle  another requirement on its plate.  
 
First, as commercial applicators we already submit our pesticide use dat a annually to the 
Board.  This allows them to have a  total of each pestic ide AI applied commercially within the state , 
which is the overall goal.  I fail  to see what additional benefit  would be pr ovided by reporting each 
application individually, along with the geographic location where applied and othe r information 
requested by this bill.  By reporting each address where we mak e an application, for it to be  
presumably made public information, is not only a major invasion of pri vacy for our customers but 
also essenti ally makes our customer list easy picking for any competitors.  
 
Second, the  Board staff is already stretched thin as it stands with its current duties.  It ’s no 
secret that labor is an issue nationwide, and state ag encies are not immune to this d ilemma.  I s it 
reas onable to e xpect these respective agencies  in less than a calendar year to create a new 
database , find staff to be able to process the at least 10x of new data that in theory will be po uring 
in, find staff  to enforce this new measure that will inevitably not be adhered to  due to frustration, 
confusion about requirements, or both?   We must also remember that all of this comes at a 
financ ial cost as well .  While a total dollar amou nt is unknown at this point , it certainly won ’t be 
inexpensive.  All to gather more info rmation that places undue burden on applicat ors, dealers,  and 
BPC staff  but still accomplis hes the same thing already in  place which is total pesticide use  data.  
 
Finally, out of all pesticide applications that occur in Maine the large majority of them are done by 
unlicensed homeowners or shady contractors, with no regard for label directions, sensitive area 
setbacks, continuing education etc. While responsible applicators would simply get buried in more 
ridiculous paperwork, the real misuse of pesticides would continue to go unchecked.  
For these reasons, I encourage the committee to vote “ought not to pass” on LD 1 770.  
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
Patrick Vaillancourt  
 
Northern Turf Management  
820 Caribou Rd.  
Cyr Plantation, ME 04785  
northernturf@live.com  
207-551-1449  
