1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 1, 2023  
 
Chairman  Henry Ingwersen  
Chairman  Bill Pluecker  
Joint  Committee  on Agriculture,  Conservation  and Forestry 
Cross Building, Room 214  
Maine State House 
Augusta,  ME 04330  
 
Re: NEPMA Opposes LD 1770 – An Act to Improve Pesticides Sales and Use Data Collection 
and Accessibility by the State  
 
Dear Chairman, Ingwersen, Chairman Pluecker, and Members of the Joint Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry:  
 
My name is Ted Brayton, Branch Manager at Griggs & Browne Pest Control, current Public Policy 
Chairman for the National Pest Management Association, and a Past President of the New England 
Pest Management Association (NEPMA), a trade association representing structural pest 
management companies across the New Eng land region, including Maine. The members of 
NEPMA are fully committed to providing quality pest management services that protect public 
health, food, and property. We appreciate this opportunity to share our thoughts on LD 1770, as 
we want to be construct ive to the policy making process.  
 
LD 1770 would allow the Maine Board of Pesticides Control to publish the information reported 
on all pesticide applications conducted by commercial applicators. These amendments would 
change the information required for the annual reporting to include addr esses of all sites that had 
applications done. Our members provide services to a variety of commercial and residential 
settings, sharing their information publicly could impact a wide network of citizens across the 

2 
 state. Sharing this classified informatio n will negatively impact local businesses’ reputations and 
publicize residents' home addresses leaving them open to public scrutiny.  
  
NEPMA’s member companies' daily operations and revenue would be directly impacted once 
they are required to turn over th is information. Disclosing this information to the board, who will 
then post it on the internet, will all happen without the customer’s consent. This will put Maine’s 
citizens in the tough position of choosing between protecting their health and property f rom pests 
or their right to privacy. Revealing personally identifying data online, such as home addresses, 
can be extremely dangerous. Once someone’s physical address along with other information is 
made accessible to anyone with internet access, they beco me an easy target for harassment or 
property damage  by overzealous activists.  
 
Additionally, we are concerned that these new requirements would disproportionately shame low -
income residents,  as it was recently  discovered  that low-income  households are 8  to 12 times  more  
likely to  have pest infestations  than a high-income  household.1 Not only could  this provision  
cause societal shame but it could also result in negative economic impacts for Maine residents 
wishing to  sell or rent properties  that have been known  to previously  have  pests infestations could 
result in a denial of lease approval. We fear this would discourage people from hiring pest 
management professionals and instead push untrained citizens towards treating the problem 
themselves or hiring ill egal pest control services.  
 
Maine  residents  would  not be alone,  as LD 1770’s amendment to Title  22 MRSA 1471 -CC (5B) 
would also negatively harm Maine’s business industry. Application addresses will not be the only 
new reporting requirement; these modifications will enforce the inclusion of names and quantities 
of pesticides applied at the site. This could cause substantial harm to the hospitality industry by 
publishing information about cockroach and rodent control services that take place in resta urant 
kitchens or hotels, as customers would be discouraged from frequenting those places. We  are 
concerned  that publicly  shaming  businesses  would  create unintended consequences where 
potentially dangerous self -treatments or illegal pest control companies will fill  the void in the pest 
control  market.   
 
While LD 1770 does allow for confidentiality with proprietary information, operators will have 
to file these requests to the board’s authority. Customer account information, like their addresses, 
are hard ea rned and obtained through strong values held by pest management companies. This 
information belongs to our members’ and is kept confidential to respect a client’s privacy, 
allowing this information to go public can result in customer and profit loss.  
 
The reporting requirements outlined in LD 1770 are  not only  confusing  but impractical  for all 
parties involved.  From NEPMA’s understanding, th is new  process would require our members to 
submit information for each application individually.  The current system allows for summary 
reports which makes the  uploading  process efficient by grouping information together into one 
submission.  This change is not f easible and could increase the cost of services, as pest control 
operators would increase the time spent on each account.  
 
1 Chris Sutherland, Andrew J. Greenlee, and Daniel Schneider, "Socioeconomic Drivers of Urban Pest 
Prevalence,"  People  and Nature , 2020,  https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/pan3.10096  
 
3 
  
Additionally, we question  the current software ’s ability to process  and store th is massive influx of 
information.  This increa se of data will also result in a heavy  workload, additional staff and budgets 
would need to be prepared to ensure this transition to the new  system would be  successful. We 
question the fiscal impact on the Board, Department, and state as  this implementatio n will be a 
large undertaking.   
 
NEPMA appreciates this opportunity to share our thoughts on LD 1770, as we want to protect 
public health and property across our great state and hope that we can work collectively to achieve 
this outcome. We believe everyon e should be able to have access to pest control while also keeping 
personal information confidential. These reporting measures are impractical for residents and pest 
control companies across Maine, it is for these reasons we respectively ask you to oppose LD 
1770.  
Sincerely,  
 
Ted Brayton   
Past President  
NEPMA  
