Good Afternoon Chairman Baldacci, Chain/vomen Meyer and the distinguished members of the 
Health and Human Sen/ice Committee. 
My name is Chantel Pettengill, Owner of Pettengill Academy. We are a large based childcare 
center serving the communities of Lewiston and now Brunswick. I am here in support of LD 573 
,An Act Regarding Child Care Subsidy Payments and Eligibility. 
This past year, I have been having many conversations with providers in Maine as well in other 
states on how us as an industry can increase access to childcare for families without decreasing 
quality. Out of these conversations were the pieces of this bill that will be a small start in helping 
reduce the childcare crisis in the state. 
The first piece is to change how the Child Care Subsidy is reimbursed. Currently CCSP 
reimbursement is based on a market rate. The market rate is determined by having providers 
from a county fill out a survey on what their rates are at the time of the sun/ey. Unfortunately, it 
has many flaws. One is that many providers just simply do not fill out the sun/ey causing the 
data to not be from a large enough sample from providers. The other major ﬂaw is that the 
surveys are done every 3 years, so the last survey we did was in 2018, and does not reﬂect the 
inflation rates or the huge jump of wages since that time period. And this also fails to bring into 
consideration the incredible amount of changes caused by COVlD, and while this is a singular 
unique event - the ripple effect from it will be felt for a long time. This is causing many providers 
to decrease the amount of subsidy they will accept or are no longer accepting subsidy, which 
then decreases access for families. Currently the market rate for my Lewiston Location is $70 
less than my private pay rates. l have to cap my subsidy to 10% of my enrollment or l would not 
be able to properly and safely operate my business and to cover my costs. 
By moving to a cost of care model, it will help reduce the gap to what providers charge and the 
reimbursement amount. It would also create parity between the different counties in the state, by 
reducing the gaps in rates so providers in Caribou would be reimbursed similar to providers in 
Portland. A Cost of Care model would also create more equity and inclusion for all families as it 
will make it easier for them to find care regardless of where they sit on the socio-economic 
spectrum by increasing access to care. Increasing reimbursement rates to reflect what it costs 
us to offer higher quality care, would encourage more providers to begin to accept subsidies or 
increase the amount of families on subsidy they serve as there will not be significant sacrifices 
on the provider. 
The second part of the bill would allow training outside of the Maine Roads To Quality network 
to be included as hours to move up the Provider Career Ladder as well as expand different 
degrees to be related to ECE. Currently only degrees in ECE, Elementary Education and Social 
Work are considered a related degree but psychology is not. l have a staff member who 
graduated with a BS in Psychology who is only a level 5 on the career ladder which l attached, 
however she has worked for me for 5 years and recently was hired to work as a special 
education teacher in a local public school. With the hard work she has done along with her 
experience with me, along with using the majority of the pieces she learned with her degree
program within our program everyday with her littles, she should be at a level 7. We want to 
encourage people in the field, we need to recognize the diversity the different degree programs 
will bring to an ECE program. As rigid as this criteria exists right now, I know numerous 
professionals who are considered experts in their fields ranging from business operations, 
marketing, HR, classroom management, instruction, the list goes on. However, if l were to bring 
them to Maine and into my schools to help train and better my teachers, it wouldn’t count 
towards the training to move them up the career ladder. l personally will forever be a level 7 on 
the ladder, the way the framework exists right now it makes no sense for me to go get my 
Master degree but for the past 7 years I have averaged 160 hours a year of training that won’t 
count for anything other than my desire to learn and continue to grow my business. By allowing 
out of network training, it would decrease the disparity as these professionals who are 
recognized by their peers ensure that they provide their training and knowledge at the providers 
convenience by doing on demand training, digital training and at times that are convenient for 
providers and our schedules.‘ 
The last part of this bill would rework the quality rating system for providers to be based on an 
average of the scores. Currently, the rating system is based on the lowest score you receive. l 
have included my most recent evaluation for you to see. Currently l am rated a level two despite 
my center. scoring 3 and 4 in all areas but 2 which l have scored a 2, which then means l am 
given a Quality 2 Rating. However, if you took my average I would be rated a 3.4. After 
discussing with many providers, the mindset is why bother, if staffing is going to keep me at a1 
or 2, why put the work ih to increase quality in the other areas. It is like a -child in school, if they 
know they are going to fail, what is the point of working hard to just get a failing grade. Even 
national accreditations have gone to an average scoring system recently. By changing the rating 
system to an average, it would motivate and push providers to work on increasing the quality of 
their programs, knowing that if they are having a difficult time in one area, the work they are 
doing won’t be for nothing. 
Thank you for your time and all the work you do on the HHS Committee, we really appreciate it. 
l also want to extend an outreach for you to contact me at any time with questions or comments 
pertaining to the bill and l would be willing to make time to come up for the work session as well. 
My contact information is chantel@pettengillacademy.com or 207-212-1129.A
LL] Center Based 
Z Q S Family Child Care 
<[ K’ 
School Age 
2 Direct Care Lattice 
PROFESSiONAL DEVELOPMENT NETWORK 
Level One: (Family) 
Practitioners have completed 6 hours training or Getting Started in Family Child Care. 
Level One (Center and School Based Care) 
Practitioners have 6 months experience and 30 hours of relevant training. 
Level Two: 
Practitioners have a high school diploma/GED. 1 year of experience, and 45 hours of Maine Roads Core 
Knowledge Training or 3 college credits in Early Childhood Education. 
Level Three: 
Practitioners have a 1-year credit Certificate in ECE'; Social Services. or a related field; 
Or a Child Development Associate (CDA) or Maine state approved credential ‘ and 1 year of experience; 
Or a high school diploma/GED, 3 years of experience. and 90 hours of Maine Roads Core Knowledge 
Training or 6 college credits in Early Childhood Education. 
Level Four: 
Practitioners have an AA/AS in ECE, Social Services, or a related field; 
Or AA/AS with 12 credits in ECE, Social Services, or a related field and 2 years experience; 
Or a 1-year credit Certiﬁcate in ECE, Social Services. or a related field with 2 years of experience; 
Or a CDA or Maine state approved credential ’ and 3 years experience; 
Or a high school diploma/GED. 5 years experience, and 135 hours of Maine Roads Core Knowledge Training 
or 9 college credits in Early Childhood Education. 
Level Five: 
Practitioners have a BA/BS in ECE, Social Services, or a related field; 
Or a BA/ BS with 12 credits in ECE, Social Services, or a related field. and 3 years experience; 
Or an AA/AS in ECE, Social Services. or a related field with 2 years experience; 
Or a 1 year credit Certificate in ECE, Social Services. or related field and 5 years experience; 
Or a CDA or Maine state approved credential ’ and 6 years experience. 
Level Six: 
Practitioners have a MA/ MS in ECE, Social Services, or a related field; 
Or a MA/ MS with 24 credits in ECE, Social Services. or a related field and 2 years experience; 
Or a BA/ BS in ECE, Social Services, or a related field and 2 years experience; 
Or an AA/AS in ECE, Social Services, or a related field and 5 years experience. 
Level Seven: 
Practitioners have or a Doctorate in ECE, Social Services. or a related field; 
Or a Doctorate with 30 credits in ECE, Social Services. or a related field and 2 years experience; 
Or a MA/ MS in ECE, Social Services, or a related field and 2 years experience; 
Or a BA/ BS in ECE, Social Services, or a related field and 5 years experience. 
Level Eight: 
Practitioners will have a Doctorate in ECE, Social Services. or a related field and 2 years experience; 
Or a MA/ MS in ECE, Social Sen/ices. or a related field and 5 years experience. 
0 Accepted course work/ degrees can be in Early Childhood Education. Child Growth and Development, Elementary 
Education, Early Childhood Special Education, Child & Family Studies. Child, Family and Community Relationships. and 
Recreation degrees applying to School— age children. Related degrees must include at least 36 college credits in the 
above categories. 
0 Psychology, Sociology and Secondary Education are not considered related degrees unless the degree includes 36 
college credits related to Early Childhood Education. (See above) 
w Maine state approved credentials include the Maine Infant Toddler Credential. the Maine Director Credential. the Maine 
Youth Development Credential, the Maine inclusion Credential, and the Certiﬁed Early Childhood Assistant credential. 
Revised Z019
3/20/23 1 47 PM Quality Care 
Recommendations 
Pettengill Academy 
658134 
200 MONTELLO ST,Lewiston,ME 04240 
Compliance History / Licensing Status 
Current step is #4. 
This is the highest step. Congratulations! 
Learning Environment / Developmentally Appropriate Practice 
Current step is #2. 
In order to move to step #3: 
~At least 50% of lead teachers (per program site) working with children 
ages 3-5 must have completed the training on implementing curriculum 
based on Maine's Early Childhood Learning Guidelines. 
Program Evaluation 
Current step is #3. 
In order to move to step #4: 
-Your program must have NAEYC accreditation, be accredited by the 
American Montessori Society, or be a Head Start Program with a Gold or 
Blue designation 
Staffing and Professional Development 
Current step is #2. 
https://qualityforme.org/qcare_mrtqlogin/Stepreport aspx
3/20/23, 1:47 PM Quality Care 
~In order to move to step #3: 
~At least 50% of your staff members in direct care positions must be at 
Level 5 or above on the Maine Roads to Quality Direct Care Career Lattice. 
Alternatively, if you are a Center-Based Care program, you must have 
NAEYC accreditation or be a candidate for NAEYC accreditation. 
Administrative Policies and Procedures 
Current step is #4. 
This is the highest step. Congratulations! 
Parent / Family Involvement 
Current step is #4. 
This is the highest step. Congratulations! 
Community Resources 
Current step is #4. 
This is the highest step. Congratulations! 
Child Observations 
Current step is #4. 
This is the highest step. Congratulations! 
I Don‘! SubmitI 
https://qualityforme.org/qcare __mrtqlogin/Stepreport.aspx
