_,-1. 
, HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
re ,5; 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002' 
(207) 287-1400 
Margaret Craven TTY: Maine Relay 711 
41 Russell Street 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
(207) 783-1897 
Margaret.Craven@leaislaturemaine gov 
March 21, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Margaret Craven introducing 
LD 573, An Act Regarding Child Care Subsidy Payments and Eligibility 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and fellow members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Margaret Craven, and I represent House District 93, which 
includes part of Lewiston. I am here today to present LD 573, An Act Regarding Child Care 
Subsidy Payments and Eligibility. 
The Child Care Subsidy Program (CCSP) helps eligible families to pay for child care so parents 
can work, go to school or participate in a job training program. CCSP also helps eligible families 
where the adults are retired and are the legal guardians for a child, such as grandparents who are 
raising their grandchildren. 
Currently, the payment rates for child care services are based on the market rates for care. This 
bill would change the payment rate system by requiring the Department of Health and Human 
Services to establish payment rates equivalent to the cost of care. 
This bill also requires that the Department, in determining the eligibility for early childhood 
educator workforce salary supplements, develop a process for evaluating and accepting both 
qualiﬁed training provided and degrees awarded outside of the training network of the entity 
contracted by the Department to evaluate the eligibility for such salary supplements. 
Finally, the bill requires the Department to direct the entity responsible for determining quality 
indicators for child care services to develop a ratings system for child care sites based on average 
perfonnance rather than on the lowest perfonning indicator, which is what is currently done. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you have of 
me, but I also believe that there are stakeholders here today who may be better prepared to 
answer them.
