LD 573: An Act Regarding Child Care Subsidy Payments and Eligibility 
Public Testimony, March 21, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, 
Representative Meyers, 
Members of the Committee 
My name is William Hager, a resident of Wells Maine, and I am here to speak in strong support of LD 
573: “An Act Regarding Child Care Subsidy Payments and Eligibility. ” 
I am also hoping to provide some history and perspective regarding the Maine Child Care Subsidy 
System (also referred to as CCSP.) I’ve been a childcare provider and children ’s advocate in Maine for 
more decades than I care to remember and I have had the opportunity to observe and help build much of 
the of current child care subsidy system in Maine 
In simple terms, this legislation would replace the current policy of setting rates the State pays for in 
Child Care Subsidies. Current policy establishes reimbursement rates on a county by county basis, based 
upon what parents in each county can afford to pay. The proposed change would establish these rates by 
assessing the true cost of providing that care. 
When considering this legislation, it is most important to realize that the current methodology for 
establishing state reimbursement rates is almost 30 years old and was developed speciﬁcally with 
idea that children were ONLY to seen as a barrier to employment. A barrier that needed to be 
eliminated as effectively as possible. 
The existing system was developed before there was a widespread understanding of how very important 
these early pre-school years are for children. (For those or us working day in and day out with these kids, 
this has always been a “no brainer. ” For state legislators and administrators at this time this policy was 
ﬁrst implemented, not so much.) At that time, these policies disregarded the long term value of investing 
in these children or how that investment would pay major dividends to our communities (i.e. lower 
education and social costs.) There are others who can articulate better then I about the science of early 
brain development and the advantages that can documented when we truly support families with young 
children. I can only assure you that these benefits are real. 
I would also point out the fact that this current system of setting childcare reimbursement rates has 
resulted in a number of meaningful but unintended consequences. 
One consequence has been that rural counties with lower overall family incomes received the lowest 
reimbursements, impacting both the quality of care available for those families and the overall economy 
of those regions.
A second consequence has been a loss of childcare availability throughout the state. Childcare standards 
have increased faster than parents’ ability to pay, therefore also limiting the state’s reimbursement rates. I 
don’t think there is a county in Maine who is not currently facing a crisis of limited childcare slots. 
A third consequence has been that the greatest negative impact of these lower rates has been on the 
smaller providers in our communities (once again, harming our more rural counties.) Larger providers can 
to some degree, offset these lower rates through economies of scale. Economies that are simply not 
available to smaller programs. 
I would like to conclude with one a few additional technical notes: 
1) The vast majority of the funding for these childcare subsidies are Federal dollars, and the Federal 
grant does allow states to establish policy concerning how they are administered, including how 
reimbursement rates are determined. 
2) The CCSP will still be used exclusively to keep Mainers employed. Not only are there stringent 
requirements for documenting economic eligibility, but there are equally strict requirements that 
the subsidy only be used if needed to get or hold a job. If a parent can’t document they are 
working or in an approved job training program, they cannot be approved for a childcare subsidy. 
The family cannot be approved if there is a second unemployed parent in the home. 
3) There should be virtually no ﬁscal note attached to this legislation. The Child Care Subsidy 
Program IS NOT an “entitlement ” program. Unlike other state and federal programs (think 
MaineCare, Food Stamps, TANF) the CCSP is capped. The state cannot spend more than the 
legislatively approved budget for this program. If the number of families in need exceed the 
budget, the state IS NOT obligated to provide the service. 
I hope this testimony has been helpful, and I would be happy to provide any additional information or in 
clariﬁcation you might ﬁnd helpful. 
Sincerely 
Witliawt I-Pager 
237 Sanford Rd./P.O. Box 1407 
Wells MEI 04005 
hagerbill@yahoo.com 
207-641-3320
