 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Qualified Support For 
LD 54 – An Act to Require Compliance with Natural or Agricultural Resource Protection Ordinances 
May 22, 2023 
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham and I submitting testimony in support for LD 54, An 
Act to Require Compliance with Natural or Agricultural Resource Protection Ordinances Costs on behalf 
of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the 
Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 
35 Senate districts. 
When this bill had its original public hearing, the LPC had not established a position on the bill 
and it seemed to have already been voted out of committee. Municipal officials believe this is extremely 
important and offers clarity for the implementation of statutory changes under LD 2003 from the 130th 
Legislature. Many planning officials had significant concerns about the ability to enforce important 
resource protection ordinances due to the way the statute was constructed and additionally, some 
communities had enacted significant local incentives to keep land in agricultural production. These efforts 
included paying individuals to keep those lands from being developed and maintaining the community 
cultural connection to their historic agricultural roots. It was unclear if those locally designed programs 
could continue in conjunction with the new housing incentives, thus municipal officials are fully 
supportive of the clarity LD 54 offers.  
However, the date in statute that does not allow communities to adopt additional resource 
protection ordinances is deeply problematic for communities that need to meet their federal stormwater 
permit obligations. Additionally, it will also make it impossible for some communities to manage 
development retreat from areas that will continue to become greater flooding and storm surge impacted 
lands as part of Maine’s Climate Action plans. Encouraging development in some areas may place 
individuals directly in harms way and are likely to be the same areas where such development is desired 
when that threat is not immediately visible.  
There are also 40 communities in Maine who must comply with federal stormwater management 
regulations with increasingly restrictive measures. Their permits require the municipality to develop and 
adopt a low impact development ordinance requirement for all future development in urban impaired 
watersheds during this permit cycle, or they will be in violation of their federal Clean Water Act mandates 
and subject to significant fines. These communities have been working on this ordinance requirement for 
their current permit cycle and will not be able to be enacted until 2024.  
The greatest threat to natural and agricultural land resources is development. The market value of 
these vital lands will never be in balance with their highest and best use for housing or in the case of 

waterfronts, maintaining their use for working access. It is for these reasons that Maine has 
constitutionally established different tax programs to incentivize their retention and the state and 
communities will need continued tools for this purpose going forward.  
For all these reasons, the Association and municipal officials ask that you remove the date 
entirely from the bill that would restrict natural resource protection ordinance compliance to only 
ordinances enacted before 2022.   
