 
 
  97 Main Street, Belfast, ME 04915                     207.338.6575                      mainefarmlandtrust.org  
 
 
 
Testimony of Shelley Megquier , Policy & Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust , to the 
131st Legislature’s  Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
May 15, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Brenner , Representative  Gramlich , and members of the Joint Standing  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources : 
 
My name is Shelley Megquier  and I am the Policy & Research Director at Maine Farmland Trust 
(MFT).  I am providing testimony on behalf of MFT in support of LD 54 – An Act to Require 
Compliance with Natural or Agricultural Resource Protection Ordinances.  
 
MFT is a member -powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support farmers, 
and advance the future of farming . Since our founding in 1999, MFT has helped to permanently 
protect more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. Our Farm 
Network includes over 500 farms and, in 2022, 2,250+ individuals demonstrated their commitment 
to the future of Maine agriculture through an MFT membership. In 2022, MFT supported 48 farm 
businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and grants – delivering over 680 hours of technical 
assistance and $309,000 in business and seed grants to help busine sses grow their profitability. Our 
main program areas are Farmland Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm Business 
Planning, PFAS Support, Climate Resilience, and Policy and Research . 
 
MFT is very sensitive to the need for more affordable housing i n our state –this need is critical in all 
communities across Maine. Increased affordable housing opportunities are also important to the 
viability of Maine’s agricultural sector, as the lack of available affordable housing, particularly in 
rural parts of th e state, is contributing to the challenges Maine farmers are experiencing with labor 
supply and retention. As our state and municipalities work to advance needed policy and planning 
solutions to our affordable housing crisis, MFT wants to ensure that the n eed to protect our state’s 
critical agricultural resources is also prioritized.  
 
Protecting farmland in Maine is essential for ensuring that we have the land base to grow our 
agricultural economy, particularly as more farmers reach retirement age and development 
pressures increase across the state. Protecting land is also a key natural  climate solution by avoiding 
the greater emissions associated with developed land, by providing the land base to grow our local 
and regional food economy and create greater food security for our state, and by preserving the 
climate benefits that can resul t from farmers using climate smart practices on the land. However, 
Maine’s farmland is a precious and limited resource. The 2017 Census of Agriculture showed that 
between 2012 and 2017, Maine lost more than 10 percent of its farmland, over 146,000 acres1—
                                                 
1  In 2012, Maine had 1,454,104 acres in farmland, but by 2017 that number had dropped to 1,307,566 acres – a 
loss of 146,491 acres or 10% of Maine’s farmland. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), National 
Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), U.S. Census of Agriculture for 2017 , Maine, 
 2 making Maine one of the top five states in the country with the  highest percentage of farmland 
lost, according to American Farmland Trust.2 Maine’s farmland is at risk from all types of 
development, including low -density residential development, which fragm ents the agricultural 
land base and threatens the viability of an area’s remaining working farms.3  
 
LD 54 requires that future housing development complies with enacted municipal ordinances 
designed to protect natural and agricultural resources. MFT suppo rts this effort to uphold 
municipal ordinances designed to protect natural and agricultural resources. Many 
municipalities across Maine recognize both the benefits of and threats to agriculture in their 
communities, and have identified farmland protection and support for farms as priorities in 
their comprehensive plans. It is important for towns to have a range of policy and planning 
tools available to them to advance these priorities , including  zoning ordinances enacted  to 
protect important farmland soils and working agricultural lands as well as the viability of farm 
businesses.   Further, the application of smart growth principles that reduce sprawl and balance 
the need for additional housing, particularly affordable housing, with the need to protect our 
state’s working farms and agricultural land is essential for increasing affordable housing 
opportunities in ways that also ensure we have the land base needed to grow our agr icultural 
economy and create greater food security for our state.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 54. I’m happy to answer 
any questions you may have.  
 
 
                                                 
https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2017/Full_Report/Volume_1,_Chapter_1_ State_Level/Maine/
mev1.pdf . 
2 American Farmland Trust, “2017 Census of Agriculture,”  https://farmlandinfo.org/2017 -census-of-agriculture / 
3 American Farmland Trust, (2020) Farms Under Threat: The State of the States , “Agricultural Land Conversion 
Highlight Summary: Maine.”  
