 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 968 (Opposed  as Drafted ) 
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 968, An Act Regarding Re stitution by Persons Convicted of Trafficking in Illegal Drugs  
 
DA: March 20, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 96 8 as currently drafted.       
 
 CLAC members were generally opposed to repealing the langua ge that was just en acted by 
the 130th Legislature, but if the Committee chooses to go forward with such a change, CLAC 
proposes a refinement of the current statutory language as de scribed below.    
 
 The language in the current restitution statute  that is proposed to be stricken was recently 
added by the 130th Legislature.    As a result of that amendment , restitution for drug an alysis may 
only be imposed as part of a sentence if the defendant is convicted of drug trafficking (i.e., not 
possession or furnishing), and then only if the court finds that the conduct underlying the conviction 
was motivated by profit.   Removing the language as proposed  would restore the court ’s ability to 
impose restitution as part of the sentence for furnishing and possession convictions.    
 
 In the experience  of CLAC members, the limitation  language,  “that the conduct underlying 
the conviction was motivated by profi t,” has not presented  a conte sted issue  in drug  trafficking  
prosecutions si nce its enactment , likely  because  of the statutory definition  of “traffick ” that 
frequently applies to these  types of cases.   The definition  of “traffick ,” which must be prove n in any 
prosecution for trafficking  drugs , may be satisfied  in several ways , and is as follows : “A. To make, 
create, manufacture; B. To grow or cultivate, except for marijuana;  C. To sell, barter, trade, 
exchange or otherwise furnish for consideration; or  D. To possess with the intent to do any act 
mentioned in paragraph C. ”  17-A M.R.S. § 1101(1 7)(C).    
 
 In light of the definition of “traffick ” applicable to many drug trafficking prosecutions  (e.g., 
some type of  exchange for consideration) , it would  make the st atute simpler to administer if the 
restitution provision simply a pplied to those convicted of trafficking, w ithout the added necessity of 
a finding that the co nduct was “motivated by profit. ”   (Such a change would  still not authorize 
restitution  for possession or furnishing convictions.)  Thus if the Committee is inclined to 
recommend a change, CLAC recommends stri king the language  “and the court in sentencing the 
defendant  makes a finding that the con duct underlying the conviction was motivated by profit. ”   
This would leave in place the discretion of the court to  order the defendan t to pay restitution for 
 
 drug trafficking, without  the ne cessity of making the additional finding, which i s not often at issue 
after conviction.  (It m ay sometimes be at issue in trafficking cases based on growing or 
manufacturing.)    
 
 With or wi thout this language, the court ’s authority to impose restitution as part of a 
sentence is always subject to the defendant ’s “present and future capacity ” to pay, as well as 
whether  restitution would result in an “excessive financial hardship” to the defendant or a 
depend ent, both of which must be  considered by the court before entering such an ord er at the time 
of sentence .   17 -A M.R.S. § 2005.    
     
  
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
