 
 
  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morga n 
 
Treasurer  
Walt er F. McKee  
 
Secretary 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Ma ttson 
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642 
Portland, ME 04112 -8642 
(207) 523-9869      
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
March  20, 2023  
  
Senator Anne Beebe -Center , Chair  
Representative Suzanne  Salisbury, Chair  
Committee on Criminal Justice and P ublic Safety   
5 State H ouse Station , Room 436 
Augus ta, ME 04333 
   
RE: LD 968 “An Act Regarding Restitution by Persons Convicted of 
Trafficking in Illegal Drugs. ”  
Dear Sen ator Beebe- Center , Representativ e Salisbury, and Members of the 
Committee on Crimina l Justice and Public Safety : 
 
MACDL oppose s LD 968. 
LD 968 seeks to impose a restitution  requirement for drug testing in any  drug case, 
including the most minor possession  cases . It strips  existing  law (17-A M.R.S. § 
2002(3)(B))  of protections that only tr ue drug dealers  convicted of “trafficking” 
offense s when  his/her actions were “ motivated by profit ” are required to pay for drug 
testing  costs.   
 
Many of t hose convicted of drug offenses are addicted to drugs and have significant 
challenges in the ir lives,  including all too often substantial financial challenge s.  
Requiring indigent  defend ants to pay for the cost of testing drugs in a drug case is 
unfair  and unrealistic . 
 Prior to enactment of 17 -A M.R.S . § 2002  in its present f orm, the State routinely 
sought reimbursement for testing costs  as a necessary predicate to resolution of a case. 
 In countless cases, if a defendant did not agree to pay the drug testing costs, then the 
State would not agree to a resolution of a case.  
 17-A M.R.S. § 2002 also  correc ted the unpopular  trend toward having criminal  
defendants pay for governmental services connected to their case.  A requirement that 
a defendant pay for drug testing is no more logical than hav ing a defendant pay for the 
police off icer’s time investigating  a case and preparin g a report , a prosecutor ’s 
expenses for copying a report and providing it to a defendant  or the gas used to 
transport the defendant to the jail.  All of these are connec ted to a criminal case , but 
everyone recognizes  that these are government al expens es and should not be paid for 
by a defendant.  Re quiring a defendant to pay for analysis of suspected illegal drugs 
falls into this  same category and should not be required . 
 
 
  
  
The present form of 17- A M .R.S. § 2002(3)(B) stri kes the appropriate  balance by 
requiring restitution in only those cases when the con victed defendant tra fficked in 
drugs with a motivation for profit  while not imposing burdensome testing costs on 
minor drug users struggling with addiction. 
 
For these reasons, MACDL oppose s LD 968.  
 
                  
Sincerely ,     
 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Matthew D. Morgan, Esq.  
             MACDL Vice President  
 
