;2~;_-A ;q an B-1x753-M
7 
'I 
‘f Portland, ME 4311 1 Ii 
, it (2011) 7‘74“5444 
www.ac|umaime 0|Q 
AMERICHN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine- 
_ ' 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought Not to Pass - LD 968 
An Act Regarding Restitution by Persons 
Convicted of Trafﬁcking in Illegal Drugs 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY 
March 20, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety, greetings. My name is Michael _ 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to oppose LD 1036 because it would 
impose an unfair burden on people with substance use disorders, and others who are entangled in 
the criminal legal system.i 
Under the restitution chapter of Maine’s criminal code, a court can order someone 
convicted of a drug trafficking crime to reimburse the state for its drug analysis expenses as long 
as the court ﬁnds that the conduct underlying the conviction was motivated by proﬁt. l7-A 
MRSA §2002(3)(B). If enacted, this bill would remove the requirement that there ﬁrst be a drug 
trafﬁcking conviction and a ﬁnding that the accused was motivated by proﬁt before the court can 
charge the accused for the state’s drug analysis expenses. In other words, this bill would enable 
courts to charge anyone convicted of a crime where drugs are at issue — not just those found to 
have been motivated by proﬁt and convicted of trafficking — for part of the costs of their own 
prosecution. Charging the accused for part of the state’s prosecution costs will further 
impoverish people who are already likely to be poor, without any clear rehabilitative beneﬁt. 
There is little evidence that inﬂicting a ﬁnancial punishment on people who are convicted 
of crimes serves any of the restitution statute’s rehabilitative purposes. I7-A MRSA §2002 
(describing part of the purpose of restitution statute as “to rehabilitate the offender ”). On the 
contrary, years of study show that more punishment increases a person’s likelihood of future
1
contact with the legal system.1 Adding economic hardship to an arrest and conviction will only 
increase peoples’ chances of coming into future contact with the system, especially for people 
with substance use disorder, We urge you to vote ought not to pass. 
1 
See, e.g., Motz, RT, Barnes, JC, Caspi, A, et a1. Does contact with thejustice system deter or promote 
future delinquency? Results ﬂom a longitudinal study of British adolescent 
twins. Criminology. 2020; 58: 307- 335. https://doiorg/10.1 ll l/1745-912512236 (ﬁnding that “that 
contact with the justice system . . . promotes delinquency ”)
2
