‘ 
“One Team, One Mission” 
/ii’ 1 1.. Q-A’ 
in. ~\ .;; ta yr i a 
Maine Sheriffs ’ Association 
" if0 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President 
Sheriff Scott Nichols, 1”‘ Vice-President, Sheriff William King, 2"‘ Vice-President — Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary— 
Sheriﬁ‘ Todd Brackett, Treasurer — Sheriff Troy Morton, Immediate Past President— 
Sheriﬁ Joel Merry, Past President~at-Large - Mary-Anne LaMarre, Executive Director 
March 20, 2023 
L.D. 968 — An Act Regarding Restitution by Persons Convicted 
of Trafficking in Illegal Drugs 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Robert Young. I am the Sheriff of 
Piscataquis County and here on behalf of the Maine Sheriffs Association. 
Maine sheriffs discussed this bill and those present voted to support L.D. 968 - An Act 
Regarding Restitution by Persons Convicted of T raffrcking in Illegal Drugs. 
Maine sheriffs view L.D. 968 as a pathway to accountability. Why should the taxpayers bear the 
responsibility of critical investigation expenses incurred by an individual is convicted of 
trafficking illegal drugs? The simple and obvious answer is, they should not. 
The required testing used to reach an illegal drug conviction have costly fees for processing. 
These testing fees cannot be avoided in our efforts to ascertain culpability. It’s important to 
remember that we are speciﬁcally targeting those criminals who have made the choice to sell 
illegal drugs for proﬁt. 
Seven hundred and sixteen overdose deaths in Maine reﬂect a continued skyrocketing increase in 
just one year. This number does not include nonfatal overdoses, but if the two were combined 
(fatal and nonfatal), the number of reported overdoses in Maine in 2022 was 10,110, according to 
the Mills Administration. While we may debate many facets of illegal drugs as they pertain to 
law enforcement, Maine sheriffs believe we can all agree that holding convicted drug dealers 
accountable for the expenses originating from their crimes is in the best interest of Maine 
taxpayers and all Maine citizens. 
Maine sheriffs appreciate the opportunity to share our position of support for LD 968, and we 
urge each member of this committee to vote Ought To Pass. I welcome any questions you may 
have. 
Sincerely, 
Sheriff Robert Young 
O/B/O Maine Sheriffs ’ Association
