PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444
www.aclumaine.org
TESTIMONY OF  MICHAEL KEBEDE , ESQ.  
LD 1568 – Ought Not To Pass   
An Act to Protect Access to Absentee Ballot Drop Boxes 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
April 21, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the 
Joint  Standing  Committee  on Veterans  and  Legal  Affairs,  greetings.  My name  is 
Michael  Kebede,  and  I am the Policy  Counsel  at the ACLU  of Maine,  a statewide 
organization  committed  to advancing  and  preserving  civil  rights  and  civil  liberties 
guaranteed  by the Maine  and  U.S.  Constitutions.  On behalf  of our  members,  we 
oppose this legislation because it is unnecessary. 
The ACLU  of Maine  opposes  the expansion  of the  criminal  code  especially 
where  there  are existing  provisions  of law  that  cover  the behavior  that  legislations 
seeks to prohibit. That is the reason for our opposition here. This bill would create a 
new Class  E crime  for “knowingly  block[ing]  or attempt[ing]  to block  access  to a 
secured drop box .” 
This act is already prohibited by the Main e Civil Rights Act, which states that 
both th e Attorney Genera l and a privat e citizen may bring an action: 
Whenever any person, whether or not acting under c olor of law, 
intentionally interferes or attempts to intentionally interfere by 
physical force or violence against a person, damage or destruction of 
property or trespass on property or by the threat of physical force or 
violence against a person, damage o r destruction of property or trespass 
on property with the exercise or enjoyment by any other person of rights 
secured by the United States Constitution or the laws of the United 
States or of rights secured by the Constitution of Maine or laws of the 
State [.] 
5 M.R.S. §§4681, 4682. Voting is a fundamental right protected by the United States 
and Maine constitutions, as well as Maine law. If someone were physically blocking 
access to a ballot box, it could be prosecuted under this law.  
Two other existing crimes already penalize the behavior this bill seeks to punish. 
“[I]nterfer[ing] with a voter attempting to cast a vote” is already a Class E crime. 21-
A M.R.S. § 674(1)(B). Similarly, use of force or intimidation to interfere with a public 
official performing an election-related function is already a Class D crime. 21-A 
M.R.S. § 674(2)(E). Because blocking a voter or an election official from a ballot box 
is already criminalized, this bill creates no new protections and is redundant of 
current law.
For this reason, we believe creating a new Class E crime is duplicative of existing 
law. Thank you for your time. 
