Department of the Secretary of State 
'5 #2 
\5.?3I’i." Q‘ /" 
"fl; .-;_‘ _,.' ,,-I-Y . . . . 
t 
Bureau of C0l‘p0l’(lll0l1S, Electrons and Commlsslons 
‘”' 
Julie L. Flynn Shenna Bellows Deputy Secretary of State 
Secretary of State 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
April 21, 2023 
Testifying in favor 
L.D. 1568 “An Act to Protect Access to Absentee Ballot Drop Boxes” 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
officer. l am speaking today in support of L.D. 1568. 
Ensuring that elections are both secure and convenient are among our top priorities in conducting 
elections. We should be very proud that we consistently rank among the best states in the nation in 
voter participation and that we allow eligible Maine voters to return their voted absentee ballots in 
multiple ways — in-person to the clerk, by mail, by an immediate family member or by a 3'“ person or 
by using a ballot drop box. 
In the November 2022 election, 364 out of our over 500 municipalities utilized a drop box — two of 
these used a second drop box as well. Because voting in Maine is conducted at the municipal level, 
ballot drop boxes are located outside municipal offices with appropriate security measures in place that 
meet safety and labeling standards. Placement close to a municipal office ensures the drop box will be 
monitored appropriately by election ofﬁcials, accessible to all voters, and where ballots can be 
retrieved routinely by clerks or their staff. However, requests to place drop boxes in a secondaiy or 
tertiary location would require a municipality to have the additional locations approved by my 
department. 
While we appreciate the ability to offer voters another means to submit their absentee ballot, the use of 
ballot drop boxes has also created a new kind of voter intimidation, and this should concern all of us. 
Voter intimidation can take shape in several ways - it can happen inside the polling place or outside 
the polling plate or through vigilante surveillance of voters — if the actions make a voter feel 
uncomfortable to exercise their constitutional right to vote, it can be a violation of law. 
Following the 2022 mid-term elections, the Arizona Secretary of State referred 10 complaints of 
alleged intimidation occurring at absentee ballot drop boxes to the Department of Justice. It is 
I 01 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 0433 3-01 01 
www. Maine. gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
important to recognize that Maine is not immune to this type of behavior. Last November, my office 
did receive a complaint, which you have heard from the sponsor, about a group of individuals acting in 
a way that made voters attempting to return their absentee ballot using the absentee ballot drop box 
uncomfortable. However, at the time, my ofﬁce and the local clerk had no legal ground to remove 
those individuals from around the drop box. 
Should this situation happen again in the future after this bill is enacted, we would now have the legal 
ability to remove any individual or group who attempts to intimidate Mainers who drop their ballot off 
at their local absentee ballot drop box. Mainers should feel conﬁdent that when they go to return their 
ballot it will be a happy, celebratory moment and not one where voters are made to feel uncomfortable 
or have concern that their ballot will not be received by the clerk. 
Lastly, we would like to propose a friendly amendment to this bill and the sponsor has agreed to this 
change. We propose striking section 4 of the bill which addresses absentee voting in the presence of 
the clerk. However, voters using the secured drop box are not voting in the presence of the clerk, rather 
they have already received a ballot (i.e., by mail or by an immediate family or 3rd person), voted the 
ballot and are returning the voted ballot to the drop box. Additionally, the advertising prohibitions 
currently in our election laws‘ do not need to be amended since the voter will have presumably already 
voted their ballot when they go to the drop box to deliver it. The voter will not have to enter the 
clerk’s ofﬁce as the drop box is located outside the clerk’s office. Moreover, changing the advertising 
restrictions to the entire 45 days before the election, rather than just during the times the clerk’s ofﬁce 
is open, may raise freedom of speech issues. 
The amendment addresses these concerns and is more in line with the goal to allow unlimited access to 
the drop box. 
For these reasons, we support this bill. Thank you and l am happy to answer any questions you may 
have. 
1 
21-A M.R.S. §753-B(8). 
I01 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-010] 
www.Maine. gov/sos/cec ‘ tel. 207-624-7 736
L.D. 1568 “An Act to Protect Access to Absentee Ballot Drop Boxes” 
AMENDMENT 
April 21, 2023 
Strike text of 21-A MRSA §753-B, sub-§8 in section 4 and instead enact to read: 
Section 752-A(3-A). Preserve access to drop box. To the extent possible. a pathwav to 
the drop box slot shall be kept clear of all ba1'1'iers.
