G <- .~ 
, jli . 
.
, 
A 9' 
Matthew (}_ P011110" ; THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 15 13 1st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Senator Matt Pouliot 
Sponsor of 
LD,12: 89, “An Act to Facilitate P' ropertyR'edevelopment and Encourage‘ 
Affordable Housing by Allowing the C"onveyan_ce of -Unfinished Commercial 
Condominium Units” 
> 3 
~ 3 - 
z May.9,20233
n 
Good Afternoon Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Housing Committee, I 
am Senator Matt Pouliot and I have the honor of representing Senate District 15, including the 
towns of Augusta; Belgrade; China; Mount Vernon; Sidney; and Vassalboro. I am here today to 
present LD 1289, “An Act to Facilitate Property Redevelopment and Encourage Affordable 
Housing by Allowing the Conveyance of Unﬁnished Commercial Condominium Units.” 
The purpose of this legislation is to facilitate property redevelopment and encourage affordable 
housing projects in properties like old mills or other substantially sized buildings that may be 
redeveloped and divided into multiple condominium units. The Maine Condo Act needs to be 
modernized to allow for the conveyance-of an unﬁnished condo unit so long as the purchaser and 
the developer enter into a written agreement assigning the rights and responsibilities for 
completion of the condo unit for both residential and non—residential uses. 
Maine’s current condominium conveyance requirements create unintended barriers to modem 
uses of the condominium structure in land use and housing creation. Speciﬁcally, the existing 
standard that a commercial condo cannot be conveyed unless fully complete, is posing 
unintended barriers to housing creation. 
The Condo Act is an effective and efﬁcient tool for the redevelopment of large properties like 
former mill buildings. Their size is such that several different uses may ultimately be ﬁtted-out, 
including retail, light manufacturing, and housing such as affordable housing. 
Affordable housing projects must stand alone to be eligible for ﬁnancing like the low-income 
housing tax credit — the project cannot also include a retail store, for example. To allow both of 
these uses to ultimately be housed in an old mill, developers use the condo tool to divide up the 
space appropriate to the ultimate end-use. 
StateH0use.' (207)287-1505 * Fax: (207)287~1527 * To/lFree.' 1-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Maft.P0uli0f@legislalure.mainagov * Web She." legislature.maine.g0v/senate
This proposal would allow a condo unit to be transferred unﬁnished, so long as the purchaser and 
the developer enter into a Written agreement assigning the rights and responsibilities for 
completion of the condo unit for both residential and non-residential uses. This allows one 
developer to do the rehabilitation work, and another to do the ﬁtting out for the speciﬁc end-use, 
such as dwelling units. 
By modernizing the standards, we can continue to ensure protections for end-users if dwelling 
units will be created, while allowing a prior conveyance between trained parties.* 
Thank you for your consideration of this legislation and I am happy to answer any questions.
