DlSAB|LlTY ‘ 
R | G H T S $J£l§‘£i‘n§"““"““"“"'°" 
MAINE Di 
GL e:a::::a “'** 
Maine Developmental 
Disabilities Council 
February 16, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
Cross Office Building, Room 209 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Re: L.D. 378, Resolve, to Eliminate the So-ca/led Fail First Requirement for Children ‘s 
Residential Services for Certain Individuals Whose Needs Are Unable to Be Met 
with Home and Community-based Services by Expanding Eligibility for Those 
Individuals 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members ofthe Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
My name is Atlee Reilly and I am the Legal Director of Disability Rights Maine, Maine's 
Protection and Advocacy agency for people with disabilities. Thank you for the 
opportunity to provide testimony in opposition to LD 378. The following organizations 
have signed on to this testimony: American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, GLBTQ Legal 
Advocates & Defenders, the Center for Public Representation, and the Maine 
Developmental Disabilities Council. 
LD 378 directs the Department of Health and Human Services to amend its rules 
regarding eligibility for children's residential services to include individuals who have 
been unable to access services in the home or community or who are hospitalized and 
unable to obtain documentation showing they've accessed less restrictive interventions
Committee on Health and Human Services 
February 16, 2023 
Page2 
that were unsuccessful? We oppose this change because Maine is already 
institutionalizing children with disabilities unnecessarily due to the failure to provide 
timely access to home and community-based services and there is no reason to make it 
easier to do so. 
In July 2022, the United States Department oflustice (DOJ) issued a letter outlining its 
determination that Maine unnecessarily segregates children with mental health and/or 
developmental disabilities in psychiatric hospitals, residential treatment facilities, and at 
Long Creek Youth Development Center, in violation of the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA)? The DOJ found that Maine children are subjected to unnecessary 
institutionalization when they are ”unable to access behavioral health services in their 
homes and communities —services that are part of an existing array of programs that 
the State advertises to families through its Medicaid program (MaineCare), but does not 
make available in a meaningful or timely manner." Maine must address the underlying 
problem —the failure to provide access to home and community-based services— 
instead of further clearing the path to unnecessary institutionalization. 
As an initial matter, DHHS hasalready outlined a process where, in certain 
circumstances, the Office of MaineCare Services (OMS) will approve a child's clinical 
eligibility for services in a Children's Residential Care Facility ”without requiring an 
attempt to utilize a lower level of care.”3 So, this proposal is not necessary. 
1 
Current eligibility criteria for children's residential treatment include a requirement for 
”clinical documentation that current treatment needs cannot be met by a lower level of care 
within home and/or community settings. Documentation must show that the member’s 
functioning has not significantly improved using outpatient or home and community-based 
treatment models over the prior two (2) to six (6) months" . MaineCare Benefits Manual, Ch. ll., 
Sec. 97.02-5(A)(S). 
2 The July 2022 DOJ Letter of Findings is available here: https:[/www.iustice.gov/opalprliustice- 
department-finds-maine-violation-ada-over-institutionalizatlon-children-disabilities 
3 OMS announced this position in a June 21, 2022 notice, which states this process is targeted 
to ”situations where youth are unable to step down from long~term hospitalization due toa 
lack of community-based services, where youth are hospitalized long enough that they could 
never meet the criteria of having tried home and community-based services in the prior six 
months, or where other exceptional circumstances prevent the member from being safe ina 
home or community setting." In these circumstances, these services can be approved under
Committee on Health and Human Services 
February 16, 2023 
Page3 
In addition, to the extent LD 378 is an attempt to address the problem of children stuck 
in emergency departments and hospitals, it will not do that. Many children continue to 
remain in hospitals and emergency departments even after they are determined eligible 
for residential services. As of December 20, 2022, according to information received 
from OCFS, 46 children were eligible for residential services and waiting in psychiatric 
hospitals, emergency departments, crisis units, and other residential settings in and out 
of state. It is likely that many of these children have been referred and denied admission 
and/or inappropriately discharged from lVlaine's residential programs and are waiting 
for placement out of state. And children who are deemed clinically appropriate for 
residential care will continue to be stuck in these other settings so long as Maine's 
residential providers can pick and choose which youth to accept into their programming 
and/or discharge them when they exhibit behaviors related to the same disabilities that 
made them eligible for residential placement in the first place. 
lt has been over four years since the 2018 Children's Behavioral Health Services 
Assessment, which included recommendations for reforms that would better address 
the problems this legislation aims to solve. For example, the 2018 Assessment includes a 
recommendation that residential "contracts should specify referral acceptance and 
denial policies to promote transparency and consistency, and ’no reject, no eject’ 
policies as other states have done/'4 The 2018 Assessment advised that these policies be 
implemented in conjunction with other changes aimed to "strengthen the treatment 
interventions offered at residential programs" and that rates may need to be revisited 
at the same time. 
Early Periodic Screening Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) benefit, MaineCare Benefits Manual 
(l\/IBM) Chapter ll, Section 94, https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/omsLproviders[provider- 
buIletins/epsdt-coverage-childrens-residential-care-facility-level-care-2022-O6-21 
4 Maine Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Child and Family Services, 
Children's Behavioral Health Services Assessment Final Report," Public Consulting Group, 2018, 
page 74. Available at: 
https:[/www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/files[documents/ocfs/cbhs/documents/l\/I 
E~OCFS~CBHS-Assessment-Final —Report.pdf. This assessment also found there were significant 
problems with access, concluding: ”Children's behavioral health services are not available 
immediately (or at all)." ld. at p. 22.
Committee on Health and Human Services 
February 16, 2023 
Page4 
But while the residential provider rates were raised, quality and oversight mechanisms 
were refined, and the inclusion of trauma informed care was required through Maine's 
transition to Qualified Residential Treatment Programs over the past few years, DHHS 
failed to require no reject, no eject policies as part of the rate changes and reforms. We 
understand that there will be at least one proposal to address the need for these 
policies for children in l\/laine, which would be more likely to resolve the problems LD 
378 seeks to address? 
As the DOJ found last year, ”Maine can and must make changes to its service system to 
ensure that children receive the support and treatment they need in their communities 
and with their families. ” LD 378 would send the message that it is appropriate to 
institutionalize youth who are not provided access to the services they need to remain 
in their homes and communities. And it would not solve the problem of youth stuck in 
hospitals and emergency departments in any event. For these reasons, we respectfully 
request that this Committee vote ought not to pass on LD 378. 
Sincerely, 
Atlee Reilly Carol Garvan 
Legal Director Legal Director 
Disability Rights Maine American Civil Liberties Union of lvlaine 
Mary Bonauto Kathryn Rucker 
Civil Rights Project Director Senior Attorney 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders Center for Public Representation 
Rachel Dyer 
Associate Director 
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council 
5 We understand that no eject, no reject requirements will be included in LR 919 - Resolve, to 
Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with Intellectual 
Disabiiities or Autism Spectrum Disorders - which has yet to be printed.
