  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
February 16, 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 378 – Resolve, to Eliminate the So -called Fail First Requirement for Children's 
Residential Services for Certain Individuals Whose Needs Are Unable to Be Met with Home and 
Community -based Services by Expanding Eligibility for Those Indi viduals  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
The Department shares the sponsor’s goal of ensuring children have access to the appropriate 
level of care needed for their acuity , but we do not believe this proposal aligns with the reality of 
our work to this end. As such, t his letter is in opposition to  LD 378, Resolve, to Eliminate the So -
called Fail First Requirement for Children's Residential Services for Certain Individ uals Whose 
Needs Are Unable to Be Met with Home and Community -based Services by Expanding Eligibility 
for Those Individuals . This resolve directs the department to amend its rules regarding eligibility 
for children’s residential service to include individu als who are unable to access services in the 
home or community or who are hospitalized and unable to secure clinical documentation that the 
individual’s treatment needs cannot be met by outpatient or home and community -based 
treatment models and in other c ircumstances in which an individual cannot be safely  maintained 
at home or in the community . 
 
The bill inaccurately characterizes the department’s criteria for placement in children’s 
residential care facilities . The CALOCUS -CASii  is a process independentl y determines a youth’s 
needed level of care, including team meetings with the family and in consideration of the level of 
support at home. If a youth’s CALOCUS -CASii score indicates that a residential level of care is 
not appropriate, it is not because the  youth has not tried a lower level of service first, but because 
their needs are more appropriately met at the community -based level of care  
 
A state Medicaid agency (SMA) is allowed to put reasonable service controls in place in the 
provision of services to ensure clinically appropriate and quality care, including the appropriate 
level of care, maximizing the ability of members to stay with their communities. In situations 
where these criteria may fail to best meet the needs of the child, federal Early Periodic Screening 
Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT) laws enable the SMA to make exceptions to general 
requirements so that the youth may still access appropriate treatment to meet their needs.  
 
Given this existing flexibility, there is no change neede d to MaineCare’s eligibility criteria for 
Section 97, Appendix D , Principles of Reimbursement for Children's Residential Care Facilities, 
 
 in fall of 2021 . The Department’s contractor, Kepro , conducts the evidence -based CALOCUS -
CASii level of care assessmen ts to determine the appropriate level of care to meet a youth’s 
clinical need, and during that process they consider appropriate use of EPSDT prior to issuing 
any eligibility denials . 
 
The Department has taken action to address the challenge  of children’s access to the appropriate 
level of behavioral health treatment and supports, an issue much exacerbated by the pandemic 
and workforce shortage.  These actions include special payments to BH providers to assist with 
COVID -related impacts, including payments to recruit and retain staff; historic rate investments 
in Sec tion 97, Appendix D  residential services ; and, effective January 1, 2023 , in community -
based and outpatient children’s behavioral health and care coordination services under Section 
13, Targeted Case Manag ement Services ; Section  28, Rehabilitative and Community Support 
Services for Children with Cognitive Impairments and Functional Limitations ; Section 65, 
Behavioral Health Services ; and Section 92, Behavioral Health Home Services . 
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact either of us . 
 
 
Sincerely,  
     
Michelle Probert      Todd A. Landry, Ed.D.  
Director       Director  
Office of MaineCare Services     Office of Child and Family Services  
 

