131$!‘ Legislature Senator Benjamin M. Chzpman 
3 State House Station 
S€116lt€ Of Maine Augusta, ME04333-0003 
, , Oj_‘/‘ice: (207) 287-Z515 
Senate District 28A 
Benjamin. Ch.jz2man@legisiature.maine gov 
T ransportarion Committee, Chan 
Taxation Committee, Membez 
Testimony of Senator Ben Chipman to introduce 
LD 1384, “An Act to Promote Fairness in the Taxation of Adult Use Cannabis by Basing the 
Excise Tax on the Tier of a Cultivation Facility ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
April 26, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation, my name is Ben Chipman, and I represent Senate District 28, which 
includes part of Portland. I am here to introduce LD 1384, “An Act to Promote Fairness in the 
Taxation of Adult Use Cannabis by Basing the Excise Tax on the Tier of a Cultivation Facility. ” 
This legislation would change the calculation of the excise tax on adult use cannabis to graduated 
rates based on the tier of a cultivation facility to begin on July 1, 2024. This graduated system 
would ensure a more fair Way of taxing cannabis businesses. 
One of the goals of legalizing cannabis is to eliminate the illicit market. Elimination of the illicit 
market lowers underage use, ensures the safety of the product, and increases revenues for the 
state. A high or arbitrary excise tax pyramids taxation of cannabis businesses, greatly increasing 
costs for producers, and resulting in the perpetuation of the illicit and grey markets. 
Maine’s current excise tax is too high. Those costs particularly disadvantage small producers by 
increasing the price of entry into the market. A cannabis cultivator is required to outlay $335 per 
pound of ﬂower, regardless of the wholesale price. That cost has to be absorbed before the 
product is even sold at retail. 
Most importantly, a high, ﬁxed cost excise tax, pushes product into the grey or illicit market. 
According to CNBC, the hefty price tag for legal cannabis in New York causes legal adult use of 
cannabis to be that much more expensive than the illicit market, and leaves customers with 
“sticker shock.” In California for example, where high taxes and competition from unlicensed 
businesses are still a problem for its legal industry six years out from its launch. California is 
getting decimated by their illicit market that’s thriving because legal products are more 
expensive, more regulated, and have more taxes. 
Illegal sales are bad for kids. They do not require checking lD’s. Whereas a robust legal market 
has actually reduced youth use. According to a study by the National Instutute of Health, “Using 
the Washington Health Youth Survey we estimate that after recreational cannabis legalization 
Fax: (207) 287-1585 T T Y 711 * Message Service 1-800-4236900 Zegislcatzire.maine.govAsena¢ ‘e
131$! Legislature Senator Benjamin M. Chipman 
3 State House Statzon 
S€1-’l6lt€ Qf Maine Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
. . Oﬁce.' (207) 287-1515 
Senate D ‘Sty tat Benjamin. Ci1§vn1an@ZegisZafz11'e.maine gov 
T ransporfalion Committee, Chan 
T oxa2‘z' 0n COI?7I77ifZ €€, Member 
past 30-day cannabis use prevalence in grade 8 decreased by 22.0%, in grade 10 prevalence 
decreased by 12.7%, and no effect in grade 12.” 
An illegal market is bad for the safety of consumers. It doesn’t require testing for pesticides and 
heavy metals. In November 2022, a studv commissioned by the New York Medical Cannabis 
Industry Association found that after reviewing cannabis products from 20 illicit stores in New 
York City, about 40% contained harmful contaminants such as E.coli, lead and salmonella. Illicit 
sales often include the sale of other unregulated drugs, with no barrier to the market. 
To be clear, Maine’s legalization of cannabis has been an extraordinary success. Already sales of 
adult use and medical cannabis exceed the value of our famous blueberry harvest. It also exceed 
the even more iconic lobster harvest from this past year. 
We have a moment in time to right size the taxation of cannabis and eliminate the illicit market. 
If we capture the growth of the new revenue, we can right size the level of taxation. Overtime 
pushing consumers to the legal market will strengthen and stabilize state revenues, in addition to 
protecting consumers of all ages. 
My proposal would not eliminate the excise tax, but rather take a more incremental, affordable 
approach by incorporating tiers to the levels of the excise tax. This tax system will protect small 
cannabis businesses, while providing a higher graduated rate for large, corporate cannabis 
entrepreneurs. 
Even better than the proposal before you today would be the elimination of all excise tax for all 
cannabis businesses. The sales tax is the best place to capture the value added from our cannabis 
manufacturers. That would also export some of the cost of taxes to Maine’s huge tourism market. 
That said, I am hoping that this incremental approach will have a lower price tag and will be 
palatable to the committee. If you all would like to go further, I’d Welcome that discussion as 
well. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer questions. 
Fax: (207) 287-1585 TTY 71] *1‘ 
Message Service Z-800~423-6900 * iegi.sia?z1re.maine.gov/senate
