HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 sTATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 0002 
3 
(207) 287-1400 
1 Silvennount Street’ 
Waterville, ME 04901 
Phone: (207) 660-8722 
Bruce.White@le2islature.maine.gov 
Testimony of Rep. Bruce White introducing 
LD 900, An Act to Modernize the State Motor Vehicle Inspection Program 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and distinguished members of the Transportation 
Committee, my name is Bruce White and I proudly represent House District 65, which consists 
of half of the City of Water'ville. I come before you to present LD 900, An Act to Modernize 
the State Motor Vehicle Inspection Program. 
This bill proposes to authorize the Chief of the Maine State Police to adopt an electronic 
inspection program for the purpose of performing motor vehicle inspections in Maine. 
Last year in the 130*‘ Legislature, a similar bill, LD 2032, was considered before this committee. 
The Transportation Committee at that time voted with unanimous support of those present to 
move the bill forward to the House and Senate.‘ Despite the bill receiving overwhelming support 
in the House, the bill was tabled in the Senate 2 and unfortunately did not come back up fora 
vote. I am submitting this legislation again this year as I believe it alleviates the concerns that 
were raised in that bill by my colleagues. 
If the State of Maine chooses to pursue an electronic inspection program in the future, it would 
bring a number of beneﬁts by modernizing how we register vehicles in Maine. In Maine, there 
are 1.3 million vehicle inspection stickers sold each year.3 Processing this many stickers each 
year can be a time-consuming endeavor and places a signiﬁcant amount of stress on our Motor 
Vehicle Inspection Unit that is housed in the Maine Department of Public Safety (DPS). If the 
state were to move to an electronic inspection process in the future, it would ease this burden -on 
the staff that are responsible for processing these orders. Furthermore, it would reduce the 
amount of paperwork that is used to process these requests. I believe Lt. Scott from DPS is here, 
and he will be able to help explain that process in greater detail. This legislation will also help 
reduce the opportunity for illegal inspection stickers being created by those acting in bad faith 
which is a signiﬁcant public safety risk for millions of motorists who travel on Maine roads. 
1 
Legis. Rec. S-1809 (2d Reg. Sess. 2022). 
2 Legis. Rec. H-1252 (2d Reg. Sess. 2022). 
3 Maine Department of Public Safety, (n.d). Motor Vehicle Inspections. Retrieved from 
https://www.maine.20v/dps/msp/investigation-traf ﬁc/crash-investigations/mv-inspections 
District 65: Waterville (part)
In the interest of public safety and consumer protection, I urge the committee to recommend an 
“Ought to Pass” report on LD 900, and I thank the members of this cormnittee who signed on as 
co-sponsors to this legislation. Thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any 
questions at this time or at the Work session. 
District 65: Waterville (part)
