' 
'1; 
‘ ‘I 
i 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Trafﬁc Safety Unit 
State House Station 20 
. Augusta, Mainei 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS COL. WILLIAM ROSS 
GOVERNOR CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT 
COMMISSIONER DEPUTY cams 
Testimony of Lt. Bruce Scott 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 900 
An Act‘ to Modernize the State Motor Vehicle Inspection Program 
Senator Chipman, Rep. Williams, and distinguished Members of the ]oint 
Standing Committee on Transportation, my name is Aaron Turcotte, andI 
am a sergeant of the State Police Trafﬁc Safety Unit. I am here today to 
testify on behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State 
Police in Support of LD 90o. 
This bill wasdintroduced last year to the Transportation Committee as LD 
2032 and gained unanimous support from the committee members that 
were present, with a 12-o ﬁnal count (I believe). This bill then gained strong 
support in the House with 95 yeas and 39 nays but was indeﬁnitely tabled9 
days later before it was voted on by the Senate. The bill was sponsored by 
Sen. Diamond because of a report back from a Motor Vehicle Inspection 
working group that was established as a result of LD 2,84. The working 
group made several recommendations to include allowing the Maine State 
Police to leverage technology by implementing a state-wide electronic 
motor vehicle inspection program. 
The working group considered the following information about electronic 
inspections when making its recommendations: 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPAS SION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207)624-8945 (Fax)
Most of states that have a motor vehicle inspection program have an 
electronic program. The group agreed that electronic inspections are 
good for consumer protection. It would help to prevent attempted 
oversell issues and would provide greater accountabilityi with real time 
over-sight and regulation. E—inspection programs are a great tool for 
the inspectors as they are plug and play. The inspection information 
and the vehicle history are well documented. It standardizes the 
process, reduces human error, checks for open recalls, and can access 
the pertinent sections of the inspection manual if there is a question on 
a speciﬁc part of the process.‘ 
A registration-based electronic inspection program can reduce fraud by 
eliminating fake or illegal inspection stickers. The current Maine 
Inspection Sticker is being used as a commodity on the black market 
and is sold for $100.00 or more, which continues to fuel the drug trade. 
Eliminating the need for inspection stickers would help reduce 
deception and force more vehicles into compliance. Which in turn 
would improve overall road safety. A print on demand system would 
also help to reduce fraud if a registration-based denial system is too 
cumbersome. 1A 
At the present time, Inspection Stickers must be ordered online or by 
mail. Once an order is received by the Inspection Unit, it must be 
processed, packaged, and shipped back to the station. VVl1en a' 
technician inspects a vehicle, he or she must ﬁll out the back of the 
Inspection Sticker and the corresponding Stub Sheet by hand. The 
station is then required to photocopy the Stub Sheets for their records 
and then mail the original back to the Inspection Unit monthly, where 
they are then sorted by like station numbers and ﬁled in multiple 
rolling shelving units. Additionally, any vehicle inspected in1 
Cumberland County must also have an additional OBDII form ﬁlled out 
by hand and mailed to Maine DEP. The Inspection Unit sells 
approximately 1.3 million stickers a year, which means it receives back 
the same number of Stub Sheets to archive. This is a timely and costly 
antiquated system that would be greatly enhanced by an electronic 
program, as there would be no need to order, ﬁll out, copy, mail, sort 
and ﬁle anymore stickers, stub sheets or OBDII forms. The OBDII 
forms would be electronically generated by the system and 
automatically forwarded -to DEP. This would save approximately 
$100,000 a year in postage alone.‘ 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
N.H. and other states has an electronic inspection program that is 
much easier than Maine's program for both the technicians, the state 
and the public. These systems walks the technician through the 
inspection process, prints the inspection sticker and keeps track of 
inventory so they never run out of stickers. Also, there isn’t additional 
follow up paperwork after the inspection has been performed like is 
currently required in Maine. 
An E—inspection program would beneﬁt the consumer by reducing 
fraud and attempted overselling of parts and repair. The consumer 
would also receive a copy of the vehicle inspection report. The increase 
in fees for the inspection can be offset by the reduction in unnecessary 
repairs and by forcing other vehicles into compliance. Thereby 
reducing the number of crashes, which ultimately saves us all money. 
The centralized data base created by the electronic system will provide 
data to our law makers to better determine the effectiveness of the 
program and allow them to create appropriate laws surrounding the 
need or lack thereof, for an inspection program. 
This system, when interfaced with the BMV, could assist in electronic 
titling, and could help reduce the number of vehicle thefts around the 
country. This program eliminates the ability for someone to use a fake 
or altered VIN # when performing an inspection and subsequent 
registration. The data is automatically imported into the system when 
the inspecting technician hooks the computer into the OBD II port in 
the customer's vehicle. Once the VIN # is auto—populated from the 
vehicle’s computer into the e-inspection program and it can’t be altered 
afterwards. After this data is entered for the ﬁrst time in the system it 
can be retrieved by any other station thereby shortening up inspection 
times thereafter. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote in favor LD 900. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I 
thank you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any 
questions that you might have, but Lt. Scott will be at the work session and 
prepared to answer any questions you have. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-7088 (Fax)
p/
