S T A T E  OF  M A I N E  
DEP A R T MEN T  OF  EN VIR ON MEN T A L  PR OT EC T ION  
 
 
 
  
  
AUGUSTA  BANGOR  PORTLAND  PRESQUE ISLE  
17 STATE HOUSE STATION  106 HOGAN ROAD, SUITE 6  312 CANCO ROAD  1235 CENTRAL DRIVE, SKYWAY PARK  
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 -0017  BANGOR, MAINE 04401  PORTLAND, MAINE 04103  PRESQUE ISLE, MAINE 04 769 
(207) 287 -7688 FAX: (207) 287 -7826  (207) 941 -4570 FAX: (207) 941 -4584  (207) 822 -6300 FAX: (207) 822 -6303  (207) 764 -0477 FAX: (207) 760 -3143  
 
website: www.maine.gov/dep  
 MELANIE L OYZIM  
COMMISSIONER  
 JANET T. M ILLS  
GOVERNOR  
  
March  15, 2023 
 
Senator Ben Chipman , Chair 
Representative Lynne Williams, Chair  
131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME  04330  
 
RE:  LD 746 “An Act to Modernize the State’s Vehicle Inspection System by Requiring Inspections 
Biennially and Allowing for an Electronic Inspection Program , LD 900 An Act to Modernize the State 
Motor Vehicle Inspection System .” 
 
Dear Senator Chipman , Representative Williams , and Members of the Committee,  
 
The Maine Department of Environmental Protection wishes to convey the impacts th ese bills could have 
on Maine’s efforts to remain in compliance with the federal Clean Air Act.  
 
The Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 require all states located in the Ozone Transport Region, which 
includes the State of Maine, with Metropolitan Statistical Areas of  100,000 people or more to implement 
an annual “enhanced’ motor vehicle emissions inspection and maintenance (I/M) program as an ozone 
control strategy.  Cumberland County is the minimum area in Maine that is required to comply with this 
requirement.    
 
In 1997, the Legislature passed an enhanced emissions testing program for Cumberland County only; this 
program was subsequently approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and became 
part of the Maine State Implementation Plan (SIP).  The SIP is the state’s plan for achieving, maintaining 
and enforcing the national ambient air quality standards.  Maine, along with some other areas in the 
northeast are using an abbreviated emissions testing protocol commonly referred to as the Ozone 
Transport Re gion “low -enhanced” program1, in lieu of a more involved tail pipe testing program.   
 
Maine’s I/M program began in January 1999, and requires the following to be conducted at the time of 
the safety inspection:  
 
1) a visual inspection of the catalytic conver ter on all 1983 and newer vehicles (required statewide);  
 
2) a gas cap pressure test that checks the ability of the cap to limit the release of gasoline vapors on 
1974 and newer vehicles (required in Cumberland County); and  
 
3) an on -board diagnostics (OBD) insp ection of emissions controls on 1996 and newer vehicles 
(required in Cumberland County).  
 
1 This abbreviated program w as developed for specific areas in the northeast that are statutorily required to 
implement I/M programs.   
LD 746 “An Act to Modernize the State’s Vehicle Inspection System by Requiring Inspections Biennially and 
Allowing for an Electronic Inspection Program, LD 900 An Act to Modernize the State Motor Vehicle Inspection 
System.”  
Letter to the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation from Jeffrey Crawford/DEP  
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
Today’s motor vehicles depend on the proper operation of a wide range of integrated systems, including 
those related to emissions control.  Maine’s I/M program not on ly helps to reduce motor vehicle 
emissions, but also provides consumers with valuable maintenance information on many of their vehicle’s 
most important components, including the ignition, fuel metering and air injection systems, helping to 
reduce fuel use and save money.  The annual inspection and maintenance program is effective in 
identifying improperly operating and defective vehicle emission control components, some of which may 
still be replaced under warranty.   
Reducing the motor vehicle emission ins pection frequency from an annual to biennial, or longer basis, 
would result in some loss of program effectiveness, as polluting cars and trucks may operate for longer 
periods before proper maintenance.  Since the Maine I/M program is incorporated in the Ma ine SIP and 
therefore federally enforceable, implementation of these bills as written could be considered 
“backsliding” by EPA, meaning there is a loss of emission reduction credit from our State Implementation 
Plan.  In this event, EPA would require the S tate of Maine to find additional emission credits to “make 
up” for credits lost because of the less frequent inspection schedule.   
The D epartment fully support s an electronic state inspection program . However,  the current proposal 
would create issues if the electronic system was optional and not mandatory. As we seek to curb the 
tampering of vehicles and the stickering of non -legal vehicles, we realize that unscrupulous shops could 
opt out of the electronic pro gram and continue to illegally sticker vehicles that do not meet the safety or 
emission requirements that are laid out in the inspection manual. Without an electronic program this will 
continue to be difficult or impossible to track.  
 
Maine does not receiv e full “credit” from EPA for the I/M program because the Department c annot 
determine the emission control failure rate  without an electronic reporting system for the inspection 
program . Since Cumberland County is our only enhanced inspection area of the st ate, an electronic 
inspection should at a minimum include all shops in Cumberland  County as we modernize the inspection 
program.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide our comments, and we would be happy to attend the work 
session to answer any question s. 
 
 
Jeffrey S. Crawford  
Director, Bureau of Air Quality  
Department of Environmental Protection  

