 19 Community Drive • Augusta, Maine 04330 • (207) 622-7501 • Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORSâ   12781773.1 
 Testimony in Opposition to LD 1839 (“An Act to Study a Permitting Process for and Establish a Moratorium on Certain Tall Structures”)  J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  May 8, 2023  Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® is opposed to LD 1839. The bill would create a moratorium on the construction of structures over 700 feet in height and establish a working group to recommend regulations around such structures.  MAR opposes the bill because it would impose a moratorium on construction without evidence that such a structure poses a specific concern. In truth, Maine has experience with the construction of tall buildings and other structures such as wind turbines, and we have permitting processes in place that take into account those considerations (environmental impacts, impacts on air traffic, etc). While we are not opposed to studying the issue to see if further improvements to those regulations may be made, we are opposed to any moratorium that could have negative implications on development which restricts economic and investment opportunities.  For these reasons, we respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1839. Thank you for your time and consideration.  
