District 16: Blue Hill, Brooksville, Castine, Sedgwick, Surry, Trenton 
  
Testimony of Rep. Nina Milliken introducing 
LD 1839, An Act to Study a Permitting Process for and Establish a 
Moratorium on Certain Tall Structures 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
  
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and friends and colleagues on the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. My name is Nina Milliken and I have the 
good fortune of representing the good people of Blue Hill, Brooksville, Castine, Sedgwick, 
Surry, and Trenton in the Maine House. I am here today to present LD 1839, An Act to Study a 
Permitting Process for and Establish a Moratorium on Certain Tall Structures for your 
consideration. 
 
The community I am privileged to represent in this space is BEAUTIFUL. We are nestled on a 
peninsula on the coast, with sweeping vistas of the mountains of Acadia National Park and the 
Camden Hills. I regularly climb Blue Hill and John B. Mountains in our district with my young 
children. We love to have picnics on top of Blue Hill looking out over our quaint town, our 
beautiful harbor, and our many ponds and lakes. These vistas have been virtually unchanged in 
the many years that I have been climbing these hills and for that I am immensely grateful. I'd like 
to keep them mostly unchanged for my children and their children. 
 
Currently, the highest structure in the state is Saint Joseph’s Church in Biddeford at a whopping 
235 feet. A building at this height does very little to negatively impact the beautiful landscape 
where we all get to live. This is one of the many, many things that I love about this state. We 
value living in a place where skyscrapers are essentially a foreign concept of faraway places like 
Boston or New York City. This is also true in our rural north woods, as much as it is downtown 
Portland where the tallest building is only 204 feet and is also a church. As a state, we seem to 
value quaintness. 
 
Tall buildings are bad for the environment. They have a much larger carbon footprint than 
smaller structures that accomplish similar things. Proponents for tall buildings have argued that 
they are the solution to urban sprawl, but according to research, the environment is better cared 
for by spreading out buildings, rather than building up into the sky, because of the materials 
needed to create a foundation to sustain a tall structure. According to Tomorrow City, a digital 
content platform that combines knowledge, business and awareness to accelerate sustainable and  
Nina Azella Milliken 
276 Turkey Farm Road 
            Blue Hill, ME 04614           
           Phone: (207) 412-8828 
Nina.milliken@legislature.maine.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 

District 16: Blue Hill, Brooksville, Castine, Sedgwick, Surry, Trenton 
 inclusive cities for all, “The taller they are, the greater the pollution.”1 Additionally, they require 
more energy to maintain them. According to Green Tech Media, a building over 10 stories high 
(about 100 feet) takes 76% more electricity per square foot than a shorter structure.2 
 
My bill before you today does not mandate that tall structures never be built here in our beautiful 
state. My bill asks that we convene a panel to create a special permitting process for any 
proposed structure in the state over 700 feet high, which is nearly three times the height of the 
current tallest structure. It also puts a moratorium on any current plans for building structures 
that are that height or taller until October 1, 2024.  
 
I appreciate your time and consideration. Please vote to pass on LD 1839and I'll be happy to 
answer any questions.  
 
 
1 Lucía Burbano, (November 25, 2021). Are Skyscrapers an Example of Sustainable Urban Planning? Tomorrow 
City. Retrieved from https://tomorrow.city/a/environmental-impact-of-
skyscrapers#:~:text=Environmental%20disadvantages%20of%20skyscrapers&text=Building%20high%20means%2
0using%20more,substantially%20increases%20the%20carbon%20footprint . 
  
2 Ingrid Lobet (November 30, 2020). Getting Building Height Right for the Climate. Green Tech Media. Retrieved 
from https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/getting-building-height-right-for-the-
climate#:~:text=They%20found%20that%20high%2Drises,of%20five%20stories%20and%20under . 
 
