 19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622-7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®    
 Testimony in Support of LD 1864 (“An Act to Increase Maine's Housing Supply by Prohibiting Certain Zoning Requirements in Areas Where Public Sewer and Water Infrastructure Are Available and in Designated Growth Areas”) J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  May 19, 2023  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports LD 1864. This bill requires municipalities to allow dwelling units on minimum lot sizes supported by water and sewer infrastructure and larger lot sizes when that infrastructure is not in place. This ensures that ordinances must be adaptive in their minimum lot size requirements. In doing so, it will increase zoning opportunities for more housing to be developed.   Much like several other bills heard before this committee, LD 1864 would create solutions to a critical component of the housing shortage; restrictive zoning that inhibits housing development and prevents economic stability in communities. The bill is a complement to Public Law Chapter 672, “An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Commission To Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Zoning and Land Use Restrictions”, which is an example of policy-making that respects incremental growth and community integrity, but also boldly addresses the housing needs of today and tomorrow by encouraging housing development and updating zoning policies that inhibited the building of multiple housing units and ADUs. Similarly, LD 1864 would provide solutions while ensuring that local control and private property rights remain preserved.   For these reasons, we support LD 1864 and respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration.    
