Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Ed Libby and I live in 
Yarmouth and I am here to testify in support on LD1864 
 
I am a 4th generation Mainer and began my career in real estate in 1987 after 
graduating from college.  I moved to Yarmouth in 1996.  After doing subdivisions 
mostly in rural areas for more than 20 years, about 10 years ago began to 
understand the importance of smart growth and that has been my focus and 
passion ever since.  What I have found though, is that local zoning policies in 
many areas are not based on the smart growth policies that the State recognizes 
as the desired pattern of growth.  
I followed the progress of LD2003 through the extensive hearing process and 
continue to work closely with my Town in implementing its adoption there.  I was 
a member of the Growsmart Maine Policy Action 2023 working group # 7, from 
which this bill was conceived.  Some would say I have become a zoning nerd. 
 This bill is fundamentally about Small Lots in Smart Places. 
 Read from Small Lots in Smart Places 
Originally, we recognized not doing smart growth as sprawl and the State 
reported on the negative consequences of Sprawl in a report from the Maine 
State Planning Office May 1997 report: Cost of Sprawl 
Read back of report 
Since then, we can add Climate Change, unaffordable and unattainable housing 
for many, and large lot zoning as an impediment to Fair Housing. 
The problem is that changing zoning at the local level is very difficult, even when 
we know it is the right thing to do.  Despite Comprehensive Plans that say what a 
municipality will be doing to achieve the State’s smart growth policies and 
provide for 10% affordable housing, many are never implemented, despite 
existing state statutes such as MSRA 30-A Section 4352 that require zoning to be 
consistent with a comprehensive plans.  That is not being enforced. 
So, in many places, the traditional village pattern of development that we all love 
is not possible without smaller lot sizes being allowed again. 
 At a time that we are 30 years since trying to combat sprawl, a decade since we 
recognize climate change, and find ourselves in the midst of a housing production 
and affordability crisis, the State must act where many municipalities have failed 
to act for decades.  It is a small intrusion on home rule, but the system as 
currently operating, has failed to accomplish the State’s goals.  Relying on the 
Comprehensive Plan process, while not enforcing adoption of the policies within 
those Comp Plans, is no longer tenable. 
LD1864 will allow more housing in the areas that the State has already set policy 
for housing to be located, which is not only smart growth, but will contribute to 
housing production, including making housing more attainable and affordable. 
 
   
