‘£5 
HoUsE OF REPRESENTATIVES ., Q... . 
*-: . A. vi‘ 
it -o 
"='.i F3 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
James Boyle TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
25 Dundee Road 
Gorham, ME 04038' 
Cell Phone: (207) 756-2928 
James.Box/le@legislature.maine.gov 
May 19, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Jim Boyle presenting 
LD 1864, An Act to Increase Maine's Housing Supply by Prohibiting Certain Zoning 
Requirements in Areas Where Public Sewer and Water Infrastructure Are Available and 
in Designated Growth Areas 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Housing 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and distinguished members of the Select Committee on 
Housing, my name is Jim Boyle and I represent House District 109, which is the eastern half of 
Gorham. I am here today to present LD 1864, An Act to Increase Maine's Housing Supply by 
Prohibiting Certain Zoning Requirements in Areas Where Public Sewer and Water 
Infrastructure Are Available and in Designated Growth Areas. 
I will not belabor the state of Maine’s housing shortage before this committee which I know is 
all too familiar with the impact the shortage has on every aspect of life. To address this crisis, we 
must look critically at the ways we have built our communities and examine opportunities to 
reimagine them. Through the technical lens of zoning, this bill seeks to do just that by amending 
our minimum lot size rules. 
Minimum lot size rules determine how small a developer can subdivide a lot. Lot subdivision isa 
wonky issue, but it matters a lot for the form that neighborhoods take. Small, 1,400 square foot 
lots allow for rowhouses and shotgun houses. These are building types that keep housing cheap 
and burden on infrastructure low by economizing on land; they also tend to produce more tax 
revenue, acre-for-acre, to fund local govemment services. Their higher densities also make 
walkable, mixed-use urban neighborhoods viable. Large lots, on the other hand, are the standard 
in U.S. post-war suburbs, and are especially common in a rural state like ours. These larger lots 
mean that fewer homes can ﬁt in a given area, which encourages auto-orientation and the 
segregation of land uses like residential and commercial. 
In urban areas, tiny or highly irregular lots can make property rights fuzzy. But in rural areas, 
like much of Maine, you need a large lot to safely accommodate things like septic tanks and 
wells for drinking water. But like many zoning rules, these historically reasonable rules have 
often been manipulated for nefarious ends. In most US cities, large minimum lot sizes are used to 
drive up housing prices or mandate spread-out development. Here in Maine, this has contributed 
to our housing shortage and the skyrocketing prices of homes and rent. 
District 109: Gorham (part)
Under current Maine law, lots that rely on septic systems must be at least 20,000 square feet. 
Studies have shown that reducing minimum lot size where safe to do so, is a critical step in 
reducing barriers to more housing development. 
LD 1864 would establish limitations for allowable minimum lot sizes in areas where water and 
sewer infrastructure are available and in areas that are designated growth areas, even if water and 
sewer are not available. This language intentionally mirrors the language of LD 2003, passed last 
session. 
Speciﬁcally, in an area sewed by public water and sewer, this bill would require a municipality 
to allow a dwelling unit on a lot with a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet. For a housing 
development in a designated growth area and where housing is pennitted, regardless of if it is 
served by public water and sewer, the municipality must allow a dwelling unit on a lot witha 
minimum size of 20,000 square feet. The bill also limits what restrictions a municipality can 
place on lot coverage, road frontage and setback requirements. 
In order to meaningfully combat the crisis-level housing shortage facing our state we need to 
employ a range of tactics. This is just one, but I believe it is a powerful option that will get us 
one step closer to meeting the need across the state. 
Thank you for the opportunity to present my bill. I’m happy to answer any questions.
