Robert M. Liscord  
41 Reynolds Street  
South Portland, Maine 04106  
 
RE: LD 1864 - An Act to Increase Maine's Housing Supply by Prohibiting Certain Zoning 
Requirements in Areas Where Public Sewer and Water Infrastructure Are Available and 
in Designated Growth Areas  
 
Esteemed Members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing,  
 
I submit this written testimony in support of LD 1864 because limits on large lot zoning in 
will help towns address the discriminatory effect of zoning practices and  meet  their 
obligations to affirmatively further fair housing under LD 2003. For these reasons and 
more, the committee should vote “ought to pass” on LD 1864.  
 
Even prior to LD 2003, all Maine municipalities have been subject to the federal fair 
housing acts r equirements. The Federal Fair Housing Act (FHA) protects families against 
discrimination in housing based upon race, color, religion, sex, national origin, familial 
status, disability, marital status, and age. These fair housing protections apply to “zonin g 
laws and other housing restrictions that function to unfairly exclude minorities from certain 
neighborhoods without sufficient justification.”1 When an area is on municipal water 
and sewer, large lot zoning is a tool of exclusion with no reasonable poli cy 
justification.  
 
LD 1864 places limits on a city and town’s ability to require large lots in parts of the city 
that have access to public sewer and water or are within designated growth areas. It is 
no secret that Maine has a housing affordability crisi s. Statewide, the number of 
households who cannot afford the median home price has climbed over the last 5 
years from an average of 55% of households to 72% in 2022.2 The situation for renters 
is just as dire.3 The rates of housing cost burden disproport ionately fall on black and 
brown families.4 The large lot zoning that LD 1864 would prevent is discriminatory 
 
1 Texas Depar tment of Housing and Community Affairs v. Inclusive Communities, 576 U.S. 519, 539 
(2015), quoting Huntington v. Huntington Branch, NAACP , 488 U.S. 15, 16 -18 (1988). In Inclusive 
Communities, the U.S. Supreme Court affirmed a longstanding position of lower  courts that the FHA 
prohibits not only intentional discrimination (E.g. explicit restrictions based on race), but also 
discriminatory effect of facially neutral law or policy on a protected group. It is this “disparate impact” 
discrimination that LD 1864 addresses.  
2 “2022 Homeownership Housing Facts and Affordability in Maine ,” MaineHousing,  
3 Hannah LeClaire, “ Scenes from the affordable housing crisis. ” Portland Press Herald (Feb. 12, 2023).  
4  In 2019, forty -five percent of African Ameri can or Black Families were cost burdened in housing versus 
28% of white households. See, Root Policy Research, “City of Portland and Cumberland County, Analysis 
of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice”, March 20, 2023, sec. 4, p. 22 -23.  
because it increases the costs to develop housing that is affordable by increasing the 
amount of land (and land costs) required for each ownershi p or rental home built. Since 
housing cost burdens fall disproportionately on groups protected under fair housing laws, 
towns that require large lots are at risk of claims of discrimination.  
 
However, Large lot zoning does not universally violate fair hou sing laws. It only violates 
fair housing laws if there  is no “substantial, legitimate nondiscriminatory interest served 
by the policy or practice.”5 For example, it could be reasonable for a town to require larger 
lots where there is not access to public sewer and water. In these cases, space is needed 
for adequate private waste and water systems. However, where there is sewer and water, 
or where the town has already made a policy decision themselves that the area should 
be designated for growth, there is a lack of sufficient policy justification to override the 
discriminatory effect of large lot zoning. LD 1864  walks this line well. It  protects the  town’s 
substantial, legitimate interest in these health and safety matters while prohibiting conduct 
that is discriminatory and without substantial policy justification.  
 
In addition to these fair housing protections, it is also important to be mindful of the new 
requirements of LD 2003 that “a municipality shall ensure that ordinances and regulations 
are design ed to affirmatively further federal and state fair housing laws. Affirmatively 
furthering fair housing means that towns must “determine who lacks access to 
opportunity and address any inequity among protected groups.”6 LD 1864 gives the 
legislature a chan ce to help towns meet this requirement. It takes the practice of 
discriminatory large lot zoning off the table where there is no health or safety reason for 
it to be imposed.  
 
I ask that you vote ought to pass because LD 1864 minimizes the discriminatory 
effect of large lot zoning, while thoughtfully allowing towns to address  legitimate 
health and safety concerns . This bill benefits all those who are impacted by (i) 
substantially reducing the risk to towns of claims of discrimination based on the disparate  
impact of large lot zoning, (ii) allowing for the development of more housing that will be 
affordable to more households; and (iii) complementing the other actions that will be taken 
on housing this legislative session without added costs.  
 
For these rea sons, I urge the committee to vote “ought to pass” on LD 1864  
 
5 Final Rule Reinstating HUD’s Discriminatory Effects Standard , discussing the Supreme Court’s Inclusive 
Communities ruling.  
6 The Federal Fair Housing L aw requirements for recipients of federal funds, provide a good framework 
for how to think about affirmatively furthering fair housing in the context of LD 2003’s requirements. See 
Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing , Department of Housing and Urban Development.   
