Maine Human Rights Commission 
v # 51 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0051 
Physical location: 19 Union Street, Augusta, ME 04330 iv» ~~ =1» 
Phone (207) 624-6290 " Fax (207) 624-8729 ' TTY: Maine Relay 711
v wzuwmaine.govgmhrc 
Amy M. Sneirson Barbara Archer Hirsch 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR COMMISSION COUNSEL 
March 21, 2023 
The Honorable Anne Carney, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Matthew Moonen, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: An Act to Strengthen Protections of Persons After a Maine Human Rights Commission Investigation Finds 
No Reasonable Grounds Exist to Believe Unlawful Discrimination Occurred, LD 967 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
The Maine Human Rights Commission ("Commission") is Maine's quasi-independent, neutral, apolitical State 
agency charged with enforcing our state anti-discrimination law, the Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S. §§ 4551, et seq. 
("MHRA"). The MHRA charges the Commission with: investigating, conciliating, and at times litigating discrimination 
cases under the MHRA; promulgating rules and regulations to effectuate the MHRA; and making recommendations for 
further legislation or executive action concerning infringements on human rights in Maine. 5 M.R.S. § 4566(7), (11). 
Given these duties, the Commission provides this testimony against LD 967. 
The MHRA's Purpose and Processes. 
The policy of the Commission and the MHRA itself is to ”keep continually in review all practices infringing on 
the basic human right to a life with dignity, and the causes ofthese practices, so that corrective measures may, where 
possible, be promptly recommended and implemented, and to prevent discrimination in employment, housing or 
access to public accommodations on account of race, color, sex, sexual orientation, physical or mental disability, 
religion, ancestry or national origin" . To that end, the Commission is charged with, among other things, investigating 
complaints of invidious discrimination in Maine by providers of housing, employment, places of public accommodation, 
education, and credit, and in some cases individuals.0 
ln any given year, the Commission receives approximately 700-800 new complaint filings, and closes — by 
investigation, via settlement, or administrative dismissal — a similar number of cases. The Commission's 13.5 staffers, 
including six full-time investigators, must process and investigate these cases within two years, except in housing cases, 
in which the investigation must be complete within 100 days. Of the 700-800 cases processed each year, about 175- 
280 remain with the Commission for the investigator assigned to complete their preliminary investigation and issue an 
investigator's Report. That Report, along with any objections from the parties, is then considered by the Commission 
itself, which votes on whether or not there are "reasonable grounds" (”RG") or "no reasonable grounds" ("NR6") to 
believe that unlawful discrimination occurred. Typically, the Commission's overall RG rate is around 5% of all cases (or 
17-20% of those with Reports argued to the Commission). If the Commission does not find RG in a case, the case is 
dismissed with notice to the parties and no further agency action? 
If the Commission does find RG to believe that discrimination occurred, the Commission becomes a party to the 
lln rare instances, the Commission might act after a NRG finding (a) if a party requested that the Commission reconsider the 
finding, or (b) to file an amicus curiae brief addressing legal issues that arise in the parties’ litigation of such a case (not in 
support of a particular finding, but rather as a ”friend ofthe court" explaining the agency's interpretation ofthe MHRA).
case, with an interest in obtaining relief in the public interest to ensure that the identified discrimination does not 
recur. During the 90 days after the Commission's finding, the Commission attempts to conciliate the matter with the 
parties by reaching an agreement on individual and public reliefthat is acceptable to all parties. If conciliation is 
successful, the Commission monitors the case until the agreement's terms have been implemented, then dismisses the 
case. If conciliation fails, the Commission considers whether to initiate litigation in its name (for the use of the victim of 
discrimination), except that in housing cases which have been dual-filed with the federal Department of Housing and 
Urban Development ("HUD"), the MHRA requires that the Commission initiate litigation if conciliation is unsuccessful. 
In many cases, the Commission reaches a "split decision ” — some RG and some NRG findings — in which case the RG 
claims go through the conciliation process and are referred for potential litigation while the NRG claims are closed. 
Our Commission Counsel has responsibility to review the evidence and proposed determinations in every single 
case in which our agency issues an Investigator's Report each year, while also litigating all Commission matters. 
Commission Counsel does that work while simultaneously (a) litigating court enforcement actions in unresolved 
reasonable-grounds dual-filed housing cases, (b) drafting proposed statutory amendents, (c) drafting proposed 
regulatory changes and assisting our agency and Commissioners in the rulemaking process, (d) providing information to 
the Legislature on proposed measures impacting the MHRA, Commission or other issues related to the right to a human 
life with dignity in Maine, (e) counseling agency staff about ongoing legal issues, (f) issuing guidance and advisory opinions 
as needed, and too many other items to mention. Additionally, as more housing cases are investigated, there has been 
an increase in the number of cause findings in dual-filed housing cases; given the MHRA’s requirement that the 
Commission file court enforcement actions for all HUD-dual-filed housing cases in which cause is found and which do not 
resolve, the number of court actions Commission Counsel has had to file and litigate in court also has skyrocketed. 
LD 967 ls Unnecessary and Unworkable. 
The premise of this bill appears to be that the Commission - or its Commission Counsel — did or would assist in 
the court prosecution of NRG claims, which is factually false and counter to the agency's mission and statutory charge. 
Even if this wasn't the case, and the Commission wanted to provide the assistance that LD 967 imagines — which it does 
not - the agency has neither the ‘budgetary nor the personnel resources to accomplish that. 
All litigation goes through a single Commission employee: our Commission Counsel. As noted above, her duties 
are so extensive as to be almost laughable. The demands created by housing case increases have directly impacted the 
Commission's ability to issue investigator's Reports in the past two years,2 and our agency's case backlog ballooned 
during 2020 and 2021, a hole out of which Commission staff are working to dig. At the moment, there are 
approximately 13 court actions pending, and another five cases that our Counsel must file in court this Spring. The 
Commission's litigation budget is nonexistent: for example, the Commission generally forgoes taking depositions, even 
in its most complicated cases, because it has no funding with which to pay a court reporter. The notion of the 
Commission providing support to outside parties, when it cannot financially support its own litigation, is both ludicrous 
and utterly without merit. Similarly, the idea that Commission Counsel could divert time from her already Herculean 
workload in order to assist individuals with their own civil suits has no basis in reality? 
If LD 967 were to pass, it would cripple the Commission's ability to fulfill its statutorily-mandated duties, would 
require substantial additional work on the part of Commission Counsel and other Commission staff, and would 
necessitate substantial additional funding by the State for the Commission and the court system. Forbidding the 
Commission to “[e]xpend any commission resources" to assist a complainant who files a civil action" after an NRG 
decision, would result in at /east the following consequences (and likely others):C 
2 As noted in the Commission's Annual Reports, the Commission's ability to issue investigator's Reports has decreased 
significantly in recent years, from 280 in FY2019 to 155 in FY2022. 
3 The housing/pandemic crises have led to such a heavy load of housing investigation and litigation that the Commission had 
to divert existing investigator resources to allow Commission Counsel keep up with statutory obligations. About a year ago, 
one Commission investigator with housing litigation experience was assigned litigation tasks to assist Commission Counsel. 
MHRC Testimony, LD 967 March 21, 2023 Page 2 of3
The Commission would have to refuse to fulfill requests for file copies made by these complainants after an 
NRG decision. As a result, the Commission would be constantly in violation of Maine's Freedom of Access Act 
("FOAA"), resulting in a surge of FOAA appeals burdening Maine's Superior Courts, all of which would have to 
be defended by Commission Counsel. The Commission would be subject to escalating fines for its repeated 
violations of the law, for which it would need additional funding from the State. See 1 M.R.S. §§ 409, 410. 
The Commission would have to go to court to seek to quash any subpoena served on it by a complainant 
litigating a discrimination claim after an NRG filing. This includes subpoenas for records and for testimony, such 
as testimony authenticating Commission records. if the subpoena is not quashed, the Commission would face 
the option of refusing to testify and being held in contempt, or testifying and risking being held liable for the 
defendant's attorneys ’ fees. 
The Commission would have to file separate actions from complainants in RG cases, whereas now the 
Commission routinely files cases in conjunction with complainants after RG findings in the interests ofjudicial 
economy. ln any case in which the Commission made a split decision, this standard practice would be 
foreclosed, since individual litigants often also reassert their NRG claims (in which the Commission does not 
join). Because filing a consolidated court complaint in which the individual complainant reasserts NRG claims 
might be considered "assistance" , the Commission would no longer be able to file these joint complaints. 
Instead, the Commission would be required to file separately, then oppose any attempt by either the 
complainant or the respondent “ to consolidate the cases. If the cases were consolidated over ther 
Commission's ‘opposition, the Commission would again be in a no-win situation: it could proceed with the 
litigation and risk having to pay for respondent's defense, or dismiss its claims in violation of the MHRA and its 
work-sharing agreement with HUD. See 5 M.R.S. § 4612(4). 
The Commission would need to seek additional funding from the State sufficient to pay respondents ’ attorneys ’ 
fees and its FOAA fines. In addition, the overwhelming burden of these additional court actions against it 
would require the Commission to seek funding for at least one additional attorney, if not more. 
Finally, it is likely that the Commission would lose its federal funding from HUD. HUD provides funding to the 
Commission because it has determined that the MHRA is ”substantially equivalent" to the federal Fair Housing 
Act, allowing HUD to pay the Commission to process housing discrimination claims that are dual-filed with both 
agencies. This funding is approximately $286,500 in the current fiscal year alone. If the Commission is deemed 
ineligible for this funding, it will have to seek additional funds from the State to make up the shortfall. 
LD 967 IS unnecessary, would severely hamper the Commission's operations and place additional strain on the court 
system and the State's General Fund budget, and is ill-advised. 
Conclusion 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony against LD 967. The Commission would be pleased to 
dlSCUS5 these issues with you at your convenience, including at the work session on this matter. 
Sincerely, 
/‘44L¥12g/w~'{.% ‘*‘\1’*;»(5"*" ‘~"
F 
Amy M. Sneirson, Executive Director 
Cc Commissioners 
4 The Commission notes that it would be particular unjust for a respondent to move to consolidate the claims, then later seek 
its attorneys ’ fees from the Commission by claiming something done during the suit was of assistance to the complainant. 
MHRC Testimony, LD 967 March 21, 2023 Page 3 of3
