Ann Sawchuck
Cumberland
LD 518
OPPOSE LD 518
Chairpersons Rafferty and Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, thank you for reading my testimony OPPOSING LD 518, An Act 
to Allow Armed Security in Schools.
My name is Ann Sawchuck and I am a resident of Cumberland, Maine. I am the 
daughter of a public school teacher and for 10 years, following my retirement from 
business, I was a volunteer academic coach for ESL students in the Portland Public 
Schools. I am also a grandmother.
Maine has been fortunate to escape a mass shooting in our schools, maybe because 
our schools are now firearm free zones (20 MRSA 6552, Firearms), like Maine’s 
courts and the Statehouse. LD 518 will do nothing to increase school safety and much
to harm it.
Law enforcement officers are the only persons allowed to carry weapons on school 
property under 20 MRSA 6552. LD 518 will allow, absent discretionary adoption of 
standards by local school boards, untrained armed personnel in public schools without
any firearm permit or firearm safety or use training.
Trained law enforcement officers are the only persons who should have firearms on 
school property.  Security guards are not law enforcement officers.  There is no state 
mandated training program for security guards in Maine.  If Maine seriously wants to 
use security guards in schools a state program of training and permitting must be 
developed.
And, of course, if there were a tragedy involving a school board approved security 
officer or his or her weapon, the school board or the school district (or both) would be
liable. 
Youth in Maine are struggling with mental health, academics and housing instability 
at higher rates than before the COVID-19 pandemic, according to a report released by
the Maine Children's Alliance on Tuesday. (See Portland Press Herald, April 25, 
2023, “Maine children continue to struggle in wake of the pandemic”.)  Let’s try to 
help kids with these issues before we put guns in our schools.
LD 518 is a bad idea.  Please OPPOSE it.  Thank you.

