Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education 
Committee. Good afternoon, my name is Henry Cossaboom and I am a junior at 
Casco Bay High School in Portland. I have lived in Maine for almost 4 years 
now. Maine has been a nice change of pace from Colorado where I lived for 10 
years. One of the main reasons is I honestly like the lack of local school 
shootings and there are also less school shooting drills and lockdowns that 
happen in Maine. l firmly believe that the current proposed bills 52, 518 and 
1557 should not pass because I feel that these changes will endanger the 
students, teachers and other staff of being harmed or killed. Many teachers may 
not want to be armed and what happens when one of these guns is stolen or 
misplaced? Having access to guns in schools is a ticking time bomb. It only 
takes one person and one gun to cause chaos. Most of us know or have heard 
of the Columbine shooting at Columbine high school in Colorado. Sol Rais was 
an 18 year old woman fascinated with this shooting and in 2019 on Columbines 
20th anniversary she took a plane from Florida to Colorado. She landed at 
DIA, immediately took an uber to Columbine and bought a gun at the gun store 
near the high school. Sol then took an uber to Mt. Evans in the mountains and 
dropped off the radar. Because her whereabouts were unknown the next day 
almost every single school in the state closed due to one person and one 
gun. She was later found dead due to a self-inflicted gunshot wound. Not even 
a month later in Highlands Ranch, Colorado the STEM school had its shooting 
where 18-year-old Devon Erickson and 16-year-old Alec McKinney went armed
to school with the weapons in their guitar cases. They opened fire in two 
different locations and sadly killed one student, Kendrick Castillo. 8 were injured 
6 by the perpetrators but 2 were accidently shot by armed security guards at the 
school. Guns in schools no matter who wields them do not solve this growing 
issue in American society. That was less than a mile from my home. My friends 
were there. Thankfully none were physically hurt but all were mentally and 
emotionally hurt. I was honestly scared to go back to school then. If these bills 
pass I would really consider dropping out and I know many others would do the 
same. It wouldn’t be school anymore it would become a battle ground and filled 
with more than the typical stresses of school which is hard enough. l know many 
others would do the same as me. l value my education and I enjoy aspects of 
school and I want it to stay like that. Guns don't solve guns, that's one of the 
main things Ive learned in the 16 years of my life and l hope you can see it that 
way too.
