Janice Vance
Kennebunk
LD 518
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the 
Education & Cultural Affairs Committee. My name is Janice Vance and I am a 
resident of Kennebunk – one of Senator Rafferty’s constituents. I cannot be present 
today to testify. LD 518 is a “trick question” bill and I am opposed to it. The bill 
states that a school board can employ “a school resource officer, private contractor or 
volunteer with applicable background and experience to provide armed security at a 
school.” Maine has 192 school districts, and 29 of them already have School Resource
Officers (70 officers in total). In Kennebunk we’ve had some awesome SROs. But the
role SROs play varies significantly from school to school. A good SRO can promote 
safety, deter criminal activity, reduce fighting, bullying and other rule-breaking, and 
make some students feel safer. But the idea that an SRO can protect an entire school 
from a shooter armed with an AR weapon is overly optimistic. At Sandy Hook the 
shooter used his AR-15 to blow holes through the doors and in less than five minutes 
discharged 154 rounds, killing six school administrators and twenty first-graders 
before killing himself. That’s barely enough time for an SRO to respond, and that 
SRO would have been sadly out-gunned by the shooter’s military weaponry. We 
know that multiple SROs at the Uvalde school shooting, along with the 376 other 
officers who arrived at the school, didn’t confront the active shooter for over an hour, 
while 19 students and 2 teachers were murdered by a student who had stockpiled 
military-style weapons. But, on the plus side, at least SROs are actual trained police 
officers. Because here’s the trick part of this bill:  it proposes to also allow “private 
contractors or volunteers” to provide armed security at schools. If a trained SRO, who
is usually assigned to a school long-term, isn’t equal to the task of stopping shooters, I
can’t imagine how a contractor or volunteer would perform under such duress. Who 
determines what the “applicable background and experience” needs to be? Please do 
not advance this half-baked bill.  
