LD 518 - An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools 
  
 
Memorandum of Support  
Date:  April 26, 2023 
To:  Honorable Members of the Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs.  
From:  Jonathan Martell  
RE:  LD 518 - An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools 
 
 
Members of the committee, I would like to express my Support of LD 518 - An Act to Allow Armed Security in 
Schools 
 
My Name is Jonathan Martell. I am a Sanford City Councilor, Head of The Southern Maine Chapter for Gun 
Owners of Maine, Legislative Officer for Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Club and NRA Member.  
 
School shootings have been an issue since they were made into gun free zones in 1990. Title XVII, Section 
1702, of the Crime Control Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-647), the Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990, makes it 
illegal for any individual to knowingly possess a firearm in a school zone. 
 
Clearly, the opposite of the intended effect has happened since we now hear of school shootings in various parts 
of the country Maine is the safest state in the country, except for our schools where everyone but possibly a 
School Resource Officer that may or may not be at a school based on funding and other factors. School 
Resource Officers have been used with success at some locations, but are limited to to availability of officers, 
budgeting limitations and other factors. SRO's and suitably trained private contractors or volunteers would allow 
for additional security with lowered to no cost to the taxpayer. In Sanford, at least one SRO has to move 
between buildings due to budgeting restrictions for officers. Can we justify not allowing the school to provide 
additional security at the same training levels?  
 
While I would like to see Gun Free Zones go away completely, this is a good first step in allowing SRO's, 
Contractors and volunteers to be armed with suitable training  
 
 
Please support this bill as we need to better protect our children.  
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Jonathan Martell 
Sanford, ME 
Sanford City Councilor 
Head of The Southern Maine Chapter for Gun Owners of Maine 
Legislative Officer for Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Club 
National Rifle Association Member 
 
