PO BOX 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
' 
(207) 774-5444 
www.ac|umaine org 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNIUN 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN ASWAY, ESQ. 
LD 518 — Ought Not to Pass 
An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools , 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
_ 
April 26, 2022A 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am 
Policy Director for the American Civil_Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization 
committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S.- 
Constitutions through advocacy; education, and litigation. On behalf of our members, we urge 
you to oppose this bill because it would reinforce the harmful institution of school policing. 
If enacted, this bill would allow school boards to create an aimed police presence in 
Maine schools. This legislation would allow school boards to employ or engage an armed 
school resource ofﬁcer, private contractor, or volunteer to work in the school board's school 
administrative unit.C 
Keeping Maine children safe at school is vital, but placing armed law enforcement in 
our schools would only create new problems. The ACLU has long advocated for the removal 
of police from schools because they are generally ill equipped to address the mental and 
behavioral health challenges that often underpin children ’s misbehavior. When police enter 
schools, they do what they are trained to do: detain, handcuff, and arrest students of color and 
with disabilities — and the data prove it. School police arrest Black girls at nearly 8 times the 
rate of white girls, and kids of color or with disabilities at 3 times the rate compared to all other 
students. ‘ The presence of an aimed, uniformed police officer in a school often means the 
difference between as child’s misbehavior being considered criminal conduct or being treated 
l 
ACLU, Cops and No Counselors: How the Lack of School Mental Health Staff Is Harming Students, Mar. 2019, available at 
llitps // www .aclu .o1'g/report/ ‘cops-and-no-counselors .
with the appropriate behavioral health intervention that counselors and teachers are well 
trained» to handle alongside parents and guardians? 
In addition to pushing students into the criminal legal system when what they really 
need is support, armed police do not even make schools or students safer. The only study ever 
conducted of Maine’s school resource officer system conﬁrms this conclusion, and the same 
results have been found throughout the country.3 Moreover, other studies show placing armed 
police in schools doesn’t even make students feel safer.4 Students of color feel — and are— 
especially vulnerable in the presence of school resource off1cers.5 This leads to greater student 
alienation and a more threatening school climate. Last, funding programs like this force 
teachers, counselors, and social workers to compete for scarce funds. Portland ’s school board 
ended its school resource officer program in 2020, citing this ﬁscal burden and the harmful 
impact of armed police on students of color and students with disabilities. 
For the same reasons we have opposed the use of school resource ofﬁcers in schools, 
we oppose the use of school resource officers, contractors, or volunteers to patrol schools 
armed with weapons. We all want to make schools safer, but bringing more guns and law 
enforcement into our schools is not the answer. Instead, we should increase our children ’s 
access to counselors, therapists, social workers, after school programming, and violence 
intervention. We urge you to vote ought not to pass. 
2 See Matthew Theriot, School Resource Oﬁficers and the Criminczlization of Student Behavior, 37 J. of Crim. Just. 
280, 280 (2009); Kim Brooks et al., School House Hype: Two Years Later, Justice Policy Inst. & Children ’s Law Center, 
Inc. (2000). 
3 School-Based Policing in Maine: A Study on School Resource Oﬂicers in Maine‘s Public Schools, Univ. of S., 
Maine, Muskie School, Cutler Institute, October 3, 2019, at 12 [hereinafter Cutler Institute Study] available at 
https://usnrmaine.edu/publicaffairstfirst-ever-report-mainesschool-based-policing-rele-ased-usms-cutler-institute. 
4 Theriot, M. & Cuellar, M. (2016). School resource oﬂicers and students ’ rights. Contemporary Justice Review, 19 
(3), 363-379; Tillyer, M.S., Fisher, B.S. & Wilcox, P. (2011). The eﬂects of school crime prevention on students ’ violent 
victimization, risk perception, and fear of crime: A multilevel opportunity perspective. Justice Quarterly, 28 (2), 249-277. 
5 Morris, M.W., Epstein, R., & Yusuf, A. (2018). Be Her Resource: A toolkit about school resource officers and girls 
of color. Center on Poverty and Inequality, Georgetown Law; Lacoe, J. (2015). Unequally safe: The race gap in school 
safety. Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice, 13, l43»l68.
