.mE'=F?'I —_' _-5 INVESTIGATIONS & SECURITY 
LD-518, “An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools” (April 26, 2023) 
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and respective members 
of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is 
Michael C. Harrington, II. I am a resident of Winthrop. I am Co-Owner / Vice_ 
President of Merrill’s Investigations and Security Services and a professional 
licensed Investigator. I am testifying today on behalf of my company in support of 
LD-518. 
Founded in 1986, Merrill's Investigation and Security has spent the past 37 
years building our reputation as the best, most reliable, and easiest to Work with 
investigation and security firm in the industry. In 1999 the company added 
security and executive protection to its suite of services. 
Over the past several years, l\/Ierrill ’s has been called upon by clients who are in 
desperate need of a high-level security service to assist them in mitigating risksI 
they are facing. Often, these callers are affiliated with a school or educational 
program, and they have been referred to l\/Ierrill ’ s by a trusted member of the Law 
Enforcement Community due to our reputation. In one recent instance, lVIerrill ’s 
Was contacted by a superintendent of schools here in Maine. ’They were facing 
serious threats of violence at one of their schools and the police department did not 
have the resources to dedicate an officer to the school. The police chief 
recommended the Superintendent reach out to Merrill’s, so they did. 
It Was immediately clear, in this particular instance, this school Was in a very bad 
situation. They were looking for our guidance in mitigating the risk they Were 
facing from the current threats. Part of this conversation turned to them asking for 
email: m2@merrilIsinvestigations.com 0 phone: (207)685-7309
us to provide armed security for the school. They Were prepared with the school 
board’s support to provide an exception in policy for us to provide this service. I had 
to inform them that the Way the law is Written, even With being professionally 
licensed to do so, We cannot be on school property with a firearm for any reason, 
even to provide security for the school at the school’s request. 
Through this conversation, and finding Ways to assist them in mitigating risk, it' 
was decided We would provide un-armed security to them at night to ensure the 
continuity and integrity of the school was intact when classes began the next 
morning. This meant our investigators Who are fully licensed to carry firearms 
While performing the duty of professional investigators, Were not able to protect 
even themselves in the event a nefarious actor did indeed arrive at the school With 
ill intentions While they Were there during the overnight. Through this and many 
other conversations With the Public Safety community, it is glaringly obvious to 
most there needs to be a change in the law. Law Enforcement agencies are 
struggling more and more to attract and retain the numbers they need in order to 
conduct the basic functions of the agency, let alone commit resources to a school. 
There needs to be a supplement to this need as it is likely not going away anytime , 
soon. 
Licensed Professional Investigators like those Who Work With Merrill’s are required 
to be tested and licensed for firearms carry through the Maine State Police, 
department of public safety. We cannot simply take a class and get a concealed 
carry permit through a municipal department. This is because there is an 
understanding We will utilize firearms professionally in our course of Work in 
Armed Security, Personal protection, Executive protection, etc. and for this, We are 
held to a higher standard for testing and licensing. Most _ all investigators who Work 
with Merrill’s are former law enforcement or military police and security forces Who 
have Worked and trained for years in protecting others at times of uncertainty. 
email: m2@merril|sinvestigations.com 0 phone: (207) 6857309
We truly feel there should be exceptions in the law to allow personnel who are duly 
licensed and insured to perform these high-level security services to do so at our 
schools here in Maine, to act as a supplemental resource to public safety agencies in 
keeping our schools and Maine’s children and young adults safe While in the 
classroom. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of our position on this matter. 
email: m2@merrillsinvestigations.com 0 phone: (207) 6857309
