Testimony in Support of LD 52, LD 518 & LD 1557 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
April 25, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 52
An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School Property 
and
LD 518
An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools  
and
LD 1557
An Act to Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing Individuals with Concealed
Carry Permits to Possess Handguns on School Property
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:
My name is Nathan Gould. I am writing this testimony in support of LD 52, LD 
518, and LD 1557.
We should place the highest emphasis on the protection of our children. If we 
trust educators to equip children for their future, should we not also give them the 
ability to exercise their Second Amendment right to protect them? If there is such a 
push to give teachers sweeping control over children’s lives, why would we not trust 
teachers to defend their students? Should we not trust parents, who are the primary 
protectors of their children, who have demonstrated the knowledge and responsibility 
Testimony in Support of LD 52, LD 518 & LD 1557 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
evidenced in obtaining a concealed carry permit? Should we not invest in armed 
security for our schools?
The right to defend family—whether your own or those of another entrusted to 
your care—in a fundamental, Natural—God-given—right. It is also a responsibility. The 
requirements to obtain a concealed carry permit ensure that those who possess it are 
the most responsible of gun owners, capable of exercising that right and responsibility.
Firearms serve as a deterrent. A grocery store may have a sign warning potential 
robbers that the safe requires two keys, one being in an armored car. An even greater 
deterrent to those with homicidal intentions would be the knowledge that a school’s 
faculty may be armed and trained. Firearms are used for protection more than 2 million
times a year1. Just the presence of a firearm can serve a deterrent.
We must also protect concealed carry permit holders who are traveling near 
schools. One may be stopped by law enforcement, reveal they have a firearm, and face 
severe penalties when they had no intention of breaking the law.
You will be informed about the eight states that already allow concealed carry in 
their schools for those with the permit. Maine should follow their lead.
We put armed protection around our most important persons, our most valuable
materials, and our most critical infrastructure. What is more important, more valuable, 
and more critical than our children—our posterity?
I ask the Committee to vote Ought to Pass, and I thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
1Kleck, Gary and Gertz, Marc. (1995). "Armed Resistance to Crime: the Prevalence and Nature of Self-defense with a 
Gun." Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology 86(1):150-187
