Peggy McGehee 
F almouth, Maine 
Testimony in Opposition to LD S18: An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools 
Dear Chairs Rafferty, Brennan and Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee: 
I am Peggy McGehee, a resident, former school board member and town councilor of the Town of F almouth. 
I oppose L.D. 518, as someone who believes fervently that we need to protect our students, and who is part ofa 
gun-owning, public service family. Our son is a U.S. Marine captain having served in active duty in Iraq, and 
my daughter ’s son, my grandson, ls leaming to shoot and hunt. 
l oppose this bill because anyone who is armed in our schools should be highly trained in gun use, gun safely 
and de-escalation techniques. This bill, however, would allow for untrained, unqualiﬁed private contractors to 
be armed in schools. This is a bad, risky, idea. 
Our town pays for two police officers to be in our schools, and is considering adding a third. Our police chief 
has lunch with our high school students at school, once a week. These police officers are called “school 
resource officers, ” (“SROs”) by state statute, 25 M.R.S.A. § 3701 (3). They are highly trained in gun use and 
gun safety and serve a minimum of ﬁve years on the police force, and leam de~escalation teclmiques, before 
they even enter a school environment as an SRO. 
Every school district that wants armed protection in their schools deserves the same level of training as 
our schools in F almouth have. For towns that cannot afford to pay for such SROs, the State should pay 
for them though a grant program. Students do not deserve to have the false security and higher accident risk 
of untrained, and unqualiﬁed armed private contractors that this bill will allow. 
Maine does not require armed security guards to have any gun permit or certiﬁcation, or any gun use or safety 
training. See the Private Security Guards Act, Title 32 M.R.S.A. §94l0-A. See also securityguard-license.org - 
Maine: “Maine does not currently mandate training or testing [to carry guns] ...Maine does not havea 
credentialing process for armed security qﬂicers.” Nor is there any State gun use training program available to 
train armed security guards. 
Other states that allow armed security guards in their schools have rigorous State training and permitting 
standards. ln Connecticut armed security officers must pass a State Police course with extended classroom, 
ﬁring range and safety training, and must obtain a pistol permit license “Class 1/ armed security ofﬁcer,” called 
a “Blue Card”. 
This bill would be ineffective in its goal to protect. Instead of shielding students from being what proponents 
call a “soft target” , it would only create the more likely risk of their becoming an “accidental target” , as the 
incidents of accidental discharges of ﬁreairns carried by untrained school personnel are too common. And 
schools risk liability for injury from any accidental shooting, for negligence due to the inadequate training and 
supervising of these aimed guards. 
l therefore urge the Committee to vote ought not to pass, and ask that legislators go back to the drawing board 
to do this right, to do this safely, for all students in Maine. No student should be second class when it comes to 
safety and protection from gun violence. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. Peggy McGehee pmcgehee4@gmail.com
