 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
Neither For Nor Against  
April 20 , 2023  
 
LD 52 - An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on  
School Property , and 
LD 518 - An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Educational and Cultural Affairs 
Committee , my name is Rebecca Lambert,  and I am providing testimony neither for nor against LD 52 and 
LD 518  on behalf of Maine Municipal  Association’s (MMA) elec ted 70 -member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC). For reference, the LPC provides direction to the advocacy team at MMA and establishes 
the position on bills of municipal interest.   
  Municipal officials recognize the intense feelings both in support and opposition to any bill 
introduced relating to firearms in schools. As such, LD 52 sparked  immense discussion among LPC 
members from both sides of the aisle. Support for the bill is due in part to the fact that local leaders are 
also parents and aware of the tragic events that have occurred in schools across the nation in recent years. Officials are committed to ensuring that every possible measure is taken to provide a level of safety in  our 
schools relating to an active shooter event.  
 However, municipal officials are concerned about how law enforcement will know who is armed 
within a school and is actually a “good guy,” if an active shooter event should occur. The potential for mistaken identity during a critically stressful time  is too great of a risk . Schools currently have the ability 
to hire a trained school resource officer (SRO ), and should the community feel that  level of security is  
necessary, can vote to approve a school budget that include s funding for an SRO.  
 Municipal leaders appreciate that arming school employees would not be mandatory and support 
local control and community choice in this matter. The LPC fu rther recognizes that school staff and 
students come from a variety of backgrounds with differing experiences who could find having firearms in schools extremely unsettling and potentially triggering for survivors of violence.  
 Knowing that education is ke y to the future of young people in our communities, the LPC 
appreciates that LD 518 aims to provide a safe and secure environment for students and staff within our schools. As stated earlier in my testimony, schools have the ability to budget for and hire a trained school 
resource officer and feel this proposal might be unnecessary.  
 
For all these reasons  the LPC is neither for nor against LD 52 and LD 518. Thank you for your time 
and for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.       
