April 23, 2023 
 
Dear Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, 
 
LD 518 is a terrible bill for many reasons, but primarily because we do not need armed security 
guards in our schools. My husband is a high school teacher and I retired from classroom 
teaching in 2020. We have spent our careers trying to give children a safe and stimulating 
educational experience, and reaching out to those marginalized children so everyone feels 
welcomed In our classrooms. Our schools are places of learning. You must not give in to 
people’s fear and the gun lobby’s talking points. Armed persons in schools will put everyone at 
risk of harm.  
 
Additionally, I find it unreasonable to ask our school boards to allocate precious education 
funds to hire private security guards. The presence of armed security guards will cause children 
and teachers more anxiety and make it harder for us, as teachers, to create a welcoming 
culture in our schools. The idea of hardening our schools is the opposite of what we need to do. 
This bill is yet another shallow ploy by the gun lobby and those legislators who benefit from the 
NRA to make guns more prevalent in our society.  
 
I say, “Enough is enough.” We must say “No” to more guns as the solution to the epidemic of 
gun violence. Let’s treat the disease at its root—by addressing the causes of gun violence 
through research-informed policies at the state and national level.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Robin Brooks 
(she, hers) 
 
47 Ivanhoe Drive 
Topsham, Maine 04086 
 
207-232-9734 
 
 
 
Robin Brooks
Topsham
LD 518
April 23, 2023
Dear Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee,
LD 518 is a terrible bill for many reasons, but primarily because we do not need 
armed security guards in our schools. My husband is a high school teacher and I 
retired from classroom teaching in 2020. We have spent our careers trying to give 
children a safe and stimulating educational experience, and reaching out to those 
marginalized children so everyone feels welcomed In our classrooms. Our schools are
places of learning. You must not give in to people’s fear and the gun lobby’s talking 
points. Armed persons in schools will put everyone at risk of harm. 
Additionally, I find it unreasonable to ask our school boards to allocate precious 
education funds to hire private security guards. The presence of armed security guards
will cause children and teachers more anxiety and make it harder for us, as teachers, 
to create a welcoming culture in our schools. The idea of hardening our schools is the 
opposite of what we need to do. This bill is yet another shallow ploy by the gun lobby
and those legislators who benefit from the NRA to make guns more prevalent in our 
society. 
I say, “Enough is enough.” We must say “No” to more guns as the solution to the 
epidemic of gun violence. Let’s treat the disease at its root—by addressing the causes 
of gun violence through research-informed policies at the state and national level. 
Sincerely,
Robin Brooks
(she, hers)
47 Ivanhoe Drive
Topsham, Maine 04086
207-232-9734
