 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE IMMIGRANTS’ RIGHTS COALITION  (MIRC)  ON: 
• L.D. 52: An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School 
Property  
• L.D. 518: An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools  
• L.D. 1557: An Act to Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing Individuals with 
Concealed Carry Permits to Possess Handguns on School Proper ty 
 
Senator Raffert y, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs:  
 
 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I am the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ 
Rights Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network of almost 100 member organizations working to 
enhance the lives of Maine’s immigrant communities. MIRC works to advance systemic changes 
in Mai ne through collaborative advocacy to ensure that voices of the state’s large, diverse, and 
growing immigrant communities are heard.    
It seems that each week , there is another school sho oting in America. I cannot imagine the fear 
that parents and children have that their school could be next. The common denom inator in all of 
these shootings i s guns. Regrettably, these proposals would just  put more guns – the very 
weapons used to c ause death  and d estruction – into schoo ls. This is not good policy.  It is easy to 
imagine a scenario  in which accidental discharge or theft of a weapon results in catastrophe . 
Recently, guns have become th e leading cause o f death of children nationwi de. We also know 
that BIP OC children face disproportionate  discrimination by secu rity. Combined, this is a 
potential ly deadly com bination.  
We trust Dr. Abbie Yamamoto  of Portland Public Schools when she says “From where I sit, 
leading an educational institution whose constituents are majority immigrants a nd BIPOC, the 
issue feels dire. Our school, adult learners, instructors, and staff will not be safer for having guns 
here. ” In their testimony against  L.D. 1557, the Maine Principals' Association said , "We are 
strongly opposed to having anyone with a handgun in our schools ." In their testimony  against 
L.D. 52, the Ma ine Children ’s Alliance said, “introducing more guns into schools is not an 
effective policy solution to address this issue .”  
This all  seems pretty straightforward to us. If guns are  ever to be carried, they need to be on a 
military batt lefield against enemy combatants  or hunting for food  in the outdoors ; not in the 
hallways of our school buildings  full of students and teachers . We wholeheartedly oppose L .D. 
52, L.D. 5 18, and L.D. 1557  and encourage you to do the same.  Thank you very much for your 
consideration of this important issue.  
 
### 
