Testimony to the Maine Legislature Education and Cultural Affairs Committee on LD 518 
Xavier Botana, Portland Maine 
April 26, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education Committee. My name 
is Xavier Botana, I am a resident of Portland and a forty year educator. Until January lserved 
as superintendent of the Portland Public Schools for the past six and a half years. 
I am here to ask you to NOT SUPPORT passage of LD 518, An Act to A/low Armed Security in 
Schools. 
As a local superintendent, there were many things that kept me up at night. None was more 
haunting or daunting than the responsibility of working to ensure that students and staff under 
my care were safe from a deadly attack brought by someone with access to firearms. And,l 
can tell you unequivocally that this is a sentiment that is consistently voiced by my colleague 
superintendents. 
And for good reason. 
According to a recent Pew Research Center report, gun deaths among America’s children 
increased by 50% between 2019 and 2021. Since the start of this year, over 500 American 
children under the age of 17 have been killed with guns. Additionally 1,286 had been injured. 
Last year marked the deadliest year in American schools in this century. 
l want to speak specifically to LD 518. Over my career, I have had the privilege of working 
closely with law enforcement. I am honored and humbled to currently serve on the City of 
Portland ’s police incident review subcommittee. I have tremendous respect for the work of law 
enforcement. Through this work, l have a better than average line of sight into their work.l 
realize how incredibly challenging that work is. Every day our sworn officers rely on their 
training and expertise to make critical, sometimes life and death decisions. 
lt is with that understanding that l assert that anything less than the most highly trained, 
experienced and well supervised police do not belong in schools. Let's face it, you will get what 
you pay for. To look for cheap solutions to keeping students and staff safe will, again, just bring 
along unintended consequences and make our schools less safe. The math is simple: Less 
guns=Safer schools, More guns=Less safe schools. 
Thank you for your work on this important topic.
