LD 927 Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation to Conduct an 
Independent Assessment Regarding a Proposal to License Genetic Counselors 
Testimony in Support 
March 21, 2012 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee, my name is Margaret Rieley, MD, and l am a board certified clinical medical 
geneticist and pediatrician at Northern Light Eastern Maine Medical Center. i am here today speaking in 
strong support of this bill. 
Medical geneticists and genetic counselors work together to provide counseling, diagnosis, and care of 
genetic conditions throughout the lifespan, from prenatal to adult. We see individuals with congenital 
anomalies including congenital heart defects and cleft lip/palate, developmental delays, autism, 
seizures, adult conditions including cardiac arrhythmia, cardiomyopathy, aortic aneurysm, 
neuromuscular disorders, and hereditary cancer syndromes. 
As you have or will hear today, the quality of patient care suffers without access to genetic counselors. 
Genetic counselors focus on the gathering of pertinent family history, providing nondirective patient 
education of genetic test options, potential results, insurance coverage, privacy protections and 
limitations of genetic information by the GINA law, and provide support resources for patients and 
families. When a genetic counselor is not involved, we see an increase in the wrong test being ordered, 
patients receiving a bill for sometimes thousands of dollars, and patient distress when the lab results are 
incorrectly interpreted by a non-genetics provider. 
Without licensure, Maine hospitals cannot hire additional genetic counselors due to inability to bill for 
their services. Our wait list for Northern Light cancer genetics is over 800 patients; for pediatric and 
adult genetics it is 18 months. This means Maine people may have an extended wait for services, 
decline genetics care or must travel out of state. I hope you will agree that genetic counselor licensure 
is critical to ensure Mainers’ access to genetic services. 
In closing I ask that you support this important legislation and I thank you for the opportunity to share 
why this bill is important to the people of Maine. 
Margaret B. Rieley, MD FACMG FAAP
