March 21, 2023  
 
Joint Committee on Health Coverage, I nsurance and Financial Services  
Re: LD 927: Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation to Conduct an 
Independent Assessment Regarding a Proposal to License Genetic Counselors  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the Committee : 
As genetic counselors  and clinicians working with genetic counselors  who practice  in Maine, we appreciate 
the opportunity to testify in favor of genetic counselor licensure before the Joint Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insuran ce and Financial Services. We were pleased that the Advisory Panel t o Better Understand 
and Make Recommendations Regarding the Implications of Genome -editing Technology for the Citizens of 
the State  identified genetic counselor licensure as an importan t component of ensuring that Mainers have  
access to high quality genetic services.  
Genetic counselors are experts with advanced training in medical genetics and counseling who work 
collaboratively as part of the medical team to offer comprehensive genetic coun seling services to patients. 
They serve as one of the foundational pillars in delivering personalized medicine to patients who would 
benefit from genetic testing to identify specific genetic markers, prevent disease, and ensure optimal 
treatment.  
Genetic c ounselor licensure is important for the state as it will help ensure Mainers are not harmed by 
unqualified genetic counselors.  Genetics is an extremely innovative space with ten to fourteen new tests 
coming to market daily. We have the specialized trainin g to determine the best test fo r a patient, the best 
laboratory  to order a test from (high quality and lower cost), and the ability to correctly interpret results.  
Significant harm can occur when health care practitioners do not utilize the technology of genetic testing 
correct ly.  Examples of this harm are:  
A local neurologist ordered a genetic testing panel for a toddler with a seizure disorder and developmental 
delays.  The physician told the family that the test result was not diagnostic.  A genetic co unselor who 
reviewed the results later noticed that the child actually had duplications of several genes on the X 
chromosome and ordered chromosomal testing that identified a small extra ring X chromosome; similar 
ring chromosomes are known to be associate d with developmental delays and structural brain 
abnormalities.  This provided the child/family with a diagnosis and the medical team with prognostic 
information that could be used for management of the child’s symptoms.  
A Maine woman was seen at a hospita l in Boston for her family history of chromosome translocation.  Her 
brother was born with a chromosome deletion (2q37 microdeletion syndrome). The provider in Boston 
ordered a karyotype (chromosome analysis) and told the woman she was not a carrier of a b alanced 
translocation.  The woman went on to have a child with developmental delays.  The child was seen by a 
Maine genetic counselor and geneticist, who ordered chromosomal testing that identified a 2q37 deletion 
the child.  Additional testing in the woma n (using a more specific method, called FISH) identified that she 
was indeed a carrier of a balanced translocation.  
A 31 year old woman with breast cancer presented for a cancer genetic evaluation, testing was facilitated 
by a trained genetic counselor through a well -known and reputable genetic testing laboratory, and the 
patient was identified to have a patho genic mutation in the ATM gene, associated with higher risks for 
breast and other cancers. Other family members were then recommended to pursue testing for the 
mutation. The patient’s mother approached her primary care provider to initiate testing, which w as 
ordered without the involvement of a genetic counselor. A multi -gene hereditary cancer panel was 
ordered through a different genetic testing laboratory that did not have the same level of expertise in 
oncology genetics as the lab that performed the initial patient’s testing. The large panel of genes was an 
unnecessary t est for the patient’s mother;  the most cost -effective testing strategy would be to order 
targeted single -gene testing for the known familial mutation. In addition, this laboratory failed to ide ntify 
the mutation, as this specific ATM mutation is a technically complex mutation to detect. As a result, the 
patient’s mother was incorrectly determined to be at average risk for cancer, which could have led to a 
missed opportunity for early detection o r prevention of cancer. Fortunately, the patient provided these 
records to us for review, we re -tested the mother through the initial genetic testing lab, confirmed that 
the mother also carried this mutation, and initiated high risk screening for breast ca ncer. Had a genetic 
counselor been involved from the outset in the mother’s test ordering, the genetic counselor would have 
had the expertise to select the appropriate genetic testing laboratory and test, which would have saved 
the family cost, con fusion, and anxiety, and avoided the potential for morbidity and mortality related to 
a late -stage cancer diagnosis.  
A male patient was tested for a  familial BRCA2 pathogenic mutation through their PCP’s office, which 
returned with a positive result for the BRCA2 mutation. The nurse who disclosed the result to the patient 
recommended that the patient consider chemoprevention and prophylactic surgery b ased on the genetic 
test results in her documentation. These recommendations would be appropriate for a female patient 
identified to have a BRCA2 mutation, however, given the significantly lower lifetime risk for men to 
develop breast cancer compared to wo men, chemoprevention and prophylactic surgery would not be 
recommended for a male patient. Had the patient pursued chemoprevention and prophylactic surgery, 
he would have faced unnecessary medication and/or procedures and significant possible side effects of 
these medications and/or procedures. The distress caused by this inaccurate interpretation of genetic 
testing results could have been avoided had a genetic counselor been involved in his care.  
A patient informed her obstetric care provider  that her sist er had recently been diagnosed to have a 
connective tissue disorder. The patient was concerned that she might also have the condition and could 
pass it on to her future children. The provider  ordered a panel test that included several genes associated 
with  various connective tissue disorders. The results were negative and the patient was reassured. The 
patient was later referred to a gen etic counselor for an unrelated indication . In reviewing the record the 
genetic counselor noted that the genes on the test ing panel did not include the gene responsible for her 
sister’s condition.  A targeted test would have been more accurate and less expensive than the testing that 
was performed.  
To date, thirty -five states have enacted licensure laws including New Hampshir e, Massachusetts and 
Connecticut.  Licensure improves access to our services as hospitals are more able to credential us. 
Credentialing makes it more likely that health plans will reimburse our service. The lack of reimbursement 
is a barrier to our service s as most patients cannot afford to pay out of pocket and it prevents many 
hospitals and physician practices from hiring us.  Today there are about twenty genetic counselors in the 
state whereas there are about thirty in New Hampshire and over two -hundred in Massachusetts.   
It is important to note that licensure of genetic counselors does not have to be a significant administrative 
burd en. As a profession, genetic counseling has one accreditation for our Master’s level education and 
training.  We also have  one certification board and certification requires that we have successfully 
graduated from an accredited training program. Therefore, verifying credentials can be a very 
straightforward process of verifying certification. Most states charge genetic counselors between $100 -
$350 for a two -year license.  
The National Socie ty of Genetic Counselors (NSGC)  have led the licensure effort around the country and 
they have significant resources that are available including model legis lative provisions that would ensure 
our licensure is consistent with other states .  
Thank you for your consideration and we hope the committee will support genetic counselor licensure. 
This will ensure that high quality genetic services are provided to Mai ners while improving access to our 
services.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Renée Chard, MSc, CGC  (she/her)    Stephanie Sharp, MS, CGC (she/her)  
Certified Genetic Counselor     Certified Genetic Counselor  
 
Elizabeth Schweitzer, MS, CGC (she/her)    Molly Carpenter, MS, GCG  (she/her)  
Certi fied Genetic Counselor     Certified Genetic Counselor  
 
Ashley Kennes, MS, CGC (she/her)    Kathlene Gravelin, MS, CGC  (she/her)  
Certified Genetic Counselor     Certified Genetic Counselor  
 
Jenna Albrecht, MS c, CGC  (she/her)    Katherine A. Lafferty, MS, CGC ( she/her)  
Certified Genetic Counselor     Certified Genetic Counselor  
 
Katarzyna Bloch, MS, CGC  (she/her)    Kelsey M. Fusco, MS, CGC (she/her)  
Certified Genetic Counselor     Certified Genetic Counselor  
 
Sara Ellingwood, MS, CGC (she/her)    Luanna Buchanan, MS, CGC (she/her)  
Certified Genetic Counselor     Certified Genetic Counselor  
 
Taylor Carter, MS, CGC      Joseph Pagliarulo, MS, CGC (he/him)  
Certified Genetic Counselor     Certified Genetic Counselor  
 
Hannah Novak, MS, CGC  (she/her)    Jessica Cary, MS, RN,  CGC (she/her)  
Certified Genetic Counselor     Certified Genetic Counselor  
 
Rosemarie Smith, MD, FACMGG  (she/her)   Wendy Smith, MD (she/her)  
Clinical Geneticist      Clinical Geneticist  
 
Lindsey Kelley, MPH, MS, CGC  (she/her)    Carrie Milliard , MS, CGC  
Certified Genetic Counselor     Certified Genetic Counselor  
 
Judy Hiemenga, MD  
Clinical Geneticist  
