William Feero
Waterville
LD 927
Dear committee members:
My name is W. Gregory Feero MD, PhD and I am a family physician and human genetics 
researcher.  I have lived in Waterville, ME for approximately 20 years in total.  I am providing 
testimony in support of LD 927 “Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Professional and 
Financial Regulation to Conduct an Independent Assessment Regarding a Proposal to 
License Genetic Counselors”.   I am former Chief of the Genomic Healthcare Branch of the 
National Human Genome Research Institute of the National Institutes of Health.  I have been 
the genetics editor for the Journal of the American Medical Association for over a decade, am
co-chair of the Roundtable on Genomics and Precision Health for the National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, Professor in the Department of Community and Family 
Medicine Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, and on faculty at the Maine Dartmouth 
Family Medicine Residency Program.   I represent only my perspective as a Maine resident 
and physician in this testimony, and not any of those organizations.
Timely access to genetic services including counseling and testing for life threatening genetic 
conditions from newborns through adulthood is a national challenge.    This challenge to 
access is particularly true for under-served and rural communities; Maine is no exception.  
For example, current wait times for evaluation, genetic counseling, and genetic testing for 
pediatric patients with unexplained developmental delay is up to 12-18 months.  Delay in 
diagnosis, particularly when treatments specific to a particular genetic condition may be 
available, can be devastating to patients and families.
One of the major impediments to timely access to care is the lack of access to board certified 
medical geneticist physicians.  Currently in Maine there are less than 5, and the pipeline for 
training these individuals nationally has been challenging to ramp up.  Traditionally, medical 
geneticists have served as gatekeepers for access to genetic services, with genetic 
counselors unable to provide genetic services unless overseen by a physician.
Board certified genetic counselors are highly trained Master’s degree level health care 
professionals skilled at providing genetic counseling, as well as ordering and interpreting 
genetic testing.  Their training is rigorous and requires considerable hands on experience.   
They are a growing profession, and can work with a variety of physicians in pediatric and 
adult care settings to provide high quality genetic services.
Licensure of genetic counselors at the state level has allowed counselors increased ability to 
independently provide genetic counseling services.   The majority of states in the U.S.  offer 
licensure to counselors providing services in their states.  Licensure has facilitated the ability 
to directly order genetic tests in many states that have granted licensure status, has 
increased the ability to receive payment for their services, and prevented other types of health
care professionals less well trained from making claims of being a genetic counselor. 
I would strongly endorse Maine formally evaluating the potential for granting licensure status 
to genetic counselors.  Long term, I think licensure will attract genetic counselors to our state, 
increase timely access to high quality genetic services and improve the health of our citizens. 
Thank you for your time,
W. Gregory Feero MD, PhD

