 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Sewall Street  
Augusta, Maine 04330-6822 
TTY/Voice: (207) 632-9438 
www.maineequaljustice.org   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alex Carter 
Policy Advocate 
acarter@mejp.org 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1077, An Act to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure 
Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents 
 
April 4, 2023 
 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services. My name is Alex Carter, I use she/her 
pronouns, and I am a Policy Advocate at Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider 
working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. I am 
submitting testimony in support of LD 1077, An Act to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure 
Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents, sponsored by President Jackson. 
 
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) established Consumer Assistance Programs (CAPs) to help 
people learn about their coverage options and to enroll in and use their health insurance 
effectively. In 2011, Consumers for Affordable Health Care (CAHC) was designated as Maine’s 
CAP by the Attorney General and Superintendent of Insurance. However, federal funding has 
not been available to support their work since 2016. As a close collaborator with CAHC, we 
support ongoing state funding to continue their critical services.  
CAHC is an invaluable partner in our work to support low-income Mainers to access affordable 
healthcare. While MEJ holds significant expertise in MaineCare policy and eligibility, we 
regularly refer people to CAHC’s Helpline for education and navigation on their healthcare 
options. In their role as the state’s CAP, CAHC assists Mainers in figuring out how to cover the 
costs of their healthcare needs, determine the right health coverage for themselves and their 
families, understand what their rights and responsibilities are under their insurance contracts, 
assist in filing appeals with their insurance providers, and help them understand whether they 
are eligible for tax credits for insurance or other programs as individuals or as a small business. 
When it comes to understanding your options on the ACA Marketplace or for other private 
insurance, there is no better source of reliable and comprehensive information than CAHC. 
 
CAHC will play an even more essential role in our healthcare system in the coming year when 
many people are at risk of losing their healthcare coverage. Over the next 12 months, the state 
will be working to unwind many of the flexibilities that began under the federal Public Health 
Emergency (PHE), including the Medicaid continuous enrollment provision, and all MaineCare 
2 
members will be required to complete a redetermination. We know many people will fall 
through the cracks and miss their redetermination deadline, and many others will be found 
ineligible for MaineCare but may qualify for significant subsidies on the Marketplace. This is 
where organizations like CAHC will play a pivotal role, both helping to mitigate gaps in coverage 
and the “churn” of members on and off MaineCare and assisting those who are found ineligible 
to enroll in an affordable, private plan that best meets their needs.  
 
In addition to this hands-on assistance, CAHC provides information to the public and other 
service providers through numerous trainings on MaineCare, the ACA Marketplace, and other 
health care coverage issues throughout the year. Their trainings—many of which we participate 
in—have served hundreds of people across the state who in turn assist thousands of Mainers 
annually in enrolling in MaineCare. It’s hard to quantify the value of that assistance and 
expertise. Providing support in navigating our complex and ever-changing healthcare systems 
saves lives, money, and time—both for individual consumers and for the Department of Health 
and Human Services by diverting many of the questions that would go to eligibility workers.  
 
Our state’s CAP is an integral part of our healthcare system and a uniquely valuable resource 
for your constituents. It provides important information and support to Mainers throughout 
our state every day. For all these reasons, I urge you to support LD 1077. Thank you. 
 
