 
 
 
 53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202   |  Portland, ME 04101  
 Phone: 866 -554-5380  | Fax: 207-775-5727  | TTY: 877-434-7598  
 aarp.org/ me  |  me@aarp.org  |  twitter: @aarp maine  
 facebook.com/ aarpmaine  |  instagram.com/aarpme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 April 4, 2022  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1077: An Act to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure 
Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents  
 
Greetings Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services . I am Bridget Quinn, 
Associate State Director on Advocacy and Outreach for AARP Maine.  
 
AARP is the nation’s largest nonprofit, nonpartis an organization dedicated to empowering 
Americans 50 and older to choose how they live as they age. On behalf of our more than 
200,000 members statewide, thank you for the opportunity to share testimony.  Today I am 
testifying in favor of LD 1077: An Act t o Fund Consultation Services to Ensure Affordable 
Health Care for Maine Residents .  
 
An August 2020 report from the Kaiser Family Foundation, "Consumer Assistance in Health  
Insurance: Evidence of Impact and Unmet Need" noted that nationally 18% of consumer  
who looked for coverage received consumer assistance in the past year but "another 12% 
tried to find help but did not get it."1 The same report further states, “ Among consumers 
who received help 62% said they did not understand their coverage options and  52% said 
the process of applying was too complicated to complete on their own .” When consumers 
sought out help, “ 94% of consumers who got assistance said it was very or somewhat 
helpfu l.” Finally, “Many consumers sought help from the same assisters in pre vious years. ”2 
 
LD 1077 assures that health care insurance information continues to be available to all 
Mainers by extending funding for consumer support. Originally established in  
2019 by LD 1274, Consumer Assistance Programs (CAPs), required by the Affordable Care 
Act, were established to help people enroll in and use their health insurance effectively. 
Since then,  the Maine CAP, Consumers for Affordable Health Care, has provided a range of 
needed services  such as:  
 
• Collecting, tracking and quantifyi ng inquiries regarding health insurance and 
problems encountered by consumers;  
 
1 https://www.kff.org/health -reform/issue -brief/consumer -assistance -in-health -insurance -evidence -of-
impact -and-unmet -need/  
2 https://www.kff.org/health -reform/issue -brief/consumer -assistance -in-health -insurance -evidence -of-
impact -and-unmet -need/  
 
• Educating consumers on their rights and responsibilities with respect to health 
insurance coverage;  
• Assisting consumers with obtaining health insurance coverage by providing 
information, referrals or other assistance;  
• Providing information to the public about the services of the consumer 
assistance program through a comprehensive outreach program and a toll -free 
telephone number  
 
If no action is take n funding for the Consumer Ass istance Program will end later this year. 
This will be incredibly detrimental to Mainers particularly  with the ending of the Medicaid 
Continuous Coverage Requirements. It is predicted that at the end of the red etermination 
process between 65,000 to 90,000 Mainers may los e their MaineCare coverage.3 
 
AARP Maine works closely with Consumers for Affordable Health Care , and commends the 
work it does  to support Mainers 50 - 64 and their families who are navigating the health 
care system. CAHC is the  go-to resource for trusted information . 
 
LD 1077 ensures  easy -to-understand, common -sense solutions for consumers.  I urge this 
committee to support LD 1077. If you have questions for me I can be reached at 
bquinn@aar p.org  or at 207 -272 -8563 . Thank you.  
 
Bridget Quinn  
AARP Maine  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/files/inline -files/Presentation_0.pdf  
