 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 13 1st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial  Services  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
April 4 , 202 3 
 
Supporting:  
LD 1077 , “An Act to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents ” 
 
Sponsored by President Jackson  
 
Senator Ba iley, Representative Perry , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial  Services, I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager 
at Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA) .  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
 
We strongly support LD 1077  and thank President Jackson for bringing  this legislation forward . 
 
Section 1002 of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) established Consumer Assistance Programs (CAPs) to 
help people enroll in and effectively use their health insurance . CAPs play a critical role in ensuring 
consumers can find health insurance and are able to access the benefits they are entitled to.1 
 
In Maine, Consumers for Affordable Health Care (CA HC) was designated as Maine’s Consumer 
Assistance Program by the Attorney General and Superintendent of Insurance in 2011. However, 
federal funding has not been available to support this work since 2016. LD 1274, passed in the 129th 
Legislature, provided state funding to the CAP for two years. This funding was renewed for another 
two years by the 130th Legislature. If the Legi slature does not act  now , funding for the CAP will end 
later this year.   
 
Enrolling in coverage and navigating health plans can be confusing and overwhelming for many people, 
especially for those experiencing transitions in employment, other life changes, or managing serious or 
chronic health conditions. LD 1077 provides ongoing funding for Maine’ s Consumer Assistance Program 
and ensures these critical services remain available to help Maine people enroll in and navigate private 
health coverage and access the care they need.   
 
MPCA has consistently supported outreach and enrollment efforts throughou t the state related to 
MaineCare, Medicare, and the Affordable Care Act (ACA). We provide direct support to individuals 
within CHCs who do this work and maintain a network of resources outside of the CHCs for referral 
support. We also connect health center s to national resources and link potential patients with health 
centers if they need assistance  obtaining health insurance (e.g., older adults who experience gap periods 
before Medicare kicks in.) Given our work in this area, we understand the crit ical role that CAH C plays  
and are grateful for their presence in our state.  
 
1 CMS Consumer Assistance Program  
 
 
 
 mepca.org   
MPCA is  closely monitoring the conclusion of the Public Health Emergency (PHE), which will bring about 
the end of several temporary authorities adopted at the federal and state level during the COVID -19 
pandemic. Included in this is the expiration of the continuo us coverage requirement authorized by the 
Families First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA), which will be the single largest health coverage 
transition event since the first open enrollment period of the Affordable Care Act.  
 
The availability of CAP service s will be especially important over the next year, as 65,000 to 90,000 
Mainers are expected to lose MaineCare coverage during the PHE unwinding, many of which will require 
assistance learning about and transitioning to private health coverage.2 
 
On behalf  of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please do 
not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
 
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
 
2 End of the M edicaid Continuous Coverage Requirement: Implications for Maine   
