northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1077 An Act to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure Affordable Health Care for 
Maine Residents 
 
Testimony in Support  
April 4, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry  and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, my name Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am providing 
testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member organizations in support 
of  this bill.  Northern Light Health member organizations include 10 hospitals located in 
southern, central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground 
ambulance, behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty 
care practices and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  Ninety three percent 
of Maine’s population lives in the Northern Light Health service area.  Northern Light 
Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with over 12,000 employees 
statewide. 
 
Northern Light Health has application counselors located at our hospital locations in 
Aroostook, Hancock, Kennebec, Penobscot, Piscataquis, Somerset and Cumberland 
counties. Our staff routinely work with individuals in our communities needing 
assistance with insurance coverage. It is important to note that our application 
counselors serve our communities and services are not restricted to Northern Light 
Health patients.  
 
Our counselors benefit from trainings and workshops offered by Maine Consumers for 
Affordable Health Care. The programs support new staff to obtain the necessary skills to 
assist individuals to apply for MaineCare or seek insurance on the Health Exchange and 
support our more experienced staff to advance their skills and knowledge to screen and 
advocate for insurance applicants. Our staff also work collaboratively with Maine  
Consumers for Affordable Health Care staff in the Consumer Assistance Programs. 
Together we increase insurance coverage for qualified individuals throughout the State 
of Maine. 
  
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of this bill. 
