295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1 077 
“An Act to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure Affordable Health Care  
for Maine Residents.”  
Sponsored by President Troy Jackson  
April 4, 2023  
 
Good  afternoon  Senator Bailey, Representative Perry , and esteemed  members of the 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services .  My name is  Malory Shaughnessy and 
I am the Executive Director of the  Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The 
Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s community 
based mental health and substance use treatment providers , providing services to over 
80,000 Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance advocates for the implementation 
of sound policies and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support  of LD  1107, “ An Act to 
Fund Consultation Services to Ensure Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents.” 
Consumer Assistance Programs (CAPs) play a critical role in ensuring that  
consumers can find health insurance and are able to understand AND  access th e benefits 
to which they are entitled. The need for consumer  assistance programs is greater than 
ever due to a rapidly changing policy  landscape  and increases in the cost of health 
coverage, including coinsurance . 
 
Enrolling in coverage and navigating heal th plans can be confusing and overwhelming for 
many  people, especially for those experiencing transitions in employment, other life 
changes, or  managing serious or chronic health conditions. LD 1077 provides ongoing 
funding for Maine’ s Consumer Assistance Program and ensures these critical services 
remain available to help  Maine people enroll in and navigate private health coverage and 
access the care they need.  
 
Consumer assistance programs are helpful not only in helping people enroll in  
coverage but also  in helping people appeal inappropriate denials of coverage. Eligibility 
criteria for private Marketplace  coverage and subsidies, and for public coverage differs - 
and can be a confusing  undertaking. And for those struggling with mental health and 
substanc e use issues, it  can be especially daunting.  
 
Availability of CAP services will be especially important over the next year, as 65,000 to  
90,000 Mainers are expected to lose MaineCare coverage during the PHE unwinding, 
many of  which will require assistance learning about and transitioning to private health 
coverage.  
 
Enrollment assistance works. Maine needs to continue supporting consumer assistance 
that provides one-on-one assistance to educate individuals about healthcare  programs, 
including private insurance options.  Finally, LD 1107 will help  those beginning their 
recovery journey  get the health care they need to accomplish t heir goals . Please vote 
Ought to Pass on LD 1107 . Thank you and l am happy to answer any question s you may 
have  for me.  
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

