Maine Medical :.;:=<:-1; ‘ ~=:.-. 
:-1.»: i-2 H it *>' 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect l R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO i Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
Q SUPPORT Maine Physicians Q ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine 0 PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
TO: Joint Committee on Health Coverage, insurance and Financial Services 
F ROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate 
DATE: April 4, 2023 
SUPPORT —LD 1077; An Act to Fund Consultation Sen/ices to Ensure Affordable Health Care 
for Maine Residents 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and the members of the Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, l am the 
Public Health and Government Affairs Associate with the Maine Medical Association and l live 
in Windham. The MMA appreciates the opportunity to submit the following comments in 
support of LD 1077, to provide ongoing funding for the consultation senlices that have helped 
many Mainers understand their coverage options and navigate the system. 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine's largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
Over the next year, 65,000-90,000 Maine residents will lose MaineCare coverage because of 
the unwinding of the Public Health Emergency. These individuals may need assistance with 
the transition and understanding their options. The Consumer Assistance Program offered 
through Consumers for Affordable Health Care (CAHC) provides this much needed assistance 
and can protect continuity of care. 
Investing in public health is one of the Maine Medical Association's core priorities and a key 
part of this is ensuring access to care and preventing gaps in coverage. Loss of coverage can 
cause adverse health outcomes as those uninsured individuals cannot access preventative 
care. in a 2003 study published to the American Journal of Public Health they found individuals 
in their 50s and 60s with coverage gaps were significantly less likely to receive preventative 
health services like mammography, Pap tests, cholesterol, flu vaccination, and prostate and 
breast cancer screenings. 
The CAP program provides valuable resources to Maine residents by providing assistance 
navigating the system which helps to prevent long gaps in coverage and protect access to 
care. The MMA urges the committee to vote ought to pass LD 1077 to ensure ongoing funding. 
Thank you for considering our comments in support of this bill. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
Sincerely, 
Mikenzie Dwyer 
(mdwyer@mainemed.com) 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
