 
Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine | 11 Bowdoin Mill Island, Suite 260, Topsham, ME 04086  
P: (207) 844 -8106 |  E: info@purchaseralliance.o rg | www.purchaseralliance.org  
 
 
April 3, 2023 
 
 
Senator  Donna Bailey , Co-Chair  
Representative Anne Perry , Co-Chair  
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
C/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME  04333  
 
Dear Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services,  
 
I am writing to express the Healthcare Purchaser Alliance (HPA) of Maine ’s support for LD 1077, An Act 
to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure Affor dable Health Care for Maine Residents .   
 
The HPA is a nonprofit that represents the purchasers of healthcare in Maine. Our mission is to advance 
healthcare value and to support and incentivize high -quality, affordable care. We have over 60 
members, includ ing some of the largest public and private employers and health trusts in Maine. 
Collectively, our members spend over a billion dollars annually providing health care for nearly one 
quarter of the commercially insured population in the state.  
 
The funds a ppropriated under this bill would continue ongoing support o f Maine ’s health insurance 
Consumer Assistance Program (CAP ), and its work to help Maine residents access high -quality and 
affordable health care.  
 
Today, medical  bills are one of the major caus es of personal bankruptcy in the US,1 with a 2015 Kaiser 
Family Foundation study finding that 26 percent of Americans age 18 –64 struggled to pay medical bills , 
including 19 percent with employer -sponsored health insurance .2  Not only is health care increasingly 
unaffordable, the system is incredibly complex, with many people unsure of basic health insurance 
terms and how to use insurance to access needed care. Indeed, a 2019 study  found that over half of U.S. 
adults have ina dequate health insurance  literacy, which is the “ability to seek, obtain, and understand 
health insurance plans, and once enrolled use their insurance to seek appropriate health care services.”3  
 
 
1 Safehaven, “Medical Bankruptcy is Killing the American Middle Class,” NASDAQ, February 2019. Available at: 
https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/medical -bankruptcy -is-killing -the-american -middle -class -2019 -02-14.  
2 Liz Ha mel, Mira Norton, Karen Pollitz, Larry Levitt, Gary Claxton, and Mollyann Brodie, “The Burden of Medical 
Debt: Results from the Kaiser Family Foundation/New York Times Medical Bills Survey, Kaiser Family Foundation, 
January 2016. Available at: https://www.kff.org/report -section/the -burden -of-medical -debt -section -1-who -has-
medical -bill-problems -and-what -are-the-contributing -factors/ .  
3 Jean Edward, Amanda Wiggins, Malea Hoepf Young, and Mary Kay Rayens, “Significant Disparities Exist in 
Consumer Health Literacy: Implications for Health Care Reform,” National institutes o f Health, National Library of 
Medicine: National Center for Biotechnology Information, October 2019. Available at: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6831506/ .  
 
Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine | 11 Bowdoin Mill Island, Suite 260, Topsham, ME 04086  
P: (207) 844 -8106 |  E: info@purchaseralliance.o rg | www.purchaseralliance.org  
With consumers struggling to both understand their insuran ce options and to pay for care, the services 
the CAP  provides  have never been more important to  ensure that Mainers are aware of all the resources 
that may be available to them to help defray and lower their healthcare costs . These include assistan ce 
with determining eligibility and applying for coverage programs, such as subsidized care on the Maine 
Marketplace, or hospital free care, as well as understanding and leveraging coverage and appeals rights 
under their current insurance  plans .   
 
The CAP is an incredible resource for Mainers, with a dedicated and caring staff whose expertise 
provides vital assistance to Mainers struggling to access and afford care. We are extremely fortunate to 
have this tremendous resource available in our state, and I ur ge you to continue to support the essential 
work that the CAP provides to  Mainers.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our support for LD 1 077 and for the important work that the CAP 
undertakes to help Mainers navigate the complexities of our healthcare system and access affordable 
care.  Please let me know if you have any questions or if I can be of further assistance. I can be reached 
at phayes@purchaseralliance .org or 844 -8106.   
 
Best,  
 
 
Peter Hayes  
President and CEO  
 
