RJ McComish
Portland
LD 1077
RJ McComish, Portland
CAP Funding Testimony
Testimony in Support of LD 1077, "An Act to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure 
Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents"
April 4, 2023
I support this bill because I directly benefited from Maine’s Health Insurance 
Consumer Assistance Program, which helped me get coverage for a claim that my 
health insurance company denied. 
In March of 2020, my PCP’s office directed me to Mercy Hospital’s emergency room 
for what turned out to be a kidney infection and kidney stones. I had to have surgery 
at Mercy as a result. Two years later, I received a bill from Mercy for $7,000. I was 
told by Mercy’s billing department that Anthem, my health insurance company, 
denied the claim for my surgery in February of 2022, nearly two years after the 
procedure, saying that Mercy was out of network. When I called Anthem, I was told 
that the only way the $7,000 would be covered was if the doctor deemed it medically 
necessarily to be treated there because there was no other option. The urologist who 
did the procedure called Anthem and initiated an appeal. Anthem reviewed and 
denied the appeal. I needed to file an appeal with the Maine Bureau of Insurance. 
I contacted Maine’s Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program HelpLine in 
March of 2022 to get help with filing my complaint with the BOI. As a side note, I’d 
previously had to deal with another insurance complaint a few years ago and I did that
on my own. It was a very chaotic, confusing and time intensive process. When I sent 
an email to the CAP HelpLine, a staff member responded to me and asked a lot of 
good, helpful questions. The staff member explained that the best course of action 
would be to file a complaint with the Maine Bureau of Insurance. She represented me 
in that complaint: assembled all the information and made the arguments as to why 
coverage was required. The Bureau of Insurance agreed. My insurance company was 
required to cover the care I received at Mercy Hospital. 
Having an advocate who understood the system, knew how to effectively represent 
me and actually succeeded in getting these services covered was a huge relief. If the 
system has to be this complicated, it’s great to know there are caring, knowledgeable 
people who can help sort everything out.

