Sandra Wissmann, Lovell 
Testimony in Support of LD 1077, "An Act to 
Fund Consultation Services to Ensure 
Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents" 
April 4, 2023  
I support this bill because Maine’s Health 
Insurance Consumer Assistance Program 
helped me secure coverage for medically 
necessary cancer screenings. 
Because I have a family history of colon cancer, 
I am at increased risk for the disease. Nationally 
recognized clinical practice guidelines 
recommend screening for people at increased 
risk every five years, rather than every ten 
years. Under the Affordable Care Act, colon 
cancer screenings are considered preventive 
care. Consequently, my insurance company is 
supposed to process claims for screening at no 
cost to me. 
My 5-year screening was postponed due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. This past February, at the 
six-year point, my physician requested 
preauthorization for a screening colonoscopy. 
My insurance company denied the 
preauthorization because, the letter stated, I do 
not have a first-degree relative who was 
diagnosed with colon cancer. While that is true, 
I do have a first-degree relative who has had 
multiple pre-cancerous polyps removed. 
According to the US Multi-Society Task Force on 
Colorectal Cancer, this circumstance is 
sufficient to warrant screenings every five 
years. Therefore, my insurance company’s 
evaluation of my risk was not consistent with 
national cancer society screening guidelines, as 
required by Maine law. 
I contacted the Health Insurance Consumer 
Assistance Program. A staff member 
researched this issue and recommended filing a 
Complaint with the Bureau of Insurance. In the 
meantime, however, I was able to engage in 
self-advocacy and overturn the initial denial of 
my screening. 
It was hugely helpful for me to have a 
professional resource during this upsetting, 
confusing dispute with my insurance company. 
Health insurance is complicated.  Consumers 
are at a terrible disadvantage.  I support public 
funding of the Consumer Assistance Program 
because sometimes people need the support 
and expertise of professionals in trying to get 
their coverage needs met. 
Thank you for your consideration of this 
important bill and listening to my testimony. 
