 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 1077, “An Act to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure 
Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents” 
Tuesday, April 4, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, I am Sarah Calder, Senior 
Government Affairs Director at MaineHealth, and I am here to testify in Support of LD 1077, 
“An Act to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents.” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a full continuum of 
health care services to the residents of eleven counties in Maine and one in New Hampshire. As 
part of our mission of “Working Together So Maine’s Communities are the Healthiest in 
America,” MaineHealth’s members are committed to providing access to health care services for 
all patients regardless of their insurance status. We also provide free care to those at or below 
200% of the federal poverty level, above and beyond the state requirement of 150%.  
Although charity care provides a safety net, MaineHealth has developed innovative Access to 
Care solutions across our service area since 1997. Over the years, hundreds of thousands of 
Maine people have received high-quality care, improved their health status, received free and 
reduced-price medications, reduced unnecessary emergency department visits, and learned how 
to successfully navigate the complexities of the healthcare system through our nationally-
recognized Access to Care programs. These accomplishments are the result of hundreds of 
primary care and specialty physicians who donate their time, participating hospitals that donate 
their services, and the development of key partnerships, all fueled by a common vision and sense 
of responsibility to ensure access to care for all. 
The MaineHealth Coverage Team, a program of Access to Care, specializes in helping uninsured 
or under-insured patients enroll in programs such as MaineCare and the Health Insurance 
Marketplace. Consumers for Affordable Health Care (CAHC) is a critical partner in their work to 
ensure that individuals have access to affordable, high quality health coverage. In fact, the 
MaineCare A-Z Manual and ABC trainings CAHC provides our staff are invaluable. 
Additionally, they are a resource for the Coverage Team for more complicated situations.  
I urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1077, “An Act to Fund Consultation Services 
to Ensure Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents.” 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
