.11.. 
_- T;:=_T ;' -5+! can 
,‘ >‘ 
ii-. 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 1077 
An Act To Fund Consultation Services to Ensure Affordable Health Care for Maine 
Residents 
Presented to the loint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Ioint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insuranceand Financial Services, my name is Troy Jackson. I serve as 
President of the Maine Senate and have the great honor of representing Aroostook County 
in the Legislature. I am here today to introduce LD 1077, “An Act to Fund Consultation 
Services to Ensure Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents." 
Before l get into why this bill is important to the health of Maine people, I want to note that 
I have an amendment that simply changes which office provides funding for the program, 
bringing the measure in line with previous allocations.' 
LD 1077 provides funding for a nonprofit and independent health insurance consumer 
assistance service. As this committee is well aware, health insurance is incredibly complex 
and difficult to navigate for folks who are not industry experts. Yet, it is critical to health 
and well-being of Maine families. A quality, affordable health care plan can mean the 
difference between going to the doctor when you are sick or injured, or delaying a doctor's 
appointment due to cost, putting your health at risk. 
This continued funding ensures that working families can seek out independent, expert 
assistance when navigating difficult insurance plans. This includes helping folks navigate 
health care coverage options, understanding medical bills, filing insurance coverage 
appeals and understanding the rights they have under health insurance contracts. 
These services ensure that everyday folks know what they re entitled to when they deal 
with a system that is designed to confuse them and discourage them from questioning 
whether or not they really should be footing the bill for their care. Consumer assistance 
programs and helplines supported by this funding are an essential way to ensure that 
everyone has access to the best insurance plan for them and can ensure that they're getting 
the full value of the premiums they pay when they need coverage for their medical care. 
Stare House (207) 287-1500 * Cel1(207) 436—0763 * Fax (207) 287-5862 * T0llFree I-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Senat0rJac/(sonl@gmail.com * Web Site; legislature.maine.g0v/sena/e
In 2021, Maine Consumers for Affordable Health Care's helpline fielded 5,641 calls and 
helped consumers recover more than $107,000 in medical benefits. They also assisted 
Mainers in navigating the Affordable Care Act Marketplace and the state Marketplace in 
determining if there was a plan available that was right for them and trained enrollment 
professionals to create a robust network of people to assist consumers. 
On a personal note, I have referred a number of my constituents to their consumer 
assistance helpline over the years. The response from my constituents is almost always 
overwhelming gratitude. 
Health insurance is incredibly complicated. Continuing the consumer assistance program is 
about making sure that Maine people have someone in their corner, someone they can 
trust, to help them get the coverage and care they deserve. I think this investment is a small 
price to pay to ensure that Mainers who need help will be able to find it. I urge you to join 
me in supporting this amended proposal. 
Thank you for your time today. I'd be happy to take any questions.
FOR HCIFS REVIEW 
Amendment to LD 1077 
Proposed by Pres. Jackson 
LD 1077, An Act to Fund Consultation Services to Ensure 
Affordable Health Care for Maine Residents 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sec. 1. Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and allocations are made. 
ATTORNEY GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF THE 
Administration - Attorney General 0310 
Initiative: Provides ongoing funding to the Ofﬁce ofthe Attorney General to contract with a designated 
nonproﬁt and independent health insurance consumer assistance entity to continue to operate the 
Health insurance Consumer Assistance Program, as established in Title 24-A, §4322. 
GENERAL FUND 2023-Z4 2024-Z5 
All Other $300,000 $300,000 
GENERAL FUND TOTAL $300,000 $300,000 
SUMMARY 
This bill provides ongoing funding to the Office of the Attorney General to contract with a nonproﬁt, 
independent health insurance consumer assistance entity to continue to operate the Health Insurance 
Consumer Assistance Program.
