TESTIMONYOF THE 5 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE
l 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 458 
"An Act to Require an Application for a Hunting License to Include aiCheck-off Box 
Indicating an Applicant's Wish to Be Entered in the Antlerless Deer Ffermit Lottery", 
_
I 
Presented by Senator GUERIN of Penobscot. Cosponsored by Senator: BLACK of Franklin, 
Representatives: DILL of Old Town, LANDRY of Farmington, THORNE of tarmel. 
DATE OF HEARING: March 13, 2023
I 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and memtlers of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Nate Webb, Wildlife Division Dirfector at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in 
opposition to L.D. 458.I 
This bill requires a hunting license application to include a check-off bo>]l < designating 
whether the applicant wishes to be entered into the antlerless deer perimit lottery. 
Our understanding is that the intent of this bill is to make it easier for hli unters to apply_ 
for an antlerless deer permit by giving them an option to do so at the same time they 
purchase their hunting license. However, while well intentioned we believe that this bill 
would actually make the deer lottery process more complicated for hunters and reduce 
overall satisfaction with-the lottery process. We begin selling annual hunting licenses in 
December, but the numbers of antlerless deer permits available in the ‘lottery are not 
finalized until July. Therefore, ifthis bill were to pass there would be a irisk of hunters 
applying for deer permits in WMDs in which no permits are ultimately issued, or 
determining their application strategy without knowing how many perrgnits will be issued 
in each WMD. Since permit numbers can change dramatically from yea_r to year in 
response to winter severity and deer population trends, we believe theil se scenariosI 
would be common and there would be low hunter satisfaction with the lottery process. 
The Department has a very strong outreach program and we invest significant effort in 
reminding hunters when the lottery application opens and send multiple reminders as 
the deadline approaches. We believe the effectiveness of this approach is reflected in 
the high number of applicants for the 2022 lottery as well as the signifitzant demand for 
the over-the-counter, leftover permits.'
l 
The Legislature and the Department made several significant changes to the antlerless 
deer permit system in 2022, and it will take a couple of years for hunters to adjust to the 
changes and become comfortable with the new system. We have identified some 
relatively ‘minor procedural changes that will make the permit application and purchase 
process easier for hunters and will implement these adjustments for the fall 2023 
hunting season. We are also working on a Department App, which we expect will make 
the licens‘e ‘purchase and lottery application processes much simpler and easier for most 
hunters. ,W 
1. 
I.
l 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
l 
l .. 
,.
l
l
I
.
> 
.[‘
