Charles  Jacobs
Monmouth
LD 760
Testimony of Charles Jacobs of Monmouth before the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs with regard to LD 760, An Act to Amend the 
Laws Regarding Signature Requirements on the Issuance of General Fund Bonds
April 24, 2023
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the committee, I am Charles 
Jacobs of Monmouth and I address you today in support of LD 760.  I was a member 
of the Executive Council in the 1970’s and Deputy Commissioner of Administrative 
and Financial Services in the King administration.  I regret I am not able to speak to 
you directly.  
As we are all aware, during the LePage administration the Governor, on at least one 
occasion, declined to carry out a ministerial act (affixing his signature to a bond), 
thereby blocking the issuance of a bond and overturning the will of the Legislature 
and the people of Maine.  This bill seeks to change the statutes governing the issuance
of bonds to prevent this from happening again.  
If this bill is enacted, the Governor will still have ample legitimate ways to influence 
the process, the use of the veto being the principle one.    
It is important to note that the Maine Supreme Court has ruled in a 1972 case, that a 
writ of mandamus does not issue against the Governor.  Simply put, the Court cannot 
order the Governor to do something, ministerial or discretionary.  I cite the following 
language from the decision:  “…the Governor shall answer only to his own 
conscience, to the people who elected him, and in case of the possible commission of 
a high crime or misdemeanor, to a court of impeachment."   So in a situation such as  
mentioned above, there is no recourse to the courts.  Given the unfortunate precedent 
set by the former Governor with regard to bonds and the decision of the Court, I 
believe it is important for the Legislature to craft statutes that minimize the possibility
of this happening again.  It is true that the Governor could order the Commissioner of 
the Department of Administrative and Financial Services not to attest to the 
Treasurer’s signature.  However, because the Commissioner is not a constitutional 
officer, there would, presumably, be recourse to the courts.  
In addition to the above, the requirement for the Governor’s signature is simply 
redundant.  There is no need for it. 
Thank you for allowing me to be heard.  
