Testimony in Support of LD 760, 
An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Signature Requirements on Issuance of 
General Fund Bonds” 
April 24, 2023H 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and distinguished members of the 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee: 
I am Douglas Rooks, a resident of West Gardiner, and ajournalist and author, with four 
published books, one forthcoming, concerning Maine biography and history. I am 
testifying today in support of a bill I believe will clarify the law by which General Fund 
bonds are issued, and help restore a process that has become diminished over the past 
decade.' 
As you have heard, a previous governor used what all experts on the legal and financial 
aspects of bonding agree is a ministerial role - to affix a facsimile signature on the bond 
warrants themselves — and turned it into a decision-making and even policy~mal<ing role. 
By withholding this facsimile signature, the governor effectively cancelled numerous 
bonds that had been enacted by bipartisan majorities of both chambers of the Legislature, 
and ratified by a majority of the voters in referendum. We might term it “selective 
issuance, ” and it has had long-term and substantial effects. 
Consider: From the 1950s through the 2000s, bond issues were frequent, diverse and 
substantial. From 2000-2010, the last decade before selective issuance began, 30 bond 
issues totaling $920.7 were approved over five bienniums, an average of $184 million 
(not adjusted for inflation) and six bonds per biennium. Only two were rejected by voters 
These bonds represented a wide variety of purposes, from university classroom buildings 
to water pollution abatement, from offshore wind demonstration projects to dental clinics 
The first bond issue to be nullified by the governor was approved in 2010. It was the 
Communities for Maine’s Future Fund, aimed at restoring historic downtowns. The 
program was already being implemented by DECD when it was abruptly cancelled by the 
governor. The following year, a Land for Maine’s Future Bond was also cancelled and 
others soon followed. 
Soon, most substantial bond proposals were for a single purpose only: transportation, 
primarily highways and bridges. From 2015 to the present, only 12 bond issues were 
approved. Six of them were for transportation, mostly to address shortfalls in Highway 
Fund revenue. The $606 million for transportation bonds collectively represents 78% of 
all bonding for this period.
It’s clear that a once diverse and vibrant process, involving all parts of Maine, and all 
caucuses of the Legislature, has atrophied. 
What can be done? This bill is a modest start. 
It underlines the original intent of the law, which can be spelled out as follows. Under the 
Constitution of Maine, the Treasurer has primary responsibility for bonding. Since the 
Constitution was written, however, the Executive has become a large and complex part of 
state government, handling most of its financial affairs through the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services. 
The statute before you that would be amended regulates the issuance of bonds by 
preserving the Treasurer ’s primary role, while ensuring that the Executive acknowledges 
that bond documents meet all necessary legal and financial requirements — the ministerial 
role mentioned earlier. 
The Finance Commissioner ’s signature meets the requirement of due acknowledgement. 
There is no need for the Governor ’s additional signature; it is redundant, and 
unnecessary. 
Because of the unfortunate history behind it, and because of the need to help guide future 
administrations, I strongly urge your support for this bill, and I’d be happy to answer any 
questions.
