», .~¢ A" ~i-
" Peggy Rotundo THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 21 I3 lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony introducing 
LD 760, "An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Signature Requirements on Issuance of General 
Fund Bonds" 
Senator Peggy Rotundo 
April 24, 2023 
Representative Sachs and other distinguished members of the Ioint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, my name is Peggy Rotundo and I represent Senate District 21, 
the City of Lewiston. I am here today to introduce LD 760, "An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding 
Signature Requirements on Issuance of General Fund Bonds" 
This bill removes the requirement that bonds issued by the Treasurer must be signed by the 
Governor. The purpose is to ensure that bonds passed by the Legislature and approved by the people 
of Maine cannot be set aside by the executive simply by neglecting to sign them. 
If this bill is enacted, the Governor will still have inﬂuence over the process; this is in no way 
intended to restrict input from the executive branch. Chieﬂy, the Governor may use the ”bully 
pulpit" to inﬂuence public opinion about the bonds as they go to the voters, and may veto any bill 
passed by the Legislature. I am simply trying to avoid a scenario, familiar to those of us Who 
remember recent history, where the Governor is faced with a bond bill that he or she does not like, 
and avoids carrying out or her responsibility to execute the laws of Maine by refusing to sign off 
on the bond. _ _ ' A 
Article 5, Part 1, Section I2 of Maine's Constitution states that ” [t]he Governor shall take care 
that the laws be faithfully executed. ” I have no concerns that our current Governor will continue to 
do so, as she has done since taking office. But in the event that We elect a Governor — Republican or 
Democrat — with a different outlook, I would be reassured to know that there is a law in place to 
ensure that that person must execute all enacted laws, not just the ones that he or she likes. 
Thank you for considering this bill to maintain the balance of power and to disallow a 
Governor from overturning the will of the people through the simple act of refusing to sign his or her 
name. I am happy to answer any questions you might have. 
_ Chair, Appropriations and Financial Ajffairs Committee 
State House: (207) 287-1515 * Fax: (207) 287-1585 * T011 Free: 1-800-423-6900 * TTY? 711 
Peggy.Rotzmd0@Zegis1a1 ‘z1re. maine. gov * 1egisZaz ‘ure. maine. gov/senate
