State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Beth Lambert, Director of Innovative Instruction 
Neither For Nor Against: L.D. 1333 
An Act to Protect Children bv Modernizing Intemet and Digital Media Filtering Requirements 
for Education 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Sampson 
Co-Sponsored by: Senators Libby and Rafferty and Representatives Crockett, Guerrette, Hymes 
and Lyman 
Date: April 13, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Beth Lambert and I am here representing the Department of Education speaking 
neither for nor against LD l 133, An Act to Protect Children by Modernizing Internet and Digital 
Media Filtering Requirements for Education. This bill requires public schools and charter 
schools to implement policies, filtering, and technology protection measures to ensure that no 
person using school computers or digital devices has access to materials that are child 
pornography, harmful to minors, sexually explicit or obscene. It also authorizes the State Board 
of Education to adopt rules to prevent such materials from being transmitted by any software, 
hardware, or internet service managed or provided to SAUs. 
Over twenty years ago, in 2000, these same concems led to Congress enacting The Children ’s 
Internet Protection Act (CIPA). CIPA’s most recent update was in 2011. Under CIPA, schools 
that receive e-rate discounts for internet access or internal connections are required to block or 
filter student’s intemet access to pictures that are: obscene, child pornography, or harmful to 
minors. Additionally, schools must monitor the online activities of students and educate students 
about appropriate online behavior including interacting with other individuals on social media 
and cyberbullying. Schools also must have internet safety policies addressing: 
l. Access by minors to inappropriate matter on the Internet; 
2. The safety and security of minors when using electronic mail, chat rooms and other fonns 
of direct electronic communications; 
3. Unauthorized access, including so-called “hacking, ” and other unlawful activities by 
minors online; 
4. Unauthorized disclosure, use, and dissemination of personal information regarding 
minors; and 
5. Measures restricting minors‘ access to materials hamiful to them.
1
While currently all Maine schools certify that they follow CIPA either through their participation 
in the Maine School Library Network or by accepting e-rate funds, we fully support making this 
Maine policy. However, it seems unnecessary to go through expense and time of a rule making 
process with a law that is so closely modeled after a federal law that has been in effect and 
effective for the past 23 years. 
For these reasons, the Department of Education is Neither for Nor Against LD 1333, An Act to 
Protect Children bv Modemizing Internet and Digital Media Filtering Requirements for 
Education. I am happy to answer any questions the Committee may have and will be available 
for the Work sessions on this bill.
2
