§%i|l¢lI]L 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330A 
0“ Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBLIC EDUCAYION ADVDCATES A 
website: “’w“’-msmaweb-com Maine Schnoi Superintendents swarm 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
L.D. I333 
AN ACT TO PROTECT CHILDREN BY MODERNIZING INTERNET AND 
DIGITAL MEDIA FILTERING REQUIREMENTS FOR EDUCATION 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Eileen King, deputy executive director of the Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf 
of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, neither for nor against L.D. 1333. 
The Children ’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) was enacted by Congress in 2000 to address concerns about 
children ’s access to obscene or harmful content over the Internet. CIPA imposes certain requirements on 
schools or libraries that receive discounts for Internet access through the E-rate program — a program that 
makes Internet access more affordable for schools. 
Schools subject to CIPA may not receive the discounts offered by the E-rate program unless they certify that 
they have an Internet safety policy that includes technology protection measures. The protection measures 
must block or ﬁlter Internet access to pictures that are: (a) obscene; (b) child pornography; or (c) harmful to 
minors. 
Schools subject to CIPA have two additional certiﬁcation requirements: 1) their Internet safety policies must 
include monitoring the online activities of minors; and 2) they must educate minors about appropriate online 
behavior, including interacting with other individuals on social networking websites, in chat rooms, and 
cyberbullying awareness and response. 
Schools subject to CIPA are also required to adopt and implement an Internet safety policy addressing: 
I Access by minors to inappropriate matter on the Intemet; 
I The safety and security of minors when using electronic mail, chat rooms and other forms of direct 
electronic communications; 
I Unauthorized access, including so-called “hacking, ” and other unlawful activities by minors online; 
I Unauthorized disclosure, use, and dissemination of personal information regarding minors; and 
I Measures restricting minors’ access to materials harmful to them. 
To align with CIPA requirements school districts in Maine are required to adopt policies GCSA and GCSA-R 
that addresses Employee Computer and Internet Use as well as policies IJNDB and IJNDB-R that address 
Student Computer and Internet Use and Internet Safety. These policies have been included in this testimony 
for your review. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
Members of MSLN fall under the Cisco Umbrella ﬁltering system, which is provided to schools for free. 
Cisco combines multiple monitoring and filtering functions that provide protection for our students on school 
devices. This type of ﬁltering and monitoring system, if school districts were required to pay for it, would cost 
our districts thousands of dollars each year. 
We support the intent of the bill: keeping our students safe online. Membership to MSLN provides the 
security this bill is seeking at no cost to our school districts. It is for these reasons that our organizations are 
neither for nor against L.D. 1333.
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: GCSA 
EMPLOYEE COMPUTER AND INTERNET USE 
|Sch0ol unit name] computers, network, and Internet access are provided to support the 
educational mission of the schools and to enhance the curriculum and learning 
opportunities for students and school staff. This policy and the accompanying rules also 
apply to laptops, I-pads, tablets and other devices issued directly to staff, whether they 
are used at school or off school premises. 
OPTION ONE 
Employees may only utilize the school unit computers, network, and Internet 
services for purposes related to school programs and operations and performance 
of their job responsibilities. School unit computers, network, and Internet services 
may not be used for personal purposes. 
OR: 
OPTION TWO 
School unit computers, network, and Internet services are provided for purposes 
related to school programs and operations, and performance of their job 
responsibilities. Incidental personal use of school computers is permitted as long 
as such use: (1) does not interfere with the employee ’s job responsibilities and 
performance; (2) does not interfere with system operations or other system users; 
and (3) does not violate this policy and the accompanying rules, or any other 
Board policy, procedure or school rules. “Incidental personal use” is deﬁned as 
use by an individual employee for occasional personal communications. 
Compliance with the school unit’s policies and rules concerning computer use is 
mandatory. An employee who violates this policy and/or any rules governing use of the 
school unit’s computers shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including 
termination. Illegal uses of the school unit’s computers will also result in referral to law 
enforcement. 
[School unit name] computers remain under the control, custody, and supervision of the 
school unit at all times. The school unit reserves the right to monitor all computer and 
Internet activity by employees. Employees have no expectation of privacy in their use of 
school computers. 
Page l of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: GCSA 
Employees shall be informed of this policy and the accompanying rules through 
handbooks, the school website, computer start-up page and/or other means selected by 
the Superintendent. [Notez This paragraph can be modiﬁed to reﬂect the practice of 
the local school unit.] 
The Superintendent is responsible for implementing this policy and the accompanying 
rules. Additional administrative procedures or school rules governing the day-to-day 
management and operations of the school unit’s computer system may be implemented, 
consistent with Board policies and rules. The Superintendent may delegate speciﬁc 
responsibilities to the Technology Coordinator and others as he/she deems appropriate. 
Cross Reference: EGAD — Copyright Compliance 
GCSA-R — Employee Computer and Internet Use Rules 
UN DB — Student Computer and Internet Use 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official 
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used asa 
starting point for a board's policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve 
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful 
analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and 
suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and 
are not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board’s own legal counsel. 
Page 2 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
*MSMA SAMPLE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE* 
NEPN/N SBA Code: GCSA-R 
EMPLOYEE COMPUTER AND INTERNET USE RULES 
These rules implement Board policy GCSA (Employee Computer and Internet Use). 
Each employee is responsible for his/her actions and activities involving school unit 
computers, networks, and Internet services, and for his/her computer ﬁles, passwords, 
and accounts. These rules provide general guidance concerning the use of the school 
unit’s computers and examples of prohibited uses. The rules do not attempt to describe 
every possible prohibited activity by employees. Employees who have questions about 
whether a particular activity or use is prohibited are encouraged to contact a building 
administrator or the Technology Coordinator. 
A. Consequences for Violation of Computer Use Policy and Rules 
Failure to comply with Board policy GCSA, these rules, and/or other 
procedures or rules governing computer use may result in disciplinary 
action, up to and including termination. Illegal use of the school unit’s 
computers will also result in referral to law enforcement. 
B. Access to School Computers, Networks, and Internet Services 
The level of employee access to school unit computers, networks, and 
Internet services is based upon speciﬁc job requirements and needs. 
e 
Unauthorized access to secure areas of the school unit’s computers and 
networks is strictly prohibited. 
C. Acceptable Use 
[School unit name] computers, networks, and Internet services are 
provided to employees for administrative, educational, communication, an 
research purposes consistent with the school unit’s educational mission, 
curriculum, and instructional goals. All Board policies, school rules, and 
expectations for professional conduct and communication apply when 
employees are using the school unit’s computers, networks, and Internet 
services. 
Page 1 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATIONd
NEPN/N SBA Code: GCSA-R 
Personal Use 
OPTION ONE 
Employees may only utilize school unit computers, networks, and Internet 
services for purposes related to schools programs and operations, and 
performance of job responsibilities. School unit computers, network, and 
Internet services may not be used for personal purposes. 
OR 
OPTION TWO 
School unit computers, network, and Internet services are provided for 
purposes related to school programs and operations, and performance of 
their job responsibilities. Incidental personal use of school computers is 
permitted as long as such use: 1) does not interfere with the employee ’s job 
responsibilities and performance; 2) does not interfere with system 
operations or other system users; and 3) does not violate this policy and the 
accompanying rules, or any other Board policy, procedure, or school rules. 
“Incidental personal use” is deﬁned as use by an individual employee for 
occasional personal communications. 
Prohibited Uses 
Examples of unacceptable uses that are expressly prohibited include, but 
are not limited to, the following: 
1. Any use that is illegal or which violates other Board policies, 
procedures, or school rules, including harassing, discriminatory or 
threatening communications and behavior, violations of copyright 
laws, etc. The school unit assumes no responsibility for illegal 
activities of employees while using school computers. 
2. Any use involving materials that are obscene, pornographic, sexually 
explicit or sexually suggestive; 
3. Any inappropriate communications with students or minors; 
4. Any use for private ﬁnancial gain, or commercial, advertising, or 
solicitation purposes; 
Page 2 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: GCSA-R 
Any use as a forum for communicating by email or any other 
medium with other school users or outside parties to solicit, 
proselytize, advocate or communicate the views of an individual or 
non-school-sponsored organization; to solicit membership in or 
support of any non-school-sponsored organization; or to raise funds 
for any non-school-sponsored purpose, whether proﬁt or not-for- 
proﬁt. No employee shall knowingly provide school e-mail 
addresses to outside parties whose intent is to communicate with 
school employees, students, and/or their families for non-school 
purposes. Employees who are uncertain as to whether particular 
activities are acceptable should seek further guidance from the 
building principal or other appropriate administrator. 
Any communication that represents personal views as those of the 
school unit or that could be misinterpreted as such; 
Downloading or loading software or applications without permission 
from the system administrator. Unauthorized copying of software is 
illegal and may subject the copier to substantial civil and criminal 
penalties. The school unit assumes no responsibility for illegal 
software copying by employees. 
Sending mass emails to school users or outside parties for school or 
non-school purposes without the permission of the Technology 
Coordinator or building administrator. '' 
Any malicious use or disruption of the school unit’s computers, 
networks, and Internet services; any breach of security features; or 
misuse of computer passwords or accounts (the employee ’s or those 
of other users); 
Any misuse or damage to the school unit’s computer equipment, 
including opening or forwarding email attachments (executable ﬁles) 
from unknown sources and/or that may contain viruses; 
Any attempt to access unauthorized sites or any attempt to disable or 
circumvent the school unit’s filtering/blocking technology; 
Failing to report a breach of computer security to the system 
administrator; 
Page 3 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: GCSA-R 
13. Using school computers, networks, and Internet services after such 
access has been denied or revoked; and 
l4. Any attempt to delete, erase, or otherwise conceal any information 
stored on a school computer that violates these rules or other Board 
policies or school rules, or refusing to return computer equipment 
issued to the employee upon request. 
N 0 Expectation of Privacy 
[School unit name] computers remain under the control, custody, and 
supervision of the school unit at all times. The school unit reserves the right 
to monitor all computer and Internet activity by employees and other system 
users. Employees have no expectation of privacy in their use of school 
computers, including email messages and stored ﬁles, and Internet access 
logs. 
Disclosure of Conﬁdential Information 
Employees are expected to use appropriate judgment and caution in 
communications concerning students and staff to ensure that personally 
identiﬁable information remains conﬁdential. 
Employee/Volunteer Responsibility to Supervise Student Computer Use 
Employees and volunteers who use school computers with students for 
instructional purposes have a duty of care to supervise such use. Teachers, 
staff members, and volunteers are expected to be familiar with the school 
unit’s policies and rules concerning student computer and Internet use and to 
enforce them. When, in the course of their duties, employees or volunteers 
become aware of a student violation, they are expected to stop the activity 
and inform the building principal. 
Compensation for Losses, Costs and/or Damages 
The employee is responsible for compensating the school unit for any losses, 
costs, or damages incurred by the school unit for violations of Board policies 
and school rules while the employee is using school unit computers, 
including the cost of investigating such violations. The school unit assumes 
Page 4 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEIVIENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: GCSA-R 
no responsibility for any unauthorized charges or costs incurred by an 
employee while using school unit computers. 
Cross Reference: GCSA - Employee Computer and Internet Use 
Adopted: 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reﬂect ofﬁcial Association 
policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a starting point for a board's 
policy development on speciﬁc topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve exactly to address the concerns and 
needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful analysis of the need and purpose of any policy anda 
thorough consideration of the application and suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not 
intended as a substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. 
Page 5 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
v
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: IJNDB 
STUDENT COMPUTER AND INTERNET USE AND INTERNET SAFETY 
|School unit name] computers, network, and Internet access are provided to support the 
educational mission of the schools and to enhance the curriculum and learning 
opportunities for students and school staff. This policy and the accompanying rules also 
apply to laptops, I-pads, tablets and other devices issued directly to students, whether 
they are used at school or off school premises. 
Compliance with [School unit name]’s policies and rules concerning computer and 
Internet use is mandatory. Students who violate these policies and rules may have their 
computer privileges limited, suspended, or revoked. The building principal is authorized 
to determine, after considering the circumstances involved, whether and for how longa 
student’s computer privileges will be altered. The building principal ’s decision shall be 
ﬁnal [OR: may be appealed to the Superintendent]. 
Violations of this policy and |School unit name| ’s computer and Internet rules may also 
result in disciplinary action, referral to law enforcement, and/or legal action. 
|School unit name] computers remain under the control, custody, and supervision of the 
school unit at all times. The school unit monitors all computer and Internet activity by 
students. Students have no expectation of privacy in their use of school computers, 
whether they are used on school property or elsewhere. 
INTERNET SAFETY' 
[School unit name] uses ﬁltering technology designed to block materials that are 
obscene or harmful to minors, and child pornography. Although |School unit name] 
takes precautions to supervise and monitor student use of the Internet, parents should be 
aware that the |School unit name] cannot reasonably prevent all instances of 
inappropriate computer and Internet use by students in violation of Board policies and 
rules, including access to objectionable materials and communication with persons 
outside of the school. The school unit is not responsible for the accuracy or quality of 
information that students obtain through the Internet. 
In the interest of student Internet safety, |School unit name] also educates students 
[OR: students and parents] about online behavior, including interacting with other 
people on social networking sites and in chat rooms, the dangers of engaging in 
“hacking” and other unlawful online activities. and issues surrounding “sexting” and 
cyberbullying awareness and response. 
Page 1 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: IJNDB 
The Superintendent /designee shall be responsible for integrating age-appropriate Internet 
safety training and “digital citizenship ” into the curriculum and for documentation of 
Internet safety training. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICY AND “ACCEPTABLE USE” RULES 
The Superintendent/designee shall be responsible for implementation of this policy and 
the accompanying “acceptable use” rules. Superintendent/designee may implement 
additional administrative procedures or school rules consistent with Board policy to 
govern Internet access and the day-to-day management, security_and operations of the 
school unit’s computer and network systems and to prevent the unauthorized disclosure, 
use and dissemination of personal information regarding minors. 
Students and parents shall be informed of this policy and the accompanying rules through 
student handbooks, the school Website, and/or other means selected by the 
Superintendent. 
Legal Reference: 20 USC § 677 (Enhancing Education through Technology Act) 
47 USC § 254(h)(5) (Children ’s Internet Protection Act) 
47 CFR § 54.52 (Children ’s Internet Protection Act Certiﬁcations) 
Federal Communications Commission Order and Report ll-125, 
(August 10, 2011) 
Cross Reference: EGAD - Copyright Compliance 
- 
GCSA - Employee Computer and Internet Use 
IJNDB-R - Student Computer and Internet Use Rules 
IJND — Distance Learning Program 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official 
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used asa 
starting point for a board’s policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve 
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful analysis of 
the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and suitability to the 
individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are 
not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board’s own legal counsel. 
Page 2 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
* MSMA SAMPLE PROCEDUREY* NEPN/N SBA Code: IJNDB-R 
STUDENT COMPUTER AND INTERNET USE RULES 
These rules accompany Board policy IJN DB (Student Computer and Internet Use). Each 
student is responsible for his/her actions and activities involving school unit computers 
(including I-Pads, tablets, laptops and other devices issued to students), networks, and 
Internet services, and for his/her computer ﬁles, passwords, and accounts. 
These rules provide general guidance concerning the use of the school unit’s computers 
and examples of prohibited uses. The rules do not attempt to describe every possible 
prohibited activity by students. Students, parents, and school staff who have questions 
about whether a particular activity is prohibited are encouraged to contact the building 
principal or the Technology Coordinator. 
A. Acceptable Use 
The school unit’s computers, networks, and Internet services are provided 
for educational purposes and research consistent with the school unit’s 
educational mission, curriculum, and instructional goals. 
All Board policies, school rules, and expectations concerning student 
conduct and communications apply when students are using computers, 
whether the use is on or off school property. 
Students are also expected to comply with all speciﬁc instructions from 
school administrators, school staff or volunteers when using the school 
unit’s computers. 
B. Consequences for Violation of Computer Use Policy and Rules 
Compliance with the school unit’s policies and rules concerning computer 
use is mandatory. Students who violate these policies and rules may, after 
having been given the opportunity to respond to an alleged violation, have 
their computer privileges limited, suspended, or revoked. Such violations 
may also result in disciplinary action, referral to law enforcement, and or 
legal action. 
The building principal shall have ﬁnal authority to decide whether a 
student’s privileges will be limited, suspended or revoked based upon the 
circumstances of the particular case, the student’s prior disciplinary record, 
and any other relevant factors. 
Page 1 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: IJNDB-R 
Prohibited Uses 
Examples of unacceptable uses of school unit computers that are expressly 
prohibited include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1. Accessing or Posting Inappropriate Materials — Accessing, 
submitting, posting, publishing, forwarding, downloading, scanning 
or displaying defamatory, abusive, obscene, vulgar, sexually 
explicit, sexually suggestive, threatening, discriminatory, harassing 
and/or illegal materials or engaging in “cyber bullying; ” 
2. Illegal Activities — Using the school unit’s computers, networks, and 
Internet services for any illegal activity or in violation of any Board 
policy or school rules. The school unit assumes no responsibility for 
illegal activities of students while using school computers; 
3. Violating Copyrights — Copying, downloading or sharing any type 
of copyrighted materials (including music or ﬁlms) without the 
owner’s permission (see Board policy/procedure EGAD — Copyright 
Compliance). The school unit assumes no responsibility for 
copyright violations by students; 
4. Copying Software — Copying or downloading software without the 
express authorization of the Technology Coordinator. Unauthorized 
copying of software is illegaland may subject the copier to 
substantial civil and criminal penalties. The school unit assumes no 
responsibility for illegal software copying by students; 
5. Plagiarism — Representing as one’s own work any materials 
obtained on the Internet (such as term papers, articles, music, etc.). 
When Internet sources are used in student work, the author, 
publisher, and website must be identiﬁed; 
6. Non-School-Related Uses — Using the school unit’s computers, 
networks, and Internet services for any personal reasons not 
connected with the educational program or assigmnents; 
7. Misuse of Passwords/Unauthorized Access — Sharing passwords, 
using other users’ passwords, and accessing or using other users’ 
accounts; 
Page 2 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: IJNDB-R 
8. Malicious Use/Vandalism — Any malicious use, disruption or harm 
to the school unit’s computers, networks, and Internet services, 
including but not limited to hacking activities and creation/uploading 
of computer viruses; and 
9. Unauthorized Access to Blogs/Chat Rooms/Social Networking 
Sites — Accessing blogs, chat rooms or social networking sites to 
which student access is prohibited. [NOTE: Schools that allow 
such use should modify this paragraph to reﬂect local decisions.] 
No Expectation of Privacy 
[School unit name] computers remain under the control, custody, and 
supervision of the school unit at all times. Students have no expectation of 
privacy in their use of school computers, including email, stored files, and 
Internet access logs. 
Compensation for Losses, Costs, and/or Damages 
The student and his/her parents are responsible for compensating the school 
unit for any losses, costs, or damages incurred by the school unit for 
violations of Board policies and rules while the student is using school unit 
computers, including the cost of investigating such violations. The school 
unit assumes no responsibility for any unauthorized charges or costs 
incurred by a student While using school unit computers.' 
Student Security 
A student is not allowed to reveal his/her full name, address or telephone 
number, social security number, or other personal information on the 
Internet Without prior permission from a teacher. Students should never 
agree to meet people they have contacted through the Internet without 
parental permission. Students should inform their teacher if they access 
information or messages that are dangerous, inappropriate, or make them 
uncomfortable in any way. 
System Security 
The security of the school unit’s computers, networks, and Internet services 
is a high priority. Any student who identiﬁes a security problem must 
notify his/her teacher immediately. The student shall not demonstrate the 
Page 3 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: IJNDB-R 
problem to others or access unauthorized material. Any user who attempts 
to breach system security, causes a breach of system security, or fails to 
report a system security problem shall be subject to disciplinary and/or 
legal action in addition to having his/her computer privileges limited, 
suspended, or revoked. 
Additional Rules for Laptops Issued to Students 
1. Laptops are loaned to students as an educational tool and are only 
authorized for use in completing school assignments. 
2. Before a laptop is issued to a student, the student must sign the 
school’s “acceptable use” agreement. Parents are required to attend 
an informational meeting before a laptop will be issued to their 
child. Attendance will be documented by means of a “sign in” sheet 
The meeting will orient parents to the goals and Workings of the 
laptop program, expectations for care of school-issued laptops, 
Internet safety, and the school unit’s rules in regard to use of this 
technology. 
3. Students and their parents are responsible for the proper care of 
laptops at all times, Whether on or off school property, including 
costs associated with repairing or replacing the laptop. [School unit 
name] offers an insurance program for parents to cover replacement 
costs and/or repair costs for damages not covered by the laptop 
warranty. Parents who choose not to purchase insurance should be 
aware that they are responsible for any costs associated with loss, 
theft, or damage to a laptop issued to their child. 
4. Loss or theft of a laptop must be reported immediately to [insert 
appropriate school personnel], and, if stolen, to the local law 
enforcement authority as well. 
5. The Board’s policy and rules concerning computer and Internet use 
apply to use of laptops at any time or place, on or off school 
property. Students are responsible for obeying any additional rules 
concerning care of laptops issued by school staff. 
Page 4 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: IJNDB-R 
6. Violation of policies or rules governing the use of computers, or any 
careless use of a laptop may result in a student’s laptop being 
conﬁscated and/or a student only being allowed to use the laptop 
under the direct supervision of school staff. The student will also be 
subject to disciplinary action for any violations of Board policies or 
school rules. 
7. Parents Will be informed of their child’s login password. Parents are 
responsible for supervising their child’s use of the laptop and 
Internet access when in use at home. 
8. The laptop may only be used by the student to whom it is assigned 
and by family members, to the extent permitted by Maine’s laptop 
program. 
9. Laptops must be returned in acceptable working order at the end of 
the school year or Whenever requested by school staff. 
Cross Reference: EGAD — Copyright Compliance 
IJNDB — Student Computer and Internet Use 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official 
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used asa 
starting point for a board’s policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board’s policy serve 
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful 
analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and 
suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and 
are not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board’s own legal counsel. 
Page 5 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
