northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 953 An Act to Protect Maine Patients Regarding Hospital Price  
Transparency 
 
Testimony in Opposition 
April 24,2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, my name Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am here 
today providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member 
organizations speaking in opposition to this bill.  Northern Light Health member 
organizations include 10 hospitals located in southern, central, eastern and northern 
Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction 
treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care practices and a state-wide home care 
and hospice program.  Ninety three percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern 
Light Health service area.  Northern Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s 
largest employers with more than 10,000 employees statewide. 
 
The federal hospital price transparency regulation became effective January 1, 2021, 
and requires each hospital operating in the United States to make public its standard 
charges for the items and services it provides. Hospitals are required to make their 
standard charges public in two ways: 1) a consumer-friendly display comprising at least 
300 shoppable services, which can be satisfied through the release of a shoppable 
services file or by offering a price estimator tool, and 2) a comprehensive, machine-
readable file. 
 
Northern Light Health is in compliance with the regulation with a web page designed to 
provide the public with access to price transparency information, online price estimates, 
access to a financial counselor for assistance with price estimates and links to machine 
readable files for each member hospital.  The price estimator tool helps individuals plan 
for the costs of health care services including treatments, tests and procedures.  If the 
price estimator does not provide pricing information for the service the individual is 
looking, the financial counselors are available to help them.  The site also includes a link 
to Compare Maine to access price transparency tools from the Maine Health Data 
Organization.   
 
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has the authority to assess penalties 
against hospitals for non-compliance, the penalties range from $300 to $5500 per day 
depending on the size of the hospital.   
 
Given that the federal government requires hospitals to comply with the price 
transparency rule and has authority to assess penalties the bill before you today is not 
needed.  We ask that you vote in opposition to this bill.  
