HEALTHCARE 
PURCHASER
i 
t AL LIA N cE 
or MAlNE 
Testimony of Peter Hayes 
to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
In Support of 
LD 953, An Act to Protect Maine Patients Regarding Hospital Price Transparency 
April 24, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, insurance and Financial Services. 
My name is Peter Hayes and I'm the President and CEO of the Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine. The HPA isa 
nonprofit that represents the purchasers of healthcare in Maine. Our mission is to advance healthcare value and to 
support and incentivize high-quality, affordable care. We have over 60 members, including some of the largest public 
and private employers and health trusts in Maine. Collectively, our members spend over a billion dollars annually 
providing health care for nearly one quarter of the commercially insured population in the state. 
l am here today to testify in support of LD 953. By incentivizing compliance with federal transparency mandates, LD 
953 will help make timely provider price information available, helping Maine consumers to understand price 
variation among providers and allowing them to make more informed decisions about where to receive care. 
The cost of healthcare services are a major expense for most Maine families. Yet too often, we have no idea what the 
price of a service is until weeks after it's been delivered, and there's often no way for consumers to compare prices 
from different providers ahead oftime to try to ﬁnd the most affordable option. And medical services are not small 
ticket items. For instance, the average cost per day of an inpatient hospital in Maine was $2,765 in 2021} and our 
data shows that, depending on the procedure, prices can vary by more than 500 percent depending on wherea 
patient receives care. And while the MHDO's CompareMaine website is a fantastic source for average price 
information, it doesn't provide speciﬁc prices based on a patient's health plan. 
But in 2020, the federal government took a huge step towards more comprehensive transparency when they 
promulgated regulations that require hospitals to publicly post crucial price information that will empower 
consumers to make more informed decisions about their health care. ln addition to machine-readable ﬁles on various 
standard charges (including gross charges, payer-speci ﬁc negotiated rates, and discounted cash prices), the 
regulation also requires hospitals to provide patients with an out-of-pocket cost estimator tool or payer-speci ﬁc 
negotiated rates for at least 300 shoppable services. And as these data come online, several organizations are 
beginning to leverage the information to create user friendly pricing tools for consumers. 
1 
Kaiser Family Foundation State Health Facts, "Hospital Adjusted Expenses per Inpatient Day: 2021." Available at: 
https://www.kff.org/health-costs/state-indicator/expenses —ber-inpatient- 
day/?currentTimeframe:0&s0rtModel=%7B%22colld%22:%22Location%22,%22s0rt%22:%22asc%22%7D. 
Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine l 11 Bowdoin Mill Island, Suite 260, Topsham, ME 04086 
P: (207)844-8106 | E: info@purchaserallianceorg | www.purchaseralliance.org
,g,gj§§, HEALTHCARE .,, ,.. aw; age PURCHASER
l 
. ALL I A N CE' 
~ 
OF MAINE 
These rules—and the resulting shopping tools—are a game changer for consumers who will be able to better 
understand and compare the prices for their health care, based on their own insurance coverage. But while the 
transparency rules went into effect over two years ago (in January 2021), many hospitals have still not fully complied 
with the mandates, leaving their patients without critical information about the prices of their services. And among 
those hospitals that have published machine-readable ﬁles, many include incomplete information, leaving out prices 
for many common services. 
To improve compliance rates, in January 2022 the federal government increased annual penalties to up to $109,500 
for small hospitals and up to $2 million for large hospitals? Yet despite this increase, many hospitals remain 
noncompliant. Today, estimates of compliance rates vary, ranging from 25%3 to 70%‘ nationwide, but even if 
compliance is at 70 percent, that means well over 1,000 hospitals nationwide are still not compliant. And if 70 
percent of Maine hospitals are compliant, that would mean that nine are currently not supplying the price 
transparency information that they are required to provide. In its February 2023 report, which analyzed the websites 
of 2,000 hospitals focusing on the nations’ largest health systems, PatientRightsAdvocate.org (a nonproﬁt 
organization focused on price transparency) found that only one of the four Maine hospitals included in its review- 
which included three of the largest hospitals in the state—was fully compliant.-" ’ They noted that although the 
majority of hospitals nationwide have posted ﬁles, noncompliance was due to most hospitals ’ ﬁles being 
”incomplete, illegible, or not having prices clearly associated with both payer and plan.”" We have downloaded 
Maine hospital ﬁles ourselves and found omissions. One hospital, for example, did not include any drug pricing 
information in their ﬁle. 
With so many hospitals still noncompliant with the federal mandates more than two years after they were enacted, 
we agree with Representative Libby that additional enforcement mechanisms are needed to bring non-compliant 
hospitals fully in line with the federal mandate. And we think the enforcement tool proposed in LD 953 makes a lot of 
sense, as it would preclude hospitals from sending patients to collections agencies for unpaid bills when the patient 
didn't have access to all federally mandated pricing information beforehand. 
Lastly, as currently drafted, the bill would allow a patient, the Attorney General, or the Department of Health and 
Human Sen/ices to apply to Maine's Superior or District Court for relief. Asking a patient to pursue relief in the courts 
may discourage some patients from pursuing such relief. Hence, the committee may want to consider identifying a 
state agency to assess the compliance status of Maine hospitals with the transparency mandates, which would allow 
patients to check the compliance status of a hospital pursuing collections against them, and if that hospital is out of 
compliance, for them to receive relief based on that status. 
2 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, "Hospital Price Transparency Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)s,” November 29, 
2022. Available at: https1//www.cms.gov/ ﬁles/document/hospital-price-transparency~frequently-asked-questionspdf. 
3 Patient Rights Advocate.Org, "Fourth Semi—Annual Hospital Price Transparency Report," February 2023. Available at: 
https://www.patientriglitsadvocate.org/february-semi —annual-compllance-report~2023. 
"' 
Meena Seshamani and Douglas Jacobs, "Hospital Price Transparency: Progress And Commitment To Achieving Its Potential," 
Health Affairs, February 14, 2023. Available at: https://www.healthaffairsorg/content/forefront/hospital-price~transparency; 
progress~and-comrnitment-achieving~its~potential. 
5 
Patient Rights Advocate.Org. 
6 lbid. 
Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine I 11 Bowdoin Mill lsland, Suite 260, Topsham, ME 04086 
P: (207)844-8106 I E: info@purchaseralliance.org l www.purchaseralliance.org
K~ 
//>._
\ 
;???§*» HEALTHCARE 
Ypkéhyi PURCHASER 
. ALLIANCE '**1i“*;1Y~'"" 0 F M A | NE 
Finally, l would emphasize that the penalties laid out in LD 953 will not impact Maine hospitals who are already in full 
compliance with the federal regulations and providing their patients with the critical pricing information they need to 
make informed choices. But for any hospitals that have remained noncompliant with federal mandates for over two 
years, and that continue to deny consumers access to the pricing information required under federal regulation, LD 
953 would create a powerful incentive to encourage compliance. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our feedback on LD 953, and many thanks to Representative Libby for 
introducing this important legislation. I'd be happy to answer any questions and will be available for the work 
session. 
Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine I 11 Bowdoin Mill island, Suite 260, Topsham, ME 04086 
P: (207) 844-8106 | E: info@purchaseralliance.org | www.purchasera|liance.org
