.\\\\'//// 
MAINE TOURISM 
ASSOCIATION 
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Officer & Director of Government Affairs 
On Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
In Support Of 
LD 201 An Act To Make Permanent the Ability of Certain Retailers and Distilleries to Sell Liquor 
for Off-premises Consumption and Cocktails for On-premises Consumption 
January 30, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs: 
My name is Alison Sucy, and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for the 
Maine Tourism Association. I am testifying in support of LD 201. The Maine Tourism Association is a non- 
proﬁt association and the state’s largest tourism organization. MTA has been promoting Maine and supporting 
members in every type of tourism business such as restaurants and bars, lodging, retail, amusements, camps and 
campgrounds, historical and cultural attractions, and guides and tours for over I00 years. 
This law, originally created to help save struggling businesses at the height of the COVID pandemic, can 
continue to help these same licensed on-premises retailers such as restaurants, bars, taverns, and tasting rooms. 
As we know, restaurants in particular operate on very thin margins and have a high closure rate. The provision 
of allowing alcohol-to-go was literally what saved many of these establishments. 
A number of state and local laws were changed during the pandemic and businesses altered their operations. 
One of the things learned is that these new and creative ways of doing things were successful, safe, and are 
worth continuing into the future. Let this be another tool to help our neighbors who own, operate, and Work in 
these establishments build and maintain a successful business. 
Maine would not be alone in taking this step. According to the National Restaurant Association, 31 states have 
made permanent or extended the sunset for alcohol to go. These states include most of our neighbors and the 
home states of most of our visitors: Massachusetts, Vermont, Comrecticut, Rhode Island, New Jersey, and New 
York. 
Tourism is one of Maine’s largest private industries, supporting over 143,000 jobs and contributing billions of 
dollars to the Maine economy. The majority of our members are small business owners and many are family-run 
businesses Where an entire farnily’s income is dependent on the success of the business. This bill is an important 
component in assisting these businesses so they can continue to support themselves and their employees. 
I respectfully ask that you vote in favor of LD 201. Thank you very much for your consideration. 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 
I922, MTA members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour 
operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates seven State 
Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s ofﬁcial travel planner, 
Maine Invites You (since 1933).
