Amy Meader
Rivalries
LD 201
To: Members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee
From: Amy Meader, co-owner, Rivalries Sports Pub and Grill, Portland and 
Falmouth, Maine 
Re: Support for LD 201, An Act to Make Permanent the Ability of Certain Retailers 
and Distilleries to Sell Liquor for Off-premises Consumption and Cocktails for 
On-premises Consumption
Dear Members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee:
 
My name is Amy Meader and I co-own Rivalries Sports Pub and Grill in Portland and 
Falmouth. We opened our Portland location in 2002 and Falmouth in 2016. I am providing 
written testimony in support of LD 201. Maine’s hospitality industry has faced tremendous 
challenges since COVID landed at our doorsteps causing drastic adaptations and changes to 
our business plans with an extremely limited amount of time to prepare. A positive outcome to
those that have weathered this crazy storm has been the drive to think outside the box to 
keep our businesses open and staff employed, all while continuing with a service that so 
many customers appreciate and support.  The opportunity to sell liquor “to go” responsibly 
and safely provided businesses with the opportunity to generate additional to-go income 
during the time of forced dine-in closures. Following the lift of that restriction, it still provides 
restaurants the opportunity to bring in added revenue which is financially helpful to an 
industry that operates a business on a very tight profit margin. The additional revenue can 
help to offset the rising labor rates and increase in costs of goods and services. Importantly 
and conservatively, it can provide added income to a reserves account since our industry’s 
business flow can be very sensitive to seasonality changes.
Since our industry employs many Maine residents, it’s critical that we mindfully think
through all decisions that directly impact this already challenged and very hard 
working industry. In addition to the many hurdles caused by the pandemic, our 
industry, with historically tight profit margins, feels the pressures significantly of 
operating during this current state of our economy.  Staffing shortages and an increase
in costs for goods and services are causing restaurant owners to feel a lot more stress. 
Maine, also highly connected to tourism, relies upon restaurants to deliver food 
service to the many visitors yearly.  If the pressures of operating a restaurant continue 
at this pace and/or increase, I would be very empathetic to understanding why owners 
would choose to close their businesses.  
Aside from a restaurant owner myself, I am also someone who really enjoys dining 
out and supporting local restaurants. So, from both sides of the coin, my strong hope 
and desire for the hospitality industry is that the State of Maine continues  to 
mindfully think about business supporting initiatives and ways in which to support 
this amazing industry. Restaurant workers and owners need this approach if we’re 
going to continue to keep businesses open, keep people employed and keep the many 
customers happy! 
Thank you for considering my written testimony in the basis of your decision.
Sincerely,
Amy Meader
