 
Testimony of Three of Strong Spirits 
In Support Of   
L.D. 201- An Act to Make Permanent the Ability of Certain Retailers and Distilleries to Sell 
Liquor for Off-premises Consumption and Cocktails for On- premises Consumption   
January  30, 2023 
 
 
 
Senator Hickman , Representative S upica , and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Dave McConnell  and I am a resident of Falmouth. I am testifying today 
in support of L.D. 201 on behalf of Three of Strong Spirits (“Three of Strong”) , a small distillery 
in Portland, Maine.  
 I founded Three of Strong with my friend and business partner, Sam Pierce,  in 2019 with a little 
bit of money from friends and family  and an awful lot of time, energy and sweat.  The legislative 
reforms enacted dur ing the last session  – the ability to sell cocktails to go and to make cocktails 
with small amounts of complementary wine and spirits that we do not produce in-house – have 
helped small distilleries like ours to survive during an extremely challenging period. I am 
testifying in favor of L.D. 201 because making those changes permanent will help Maine’s small distilleries  rebuild and grow our businesses, creating new jobs and enhancing Maine’s reputation 
as a food and beverage destination.   Three of Strong is located  in the East Bayside neighborhood of Portland, which is zoned “Light 
Industrial.”  There  are a number of food and beverage manufacturers in our neighborhood, 
including coffee roasters, a chocolate maker and a number of breweries, but the neighborhood is not zoned for restaurants or full bars.    In addition to manufacturing spirits, our distillery license allows us to serve and sell cocktails and bottles in the tasting room.  Those sales represen t a significant portion of our revenue.  
Visitors to the tasting room often choose to buy a bottle of our spirits because they  have  first had 
the opportunity to sample it in a n outstanding craft cocktail .  Being able to sell cocktails “to go” 
gives our customers the flexibility to have that introductory taste in their own home rather than at the distillery tasting room.  Similarly, allowing small distilleries to purchase small quantities of complementary products for our cocktails from authorized resellers has allowed us to improve the quality and sophistication of our cocktail program.  Small distilleries like ours could not 
otherwise justify the expense and technical challenges posed by manufacturing the small quantities of specialty products like vermouth and absinthe that help make a craft cocktail sing.  

Three of Strong Spirits Testimony in Support of L.D. 201 
January 30, 2023 Page 2 of 2 
 
It is important to note that licensees selling  “to go” cocktails are subject to the same protective 
guardrails that govern the sale of on- premise cocktails or off- premise bottles.  For example, we 
cannot sell to someone who is underage or visibly intoxicated.  Similarly, allowing existing licensees to sell cocktails to go has not increased  the enforcement burden because it has not 
added any new lic ensees to the enforcement portfolio.  This is  the same number of venues selling 
the same types of products.  As I recall, the sunset provisions to be repealed if this bill is approved were originally put in 
place to give time for those  concerned about the potential public health and safety impacts of 
these laws to  observe their practical application .  Absent the presentation of compelling evidence 
that those fears have materialized, I hop e that this Committee will vote L.D. 201 “Ought to 
Pass.”   
