Senator Hickman
Representative Supica
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
Re: LD 201, An Act to Make Permanent the Ability of Certain Retailers and 
Distilleries to Sell Liquor for Off-premises Consumption and Cocktails for On-
premises Consumption
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Members of the Veterans & 
Legal Affairs Committee.  My name is Debra Hart and I am a resident of 
Manchester, Maine.  I am providing these comments in support of LD 201 on 
behalf of my client, Wine Institute.  Wine Institute is the trade association of 
over 1,000 California wineries.   Wine is a drink that is not only enjoyed on its 
own, but typically paired with food.  
We were supportive of the legislation to allow ‘cocktails to-go’ when originally 
proposed and we continue to be supportive of this practice.  The industry was 
pleased when language was added that also would allow a beverage that 
combined ‘wine with spirits’ ~~ our example was, you could order a Blood 
Mary to-go which is an alcohol-based drink, but under the original language 
not a Mimosa, since that is a drink that combines a wine-based product with a 
fruit juice.
At that time, we also asked the committee to include a glass of wine-to-go.  As 
written in the statute, wine or malt products can be sold, but have to be in the 
‘original container’.  In the case of malt beverages, the original container is 
akin to a single-serving or 12 fluid ounces.  In a 750 ml bottle of wine, there is 
more than twice that amount or 25.4 fluid ounces.  Our argument was that 
often people want ‘a’ glass of wine, or there may be two people in the 
household that each want ‘a’ glass of wine, but one prefers a white wine and 
another prefers a red variety. 
To be perfectly, clear, we did not prevail in being able to sell a ‘take-out’ glass 
of wine, but we continue to be perplexed as to why it should be such a big deal 
when you can indeed get ‘a’ cocktail to -go, and in the case of malt liquor, ‘a’ 
single serving of beer, but you must buy the entire 750 ml bottle of wine if you 
want one of glass.  There certainly are small bottles of wine, but we have 
found that most restaurants choose to purchase the 750 ml bottles rather than 
a single-serve bottle.  It is our understanding some states did include a single 
glass of wine-to-go including Rhode Island.
Again, we are supportive of making this practice of a cocktail-to-go 
permanent, however we wanted to bring our past concern to the committee 
for your consideration.  
Thank you for your attention.  
