STATE OF MAINE 
BUREAU OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND LOTTERY OPERATIONS 
“ii 8 STATE HousE STATION 
LD 201 — “An Act to Make Permanent the Ability of Certain Retailers and Distilleries to Sell Liqu DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
U 
35 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04330-0008 . 
KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
' 
COMMISSIONER 
GREGORY R. MINEO 
J"(;‘§I,g;,;‘(‘;,LS Testimony of DIRECTOR 
Gregory R. Mineo 
Director, Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
for Off-premises Consumption and Cocktails for On-premises Consumption ” 
January 30, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Joint Standing Committee on OI’ 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Gregg Mineo and I a1n the Director of the Bureau of 
Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations. I am providing the following testimony neither for 
nor against this legislation, but asking the Committee to carry this bill over to the second session. 
This is the third bill in as many years seeking to make permanent what are colloquially known as 
cocktails-to-go, an allowance that was originally granted via extension of Executive Order in the 
early days of the COVD-19 pandemic. Given the proﬁt margins on liquor sales, cocktails-to-go 
proved an invaluable lifeline to restaurants and bars during the most challenging times they had 
ever faced. 
When presented with the same bill a year ago, rather than making cocktails-to-go permanent the 
previous legislature extended the sunset by two and a half years until March 30, 2025 after hearing 
the public health concerns raised over the increased access to alcohol created during the pandemic. 
The Bureau reported that we had no evidence of our own of any issues stemming from cocktails 
to go, but with only ﬁve liquor inspectors to cover the entire state, we had inadequate enforcement 
capacity to actively monitor compliance surrounding cocktails-to-go. That is hopefully 
changing —the Bureau received two additional liquor licensing inspectors in last year’s 
supplemental budget and a request of ﬁve more has been included in the Governor ’s biennial 
budget proposal. 
We urge the Committee to use more of the time available before making this policy permanent to 
allow the public health community to gather more data about the pandemic ’s impact on Mainers’ 
alcohol use and for the Bureau to increase our enforcement capacity. 
Thank you for allowing me to testify before the Committee today. I am happy to respond to any 
questions, and of course will be available for the work session. 
Page l ofl
