Jasmine Burne
Bar Harbor Maine
LD 201
To Whom It May Concern, 
My name is Jasmine Burne and I work for the restaurant Side Street Cafe where I am 
employed as the bar manager for two properties. Side Street Cafe is a family owned 
business located in the coastal town of Bar Harbor Maine. The 2020 addition of a 
to-go alcohol bill allowing us to sell liquor for off-premises consumption in response 
to the COVID-19 pandemic was invaluable to us as a tool to help our business 
succeed, and it continues to be a positive contributor to our yearly revenue. Revoking 
the alcohol to-go policies here in Maine would not only negatively affect the revenue 
stream or our locally owned business, it would affect other small businesses in Maine,
decrease overall liquor sales for the State, and could place consumers in 
uncomfortable safety situations. 
Side Street Cafe is located on Mount Desert island nestled right against Acadia 
National Park, where our economy is based on tourism. Our tourist season is limited 
almost entirely to a 7 month stretch between April and October. During this period of 
time not only does our town population nearly triple with an influx of seasonal 
residents and workers, Acadia National Park also brings millions of visitors to our 
town (just under 4 million in 2021).  It is imperative for us to utilize every revenue 
stream available to us during this time in order to give us the financial ability to 
survive during the period of the year when there are not enough consumers in the area
to support businesses such as ours. Capitalizing on the revenue we are able to bring in
during our tourist season enables us to keep local Mainers on payroll year round, 
maintain our properties during the time we are not generating adequate revenue, and 
ensure the vitality and longevity of our business year after year. Allowing alcoholic 
beverages to be marketed and packaged for takeout has positively contributed to our 
overall gross alcohol sales because it no longer limits the sale of product to people 
with the time and financial resources to physically dine in at our establishment. 
Side Street prides ourselves on doing our best to support other local Maine 
businesses. We do this in part by offering cocktails that utilize and highlight products 
from Maine Distilleries and other Maine businesses. Being able to promote and sell 
these products in a takeout format not only increases demand for these local 
businesses but contributes to their individual brand recognition, a factor of marketing 
that is exponentially growing in importance with the increased use of social media 
presence. 
The pandemic was a catalyst for a shift in personal safety regulation and patterns of 
behavior in hospitality environments. Many of these changes have endured into 2023 
including individuals who do not feel comfortable physically entering dining 
establishments, whether it be due to immunocompromisation or other personal 
stances. By allowing the sale of alcohol to-go in addition to our normal food menu, 
we are providing these consumers an opportunity to experience our menu in full and 
continue to support small local businesses without forcing them to compromise their 
safety or comfort. 
All in all, continuing to allow businesses in Maine to sell liquor to go not only 
positively impacts individual restaurant revenue,  it helps us to support other local 
Maine businesses, provides a safe and easy alternative for compromised individuals to
support Maine restaurants, and contributes positively to the States total liquor sales. I 
am in full support of the Act to make permanent the ability of certain retailers and 
distilleries to sell liquor for off-premises consumption.
Thank you for your time. 

