At the onset of the Covid pandemic, the cocktails-to-go memorandum provided a vital lifeline 
for hospitality businesses here in Maine. As one of the top economic sectors in our state, it is 
integral that we continue to support the hospitality industry in a responsible and thoughtful way 
as we evolve in our post-pandemic society. 
The hospitality community was one of the hardest hit industries during the pandemic. Our 
industry at large has vigilantly executed responsible practices in the state of Maine under this 
legislation since it’s onset in our effort to recoup, according to the National Restaurant 
Association, a nearly 80 percent drop in revenues since 2020. We are not fully healed from this 
loss. We need more time. 
We need more time to recover from our pandemic losses. We need more time to collect 
additional reliable data. We are confident this will illustrate our industry’s commitment to 
responsible alcohol service and sales under an approved extension of this legislation.  This 
information will help guide the future of hospitality businesses in all of Maine’s 16 counties.  
As responsible alcohol service practitioners, we understand that some may have concerns like 
expanded access for minors and a potential impact for those who are in addiction recovery.  For 
these reasons too, we need to approve the extension of this legislation to collect a body of data 
that accurately authenticates the impact, if any at all, of these claims. According to the Maine 
Liquor Commission over 70% of on-premise Maine licensees were implementing cocktails-to-go 
as part of their beverage programs in 2022. Our industry has demonstrated how paramount this 
memorandum is to the lifeblood of our community while maintaining responsible alcohol service 
practices. We are advocating for the opportunity to continue with these expanded privileges as 
part of our business models.
The existing required protocols in the cocktails-to-go memorandum like limiting alcohol sales to 
only be accompanied with food, the tamper evident seals on containers, and the meticulously 
detailed labeling guidelines are there to support the ultimate purpose of this legislation: the sale 
of these beverages is intended for at-home consumption to responsible adults who choose to add 
adult beverages to their dining experience while revitalizing one of the largest industries in 
Maine’s economic ecosystem. 
We are full of gratitude and appreciation in the careful consideration to please extend this 
legislation. 
Many Thanks,
The Nonantum Resort Team
Kennebunkport, ME
Meagan Bielagus
The Nonantum Resort
LD 201
At the onset of the Covid pandemic, the cocktails-to-go memorandum provided a vital
lifeline for hospitality businesses here in Maine. As one of the top economic sectors in
our state, it is integral that we continue to support the hospitality industry in a 
responsible and thoughtful way as we evolve in our post-pandemic society. 
The hospitality community was one of the hardest hit industries during the pandemic. 
Our industry at large has vigilantly executed responsible practices in the state of 
Maine under this legislation since it’s onset in our effort to recoup, according to the 
National Restaurant Association, a nearly 80 percent drop in revenues since 2020. We
are not fully healed from this loss. We need more time. 
We need more time to recover from our pandemic losses. We need more time to 
collect additional reliable data. We are confident this will illustrate our industry’s 
commitment to responsible alcohol service and sales under an approved extension of 
this legislation.  This information will help guide the future of hospitality businesses 
in all of Maine’s 16 counties.  
As responsible alcohol service practitioners, we understand that some may have 
concerns like expanded access for minors and a potential impact for those who are in 
addiction recovery.  For these reasons too, we need to approve the extension of this 
legislation to collect a body of data that accurately authenticates the impact, if any at 
all, of these claims. According to the Maine Liquor Commission over 70% of 
on-premise Maine licensees were implementing cocktails-to-go as part of their 
beverage programs in 2022. Our industry has demonstrated how paramount this 
memorandum is to the lifeblood of our community while maintaining responsible 
alcohol service practices. We are advocating for the opportunity to continue with 
these expanded privileges as part of our business models.
The existing required protocols in the cocktails-to-go memorandum like limiting 
alcohol sales to only be accompanied with food, the tamper evident seals on 
containers, and the meticulously detailed labeling guidelines are there to support the 
ultimate purpose of this legislation: the sale of these beverages is intended for 
at-home consumption to responsible adults who choose to add adult beverages to their
dining experience while revitalizing one of the largest industries in Maine’s economic
ecosystem. 
We are full of gratitude and appreciation in the careful consideration to please extend 
this legislation. 
Many Thanks,
The Nonantum Resort Team
Kennebunkport, ME

