Brad Farrin 130th MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station
Senator, District 3 Augusta, ME 04333
Testimony of Senator Brad Farrin
Presenting L.D. 201, An Act to Make Permanent the Ability of Certain Retailers 
and Distilleries to Sell Liquor for Off-premises Consumption and Cocktails for 
On-premises Consumption
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee
January 30, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Brad Farrin, and I represent the people of Senate District 
3, which includes towns in Kennebec, Somerset and Penobscot counties. I’m here to present LD 
201, "An Act to Make Permanent the Ability of Certain Retailers and Distilleries to Sell Liquor for 
Off-premises Consumption and Cocktails for On-premises Consumption".
Instituting alcohol to-go in Maine was a business-saving economic tool during the COVID-19 
pandemic crisis and continues to serve as a needed source of revenue to this day. The bill in front 
of you makes a straight-forward change to Maine law by making it a permanent option for on-
premises liquor licensed businesses to sell for off-premises consumption. Alcohol to-go originated 
as an Executive Order from the Governor toward the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic as a 
way to keep some form of revenue coming to restaurants before what looked like to many as an 
inevitable closure of some businesses. Following the Executive Order, the Legislature passed the 
current law which has extended the option while the industry and stakeholders have had time to 
review any impacts of the law.  
I have heard from constituents, colleagues, and business owners in and out of my Senate district 
that they would like alcohol to-go to become a permanent option because either 1) it is a popular 
business amenity, 2) it is an additional source of revenue, and 3) in most cases, both.  Other states 
have caught on and have taken steps toward permanency. Given its measurable success, many 
states have since made the decision to legislatively extend, or make permanent, to-go and delivery 
alcohol. As of the fall of 2021, 29 states had extended or made permanent to-go drinks, and 32 
states had passed to-go or delivery reforms of some kind (either from on- or off-premise retailers).
Some time has passed to see this play out, and it has shown to be a positive force for the industry. 
It has been successful in part because it is optional, avoiding mandates; whether on-premise or 
delivery, it must be accompanied by a food order; and it has been a visibly popular offering for 
patrons.
We don’t know what tomorrow brings, and we shouldn’t be in the business of taking away tools 
that have been given to these establishments as a new form of revenue. As you can see by the list 
of co-sponsors, this issue is not a partisan one and really speaks to the collective goal of supporting 
our businesses here in Maine. Whether it’s simply an attractive business amenity or a financial 
lifeline, we should make alcohol to-go a permanent option for our local businesses.   
Thank you for your consideration and the opportunity to introduce this bill. 
 
