Distinguished Members of the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, 
thank you for allowing me to be here today to voice my support of LD-201 
(An Act to Make Permanent the Ability of Certain Retailers and Distilleries to 
Sell Liquor for Off-premises Consumption and Cocktails for On-premises 
Consumption). 
My name is Susan Stephenson. I am a lifelong Mainer, and I'm here to 
represent 3 Bangor businesses and many, many colleagues and co-workers. 
My restaurants - Pepino’s and Pepino’s Taco Stand - will be celebrating their 
45th year in business this April. My deli & market - the Corner Store - is 
family-owned and 30 years young. 
I take great pride in small business ownership, my community, and my 
industry. It's no secret that restaurants have struggled since the beginning 
of the pandemic. Cocktails to-go were launched out of necessity due to 
COVID-19, and they have become a popular and revenue generating custom 
not only here in Maine but in dozens of other states and cities across the 
country. 
Since the passing of LD-205 in year 2020, my restaurants have sold over 
7,000 to-go margaritas. With approximately $75,000 in additional revenue, 
I've been able to retain staff, pivot our business model, provide an 
alternative service to a variety of customers, and keep the lights on. 
To-go beverages provide a convenient and appropriate accompaniment for 
take—out meals that many people have come to rely on when they dine out 
or take away. 
Selling cocktails to-go helps restaurants, but also helps liquor stores, too. 
Here is an example from my own experience as both a restauranteur and an 
agency liquor license holder: A customer orders a to-go cocktail with their 
takeout order and enjoys the drink. In the future, they want to continue 
having the drink by making it at home. That customer will likely purchase 
the necessary ingredients from their local liquor store. Not to mention, pre- 
mixed staple cocktails like margaritas and mimosas, for example, can be 
more cheaply purchased in a can from a liquor store than from most 
restaurants and bars.
If COVID—19 taught me anything it was that competitors can be 
collaborators. My restaurant, Pepino’s, partnered with Portland Pie Pizza for 
a takeout-only Cinco de Mayo in May of 2020 in an effort to help both of our 
businesses, staffing, and faster food production. Having quick takeaway 
options proved beneficial as it was the highest sales day (in 4 decades) on 
record. 
Moving forward, it's predicted that people will eat out differently. LD-201 
gives our industry the flexibility to address changes and adapt accordingly. 
Also, there's precedent and history that selling to-go beverages works. For 
over 20 years, we've had a law that says if you order a bottle of wine with 
your meal at a restaurant, you can take it home if it's securely sealed. To—go 
cocktails have similar - if not more — 
required compliance. 
In closing, restaurants have reopened, yes, but we are still recovering. 
Please don't take away a positive industry innovation as we continue to face 
a plethora of ongoing challenges such as rising utility + food costs and 
staffing shortages. Please let to-go cocktails stay and allow this much- 
needed boost for Maine small businesses. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Susan Stephenson, Bangor 
Pepino's & Pepino's Taco Stand 
Corner Store Deli & Market (Agency liquor store)
