Timothy Rich
Bar Harbor, ME
LD 201
To The Committee Members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee, 131st 
Legislature Committee, for the State of Maine.
My name is Timothy Rich.  I am the owner and operator of The Independent Cafe & 
Market in Bar Harbor.  I have served in this role for 12 years and previous to that 
worked in the hospitality industry in Maine on and for more than a decade.  I also 
own several commercial properties in Midcoast Maine.
I also serve as the First Vice Chair of Hospitality Maine and am the incoming Chair 
of the organization later this year.  In this role I speak frequently with many of the 
over 700 members of our organization all over our state.  As many of you know 
Hospitality Maine is the largest trade group of hotels, restaurants, and affiliated 
members in our state.  I'm sure we all agree that Maine is known is an incredibly 
welcoming state to travelers, vacationers, and tourists and our industry provides them 
with incredible lodging and food and our industry is a huge driver of the tourism 
industry in Maine.  This trickles down throughout our entire state to benefit (for 
example) everyone from farmers to locally owned specialty food makers and support 
our local economies by creating good, well paying jobs for people from Fort Kent to 
Kittery.  Our organization also has a non-profit arm that does tremendous good in 
Maine by pursing many public service projects all across the state, including pairing 
former inmates leaving jails and prisons with good paying jobs in the hospitality 
industry that give them a leg up in life and an opportunity and the support to choose a 
new, better path for themselves and their families.
I'm saying all of this because I want you all to understand how important our industry 
is and how close our industry came to collapsing three years ago when COVID 
appeared and tourism looked like it was coming to a crashing halt in June of 2020.  
In the end the work you all and our federal government did, along with the flexibility 
and innovation of entrepreneurs all across our state helped prevent this catastrophe for
most of us.  Instead of failure it gave many of us the opportunity to take a close look 
at how we did business and how we could do it better.  And one of the innovations 
that came out of that period was the sale of alcohol to go for bars and restaurants 
across our state. 
I have spoken with dozens of restaurant owners, servers, and customers about this bill
and I can tell you every person is in support of this.  This benefits everyone from the 
larger businesses that employ hundreds of people to the small Mom and Pop shops 
with just one or two employees.  Tourists, locals, and servers all love having this 
option.  The state was careful to include safe guards to make sure this option wasn't 
abused and it hasn't been.  What it has done is helped support the hardworking 
entrepreneurs that are the backbone of the Maine economy and helped Maine further 
grow our reputation as a place that is hospitable and welcoming to those from all over
the world.  This option is considered by many to be far more enlightened than the 
previous laws and in every people in our state have been very respectful and careful 
not to abuse it.  This is a good law that helps all of us and I strongly encourage all of 
you to act on this, make it permanent, and tell all of us hardworking industry 
professionals that you hear us, you believe in us, and you will support us like we have
supported out.  
I regret that I can't be there in person today, but thank you all for taking the time to 
hear or read this testimony and I sincerely thank you for all of your hard work on 
behalf of the state we all love.
Timothy Rich

