Vicki Doudera
18 Trim Street 
Camden, ME 04843 
(207) 542-1990 
Victoria.Doudera@legislature.maine.gov
H
OUSE OF
R
EPRESENT ATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
Testimony of Repr esentative Victoria Doudera on LD 201, “
An Act to Make Permanent the
Ability of Certain Retailers and Distilleries to Sell Liquor  for Off-pr emises Consumption
and Cocktails for  On-pr emises Consumption”
January 30, 2023
Greetings Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Committee On Veterans
and Legal Affairs.  I am Representative Vicki Doudera, and I represent House District 41, the
towns of Camden and Rockport. I’m here today to speak in favor of
LD 201 “An Act To
Make
Permanent the Ability of Certain Retailers and Distilleries to Sell Liquor  for Off-pr emises
Consumption and Cocktails for  On-pr emises Consumption.”
Since the COVID-19 pandemic stuck us all in our homes eating take-out and watching endless
episodes of Netflix, “to-go” alcohol has become part of many small business owners’  economic
models.  In a September 2021 survey , almost three-quarters of respondents of a HospitalityMaine
survey said they were selling beer and wine to go, and 71 percent said they were selling
cocktails.
1
As you will hear from several restaurants in my district, this program works and has been a real
boon for their businesses, many of which are still recovering from the gut punch brought on by
the pandemic. As Jeremy Howard, co-owner of Blue Barren Distillery in Camden told me, “It
increases our revenue stream but more importantly , allows us to showcase our Maine-Grown
spirits and mixers instead of these customers purchasing 'Ready-to-drink' (R TD's) canned
cocktails at any liquor outlet.”
Maine residents who frequent their local restaurants like the option of being able to order a
cocktail with their take-out dinner .  Let’ s face it, not only are communicable viruses still
1
Portland Press Herald, February 2, 2022.
District 41: Camden and Rockport

circulating – think the flu and RSV , including more strains of coronavirus – but our habits have
definitely changed. We’ve embraced additional ways of enjoying the fare at our establishments,
not just dining in but ordering and taking out, often with a cocktail.
I have owned several small businesses, and I know that having flexibility is often a key to
survival. For these reasons, I believe the program outlined in LD 201 should be given permanent
status in Maine state statute. Thank you and I am happy to answer any questions.
Representative Vicki Doudera
District 41: Camden and Rockport
