PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:Members of the Joint Committee on Energy Utilitiesand TechnologyFrom:Becky Bartovics, Sierra Club Maine volunteerDate:March 7, 2023Re:Testimony in Opposition to LD 486 and LD 689 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and Members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilitiesand Technology,
I am submitting the following testimony on behalf of Sierra Club Maine, representing over22,000 supporters and members statewide. We work diligently to amplify the power of our 3.8million members and supporters nation-wide as we work towards combating climate change andpromoting a just and sustainable economy.  We urge you to vote “ought not to pass” on  both LD 486"An Act to Encourage Economic Development Through the Manufacture and Use of MarineNuclear Power Modules" and LD 689 An Act to Study the Construction of a Nuclear PowerFacility in the State.
The nuclear power industry has never dealt with its waste problem, which is already anexistential threat. The industry has devised a new plan to generate electrical power through smallscale reactors (SMR’s) while never addressing the waste threat or coming up with a viable solutionfor it. Backed by an intensive economic boost from private investors, SMR’s are a nascent,experimental industry; and little examination of the long term impacts of SMR’s has yet occurred.
We have our own nuclear waste problem right in Wiscasset, Maine.  The waste remains intemporary storage caskets only 20’ above the high-tide level and could be compromised in anabnormal storm surge, the likelihood of which only increases as we experience rising sea levels dueto global warming.  Until we can safely move our nuclear waste to a permanent repository, Maineshould never consider more nuclear power plants.
For information about nuclear waste please seehttps://news.stanford.edu/2022/05/30/small-modular-reactors-produce-high-levels-nuclear-waste/.Here’s a sample of the Stanford Study: “Simple metrics, such as estimates of the mass ofspent fuel, offer little insight into the resources that will be required to store, package, and disposeof the spent fuel and other radioactive waste,” said Krall, who is now a scientist at the SwedishNuclear Fuel and Waste Management Company. “In fact, remarkably few studies have analyzed themanagement and disposal of nuclear waste streams from small modular reactors.” We consider bothLD 486 and LD 689 ill-advised and ill-informed legislative initiatives which ought never to see thelight of day just because of the unsolved waste issue alone.

PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
If one is concerned about cost to ratepayers, it is equally an untenable non-solution.Promising lower costs with no metrics is easy to do, not possible to prove. Coming from an industry
with a history of notoriously costly power production, it is highly unlikely to prove beneficial toMainers.  According to a study done by MIT,  lower cost “ expectation is based on an assumptiontypically expressed in terms of the “learning rate” for a given technology, which represents thepercent cost reduction associated with a doubling of cumulative production. Nuclear industrycost-estimating guidelines as well as widely used climate models and global energy scenarios oftenrely on learning rates that significantly reduce costs as installed nuclear capacity increases. Yetempirical evidence shows that in the case of nuclear plants, learning rates are negative. Costs justkeep rising.”https://energy.mit.edu/news/building-nuclear-power-plants/
SC Maine urges the EUT to vote"Ought Not to Passon both LD 486 and 689.
Respectfully Submitted,
Becky BartovicsVolunteer Legislative Team

