Some of my favorite talking points on energy, environment, and climate
Alex Epstein, Energy Talking Points  <alexepstein@substack.com> Fri, Mar 3, 2023 at 8:36 PM
Reply-To: "Alex Epstein, Energy Talking Points"
<reply+1r3s1m&gnoul&&7f83004736dc1645c6caf2f9952dba2440f2e54607988466d6b3edbf40638019@mg1.substack.com>To: mckaydan2@gmail.com
Open in app  or online
Some of my favorite talking points
on energy, environment, andclimate
Talking points on: the benefits of fossil fuels; myths about fossil fuels;
climate; extreme weather; solar
ALEX EPSTEIN
MAR 4
SAVE   LISTEN
For over 2 years now, I’ve been creating Energy Talking Points—concise,
powerful, well-referenced talking points on energy, environmental, andclimate issues.
Here are some of my favorites.If you like them, please share them and encourage others to subscribe to this
free newsletter.
Upgrade to paid
Benefits of Fossil Fuels
Undeniable energy fact 1: Cost-effective energy is essential tohuman flourishingCost-effective energy— affordable, reliable, versatile, scalable
energy—is essential to human flourishing because  gives us the ability
to use machines to become productive and prosperous .
Undeniable energy fact 2: The world needs much more energy
Billions of people lack the cost-effective energy they need to flourish.  3
billion use less electricity than a typical American refrigerator. 1/3
of the world uses wood/dung for heating/cooking.  Much
more energy is needed.¹
Undeniable energy fact 3: Fossil fuels are uniquely cost-effectiveDespite 100+ years of aggressive competition,  fossil fuels provide
80%+ of the world’s energy and they are still growing —especially in
the countries most concerned with cost-effective energy. E.g., China.
²
Undeniable energy fact 4: Unreliable solar/wind are failing toreplace fossil fuelsDespite claims that solar + wind are rapidly replacing fossil fuels, theyprovide  < 5% of world energy —only electricity, ⅕ of energy—and even
that depends on huge subsidies and reliable (mostly fossil-fueled)
power plants .
³
Undeniable energy fact 5: Fossil fuel energy gives us an incredible
climate mastery abilityFossil fuels have helped drive down climate disaster deaths by98% over the last century by powering the amazing machines that
protect us against storms, extreme temperatures, and drought.
⁴
Myths about fossil fuels
Myth: The TX winter blackouts were a failure of fossil fuels, especially
natural gas.Truth: Fossil fuels perform beautifully in far worse winter weather
than Texas had in February 2021. TX blackouts were caused
by defunding reliable/resilient power  in favor of unreliable solar/wind. ⁵
Myth: Replacing fossil fuels with solar/wind will make us more secure
because we'll depend less on hostile countries.Truth: Not only are solar/wind incapable of replacing fossil fuels, but  the
control of their supply by China dwarfs any nation's influence over
fossil fuels.
⁶
Myth: Continued CO2 emissions will cause “irreversible” climate change.
Truth: At some point future technologies  will enable us to  reverse the
rise in CO2 levels if we want . But nothing can reverse mass-death
caused by trying to rapidly eliminate CO2 emissions .⁷
Myth: Fossil fuels “kill” millions of people a year via air pollution.Truth: This claim1. Ignores how  fossil fuels extend every life on Earth
2. Uses pseudoscientific speculation  about pollution deaths.
3. Ignores the fact that fossil fuels can be burned very cleanly .
⁸
Myth: The anti-fossil-fuel movement is leading to better sources ofenergy.Truth: Anti-fossil-fuel activists are  responsible for artificially
restricting the supply of fossil fuels and thereby causing a deadly,
worsening global energy crisis .
⁹
Big-picture facts about energy and climate
Fossil fuel energy gives us an incredible climate mastery ability
Fossil fuels have helped drive down climate disaster deaths by98% over the last century by powering the amazing machines that
protect us against storms, extreme temperatures, and drought.
¹⁰
Undeniable climate fact: CO2 emissions correlate with 1°C
warming, + greeningFossil fuels' CO2 emissions have contributed to the warming of the last170 years, but that warming has been mild and manageable—1° C .
Here's what that looks like compared to normal temp changes .
¹¹

Undeniable climate fact: Deaths from cold far exceed deaths from
heat
While leading institutions portray a world as increasingly riddled withheat-related death, the fact is that even though Earth has gotten 1°C
warmer far more people die from cold than heat (even in India!).
¹²
Undeniable climate fact: Warming from CO2 occurs more in colder
placesThe mainstream view in climate science is that  more warming will be
concentrated in colder places (Northern latitudes) and at coldertimes (nighttime) and during colder seasons (winter) . This is good
news.
¹³
Undeniable climate fact: Rising CO2 leads to diminishing warmingMainstream climate science is unanimous about a conclusion that thepublic is, shamefully, not made aware of: the  “greenhouse effect” of
CO2 is a diminishing  effect, with additional CO2 leading to less
warming.
The truth about alternatives
Myth: We can rapidly reduce fossil fuels at very low cost.Truth: Fossil fuels are a uniquely cost-effective form of energy, whichis why they are 80% of global energy and still growing.  Rapidly
reducing fossil fuels, in a world that needs far more energy, is
catastrophic. ¹⁴
Myth: Solar and wind are cheap.
Truth: Solar and wind are  unreliable, parasitical sources of energy
that add costs to the grid .
Claims of “cheapness” are based on  ignoring the full costs of solar +
wind —above all the cost of a reliable grid that gives them 24/7 life
support. ¹⁵
Myth: Solar/wind is cheaper than fossil fuels because Lazard’s“Levelized Cost of Energy” (LCOE) is lower for solar/wind.Truth: LCOE, by Lazard’s own admission, doesn’t include manycosts of solar/wind —above all the  cost of a reliable grid needed for
24/7 life support .
¹⁶
Myth: Solar and wind are “winning in the marketplace,” outcompetingfossil fuels and nuclear with superior economics.Truth: Unreliable, parasitical solar and wind are only  “winning” when
given massive preferences —mandates, subsidies, and no penalty for
unreliability.
¹⁷
Myth: Nuclear is too expensive, so we should use solar/wind instead.Truth: Solar/wind can’t provide reliable energy; nuclearcan. And nuclear is only expensive because it has, with the help ofmany “green” activists, been  falsely labeled unsafe and effectively
criminalized.
¹⁸
Solar myths
Myth: Just a small area of solar panels plus storage can power theworld.Truth: Storing just 3 days of global energy would cost $590 trillionat Elon Musk’s current prices. And the panels would take up more
space than all the world’s cities, towns, and villages combined.
¹⁹
Musk says that “to power the whole Earth” we need just solar
panels and “some batteries.”
What is “some batteries”?To store a mere 3 days of world energy , to be prepared for weeks (let
alone seasons) with lower-than-usual sunlight, takes  >1,350 terawatt-
hours in batteries.
²⁰
The world uses over 165k TWh of energy annually, or ~1.36 billion MWh
in 3 days. 1000 Tesla Megapacks (3916 MWh of storage) have aprice over >$1.7 billion.  This would mean  3 days of storage using
Tesla batteries would cost >$590 trillion. That's 6X world GDP!
²¹
Arguing that solar panels and batteries can provide energy to 8billion people using modest space is like arguing that Rolls-Roycescan transport 8 billion people using modest space.
Yes, there’s space for 8 billion Rolls-Royces—but the  human time it
would take to produce them is cost-prohibitive .
The main lie of “Just a small area of solar panels can power the world” is
that it ignores the insane cost of the necessary batteries.
But it also drastically underestimates how much space solar panels
require.
For example, this viral Twitter post underestimates the area by
some 25 times. ²²
If 1.8 million square km of solar panels doesn’t seem like much, note
that it is more than all cities, towns, villages, and humaninfrastructure combined (~1.5 million sq km).
And this excludes the  huge footprints of solar and battery mining,
manufacturing, and transmission .
²³
Myth: We can be like other countries who have 80%
“clean electricity”
The most persuasive argument for the Biden Administration’s radical
policy of 80% “clean electricity” by 2030 is that other countries arealready at 80%. But this is BS because those countries, unlike us, canuse huge amounts of 1) nuclear, 2) hydro, or 3) imported power.
In response to worries that the reconciliation bill's policy of 80% “cleanelectricity” by 2030—from 30% today—will cause reliability problems, agroup of prominent green electricity advocates recently claimed in
an open letter  that “reliability can be preserved and enhanced.”
The most compelling argument given for reliable 80% clean electricity by
2030 is that other places, such as France and Ontario, have alreadyachieved this. But this is a deeply dishonest comparison because thoseplaces can, unlike us, use huge amounts of nuclear and hydro.
France gets 2/3 of its electricity from reliable nuclear power.Ontario gets a combined 80% of its electricity from nuclear powerand hydropower. By contrast, the US gets 20% of electricity fromnuclear and <7% from hydro--neither of which can meaningfully
increase by 2030.
²⁴
There is no place in the world that gets a large share of its
electricity from solar and wind without huge imports from itsneighbors' reliable--not solar+wind--power plants. And yet the US,which cannot import most of its needed electricity, is considering50%+ solar and wind!
ESG
The preposterous  financial pretense of “ESG investing” is that the
promoters of it have so accurately identified universal norms of long-term value creation--Environmental norms, Social norms, andGovernance norms—that imposing those norms on every company isjustified.
In reality, ESG was a movement cooked up at the UN—not exactly aleading expert in profitable investment— to impose moral and political
agendas, largely left-wing ones , on institutions that would not adopt
them if left to their own devices.
²⁵
The number one  practical policy advocated by the ESG movement
today is: divest from fossil fuels in every way possible , and
associate yourself with “renewable” solar and wind in every waypossible. This policy is helping destroy energy production around theworld.
The most egregious immorality of the ESG movement, led by LarryFink's Blackrock, is its effort to destroy vital fossil fuel projects in poor
places that desperately need them. This effort is guaranteed to
perpetuate poverty. ²⁶
Example of ESG poverty perpetuation: South Korea canceled new coal
plants in South Africa and the Philippines after “Global investorsincluding Blackrock...warned the South Korean utility to drop coal power
projects.”
²⁷
Extreme weather
Myth: The world is  experiencing unprecedented danger from
extreme weather thanks to fossil fuels.
Truth: The world is  experiencing unprecedented safety from
extreme weather thanks to fossil fuels—because fossil fuels'  climate
mastery benefits  overwhelm any negative climate side-effects. ²⁸
Myth: We don't need fossil fuels to protect ourselves from extreme
weather—we can  just use alternatives .
Truth: As Europe is illustrating , there is no near-term replacement
for fossil fuels  for the 1/4 of the world that uses abundant energy—let
alone the 3/4 of the world that doesn't. ²⁹
Myth: Media  claims about increasing hurricane frequency are
accurate .
Truth: Leading media outlets have  deliberately misrepresented the
flat long-term hurricane trend . E.g., the New York Times cherry-
picking a starting point—the low point of 1980—to make a flat trend
seem upward. ³⁰
Here's recent US data for landfalling hurricanes , both overall and
major. Again, consuming the New York Times and other trusted sourceswould you have any idea that the data looked like this?
³¹
Myth: Hurricane intensity is expected to get catastrophically
higher as temperatures rise.
Truth: Mainstream estimates say  hurricanes will be less frequent and
between 1-10% more intense. This is not at all catastrophic  if we
continue our fossil-fueled climate mastery. ³²
Share
Popular links
EnergyTalkingPoints.com : Hundreds of concise, powerful, well-
referenced talking points on energy, environmental, and climate issues.
My new book  Fossil Future: Why Global Human Flourishing Requires
More Oil, Coal, and Natural Gas—Not Less .
Speaking and media inquiries
“Energy Talking Points by Alex Epstein” is my free Substack newsletter
designed to give as many people as possible access to concise,powerful, well-referenced talking points on the latest energy,environmental, and climate issues from a pro-human, pro-energyperspective.
Upgrade to paid
Share Energy Talking Points by Alex Epstein
1
IEA - Access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
2
BP - Statistical Review of World Energy
3
Alex Epstein - Talking Points on the reconciliation bill, part 2: the 10-year
extension of solar and wind subsidies
4
For every million people on earth, annual deaths from climate-related causes(extreme temperature, drought, flood, storms, wildfires) declined 98%--froman average of 247 per year during the 1920s to 2.5 in per year during the2010s.
Data on disaster deaths come from EM-DAT, CRED / UCLouvain, Brussels,
Belgium –  www.emdat.be
 (D. Guha-Sapir).
Population estimates for the 1920s from the  Maddison Database 2010  come
from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre, Faculty of Economics
and Business at University of Groningen. For years not shown population isassumed to have grown at a steady rate.
Population estimates for the 2010s come from  World Bank Data
.
5
Dessler on The Joe Rogan Experience , from 12:39-14:36.
Epstein’s unrefuted explanation to Dessler , from 15:44-16:24.
Alex Epstein - Talking Points on the Texas Electricity Crisis
Alex Epstein - Talking Points on Resilience
6
Dessler on The Joe Rogan Experience , from 1:19:07-1:19:52.
Epstein’s unrefuted explanation to Dessler , from 39:45-40:49.
Alex Epstein - How the Biden Administration threatens energy security
7
Dessler on The Joe Rogan Experience , from 1:28:40-1:29:23.
Epstein’s unrefuted explanation to Dessler , from 24:23-24:54.
8
Dessler on The Joe Rogan Experience , from 1:04:07-1:10:14.
Alex Epstein - Talking Points on the dangerous falsehood that "Climate
change is a public health issue"
Alex Epstein - The "fossil fuels cause 1 in 5 deaths" myth
9
Dessler on The Joe Rogan Experience , from 6:18-8:11.
Epstein’s unrefuted explanation to Dessler , from 15:44-16:24.
Alex Epstein - Testimony: "How the Biden Administration and the Global Anti-
Fossil-Fuel Movement Caused an Energy Crisis and Inflated Our Cost of
Living"
10
For every million people on earth, annual deaths from climate-related causes
(extreme temperature, drought, flood, storms, wildfires) declined 98%--froman average of 247 per year during the 1920s to 2.5 in per year during the2010s.
Data on disaster deaths come from EM-DAT, CRED / UCLouvain, Brussels,
Belgium –  www.emdat.be
 (D. Guha-Sapir).
Population estimates for the 1920s from the  Maddison Database 2010  come
from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre, Faculty of Economicsand Business at University of Groningen. For years not shown population isassumed to have grown at a steady rate.
Population estimates for the 2010s come from  World Bank Data
.
11
NASA - GISS Surface Temperature Analysis
NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information - Daily Summaries
Station Details, NY, Central Park
12
Zhao et al. (2021)
13
NOAA - Climate change rule of thumb: cold "things" warming faster than
warm things
14
Dessler on The Joe Rogan Experience , from 48:34-48:57.
Epstein’s unrefuted explanation to Dessler , from 15:24-16:24.
BP - Statistical Review of World Energy
Alex Epstein - Testimony: "How the Biden Administration and the Global Anti-
Fossil-Fuel Movement Caused an Energy Crisis and Inflated Our Cost of
Living"
15
Dessler on The Joe Rogan Experience , from 4:55-5:45.
Epstein’s unrefuted explanation to Dessler , from 29:54-31:28.
Alex Epstein - Talking Points on the reconciliation bill, part 2: the 10-year
extension of solar and wind subsidies
16
Dessler on The Joe Rogan Experience , from 4:55-5:45.
Epstein’s unrefuted explanation to Dessler , from 29:54-31:28.
“Other factors would also have a potentially significant effect on the results
contained herein, but  have not been examined in the scope of this current
analysis. These additional factors, among others, could include:  capacity
value vs. energy value; network upgrades, transmission, congestion orother integration-related costs…”“This analysis does not take into account potential social and environmentalexternalities or reliability-related considerations”Lazard’s Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis — Version 14.0
17
Dessler on The Joe Rogan Experience , from 50:00-52:44.
Epstein’s unrefuted explanation to Dessler , from 31:08-31:29.
Alex Epstein - Talking Points on the reconciliation bill, part 2: the 10-year
extension of solar and wind subsidies
18
Dessler on The Joe Rogan Experience , from 7:34-8:11.
Epstein’s unrefuted explanation to Dessler , from 25:23-26:44.
19
Elon Musk on Twitter
20
Elon Musk on Twitter
21
BP - Statistical Review of World Energy
Tesla - Order Megapack
World Bank Data - GDP (Current $US)
22
Elon Musk on Twitter
23
The world has a land area of almost 150 million square km. Only about 1%
are “built-up” areas like villages, towns, cities, and other human infrastructure.
Our World in Data - Land Use
Our World in Data - How urban is the world?
24
Our World in Data - France: Energy Country Profile
Ontario Energy Board - Ontario’s System-Wide Electricity Supply Mix: 2020
Data
U.S. Energy Information Administration - Electric Power Annual table 3.1.A
25
Betsy Atkins - Demystifying ESG: Its History & Current Status
UNPRI
26
Meme circulating on Twitter
27
Power Engineering International
28
For every million people on earth, annual deaths from climate-related causes
(extreme temperature, drought, flood, storms, wildfires) declined 98%--froman average of 247 per year during the 1920s to 2.5 in per year during the2010s.
Data on disaster deaths come from EM-DAT, CRED / UCLouvain, Brussels,
Belgium –  www.emdat.be
 (D. Guha-Sapir).
Population estimates for the 1920s from the  Maddison Database 2010  come
from the Groningen Growth and Development Centre, Faculty of Economicsand Business at University of Groningen. For years not shown, population isassumed to have grown at a steady rate.
Population estimates for the 2010s come from  World Bank Data
.
29
Alex Epstein - Talking Points on Earth Day truth: Fossil fuels make Earth
BETTER
30
New York Time - Ian Moves North
Vecchi et al. (2021) - Changes in Atlantic major hurricane frequency since the
late-19th century
31
Klotzbach et al. (2018) - Continental U.S. Hurricane Landfall Frequency and
Associated Damage: Observations and Future Risks
32
NOAA - Global Warming and Hurricanes
Clayton  Dan McKay
Dixfield
LD 486
Chair Lawrence, Chair Zeigler and Honorables Persons of the EUT Committee
Instead of subsidizing another generation resource, why don't you de-subsidized 
resources that are raising electric bills? 
Seek a level playing field for all forms of electrical generation.
Consumers are tired of you meddling with their electric bills.
CHASING CARBON ZERO IS FUTILE. 
