TESTIMONY OF 
ANYA TRUNDY, CHIEF OF LEGISLATIVE AND STRATEGIC OPERATIONS 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April 26, 2023, at 1:00 P.M 
L.D. 1384 — “An Act to Promote Fairness in the Taxation of Adult Use Cannabis 
by Basing the Excise Tax on the Tier of a Cultivation Facility ” 
L.D. 1392 -— “An Act to Change How the Adult Use Cannabis Excise Tax Is 
Calculated ” 
L.D. 1405 — “An Act to Change How Adult Use Cannabis Excise Tax Is 
Calculated” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and 
Strategic Operations for the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. 
I am providing testimony at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor 
Against L.D. 1384, “An Act to Promote Fairness in the Taxation of Adult Use 
Cannabis by Basing the Excise Tax on the Tier of a Cultivation Facility, ” L.D. 
1392, “An Act to Change How the Adult Use Cannabis Excise Tax Is Calculated, ” 
and L.D. 1405, “An Act to Change How Adult Use Cannabis Excise Tax Is 
Calculated. ” 
The committee has three separate but related bills for today’s public hearing 
that adjust the cannabis excise tax. The Administration acknowledges the 
difficulties the cannabis excise tax is creating for the adult-use cannabis industry 
and suggests that LD 1392 could be a good vehicle for addressing those 
concerns —Maine Revenue Services and the Office of Cannabis Policy have been 
working collaboratively with the bill’s sponsor since the beginning of session.
As currently written, L.D. 1392 would amend the cannabis excise tax rates 
on all cannabis products by basing them on the “fair market value” of the product 
sold, beginning July 1st, 2024. This proposal would also create a separate excise 
tax rate for cannabis ﬂower or trim intended “for extraction. ” 
The bill would result in two taxes based on value, the cannabis excise tax 
and the sales tax, imposed on different entities and at different times. The inherent 
complexity of imposing two taxes with similar tax bases and tax policy goals 
would be further complicated by the difficulty in determining the “fair market 
value” of camiabis transferred in related party transactions. 
Maine Revenue Services and the Ofﬁce of Cannabis Policy are currently 
exploring alternative models for the taxation of adult use cannabis. One option for 
consideration would be to shift the imposition and revenue from a cannabis excise 
tax to instead merge it with a uniﬁed cannabis sales tax, equalizing the revenue 
impact of that change by adjusting the existing sales tax rate. The Administration 
is currently analyzing what that commensurate rate would be and will have 
additional information available for the work session. 
LD 1384 proposes to base the cannabis excise tax on a cultivation facility ’s 
license tier. In order to effectively process cannabis excise tax returns by tier level, 
MRS would need to add a variable ﬁeld in our tax software to reﬂect the 
taxpayer ’s license tier and produce the appropriate tax rate for cannabis ﬂower and 
cannabis trim. This tier-based classiﬁcation will create administrative difﬁculties 
if a licensee changes their tier level during the middle of a tax period. 
Further, the limited authorization for sales of cannabis plants and seeds to an 
adult-use cultivation facility by a medical-use registered caregiver or dispensary
2
ended on September 8, 2022. The proposed subsection 6 on page two, lines 17-23, 
should therefore be struck. 
- 
LD 1405 proposes to base the cannabis excise tax rates on cannabis ﬂower 
and trim by basing them on the “average market rate” of those products, beginning 
January lst, 2024. The “average market rate” is deﬁned as the “median market 
price per pound of cannabis ﬂower that is sold or transferred from cultivation 
facility licensees to other licensees in the State.” This deﬁnition does not 
sufficiently consider price data on transfers between vertically integrated licensees, 
where the value may be set by the licensee and may differ from that of an arms- 
length transaction between unaffiliated businesses. 
Additionally, it is unclear which agency under DAFS would be responsible 
for determining the “average market rate,” whether the rules are to be technical or 
substantive, and the date when the ﬁrst “average market rate[s]” would be 
calculated and announced prior to January lst, 2024. While MRS is generally the 
rulemaking authority for taxation matters we do not currently receive the necessary 
pricing data to determine the rates. Further, MRS’s rules are generally “routine 
technical, ” while OCP is required to undertake “major substantive ” rulemaking for 
matters governed by the Cannabis Legalization Act. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bills; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
3
