daniel  cellucci
Warren, Maine NorcoOutdoor Cannabis
LD 1392
Good afternoon, My name is Daniel cellucci, I am founder and partner at Norco 
Cannabis in Warren Maine.  I am an adult Use cultivation facility license holder that 
also holds a solvent less manufacturing license in adult use market.   
I believe that it has gotten to the point of becoming imperative to immediately take 
action to change the Adult Use excise tax. With plummeting price trends an excise tax
has not just become crippling to cultivators and farmers, but has become actually 
impossible to survive.
  I think that it goes without saying that to put a mandatory fixed cost tax (excise tax) 
onto a product that has fluctuating value, is having detrimental consequences to the 
producers of our Adult Use Industry. 
I can understand the thought process in the beginning fueled by optimism in an 
emerging market, However, Being that the average cost per pound in Maines AU 
market was 3-4000 per lb originally, and has now dropped to less then 1,000 a pound 
in some instances, how can we sit here and not predict what happens next when 
taxation and central maine power account for almost 75 percent of the cost to produce
a pound of Maine Adult Use cannabis.  And with the 25 percent that is left over we 
are supposed to pay, mandatory package tag fees, metric fees, plant tag fees, state 
mandated testing fees, packaging fees, payroll, rent, and hope for metic and testing 
labs to not hold up our inventory too long before we have to pay that end of the month
excise fee…Not too mention paid in some cases before we even sell the pounds, I 
cases where we transfer from our own cultivation to manufacturing.  This is just a 
recipe for complete disaster in the fragile infancy of an industry that holds so much 
potential.
The state may think that the revenue from the excise change would hurt their tax 
income, however I can guarantee there will not be many farmers left to tax, and 
production of those still left will plummet or worse yet, diversion into illicit markets 
will increase for simple survival.  We should be either changing the taxation to a 
percent based tax or helping our farmers out by eradicating the excise burden on them
altogether and placing it on the point of sale to the consumer.  
This Adult Use market can prosper if we allow our farmers to not only survive but 
thrive and grow our businesses.  In doing so we will strengthen Maine’s local 
economies and in turn strengthening the economy of the state of Maine. This is a 
moment where we can learn from history, knowing that over taxation of farmers will 
only lead us to a road of destruction, one where we give up long term prosperity for 
short term gain and inevitably corrupt the foundation of what this new industry was 
built upon.  I hope you all will consider changing this current excise tax because the 
future success of Adult Use cannabis literally depends on this change.
