co ac 
l\/laine 
Qsteo ethic F\> SSOC|EltlOi'l 
P. O. Box 315/ 29 Association Drive, Manchester, ME 0435] Phone: 207-623-110]* 
Fax: 207-623-4228 * www.mainedo.org 
MOA Introduction Statement 2023 
The (MOA) is a professional organization representing approximately 400 practicing osteopathic 
physicians (or DOs as they are known by their designation) as well as an additional 700+ residents 
and students undergoing their medical training in Maine. 
v The MOA’s mission includes advocating for the “availability of quality osteopathic health 
care to the people of this State”. 
v Our ofﬁces are located in Manchester, but our members serve patients throughout the state of 
Maine. 
For those of you who may not be familiar, DOs, are fully licensed physicians who practice their 
unique whole-person approach in every medical specialty. They look beyond your symptoms to 
understand how lifestyle and environmental factors impact your wellbeing, and complete extensive 
postgraduate and clinical training before becoming fully licensed physicians. 
v Roughly 1 in 5 Maine physicians is a DO. 
¢ Osteopathic medicine is one of the fastest—growing health care professions in the country, 
with more than 141,000 practicing DOs now in the US. (AOA OMP Report 2022) 
¢ Over the last decade, the number of students attending osteopathic medical school has 
grown by 77%, helping lead to an overall 81% increase in the total number of DOs and 
osteopathic medical students in the U.S. 
v Maine’s Medical School, the University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine 
(Biddeford, ME), is accredited for 165 students per class year. 
0' The profession has a long history of providing care where patients lack doctors-- 57% of 
active DOs practice in the primary care specialties of family medicine, internal medicine and 
pediatrics and UNE COM has been a consistent provider of Maine’s rural doctors. 
0 DOs are also formally trained in a unique form of manipulative therapy called OMT;a 
hands-on treatment that has been shown to ease pain, promote healing and increase overall 
mobility.
0 More than one~third of our MOA members are in private practice medicine, and therefore we 
are mindful of the unique challenges presented by providing care for patients as an 
independent physician. 
We support patient access to physician-led care, evidenced-based medical practice, and equity 
within the healthcare svstem. 
Maine Licensure Stats (via Maine Board of Osteopathic Licensure & Board of Licensure in 
Medicine as of Jan 23“ , 2023): 
4,318 Licensed MDs with Maine Address 
1,121 DOs Licensed in Maine with ME address 
5,439 Total licensed Maine physicians with a ME Address 
~21% of Maine physicians are DOs 
American Osteopathic Association Annual Report on the Profession 2022
