MAINE Assocumom 
or 
HEALTH Prams 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt -- Ianuary 3 1, 2023 
Ioint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 36 An Act to Make Corrections to the Maine Insurance Code 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Ioint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt. I am the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health 
Plans [MeAHP). Our member plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS 
/ Aetna, Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. 
They provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 600,000 Maine people. 
Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people by promoting 
affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
Earlier this month, our association, together with other insurance carriers, met with the 
Bureau of Insurance to discuss the changes to Maine’s insurance code proposed in LD 36. 
We appreciate the willingness of Acting Superintendent Tim Schott and Senior Staff 
Attorney Ben Yardley to provide us with more context on their proposal. 
MeAHP's member health plans work hard to serve their customers and providers and to 
meet their obligations as licensees under the Maine Insurance Code. We appreciate the 
bureau's commitment to working in good faith with carriers, who strive to be responsive to 
requests for information and engagement. 
In our discussions with the bureau earlier this month, we raised two concerns: (1) the 
reduction of the required response time from 30 days to 14 days for all inquiries from the 
Bureau of Insurance; and (2) the establishment of a requirement to respo nd to follow-up 
inquiries within five calendar days. 
We appreciate the bureau's recommendation that licensees have five business days to 
respond to follow-up inquiries. 
Thank you for the chance to speak with you today. I would welcome your questions.
