_ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
at 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
at 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Anne Graham TTY: Maine Relay 711 
97 Farms Edge Road 
North Yarmouth, ME 04097 
Cell Phone: 846-0049 
Anne Gr"aha1n@legislature.maine.gov 
April 12, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Anne Graham introducing 
LD 1416, Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Increase the 
Percentage of the Population Required to Submit a State'Referendum Question 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Good afternoon, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and esteemed members of the 
Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee: I am Representative Anne Graham, and I serve the 
people of North Yarmouth and Gray, House District 105. I am honored to be before this 
committee to present LD 1416, Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
to Increase the Percentage of the Population Required to Submit a State Referendum Question. As 
the committee tasked with overseeing election-related material and legal affairs, VLA serves as 
the bedrock of so much of the work we do here under the dome. And that is why I am before you 
today. 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to increase the number 
of signatures required on petitions for the people's veto and the direct initiative of legislation 
from 10% to i5% of the total vote for Governor cast in the last gubernatorial election preceding 
the ﬁling of the petitions. Please note that this bill will require an amendment, as the draft before 
you lists the percentage at 25% of the total previous gubernatorial election. 
I believe in a vigorous referendum process that taps the will of the people to propose initiatives 
that will work for all Mainers. I believe that the more people who sign a citizens ’ 
initiative/referendum, the stronger it is. I have supported referendums in the past, particularly 
Medicaid expansion. I believed then and I believe now that healthcare is a human right, soI 
worked to collect signatures and voted for MaineCare expansion. I was delighted that it passed 
and was disappointed that it wasn’t implemented until a change in administrations. Referendums 
have their place and they are most effective when they truly represent the will of the people on 
issues that have broad support and that have not been successfully tackled by government. 
The initiative process has evolved from its early days as a grassroots tool to enhance 
representative democracy into a tool that too often is exploited by special interests. This process 
fundamentally lacks critical elements of the legislative process and can have both intended and 
unintended effects on the ability of the representative democratic process to comprehensively 
develop policies and priorities. 
District 105: North Yarmouth and Gray
This year, one of the many referenda items that I did not sign was the Right to Repair citizens ’ 
petition, largely because I don’t understand it. And I don’t believe that the majority of Mainers 
will either. The way people become informed of a referendum is by massive, expensive 
advertising campaigns. 
I share with you two flyers that I have received in the last month on a referendum that will not 
take place until November. I believe the ﬁrst advertisement that I saw about this upcoming 
referendum was during the Super Bowl. Another ad for the referendum appeared late one night 
during the nightly news. Neither advertisement provided clear, in-depth examination of the issue 
or the proposed ﬁx. Expecting folks with full-time jobs, kids and any number of other 
responsibilities to dedicate hours to investigating multiple complex policy proposals ahead of an 
election is just unreasonable. Because of all of the money going into ﬂashy advertising 
campaigns, many people are likely to make up their mind on a referendum issue after being 
inundated by persuasive messaging. And I don’t blame them! Doing the deep policy work is why 
the people elected us. Is this really the way we want to craft policy and law? Is this the way we 
want to govern, by referendum? I suggest not. 
I would like to share some history with you. Maine enacted the citizen petition process in 1909 
with the approval of Maine Constitutional Amendment XXXI (Me. Const. Art. IV, Part 3, 
Section 18). It allows citizens to submit legislation, except constitutional amendments and bond 
issues. The Legislature may enact legislation that competes with the initiative and is voted on at 
the same time as the initiative. If neither measure receives a majority of the vote, the one with the 
greatest number of votes is referred to the next statewide election for a straight up or down vote. 
Begimiing in 1911, the Citizen’s petition process began. The ﬁrst citizen petition was SD 75, 
“An Act to provide for nomination of candidates of political parties by primary elections, ” and it 
passed. Another example of a referendum in 1923 was “An Act to Amend Sections One and 
Three of Chapter Three Hundred Fifty of the Public Laws of Nineteen Hundred and Fifteen, 
Relative to the Hours of Employment of Women and Minors.” This one failed. Maine has had 66 
referendums since 1909, 26 passed and 40 failed. I have attached to my testimony the list of all 
the referenda that have taken place since 1909. Issues range from moose hunting to nuclear 
power, bottle bills and same sex marriage. 
You and I have been sent to this Capital by our communities to work on policy, make laws and 
solve problems. We have hearings where our constituents testify in support or against issues 
before us. We vote in our committees and send our recommendations to the chambers where 
issues are voted on several more times by both bodies. The issues before us are fully scrutinized 
and receive (or not) our endorsements. I believe making law and policy through advertising 
campaigns is not what the citizens of Maine want. Yes, there will be times when, we, the 
Legislature, fail to do our job and a citizen’s initiative is the path to take. I simply propose that. 
by increasing the number of people required to merit that path, the stronger the resulting policy 
will be. 
Thank you for considering this bill. I hope it begins a positive and constructive dialogue about 
Maine’s referendum process. I would be happy to answer your questions. 
District I05: North Yarrnouth and Gray
