l 
i 
é HOUSE OF REPRES EN TATIV ES ,.~. -
§ 
2 snttie HULESE S'iATi()E\?
. 1 A U{§LiS'iA. iv’i_%\iN E <w.333»t.>t><¢»2 
tam 23114-4i; 
Richard T. Bradstreet F\,-i.-/"'~\iE\tE RE.l_.A\ ’ ii 
4-i ilzzztnun} Lane 
\i.1i»\;il%w<m_>. Evil; it-i€?§<‘i 
Bitl\..i§x ‘atis21'cciirz Susisizez*s"c.asta%ne.eoa I 
(foil: 5114;?) 8{»!~i657 
April 12, 2023 
RE: LD 1416- IN SUPPORT 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and distinguished members of the Joint 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, l'm Representative Dick Bradstreet from House 
District 61, which is comprised of my home town of Vassalboro and most of Sidney. I'm here 
today in support of LD 1416, a Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Increase the Percentage of the Population Required to Submit a State Referendum 
Question. 
First, I'd like to thank Representative Graham for bringing this Resolution forward. l 
believe it has a great deal of merit and l hope you will consider it seriously in your deliberations. 
LD 1416 recognizes the rights of Maine people to petition their state government through the 
referendum process. This should always be honored and it is a method reserved to the people 
to make their state government accountable to them, the people we serve. 
We also need to understand that we are a representative form of government as well. 
People elect us in our respective districts to essentially carry out their will, and they choose 
people who are expected to examine issues brought before them, consider all the relevant data 
they can get their hands on, and make reasonable decisions for the benefit of their 
constituents, based on what they have considered during the legislative process. It is this 
process that enables us to make good decisions. It is when the public deems that we have not 
made a right decision or have neglected a matter that is important to a substantial number of 
voters that a decision to petition for a referendum is undertaken. 
Given that we, as chosen representatives for the people who have placed us in office, 
have carefully and collectively rendered our decisions on important matters, is it not too easya 
hill to climb for only ten percent of those voting in the last Gubernatorial election to essentially 
circumvent what we have done? Should that number not be more substantial? What about 
the ninety percent of the people who voted in that last Gubernatorial election but for whatever 
reason have perhaps chosen not to sign a referendum petition? I simply think the standard 
should be higher— yes, a problem for those obtaining the requisite number of signatures, but 
ilistrict 61 fﬁcinejv {Part} and Yassalboro 
5 s '~ n
one they should be able to accomplish if enough people truly believe there is a need fora 
statewide referendum. 
By the way, we should remember that one option Maine's Legislature has in reacting to 
a citizen~initiated referendum is to enact the change called for in the petition. if a number 
substantially more than the low ten percent now required to put the issue on a ballot actually 
sign the petition, then perhaps the Legislature will be much more inclined to pass the measure 
by itself and get it on the books. It could be a very effective motivator for us to do so! 
LD 1416 continues to respect the citizen-initiated referendum process while at the same 
time respects what we do as a representative form of government. I believe it is a good 
balance between the two and is a Resolve that merits much support. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I hope you will look favorably on LD 1416 and 
vote it out as Ought to Pass.
