L LEAGUE 0F WOMEN VOTERS” 
. ii} i‘<@/iﬁti i\l 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: April 12, 2023 
RE: LD 1416 — RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to 
Increase the Percentage of the Population Required to Submit a State Referendum 
Question 
Good morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee. 
My name is Will Hayward. l’m a resident of Portland. lam here today as the Advocacy Program 
Coordinator for the League of Women Voters of Maine. l am testifying in opposition on LD 1416. 
The League of Women Voters of Maine supports protecting the right of Maine citizens to propose and 
veto legislation through a state-wide, citizen-initiated petition process. We support keeping that process 
accessible to ordinary citizens. By raising the threshold of signatures required from 10% to 25% of the 
last gubernatorial turnout, which would be the highest percentage threshold for citizens initiative ballot 
access in the country, LD 1416 stands in contradiction to these values. 
We believe current thresholds established in the Maine Constitution establish a good balance between 
access to the citizens initiative process and preventing abuse of the process. There have been 10 citizen 
initiatives sent to the ballot over the past decade, an average of one per year. This does not suggest a 
process that is being abused. Indeed, citizen initiative efforts routinely fall short of the ballot, indicating 
that there are already significant hurdles to ballot qualification. Raising the threshold to 25% would seta 
bar for access that could prove impossibly high except for the most heavily funded efforts. This would 
have the effect of taking the "citizens" out of citizen initiatives —organized volunteers would not be able 
to do it; only moneyed interests would have a chance. 
Across the nation, there has been a recent trend of legislatures limiting the voice of citizens by acting to 
restrict the citizens initiative process, whether by raising signature thresholds, imposing geographic 
requirements for signatures, or by raising the percentage in support required to pass an initiative. We 
ask this committee to ensure that Maine does not join the states restricting this crucial right, and vote 
Ought Not to Pass on LD 1416. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@lwvme.0rg 207.622.0256 www.lwvme.0rg
