1 
20474784.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Opposition to L.D. 1903,  
Resolve, to Create an Advisory Council to Oversee the Review and 
Revision of the Maine Criminal Code and Other Statutes Establishing 
Criminal Offenses
May 23, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
distinguished Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is 
Charles Rumsey. I am the Chief of the Cumberland Police Department, and the 
President of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association. I am submitting testimony 
on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association against LD 1903.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This resolve creates an advisory council to select an outside consultant to 
review the Maine Criminal Code and other statutes establishing Class A to 
Class E crimes in the Maine Revised  Statutes  for  criminal  offenses  that  
have  not  been  charged  or  have  rarely  been charged within the previous 
10 years and other offenses not conducive to public safety in the State and 
the proper application of the Maine Criminal Code and of the laws regarding 
other  offenses  that  are  designated  as  Class  A  to  Class  E  crimes  in  
the  Maine  Revised Statutes and determine whether to eliminate those 
offenses from or retain those offenses in the Maine Criminal Code and in 
other laws. This resolve directs the advisory council to submit  a  report  
based  upon  the  review  and  any  recommended  legislation  to  the  joint 
standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over criminal 
justice and public safety matters, which is authorized to report out 
legislation to the 132nd Legislature in 2025.  
The Maine Chiefs are opposed to LD 1903 for two main reasons.  
First, this work is already being done. There are ongoing stakeholder groups that 
meet and work through the criminal statutes to ensure that there are proper 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 
20474784.1 classifications.  For example, this session we have supported three bills that have 
made changes to the criminal code in this committee, the Transportation Committee 
and in the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife committee. We supported those bills 
because we believe that need to constantly review our laws to ensure that people 
are appropriately held accountable and that victims are able to find peace so that 
the criminal justice system can operate smoothly. These groups will continue to 
meet to find common ground so that everyone feels like the changes are appropriate 
so that we can come to the legislature unified about the issues.  
This brings us to our second point. We are concerned about the make up of the 
Advisory Council. We do not believe that the makeup is diverse enough to ensure 
that any possible solutions proposed by the Council are successful in upcoming 
legislative sessions.  For example, there should be at least one member of law 
enforcement on this council because we are on the front lines and have firsthand 
knowledge of what laws are important and what can be removed or have a lower 
classification.  
On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank the 
committee members for your work on this Committee. And we would ask that 
you oppose LD 1903.  
