 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1903 (NFNA)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1903, Resolve, to Create an Advisory  Council to Oversee the Review and Revision of 
the Maine Crimina l Code and Other Statutes Establishing Criminal Offenses  
 
DA: May 23, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony neither for nor against LD 1903.  
 
 CLAC recommends t hat the bill be clarified to reflect whether the goal is a technical 
reorganization or policy -based  revision .  Recent examples of technical reorganization s include PL 
2019 , c. 113, which revised and reorganized Part 3 of the Cr iminal Code into Parts 6 and 7, and PL 
2021 , c. 647, which reorganized  Maine ’s protection from abuse statutes.    A technical review could 
have as some of its goals to identify unused and obsolete  provisions ; clarify  confusing language; 
eliminate inconsisten cies; consolida te redundant provisions, and to organize  or re-order  the 
structure of sections or chapters .     
 
The advisory coun cil for such a  technical, as opposed to policy -based , review  could be 
small .  CLAC recommends that it consist of  legal professionals with substantial experience with 
Maine ’s criminal statutes  and court rules .   CLAC strongly recommends that the consultant and 
mem bers of the advisory counc il be Maine -licensed a ttorneys , that the legal educator also be a 
Maine attorney and recommended  by the Dean of the Maine Law School .     
 
An unintended cons equence of including policy adv ocates at the stage of a technical review 
would likely  be policy deba tes tha t significantly  delay the much -needed te chnical review .  Instead, 
if a small adv isory council  makes  recommendation s to the Legislature  for technical reorganizati on, 
and does not advocate  for substantive changes , policy -based discussions  could be d eferred  initially .   
Indeed, a tec hnical review that eliminates r edundancies and incon sistences without making 
substantive changes might leave the remaining substantive provisions more accessible for purposes 
of meaningful policy review  at a later stage .   See , e.g., 17 -A M.R.S.  § 1757, enacted a s part of the 
Criminal Co de reo rganization accomplished by PL 2019, c. 113 —without  changing the substantive 
law, this section c onsolidates  and provides sign posts to fees and assessments authorized outside the 
Criminal Code but applicable to cri minal convictions .   Section 1757  enables practitioners and 
policymakers  to easily identify the financial consequences of criminal convictions.  In any event, 
input  from policy advocates would certainly be provided after  the te chnical grou p does its initial 
work, and be considered as appropriate when any recommended changes are before the Committee 
of juris diction .       
 
 
 If this project is in stead meant to be a policy -based review  and rewrite of all criminal 
statutes , then it would be appropriate  to include additional policy adv ocates representing other 
stakeholders and interest groups , and the  scope of the project  may we ll require a significant  
expansion .     
 
  
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
