Testimony In Support of LD 27, “An Act to Align Maine's Lead Abatement Law with Federal 
Definitions and to Clarify Lead Abatement Licensing and Certification Requirements”.
March 15, 2023
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources. Please accept this testimony on behalf of Defend Our 
Health in support of LD 27, “An Act to Align Maine's Lead Abatement Law with Federal 
Definitions and to Clarify Lead Abatement Licensing and Certification Requirements”.
Defend Our Health is a Maine-based non-profit that works to make sure that everyone has 
equal access to safe food, safe drinking water, healthy homes, and toxic-free, climate-friendly 
products. 
It is well documented that exposure to lead can seriously harm a child’s health and cause health 
effects including damage to the brain and nervous system, slowed growth and development, 
learning and behavior problems, and hearing and speech problems. Children under the age of 6 
are at greatest risk for health problems caused by lead exposure. The health effects of lead 
exposure are more harmful to younger children than older children and adults because their 
bodies are still developing, and they are growing so rapidly. Young children also tend to put their 
hands or other objects, which may be contaminated with lead dust, into their mouths.
This piece of legislation helps clarify the definition of residential dwelling further protecting 
children under the age of 6, who are at greater risk of lead poisoning at home. It also removes 
the exemption that allows individuals 18 years of age or older who owns a dwelling unit in which 
a resident child has been identified as lead-poisoned to complete training instead of obtaining 
licensing and certification to perform abatement activities within that dwelling unit. This bill aligns 
Maine’s law with current federal standards to help protect children from lead exposure. We urge 
the committee to vote “ought to pass” on LD 27.
Thank you.
 
