 
 
 
Testimony of A ngela Cole Westhoff , President and CEO  
Maine Health Care Association  
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
 
February 14, 2023 , at 1:00 pm  
 
Testifying neither for nor against  LD 116, An Act to Establish a Minimum Wage for All Health 
Care Workers Including All Support Staff  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative  Roeder , and distinguished members of the  Committee  on 
Labor and Housing :  
 
My name is Angela Westhoff, and I serve as the  President  & CEO of the Maine Health Care 
Association . We represent approximately 200 nursing homes , assisted living , and residential 
care facilities (also known as Private Non -Medical Institutions or PNMIs) ac ross the state. Our 
mission is to empower members to ensure the integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term 
care  (LTC)  in Maine.   
 
I am providing testimony neither for nor against LD 116. This bill sets a minimum wage  of $15 
an hour  for individuals  employed by or who work in a health care facility.  
 
All our staff are critical members of the team in long term care. We employ a broad team of 
workers to ensure our residents are well cared for: from direct care staff to housekeepers , 
cooks,  laundry and dietary staff, maintenance professionals , and many more . Simply put, o ur 
facilities can only function effectively with  the tireless  work of every  type of long term care 
employee.  We recognize the importance of competitive wages for workers , and  we sincerely 
appreciate the intent of this bill.  
 
 
 
2 
 However, we are concerned about adopting this minimum wage raise without a corresponding 
increase to our MaineCare rates. The primary (in many cases the only) source of LTC facility 
funding is MaineCare. This bill would  increase  the cost of providing  care  but does not, in its 
current form, specify a corresponding increase in MaineCare rates . It is no secret that Maine’s 
nursing homes and assisted living facilities are already struggling to keep their doors open. The 
latest  estimates from BerryDunn suggest Maine’s nursing homes will have a $ 59,763,003  
shortfall in funding for 2023 . This bill’s mandatory increase to our sector’s minimum wage 
would undoubtedly increase the shortfall and add additional strain to  our industry.  The cost of 
providing long term care already excee ds the reimbursement long term care facilities receive.  
 
We urge the committee to amend the bill  language to include an appropriate increase in long 
term care facilities’ Medicaid rates to cover labor, fringe benefits and taxes to ensure  that our 
facilities  could comply  and remain solvent.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments.   
