,, STATE OF MAINE 
“ DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
. . _ .1111, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 0054 
Janet ,1. 
‘ Mms Laura A. Forunan 
COMMISSIONER GOVERNOR 
Testimony of Mike Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards 
Maine Department of Labor 
Neither For Nor Against LD #116 
An Act to Establish a Minimum Wage for 
All Health Care Workers Including All Support Staff 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, February 14, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members ofthe Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. l am Mike Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards at the 
Maine Department of Labor. lam here today to speak on behalf of the Department neither for nor 
against LD 116, An Act to Establish a Minimum Wage for All Health Care Workers including All Support 
Staff. 
This bill provides that, beginninglanuary 1, 2024, the minimum wage for individuals employed by or 
who work in a health care facility is $15.00 per hour. While we understand and perhaps even 
sympathize with the intent of this proposal, we have some concerns about its actual effect. 
Maine's minimum wage is indexed annually to inflation and is currently $13.80 per hour. The wage 
level and method of indexing was established by referendum in 2015. Adjusting the minimum wage in 
this way is intended to ensure that workers earning the minimum wage can retain their purchasing 
power as the cost of living increases. We believe that this system is working well and achieves its 
intended result. 
Were the bill to pass as written, the $15 minimum for workers in health care facilities would be 
overtaken in the future by the regular minimum wage, due to the annual cost-of-living adjustment in 
that rate required by 26 MRS §664, subsection 1. Because of language in the bill, health care workers 
would then effectively be subject to a subminimum wage. We do not support subminimum wages for 
any workers. 
Thank you for your time and attention. l would be happy to answer any questions you may have now 
or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth. 
PHONE: (207)623-7900 TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-S292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and sernces are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
