ALAW OFFICE OF
Aubrey Russell
P.O. Box 194, Mechanic Falls, ME 04256 ] (207) 241-0305
February 16, 2023
RE: Opposition to LD 330 An Act to Ensure Legal Representation for Residents Facing Evictions
Dear Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee,
My name is Aubrey Russell. I am an attorney practicing out of Mechanic Falls, Maine. I represent
primarily landlords, although I also represent tenants when hired to do so. I practice throughout our
state, routinely appearing in Springvale, Biddeford, West Bath, Portland, Lewiston, Rumford, Augusta,
Bangor and occasionally In almost every other District Court In our state. I have been doing this for over
15 years. I oppose section 2 of LD 330.
First, the process to evict a tenant is already lengthy and costly in the State of Maine. For
example, in a case where a tenant has physically harmed another tenant, we must serve a seven-day
notice to quit (that usually takes a few days to serve due to service requirements). Then we must serve a
summons and complaint seven days in advance of the FED hearing. Hearings are only held once or twice
per month depending on the courts so this could mean anywhere from a seven day to thirty day notice
prior to the actual date. Then the parties go to court. Even If you get a judgment with a writ to issue in
normal course, you have to wait another seven days until you can get the writ. Oftentimes, It takes us
longer than 8 days to get the writ. Then we must have a sheriff make three attempts on three separate
days before posting that writ. Once posted, law requires us to wait an addib'onal 48 hours before
enforcing the writ. That means that in a case where one tenant has phvsicallv harmed another tenant.
the tenant that was harmed has to wait 30-45 davs before the perpetrator is evicted. This legislation
would make that 37-52 days that a victim needs to live next to a perpetrator. This is also true of domestic
violence victims, people damaging their units (cutting pipes, ripping out sheetrock. removing electrical
wiring), or people who are not even tenants but move in without permission - thev all get this time to
remain In the unit. Sometimes, legislation that helps one group can harm another group. This
legislation harms the majority of tenants that follow the rules, and it harms the landlords in
circumstances where they need to get a tenant out.
Second, I would argue that this does not increase access to representation for most tenants. Pine
Tree is available at almost all the courthouses, and they pick up cases every time they are there. Thus,
the tenants this serves to protect still can use Pine Tree's services. In addition, if some of the other
legislation passes, they will be notified about Pine Tree's services well before this, when they are served
with the notice of termination.
Sincerely,
Aubrey Russell, Esq.
33 Pleasant Street, Mechanic Falls, ME 04256 ] aubreyslawoffice.com ] arussell@aubreyslawoffice.com
