PINE TREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE, INC. 
Chet Randall ¢ Portland Area Oﬁice' 
88 Federal Street 
P. O. Box 547 
A g_ Portland, Maine 04112 I 
(207) 552-3101* 623-7774 FAX 
www.ptla.org ¢ cr'nmiall@ptIa.org 
February 16, 2023 
Written Testimony of Chet Randall, Pine Tree Legal Assistance 
In Support of LD 330 
“An Act To Ensure Legal Representation for Residents Facing Eviction ” 
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary. My name is Chet Randall. I am the Deputy Director 
at Pine Tree Legal Assistance. l live in Portland, Maine. l have been engaged in 
eviction prevention and foreclosure prevention efforts to stabilize housing on behalf of 
Maine residents for nearly 20 years. 
I am here today to urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 330. 
Summary: 
LD 330 would increase the opportunity for people with low incomes to access an 
attorney's help when defending their housing from eviction. All Mainers should have V» 
access to meaningful legal counsel and representation before being faced with eviction. ‘ 
Since 1967 Pine Tree Legal Assistance (Pine Tree) has provided free legal services to 
low-income people throughout the State of Maine. Pine Tree supports LD 330 because 
its proposed changes will increase the opportunity for people with low incomes to 
access an attorney's help when defending their housing from eviction. Pine Tree has 
helped thousands of people preserve their housing and avoid homelessness. in 
2022, Pine Tree Legal Assistance provided legal services to Maine families and 
individuals in 7,582 cases, of which 4738 (62%) involved representation of clients in 
varying types of housing cases, including preventing evictions and foreclosures, 
enforcing safe housing laws, and enforcing housing discrimination laws. ln 2022, Pine 
Tree Legal assisted Maine tenants in 2702 eviction cases statewide. However, 
thousands more have been unable to access our assistance, or the help of other civil 
legal sen/ice providers for several reasons. Many simply did not know how to contact us 
soon enough or did not have the time or opportunity to reach an attorney and obtain 
assistance.
1
What LD 330 will do: 
1) LD 330 will significantly increase the information about available legal assistance 
as early in the legal process as possible by: 
- requiring a landlord or their attorney to include a resource list with the notice 
to quit or termination of tenancy; 
- requiring the judge to notify tenants at the start of the eviction court docket of 
the availability of legal services attorneys present at the courthouse. 
2) LD 330 will increase the opportunity to access an attorney by: 
- requiring that the summons and complaint be served fourteen (14) days 
before the eviction court date rather than just seven (7) days. 
Why it is important to improve the opportunity for tenants to access an attorney: 
Ensuring the opportunity of a tenant to obtain an attorney is critical. Maine is facinga 
rental housing crisis and with that crisis comes increased housing instability. Eviction 
legal defense is an effective strategy for preserving and stabilizing tenant housing. The 
Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) found that, in Maine, tenants are 85% 
more likely to avoid an eviction judgment when they have an attorney.l 
ln contrast to tenants, landlords have dramatically ,more access to legal representation 
than tenants and this creates an unlevel playing field in the courts. The Maine 
Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) found that overall, landlords had the benefit ofa 
lawyer in about 80% of cases, while only 20% of tenants did. Moreover, since the 
landlord in an eviction case has control over the filing of the ‘eviction case; they have far 
greater opportunity to access an attorney than a tenant in Maine.1 
1A Massachusetts study found that tvvo-thirds of the tenants who received full 
representation in district court were able to stay in their homes, compared with one-third 
of those who lacked representation. The Massachusetts study found that “extensive 
assistance from lawyers is essential to helping tenants preserve their housing and avoid 
the potential for homelessness, including all of the far-reaching tangible and intangible 
costs to tenants and society generally that are associated with homelessness. ”A 
Minnesota study found that fully represented tenants win or settle their cases 96% of 
the time and clients ‘receiving limited/brief services win or settle 83% of the time.A 
study in Baltimore found that unrepresented tenants are experiencing disruptive 
displacement in approximately 93% of eviction proceedings and when tenants are 
represented, they can avoid the high likelihood of disruptive displacement in 92% of 
cases. lt is abundantly evident that access to an attorney improves housing stability and 
security.
2
It is important to note that eviction legal defense is a cost-effective strategy for_ 
promoting affordable housing. The cost of providing legal representation in an eviction is 
approximately $1,250 per case or household. The average cost of developing new 
housing is $187,862.72 per unit. (MaineHousing) The average cost of homelessness is 
$28,045 per person in the Greater Portland area (MaineHousing) and $18,629 outside 
of Portland (MaineHousing). 
Finally, we must recognize the importance of stable housing to our communities and our 
economy. Unstable housing caused by evictions impacts access to employment, health 
care, nutrition, educational services, and so much more. 
How LD 330 increases the information about available legal assistance and the 
opportunity to access an attorney: 
LD 330 simply requires information be shared. LD 330 requires that a list of 
available civil legal service providers be given to tenants before the court process 
begins. Currently, before a landlord serves the tenant with court documents, a landlord 
must end the tenancy with a notice to quit or termination of tenancy. Providing a tenant 
a list of civil legal service programs with the notice of termination or notice to quit will 
increase the opportunity and likelihood of a tenant getting legal help early. 
Access to a list of legal and tenant resources at the beginning of the process, beforea 
court case is even filed, increases the chances of being able to resolve a landlord- 
tenant dispute without the need for court. Financial resources are more likely to be 
available at that stage and over a tonger period, which helps both landlords and tenants. 
With that expanded time, landlords and tenants may reach agreement that does not 
require the expense of filing in court and tying up judicial resources. And, whena 
genuine dispute exists, tenants will have time to address the issues with a lawyer to 
ensure that a tenancy is terminated only on the merits, and not because the tenant was 
not properly educated on the law. 
LD 330 merely requires that a judge inform tenants on the eviction court date if 
there is a legal services attorney available in court that day to potentially help them. 
We believe the act of a judge informing tenants about an opportunity to talk to a lawyer 
that day, in court, can make a significant difference. Currently, the eviction day begins 
with the tenants and landlords assembling in a designated courtroom. The judge enters 
and reads from a prepared script summarizing the court process, and in some courts, 
announcing the presence of a mediator. LD 330 merely adds that the judges also 
announce the presence of legal services or pro bono attorneys when they are present. 
Unrepresented tenants are frequently scared, _ worried, and confused by the process. 
Many tenants in court are disabled or older Mainers. It is our experience at Pine Tree 
that a judge announcement will let the tenant know that free attorneys are present, they 
are bona fide and legitimate, and that it is ok to seek help without angering the judge.
3
Announcing the presence of legal service or pro bono attorneys further increases the 
opportunity for tenants to access legal help and potentially resolve cases faster and 
increase court efficiency. 
Finally, LD 330 requires that the summons and complaint be given to the tenant 
just 14 days (just 10 business days) prior to a court hearing rather than just 7 days 
(or 5 business days) before the hearing date. This change is essential to ensure the 
meaningful opportunity to find an attorney before a court date. We believe that this slight 
change could result in more tenants being able to contact us. The current time limit in 
the court rule is 7 calendar days, not business days. That brief period makes it 
exceedingly difficult for a tenant to contact a pro bono or legal services attorney, or any 
attorney for that matter, and it is a fleeting time for any attorney to confirm 
representation or their ability to help. Most legal services programs, because of limited 
resources, have limited hours for people to call or ask for help. There are often ﬁxed 
times and days of the week. For many reasons, like work, school, illness, or childcare, 
the tenant may not be able to wait on the phone when they call. Adding just ﬁve 
business days is essential to provide a meaningful opportunity to access an attorney. 
Lastly, 10 business days (fourteen calendar days) is a more appropriate amount of time 
to provide notice of a court hearing that is likely to strip someone of their right to 
possess their home and to give some reasonable amount of time to prepare for a case 
with their attorney. Ten business days provides tenants a fighting chance to reacha 
lawyer who can get up to speed on their case, requestwdocuments and records, and 
have a chance to adequately prepare for a hearing., 
We know from the MAHC study that having an attorney ‘ makes a difference. In one 
recent case a tenant, a disabled mom of a disabled child, in rural Maine faced eviction 
and needed legal assistance. A friend of hers told her to talk to Pine Tree. She found 
the courage to approach me and ask for help. It was the middle of winter. She reported 
she had nowhere to go. 
Conclusion: 
The simple changes proposed by LD 330 will help ensure that tenants have access to 
legal representation in eviction cases. lt will allow for a more fair and accessible court 
process, greater likelihood of stability for tenants, greater efficiency in the court system, 
and more fairness for everyone involved. 
For the reasons set forth above, Pine Tree strongly urges this Committee to vote ought 
to pass on LD 330 as amended.
4
