T1-IEi 
LAW OFF1oE 
W DANIEL]. BERNIER 
‘W LLC 1+._ 
February 14, 2023 
To The Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee 
From Daniel J. Bernier, representing the 
Central Maine Apartment Owners Association working in conjunction with the Rental Housing 
Alliance of Southern Maine 
Re: LD 330 An Act to Ensure Legal Representation for Residents Facing Eviction 
At the time I am drafting this memo I have not heard back from my client as to a position 
on the amendment proposed by the bill’s sponsor. We had originally decided not to takea 
position on this bill, but that was before we saw the amendment. I thought I would offer a few 
comments: going forward as a state Maine needs to be careful that we do not increase 
homelessness in the name of protecting tenants. The reality is most tenants will never see an 
eviction. If you pay your rent on time, do not damage the premises, and do not bother other 
tenants, you most likely will never be evicted. If we really want to reduce the nmnber of 
evictions in this state, we need to put our time in educating tenants how to be good tenants. It is 
against the landlord ’s ﬁnancial interest to engage in unnecessary evictions. They make money 
on full apartments; they lose money on empty apartments, and it costs them money to go 
through the eviction process. 
Both landlord and tenants have rights and responsibilities. Each need to live up to 
their rights and responsibilities. Simply telling tenants they have rights, and no 
responsibilities will increase homelessness in this state. 
The harder you make it to evict, the more landlords are going to screen tenants. I sawa 
significant increase in landlords screening tenants during the covid mortarium on evictions. If 
we want landlords taking chances on people coming out of homeless shelters, have criminal 
records or have prior evictions, they are more likely to do that if they know they can evict the 
tenants if things are not working out. If once they take the tenant, they are stuck with them 
landlords will be much more selective in whom they take on. 
I see two things going on that could increase the amount of homelessness: there are some 
of the high~powered rhetoric where landlords are deemed evil which some tenants just cannot 
handle and then they start to engage in bad behavior. There is no doubt in my mind that 
Page 1 of3 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bernierlawof ﬁce.com
eviction moratorium during covid and some of the high-powered anti-landlord rhetoric 
increased homelessness by encouraging bad behavior on the part of tenants. Most tenants paid 
their rent on time or worked out arrangements with their landlords, but there were a few that 
could simply not handle that their landlord could not evict them and ran up very large bills on 
their landlords. At the end of the day when the mortarium on evictions was lifted many of those 
tenants were evicted and if they could not ﬁnd another place to live ended up homeless. This 
represents a very small number of tenants running up very large bills on their landlords. 
Previously in evictions We would see landlords losing two to three thousand dollars before you 
got a tenant out, during the moratorium I saws landlords losing ten to twelve thousand dollars 
in rent and facing substantial property damages before the tenant was evicted. 
As an attomey who handles evictions, I am getting to the point where I like to seea 
tenant having legal counsel. I had a recent case where a tenant had moved out of the premises 
and all they had to do was give the keys back and give us a note stating they were surrendering 
the premises and I would dismiss the eviction hearing. The tenant was refusing to do that. I was 
virtually begging the tenant to talk to legal counsel to explain the situation. Other things I have 
seen is Pine Tree Council or Legal Services for the Elderly helping a tenant get enrolled in 
some of the assistance programs or helping someone with mental illness get the treatment they 
needed and trying to rehabilitate a tenancy. All of which is very good work. Sometimes the 
lawyer will negotiate more time for the tenant to ﬁnd another place. 
I have not seen a lot of beneﬁt when it comes to having a trial for tenants to the tenant 
having a lawyer. Generally, tenants lose the overwhelming number of evictions whether they 
have a lawyer or not. I have not noticed any real difference in a tenant winning or losing their 
hearing whether or not they had legal counsel. 
My experience is if a landlord loses a hearing it is usually because they did not serve the 
original eviction notice properly or they did not word it properly and Judges are going to ﬁnd 
for the tenant on those cases whether the tenant has legal representation or not. 
With respect to the proposed amendment, I am concerned about taking the summons and 
the complaint needing to be served fourteen (14) days before the return date rather the current 
seven (7) days. Because of the mail being slow and giving the sheriffs time to serve notices 
generally most of my complaints are being served fourteen (14) days before the return date. If 
you make it fourteen (14) days, I am probably going to have to put them out to be served 
twenty-one (21) days before the return date. I need time for the mail to get the complaint and 
summons to the sheriffs department from my ofﬁce, I need time for them to come back to my 
office after being served and I need to give the sheriffs deputy time to serve it and if the tenant 
is not opening the door that can take several days. However, ifI have a serious case involving 
violence or vandalism the deputy sheriffs will sometimes come to my office and pick up the 
paperwork and see to it that it gets served immediately. By going from seven (7) days to , 
fourteen (14) days for service before the return date, you eliminate our ability to get fast service 
on those very serious cases. 
On the section that says we have to attach to the notice to quit a notice which I am 
assuming that is talking about the notice we agreed to in the last legislature that is attached to 
summons. Now that would be attached to the notice of eviction. Judges insist on technical 
compliance with the statute. So if a landlord accidentally forgets to attach the notice which 
Page 2 of3 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877 .8969 * dan@bernierlawof ﬁce.com
includes Pine Tree Legal number to the ﬁrst eviction noticethe Judge will dismiss the case if 
this becomes law. By the same token tenants tend to take the complaint and summons more 
seriously than the notice; thus, attaching the notice with Pine Tree Legal’s number is more 
effective if you attach it to the complaint and summons which has an actual court date. One of 
the biggest problems in evictions that I ﬁnd is tenants tend to procrastinate. Attaching the 
notice with Pine Tree Legal’s number to the summons is far more effective than attaching it to 
the eviction notice. 
The last provision is having Judge’s announce the availability of legal counsel. Do we 
really need a statute to tell the Judge’s to do that? I also understand that there are also some 
ﬁnancial screening requirements for Pine Tree Legal representation. What if the tenant does 
not meet those requirements. If the Judge forgets to announce it, what happens? Are the 
hearings that day invalid‘? 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Very truly yours, 
, I \/ 
if 75"
“ -/D 1elJ.B, rnier 
DJB/hbI 
Page 3 of3 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bemierlawof ﬁce.com
