CrossWay LLC
  #1 Water Street, Newport, Maine 04953
 (207)368-6221 
emergencies (207)487-3680
crosswayrentals@gmail.com
February 1, 2023
To:  Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee
Re:  Opposition of LD 330: An Act to Ensure Legal Representation for Residents Facing 
Evictions
Dear Valuable Representatives of the People of Maine:
I am writing as a person with a small investment in rental property in opposition of LD 330: An 
Act to Ensure Legal Representation for Residents Facing Evictions.  The filing of a request for a 
court hearing is after at least one of the following:  failure to pay rent notice, 3 written infraction 
notices from the landlord, or a lengthy notice to move.  For an eviction to make it to the point of 
being in front of a judge involves many days and specific legal measures.  This process is NOT 
instantaneous and certainly allows for significant opportunity for legal representation, mediation, 
and ESPECIALLY for attaining the information on those rights and responsibilities.   
There is currently an information sheet and mediation request form that must be attached to the 
FED notice that is served on the tenant.  It can be found on the courts.maine.gov site Click here  
That form already list several contacts for legal representation and can certainly also be modified 
to explain that legal representation may also be available at the court on the day of the hearing.  
This bill is going to delay evictions by at least another 7 days.  That is an enormous amount of 
time for the other residents who are tolerating a bad tenant and for a landlord who is not only 
quite likely not getting paid but may be incurring additional expenses (heat, electric, damages, 
sheriff service fees, etc.).  Further delays to being heard before a judge creates a monetary 
boomerang that affects everyone (more losses for LL means higher rents, bigger deposits, and 
better references/credit worthiness requirements).  
To address the need to protect people from being evicted and/or homeless we need to focus our 
attention on PREVENTING the evictions not delaying them.  This bill does not guarantee legal 
representation but I’m afraid it is going to confuse people into thinking that they can postpone 
the responsibility of reaching out to an attorney if they think there might be one on the day of 
court.  Perhaps a funding bill that increases access to a hotline or advice would be a better way to 
ensure representation in a most timely manner.  I would prefer tenants to be represented.  By the 
time eviction is scheduled I’ve already been informing my tenant that there a strict time frames, 
notices, etc. that take place that have nothing to do with me being mean or impatient, etc. I have 
to follow the law (and spend the money to do so) and it would actually be helpful if tenants knew 
the laws too.  Please vote in OPPOSITION TO LD: 330.  Thank you for your consideration.
Donna E. Hodges 
DONNA CROSSWAY HODGES
Newport
LD 330
Opposition to LD 330.  
