   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Barbara Burt, Vice -chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lucy Van Hook  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Carney and Moonen, and all member s of the Judiciary 
committee:  
 
My name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am 
testifying in favor of LD 330, which would inform tenants facing eviction of the possibility of legal 
representation and provide more time for these tenants to acquire this representation. By 
providing more opportunity for tenants to obtain legal representation, this bill would reduce 
evictions across the  state and protect our communities’ health, safety, and financial stability.  
 
I have previously testified to this committee about the dangers that evictions pose to people’s 
wellbeing. To briefly recap, evictions can render families vulnerable to many phys ical and 
mental health conditions while removing the stability they need to support themselves 
financially. Worse, these impacts are not only limited to the time period immediately following 
the eviction but may continue to impact physical and financial we llbeing for decades into the 
future. This is especially the case for children, as research has shown that children experiencing 
multiple changes in address typically have lower lifetime earnings, work fewer hours  in 
adulthood , and receive fewer years of ed ucation.1 
 
These threats to families’ immediate security and future prosperity can be avoided  through 
legislative action . When people experiencing evictions have  legal representation, they are 
significantly less likely to be evicted.2 For example, one st udy in California found that tenants  
participating in a pilot program to receive legal services  were twice as likely to have their 
evictions settled out of court relative to other tenants, and only three percent of tenants in the 
program were formally evicted. Another study following a program in Columbus, Ohio, found 
that courts ruled in favor of tenants  without full legal representation  only 46 percent of the time. 
Tenants with full legal representation, however, received favorable rulings 99 percent of the 
time. Having legal representation also makes it more likely for tenants to have the eviction  filing 
sealed from the public record, which p revents  future potential landlords from using the 
attempted eviction to discriminat e against the  tenants’  rental applications .3 
 
Accessing legal representation can make an enormous difference in  eviction rulings and  the 
lives of renters facing evictions, but unfortunately, very few renters are represented in eviction 
cases. A 2021 report by the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition found that while 80 percent of 
landlords in eviction cases were represented by a lawyer, only 20 percent of tenants had 
representation.4 This same report provides further evidence for the importance of legal 
representation in protecting renters from harmful evictions, noting that legally represented 
tenants were 85 percent less likely to receive an eviction order against  them relative to 
unrepresented tenants.  This imbalance in representation between landlords and tenants creates 
 
1 ACLU, “No Eviction Without Rep resentation.” 
https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/field_document/no_eviction_without_representation_research_brief_0.p
df  
2 Ibid.  
3 Ibid.  
4 Maine Affordable Housing Coalition, “Evictions in Maine: February 2021 Update.” 
https://mainehousingcoalition.org/wp -content/uploads/2020/09/Evictions -in-Maine -February -2021.pdf   
 
   
 an unfavorable power dynamic to tenants, who may not be aware of all the rights or legal 
options available to them in eviction proceedings.  
 
Eviction filings have increased over the past two years , reaching nearly 5,000 in 2022.5 As 
housing continues to become more unaffordable to Mainers with low and moderate incomes, it 
is likely that eviction filings will continue to increase as well. Improving tenants’ ability to obtain 
legal representation will help ensure that people are onl y exposed to the threats that evictions 
pose when there are no other viable  options.  Because of this,  I urge the committee to vote yes 
on LD 330.  
 
 
 
 
5 Portland Press Herald, “Evictions in Maine  shot up during 2022, with filings growing 27%.” 
https://www.pressherald.com/2023/01/19/evictions -in-maine -shot -up-during -2022 -with -filings -growing -27/  
