SQI 
19 Colby Street Waten/ille, ME 
Waterville l\/ll(i~l\/li ﬂllli-3 04901 
Homeless Shelter 
8L Services 
Hap: Slaria Hem 
www.sI»\0llarmn.nrg 
lVl|D—|VlAlNE Horvuztsss SHELTER & SERVICES 
DR. KAT|E SPENCER WHITE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
(207) 872-8082( 0207 )872-65500 FAX: (207) 872-0834 
she|ter@She|terMe.org 0 ;5vyiﬁ‘_s;p~@lteni_rg;j_.5>1g;, 
February 16, 2023 
Committee on Judiciary 
Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD330 An Act to Ensure Legal Representation for Residents 
Facing Eviction 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Committee: 
My name is Dr. Katie Spencer White, and l am the President & CEO of the Mid-Maine 
Homeless Shelter & Services in Wateiville, Maine. We serve people experiencing homelessness 
primarily from Kennebec and Sommerset Counties through our 65 bed low-barrier shelter, as 
well as a range of programs and services designed to prevent people from becoming homeless 
and to quickly rehouse them if they do. In 2022 alone, we prevented 311 Mainers, 125 of whom 
are children, from becoming homeless through our Prevention & Diversion program. The 
majority of those served were facing formal or infonnal eviction. At an average cost of $278 per 
person, this program is highly effective and good value for money. 
In addition to my work at MMHSS, Governor Mills appointed me to represent Mid-Coast and 
Central Maine on the Statewide Homeless Council which I chaired in 2022. This combination of 
operational and strategic experience gives me an important perspective on the impact of eviction 
on the people of Maine, in particular families with children and older Mainers. The tiuth is, even 
if a shelter bed was a cost-effective remedy to housing instability, Maine has an insufficient 
number of shelter beds. According to data from Maine Housing from 2021, our system has fewer 
than 1300 beds for more than 4000 people experiencing homelessness on any given day. Once 
people are offered a bed, they routinely become stuck, unable to ﬁnd new housing in a state that 
has a rental vacancy rate between l-3% depending on the location. 
If we continue with “business as usual” , we will continue to push people into a system that has 
no outflow, leaving more and more people with no other option but to sleep in cars or in tents or 
in other places not ﬁt for habitation. Importantly, children are disproportionately impacted by 
eviction despite achieving protected class status under the Fair Housing Act in 1989 (Desmond, 
“Providing Emergency Food & Shelter I0 Homeless and Displaced Persons in central Maine” 
“Founded by the Interfaith Council in 1990”
et al, 2013). Children who have been evicted face a lifetime of hardship through poor educational 
attainment, and 50% higher rates of anxiety, depression, and withdrawal (The National Child 
Traumatic Stress Network, 2005). 
LD330 is an important first step in ensuring that Maine has a more equitable justice system and 
that it achieves desired outcomes like procedural fairness. But it is only a start. In addition to n1y 
organizational and state leadership on homelessness, I hold a doctorate in law & public policy 
Where my research focuses on eviction. I have spent considerable time reviewing the body of 
scholarly literature as well as doctrinal legal analysis on eviction. This research demonstrates that 
“unbundled ” legal services as proposed by LD330 are effective on the day at preventing 
eviction. This offers a limited degree of procedural fairness which is presently absent from the 
system. In most instances, however, this “victory” on the day is limited to negotiated extra time 
to vacate the unit or other solutions that do not preserve the tenancy. 
Research also indicates that unbundled legal sen/ices do not achieve the substantive legal or 
social objectives of tenants. There is a small but growing body of research that indicates that 
what tenants want is to have a positive relationship with their landlord and to meet their 
obligations under the lease so that they can remain in their community and in their schools with 
their friends, neighbors. 
In 2022 I conducted a study that sought to understand the justice needs of pro-se, defendant 
tenants and the results were eye-opening. Tenants do not feel the present system meets their 
justice needs. They recommend that a truly just system would include the following: 
. Respect for tenants from landlords and the legal system; 
Access to resources to prevent being in court in the ﬁrst place; 
. Accountability for landlords (often missing in cases of summary judgement); 
Transparency in the evidence relied on in court. 
. Good communication with the landlord to resolve potential legal issues; and 
Proportionality in the consequences of eviction. 
For low-income tenants, who are often classed as “rent burdened ” and are paying 50% or more 
of their monthly income in rent, this often means having ﬂexibility to address personal setbacks 
without fear of eviction. Ordinary life events like illness or a job loss often lead to eviction, even 
when the tenant is back on their feet with- a plan to make up the arrearages. This is lack of 
proportionality has reduced eviction court a method of debt collection with the judiciary serving 
as the collection agency. 
Even with a lawyer of the day present, for tenants in this scenario, the damage is already done by 
simply appearing on the docket. Landlords routinelylist the names of tenants (defendant or 
otherwise), and upon their inevitable loss of housing. alternative housing for the tenant is 
foreclosed. Once on a tenant “blacklist ” , there is no going back: there is no legislation to 
determine who is on the list, how long they can appear on it, or in what circumstances that 
information can be used to deny housing. 
"Providing Emergency F 00d & Shelter to Home/e.s's and Displaced Persons in central A/[aine" 
“Founded by the Interfaith Council in 1990”
LD33O is an important start to improving the eviction court system. But it is just that — a start. To 
ensure our justice system offers more than bare procedural fairness and achieves equitable 
outcomes for all participants, it is important for this committee and the legislature to continue the 
work begun with LD330 through process reform, ending tenant blacklists, funding prevention 
and diversion like the program we operate at MMHSS, tracking housing insecurity, and, 
importantly, ensuring bundled (Whole of case) representation When cases are complex and 
involve claims of discrimination or disputed facts. 
With LD33O, Maine has an opportunity begin the important long-term Work of achieving justice 
for all. I therefore encourage the committee to support this bill. 
Kind regards, 
@393 Dr. Katie Spencer White 
Chief Executive Officer 
Mid-Maine Homeless Shelter & Services 
Katie@shelterme.org 
(207) 692-4421 
“Providing Emergency Food & Shelter 10 Home/e.s'.s ‘ and Displaced P8i‘SOI’IS in central 1l/[aine” 
“Founded by the Interfaith Council i11 l990”
