1LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle
  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)
www.mainelse.org
February 16, 2023
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D. 45 An Act to Prevent Retaliatory Evictions
before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Judiciary
Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal services organization that 
was established in Maine following the passage of the Older American’s Act 
in 1974. Since then, we have provided free legal assistance to our 
disadvantaged older adults when their basic human needs are at stake. Our 
clients are all aged sixty or older and most have very low incomes. Some are 
the most physically and financially compromised people in our State. Last 
year at LSE we experienced a 30 percent increase in cases involving 
evictions. We support LD 330 as amended because we believe that it 
proposes helpful changes that will improve existing parts of the eviction 
process.      
Section 1 ensures that all tenants facing eviction will be informed as early as 
possible in the process about sources that provide legal representation to 
those who can’t afford a lawyer. It doesn’t create a new obligation in that 
regard, it simply changes the timing when the notice is given to the tenant.   
Currently, a tenant receiving a 30 day notice to quit in a “no cause” eviction 
matter may have as much as six weeks between the day they receive the 
notice and a court hearing day. If the tenant has not moved out at the end of 
the 30 day period, the landlord may legally begin the court part of the 
eviction process by having the tenant served with a summons and complaint. 
The summons will contain the date when the court hearing will take place 
which may be as early as 14 days after the summons and complaint are 
served. The law now requires the landlord to attach a notice to the summons 
and complaint that includes “…D.  A list of resources that provide legal 
2information and representation available to residential tenants”. Title 14 
Section 6004 (2). It's not until that day, (30 days after they received the 
notice to quit) that they are officially told that there are organizations that 
will provide them with free legal representation if they are otherwise unable 
to afford to hire a lawyer. The court hearing date may be as early as 14 days 
after the service of a summons and complaint in a no cause eviction case. 
This means that tenants have 14 days to find a lawyer after receiving this 
notice.     
Tenants who are being evicted “for cause” have even less time to find a 
lawyer. They receive a 7 day eviction notice that includes a reason for the 
eviction. Assuming that they don’t move out by the end of the 7 day period 
they are served with a summons and complaint. The summons and 
complaint contain the same attachment previously described regarding 
information and legal representation. However, the date for their court 
hearing may be as early as 7 days after they receive the summons and 
complaint. This gives them 7 days to find an attorney even though the facts 
of their cases may be more complicated.
Section 1 of the amended bill proposes to change the time for giving the 
tenant a list of resources that provide legal information and representation 
from the day the summons and complaint are served to the day the notice to 
quit is delivered. This additional time to find a lawyer will benefit everyone. 
Tenants will be realistically advised of their chances of success and will 
have more time to consider their options. If they decide to contest the 
eviction their hearing will take less court time since judges will not feel 
obliged to explain the process to a non-lawyer. If they decide to negotiate for 
more time to leave their dwelling, the time needed to settle their cases will 
decrease because experienced professionals will be on both sides. In short, 
the measure of justice produced in these cases has a better chance of 
increasing.      
Section 2 ensures that all tenants will have the same amount of time to 
prepare their case between the day they are served with a summons and 
complaint and the court hearing date. As previously mentioned, the current 
process allows a hearing on a no cause eviction to take place 14 days after 
the service of a summons and complaint. A hearing on an eviction “for 
cause” may take place 7 days after the summons and complaint are served.  
Section 2 extends that time by 7 days in recognition of the fact that a defense 
to an eviction for cause generally involves a more complicated fact pattern 
3and an argument based on a substantive legal principle. Without the help of 
a lawyer, it is unlikely that a tenant could successfully defend such a case. 
This change gives the tenant contesting the allegations describing the cause 
for the eviction 14 days instead of 7 to seek the services of an attorney and a 
bit more time for the attorney to investigate and prepare a defense if one 
exists. Practically speaking, unless the attorney finds admissible evidence 
that refutes the allegations in the notice, the case will likely be settled for the 
same “move out” date as a case that proceeds according to the current rule. 
The extra week before the hearing will only assist those tenants who have a 
meritorious defense, decide to have a contested hearing, and win. If the case 
is settled by negotiation, the practical benefits of having expert legal advice 
puts tenants on the same footing as represented landlords and ensures that 
they will realistically assess their options. 
Section 3 recognizes the importance of the oral announcement about the 
availability of legal representation currently made by the district court judge 
on the hearing day. While giving general instructions to the group of 
individuals whose eviction cases are set for hearing, if there are lawyers in 
the courtroom who have volunteered to offer assistance to unrepresented 
tenants, the judge will mention their presence. The language in Section three 
proposes to memorialize this common sense practice. 
We conclude our comments with the hope that you will vote “ought to pass” 
and our thanks for the opportunity to share our thoughts with you today.    
          
