Samuel M. Sherry, Esq.
Transactions, Litigation and Collection Since 1992
P. O. Box 7875    Sam@FineAttorney.comPortland, ME  04112-7875          Board Certified - Creditors Rights Law
                 
Telephone: (207) 799-8485                           Facsimile:  (207) 482-0018
DATE:February 16, 2023
TO:Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee 
FROM:Samuel M. Sherry, Esq. 
Representing the Rental Housing Alliance of Southern Maine
RE:LD 330 – An Act To Ensure Legal Representation For Residents Facing Eviction
As a Board member of the Rental Housing Alliance of Southern Maine (“RHA”), I submit this 
testimony on RHA’s behalf in measured opposition to parts of LD 330.
RHA is a non-profit organization generally comprised of small and medium-sized landlords with 
properties in York, Cumberland, Sagadahoc and Androscoggin Counties.  Our members range 
from people who rent out a room over their garage to full-time landlords with paid staff.  
My practice is directed exclusively to commercial law, almost evenly divided between small 
business practice and landlord representation.  I represent landlords for advice and in court. 
Landlord Representation On FED Dockets :  Over the course of a year I appear for landlord 
clients in about ten District Courts within an hour’s drive of downtown Portland.  Roughly 
speaking, what I see is that about half the landlords are represented by attorneys and about half 
speak for themselves directly.  
Pine Tree Legal Assistance, Inc. (“PTLAI”) :  PTLAI is a statewide law office with 
approximately fifty attorneys on staff, making it one of the largest law firms in Maine.  The firm 
is robustly funded by a variety of public, quasi-public and private sources; its budget appears to 
be in the mid-seven-figure range.  
PTLAI’s regular practice is to send groups of attorneys, with excellent paralegals, to attend the 
Portland, Biddeford and Lewiston dockets.  They are each true experts in their field.  
Announcement Of Free Representation For Tenants :  FED dockets begin with an 
announcement that lawyers are present from PTLAI to represent tenants for free.  Those 
announcements are either made by the District Court Judge or by one of the PTLAI lawyers.  
RHA’s Measured Opposition To Section 3 of LD 330:   Sec. 3 of LD 330 requires the District 
Court Judge to make that announcement.  
Recently I testified against LD 45, which (if enacted) would remove District Court Judges’ 
discretion about how to weigh the evidence before them in certain FED cases.  Sec. 3 of LD 330 
is another effort on the same theme.   
Some jurists apparently have concluded that the appearance of judicial neutrality is better-
preserved by allowing PTLAI to make the announcement  than by having it issue from the 
bench.  In place of the Judge’s own determination about how the appearance of judicial neutrality
is best served in their courtroom, Sec. 3 of LD 330 externally imposes a one-size-fits-all rule.  
The Legislature has directly approved the appointment of every District Court Judge.   It should 
trust each of them to run their courtrooms and leave the current practice as it stands.
RHA’s Opposition To Section 2 of LD 330:  RHA opposes Section 2 on the following bases:
1. Sec. 2 Does Not Fit With Actual Practice In Rental Default Cases :  I expect that some 
will testify that Sec. 2 of LD  330 is helpful because it gives tenants fourteen days, instead of 
seven, to find GA funding or other funds to pay off a rental default.  That position ignores much 
more than it states, because tenants currently have a statutory right to pay off a rental default and 
get their FED dismissed  even after judgment enters against them.  
The current eviction process is:
7 days from service to hearing
14-28 days from first hearing to continued hearing – only 1-3 cases are actually tried per docket
8+ days for issuance of a writ
- - - 
30-45+ days in which the tenant currently has the statutory right to cure the rental default and get
the case dismissed, even after entry of judgment.   
The argument that increasing that from thirty to thirty-seven is a critical enhancement doesn’t 
add up.  If a tenant is not able to find funding in 30-45 days, another seven days will not change 
that outcome.  
2. Sec. 2 Make No Sense In Behavioral Default Cases :  Each individual rental unit in Maine
is the owner’s $75,000 - $350,000 asset.   If somebody has moved themselves (or their friend) 
into your $250,000 unit without your permission, making you wait an extra week to get them out
is wrong and dangerous.   If somebody is selling drugs out of your unit, making you wait an extra
week is wrong and dangerous.   If somebody is kicking holes in your $250,000 asset,  making you 
wait an extra week is wrong and dangerous.
3. Sec. 2 Overwrites M.R.Civ.P 80D(b) :  The seven-day period is established not by statute 
but by Civil Rule 80D(b) .  RHA’s position is that the fairest way to change the Civil Rules is 
through the normal Rules amendment process supervised by the Judicial Branch.  That is 
particularly true in situations where, as here, the Judicial Branch has apparently never amended 
Rule 80D(b) since its enactment in 1990.   The Judicial Branch amended Rule 80D in 1996, 1999,
2001, 2004 and 2007, but it never touched Rule 80D(b).
The current 7-day regimen served the State of Maine fairly and justly through the housing crises 
of 1992 and 2008.  What is so different today that it requires the Legislature to bypass the 
Judicial Branch’s tried-and-true Rule amendment process?
RHA Is Neither In Favor Nor Against Sec. 1 of LD 330:   PTLAI is a constant and positive 
presence in my practice.  I enjoy solving problems in conjunction with my colleagues at PTLAI. 
I have no ax to grind.
The simple fact is that tenants know about PTLAI already and they already benefit from a live 
lecture in Court about PTLAI’s services.  Even so, roughly half of them choose to engage PTLAI
and roughly half of them choose not to.  I am skeptical that Sec. 1 of LD 330 will make any 
substantial change in that.
C:\Office\RHA - SMLA\2022-23 Legislative Session\LD 330 SMS Testimony 230216.doc
