BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director
55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to homelessness and 
hunger
Hello Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Taylor Cray, and I am a member of the Advocacy Team at Preble Street. The 
mission of Preble Street is to provide accessible, barrier-free services to empower people 
experiencing problems with homelessness, housing, hunger, and poverty; and to 
advocate for solutions to these problems. Preble Street Advocacy works to ensure that 
folks with lived experience of marginalization have the tools they need to advocate for 
themselves and their community. 
According to an article published by Maine Public in early January, eviction filings in the 
State of Maine rose more than 25% in 2022 alone. As eviction filings continue to rise, it is 
incredibly important that tenants have access to legal counsel and representation during 
their eviction processes. The ability for a tenant to have a legal representative provides 
equity in eviction cases since landlords have the economic means to be legally 
represented. Tenants will have the opportunity to ask any questions, voice their concerns 
and provide their side of the situation to their legal representative. Legal representation 
in an eviction case ensures that all individuals are given a fair chance to argue their case 
within the legal parameters of the law. 
The eviction process can be incredibly confusing and daunting, particularly when 
individuals are attempting to navigate this process without full knowledge of tenancy 
laws and contractual rights. The fear and anxiety that accompany an eviction process are 
exacerbated by the knowledge of how difficult it becomes to find another housing 
arrangement once you have an eviction on your record. A previous eviction can greatly 
decrease a tenant’s chances of finding housing, as many landlords are hesitant to rent to 
tenants with an eviction record. Legal representation also helps to ensure that tenants do 
not end up with an eviction record when alternative options are available and could be 
advocated for. These days, in Maine’s cutthroat rental market, an eviction record can 
mean the difference between housing and homelessness. 
We hope that you will vote to support equity and access to legal representation for 
tenants facing eviction. Please vote to support LD330. 
Thank you for your time. 
Sincerely,
Taylor Cray
Team Leader, Homeless Voices for Justice
Preble Street

