 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
April 7, 2023 
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee on Health and Human Services in 
opposition of the following bills; 
• LD 778, An Act Regarding Work Requirements for Able-bodied Adults Without Dependents Under the 
Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program 
• LD 784, An Act to Establish Welfare Work Requirements for Able-bodies Adults Without Dependents 
• LD 1194, An Act to Improve Work Requirements Under the MaineCare Program 
• LD 1269, An Act to Empower Patients and Eliminate Welfare Cliffs in the MaineCare Program by 
Establishing a MaineCare Savings Account Pilot Program 
To Chairperson Baldacci, Chairperson Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services.  
My name is Amy Regan Gallant and I am the Vice President of Public Policy & Research for Good Shepherd 
Food Bank of Maine. I am here today to ask you to oppose LD 778, LD 784, LD 1194, and LD 1269. 
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access to nutritious 
food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the public in the fight to end 
hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 600 organizations to help distribute food 
to community members in need. Our network of partner agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior 
centers, school programs, and healthcare facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working 
with communities of color to address food security in a culturally responsive way.  
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with the state 
legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make Maine a stronger, better 
place to work and live.  
I’ve been working on SNAP policy for 17 years, through three gubernatorial administrations, four presidential 
administrations, and nine legislative sessions. I have sat with people as they applied for SNAP, tried to help 
people navigate resources after they were cut from SNAP, and supported pantry partners across the state 
who are worried about not being able to meet the increasing demand. Pantries are supporting more people 
in need right now than during the height of the pandemic.  
A few weeks ago I was working on food security policy- not specifically SNAP- and out of the 13 people in the 
room, 5 shared that they recently lost SNAP benefits. It breaks my heart that people who are actively working 
to end hunger for others are losing their own SNAP benefits. Sadly, this is a common experience.  
Maine already has restrictions, rules, and requirements in place for SNAP eligibility. A group of dedicated 
SNAP advocates meet every other week year round, and have done for years, to coordinate all of our 
 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
advocacy and outreach efforts. I was so grateful for this group during the many SNAP changes during the 
pandemic. We are working with SNAP experts, advocates and administrators from across the country to try 
to share best practices and to build a comprehensive SNAP improvement plan for consideration in the next 
legislative session.  
Without a comprehensive plan, one change can have unintended consequences. An example is the recent 
COLA increase to Social Security. Every year the Social Security Administration is required to make a cost-of-
living adjustment to ensure the Social Security benefits keep up with inflation. The 2023 COLA increase is the 
largest in 40 years. Older Mainers that receive SNAP and Social Security benefits will see a decrease in their 
SNAP benefits to offset the COLA increase. In Maine, the average Social Security check went from 
$1100/month to $1300/month, which is an annual income of $15,600. A third of all older Mainers rely on 
Social Security as their only source of income. And now they have a lower SNAP benefit per month.  
This SNAP decrease is happening alongside the end of the three-year Emergency Allotments. I realize today’s 
hearing is not about the benefit cliff, but I am happy to answer any questions you might have about it.  
When I consider the impact that SNAP can have in our communities, I consider the SNAP recipient who can 
go to their local store and pick out what they want, and swipe a card just like you or me, I consider the local 
food pantry that SNAP recipients may not have to visit as frequently or at all, and I consider the businesses, 
retailers, farmers and farmers markets that are generating revenue from SNAP purchases. In a recent public 
hearing over in Ag, we heard from farmer after farmer that SNAP purchases can make up a quarter to a half 
of all card purchases in some markets. And we know that there are retailers in the state that generate the 
majority of their revenue from SNAP purchases. We call these stores “SNAP Dependent.” If this committee 
and this legislature passess policies that further restricts, reduces, and cuts SNAP, it will absolutely impact 
SNAP recipients, community food pantries, farmers, and food retailers. With the recent SNAP benefit cliff 
alone, $17 million fewer dollars are being spent per month in Maine stores.  
I know we are all concerned about the workforce. These bills will not increase employment. It will decrease 
benefits. People who lose SNAP benefits will turn to the emergency food network. And we are already seeing 
a post-SNAP benefit cliff increase in need at pantries statewide. I’ve heard debate in both chambers about 
the dignity of work. Please do not sacrifice the dignity of SNAP.  
Please do not pass these bills. Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. 
Sincerely, 
Amy Regan Gallant 
Vice President of Public Policy & Research  
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine  
 
