Eric Brakey 131“ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 1269, An Act to Empower Patients and Eliminate Welfare Cliffs in the 
MaineCare Program by Establishing a MaineCare Savings Account Pilot Program 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Friday, April 7, 2023_ 
Senator Baldacoi, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services, thank you for allowing me to present L.D. 1269, An Act to 
Empower Patients and Eliminate Welfare Cliffs in the MaineCare Program by 
Establishing a MaineCare Savings Account Pilot Program. l am Senator Eric Brakey, 
and I represent Senate District 20, which includes the towns of New Gloucester, 
Durham, Auburn, and Poland. 
Our entire healthcare system suffers from a lack of personalization. 
Dominated by third-party payers, doctors and patients are separated by well-paid 
middlemen, dictating payment and setting the terms. ln my years on this committee, and 
my current work on HCIFS — I see this tangled web of public and private bureaucracies 
running through the heart of our healthcare system at the root of so many problems we 
are attempting to solve. 
Why is healthcare unaffordable? One recent study found a full third of the price is the 
cost of bureaucracy. 
Why are providers dealing with unnecessary maintenance of certiﬁcation requirements? 
The dictates of bureaucrats. 
Why do so many providers refuse Medicaid patients? Low reimbursement rates 
certainly are part of the answer, but that’s only half the story. The other half is the cost 
for providers of complying with the bureaucracy. 
That’s why primary care physicians these days are going one of two ways. Independent 
practitioners cannot afford the paperwork and hassle from public or private third-party 
payers. Good luck finding one who still does! They are all either joining a hospital 
system -—- falling under the network of a provider bureaucracy that exists to interface 
with the payment bureaucracies —- or establishing themselves as direct primary care, 
opting out of the bureaucracy entirely.
For those who are not familiar, direct primary care physicians are those who have 
chosen to remain independent by not accepting insurance, Medicare, or Medicaid. Not 
having to hire a dozen people to process papen/vork, they can offer affordable and high 
quality care directly to their patients." 
My spouse and l have been using direct primary care physicians for years. For less than 
a hundred dollars a month, we can see our doctor anytime and often on short notice. 
Neither of us have ever had an appointment where we didn’t see the doctor for a full 
hour. We direct pay at an affordable price, and our doctor works for us. When the 
customer is always right, it's good to be the customer —'and not surrender that position 
of power to any public or private bureaucracy. 
The example reveals how much better aspects of our healthcare system could be —' 
affordable, accessible, and accountable — when you can cut out the middlemen and 
empower patients to have direct relationships with their healthcare providers. 
Of course, we will never eliminate bureaucracy entirely. We need systems that oversee 
ﬁnancial risk pools for catastrophic health events. ln their proper place, private and 
public insurance programs must play an important role ensuring access to care for the* 
expensive and unpredictable events of life. But what beneﬁt do these bureaucracies 
provide in micromanaging care for those events that are plannable and routine?' 
Wouldn’t it be betterfor patients to have the economic purchasing power for these 
sen/ices? 
This is why, on the private pay side of healthcare, I am an advocate for low-premium, 
high-deductible health insurance plans, paired with tax-free Health Savings Accounts. 
This model ensures people are covered for the catastrophic, while able to direct pay for 
the routine. 
Essentially, this legislation proposes bringing that model into MaineCare. lt would 
require DHHS to apply to Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Sen/ices to establish a 
pilot program, which MaineCare beneficiaries could opt into, which would do a few 
things:A
' 
1. Allow beneficiaries to receive Medicaid funds into a MaineCare Savings Account 
(effectively a subsidized HSA) — the amount scaling with income and disability 
— which can be used to directly pay for healthcare services and pay for 
commercial health insurance. Unspent fund would rollover from year-to-year. 
2. Establish that in lieu of additional funds for purchasing private insurance, those 
with an MSA can opt to maintain MaineCare as their insurance plan coverage for 
_ higher-costsen/ices. 
l understand that this would be a radically different model than Medicaid as we know it 
today, which is why l am proposing we seek this only as a pilot program. This would- 
allow limited implementation and an opportunity to gather data on how it works for those 
who opt-in. That said, l want to highlight some of the advantages this model would 
make possible." V
In the policy discourse around government welfare programs, we often talk about 
welfare cliffs that trap people into cycles of poverty and dependency. It is hard to identify 
any bigger welfare cliff than the all-or-nothing design of Medicaid. I have heard from 
many people over the years who were afraid to take a raise at work or accept full time 
hours because it would result in the loss of their Medicaid benefits. Since Medicaid 
expansion (which vastly expanded eligibility to working—age and able-bodied adults), this 
has become an even greater problem contributing to the ongoing workforce shortage. 
But under the MSA model, Medicaid would no longer have to be all-or-nothing. When 
funds can be placed directly into an MSA account, allowing the beneﬁciary to cash pay 
and budget for routine healthcare expenses, it is now possible for benefits to scale with 
income and disability. This means someone can take a raise at work without fear they 
will lose 100% of their beneﬁts. Instead, as the individual ’s income rises, the level of 
subsidy they receive can ratchet down gradually. If you want to eliminate welfare cliffs, 
this is the way. 
Additionally, the ability to direct pay for routine healthcare services will mean increased 
access to care. The many physicians, dentists, and varied healthcare providers who do 
not accept MaineCare patients will open their doors to those with MSA accounts who 
can pay the cash price without making them run the gauntlet of the Medicaid billing 
bureaucracy. _ 
Let me close by saying that, in the debate on healthcare, we have been generally given 
a false choice in policy options. We are told we must either accept expensive corporate 
bureaucracies controlling our healthcare or expensive government bureaucracies V 
controlling our healthcare. Why should we accept either of these options? Why should 
we pay so much for the privilege of being bossed around? Why are we not building a 
healthcare system that prioritizes direct relationships between doctors and patients, 
cutting out middlemen bureaucrats whenever they are unnecessary, by ensuring the 
economic power remains with the patient?A 
l’d like to personalize healthcare by putting people back in charge and getting the 
bureaucrats off our backs. lf you see value in that goal, l hope you will vote to support 
this proposal. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I will gladly take any questions to the best of 
my ability.
After a century of central 
planning, Americans 
deserve health care 
freedom BY ERIC BRAKEY, OPINION CONTRIBUTOR - 07/23/21 
Washington is selling a false choice on health care. The American people are 
expected to settle on one of two masters — big corporations or big 
government controlling our most personal decisions. 
Not for a moment does Washington want us to consider the third option: real 
freedom. ,' 
For most of history since the advent of medicine, doctors and patients enjoyed 
direct relationships with each other. There were no gatekeepers — no cartel of 
hospitals, insurance companies, and government agencies ‘ — dictating terms 
and extracting tolls. __ 
Today, third-party payers lay taxes and mandatory premiums on the public 
totaling 72.5 percent of all health care spending (up from 42.4 percent in 
1970). These gatekeepers justify themselves, saying hospitals would gouge 
patients more. Meanwhile, they drown independent physicians with
paperwork, forcing doctors into the hands of those monopolistic hospitals 
gobbling up the industry. From 2012 to 2016, independent medical practices 
in America declined by 48.5 percent. 
At some point, we must ask: ls this actually helping the American people? 
Let us remember the “old lady who swallowed a fly.” In the cautionary 
children ’s rhyme, she swallows a spider to eat the fly — solving a small 
problem with a bigger one — necessitating an even bigger solution. Next, she 
swallows a bird, then a cat, dog, goat, and cow. Upon swallowing a horse, she 
promptly dies.' 
The lesson is the “do no harm” principle, which modern medicine is supposed 
to follow, but which government medicine certainly does not. Over the last 
century, chasing Frederick Bastiat’s “great ﬁction” that “everyone can live at 
the expense of everyone else,” Washington shoved one failed intervention 
after another down the throat of the American health care system. 
The core purpose of insurance is pooling risk for rare, unplanned, and 
catastrophic events. Freezing wages during WWII, however, WashingtonJ 
pushed businesses to compete for labor by offering employment-based health 
plans covering routine care. Since then, Americans have paid inflated - 
premiums for the privilege of being bossed around by corporate bureaucrats. 
As premiums continued rising, Congress responded in 1954 and 1974, further 
entrenchingthird-party over direct payment with preferential tax treatment. 
Since many Americans remained unable to afford care plus corporate 
bureaucracy, Washington instituted its own centrally-planned systems in 1965 
with Medicare and Medicaid. ln 2010, ObamaCare made participation in these 
third-party systems mandatory.~
How is it working? Health care is more expensive than ever. Per capita health 
care expenses have skyrocketed by 600 percent since 1970. The 
fastest-growing cost driver is bureaucracy itself, accounting for one-third of the 
overall price. <-
. 
Now, Rep. Alexandria Ocasio Cortez (D-N.Y.) and the socialist wing of her 
party want America to swallow the horse. Often referred to by 
pleasant-sounding terminologies, such as “l\/ledicare for All” or “single-payer, ” 
it is the final step for consolidating control. By monopolizing payment in the 
Department of Health and Human Services, even the limited choices 
Americans have today will disappear. As the old saying goes, “He who has the 
gold makes the rules.” 
Milton Friedman observed that third parties who neither pay the expense nor 
receive the beneﬁt of a transaction are the worst incentivized to maximize 
quality and minimize cost. For unelected bureaucrats (with near-limitless 
access to the taxpayer pocketbooks) to be responsible for rationing care to 
three-hundred million Americans whom they have never met is the worst 
combination imaginable. 
The solution is not one payer, but millions. 
Competition works. Discretionary procedures, generally uncovered by 
third-party payers, rely on direct payment and defy the inflationary trend. For 
example, the National Center for Policy Analysis found the price of LASIK eye 
surqery fell 20 percent from 1999 to 2011. lf the customer is always right, we 
can make health care affordable, accessible, and accountable by putting 
patients back in this position of power, restoring direct payment options, and 
pushing third-party payers aside. 
Expanding the freedom to save tax-free in health savings accounts (HSAs) 
will empower middle-class Americans to cover routine care and shop for the
best value. Legalizing high-deductible insurance will make coverage 
affordable to Americans for unplanned catastrophes. Personalizing Medicaid 
— putting safety net dollars into the hands of patients instead of bureaucrats 
—-would eliminate America’s biggest welfare cliff and empower those with 
lower incomes to engage directly with doctors. 
Rather than helping the American people, a century of federal laws has 
entrenched a public-private health care cartel running up prices and dictating 
terms. We deserve solutions to ﬁre the gatekeepers and restore the direct 
doctor-patient relationship. 
Americans deserve health care freedom. 
Eric Brakey is the senior spokesperson for Young Americans for Liberty. He 
sen/ed two terms in the Maine Senate as Senate chairman for the Health and 
Human Sen/ices Committee.
