  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 7 , 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1269  – An Act to Empower Patients and Eliminate Welfare Cliffs in the MaineCare Program by 
Establishing a MaineCare Savings Account Pilot Program  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information and express DHHS’s opposition to LD 1269  – An Act to Empower 
Patients and Eliminate Welfare Cliffs in the MaineCare Program by Establishing a MaineCare Savings 
Account Pilot Program . This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services, within 90 days 
of the effective date of this legislation, to apply to CMS for a waiver of the requirements of Section 1902 
of the Social Security Act to allow the department to establish a pilot program that would allow an 
individual eligible for the MaineCare program to choose, in lieu of standard MaineCare coverage, to 
receive Medicaid funds, commensurate with the individual's income and disability, and deposit the funds 
into a  MaineCare savings account to be used to purchase commercial health insurance or to pay for health 
care services directly.  
 
This bill appears to establish a  Health Savings Account (HS A) type of  program. Health Savings Accounts 
are regulated by the IRS. Som e requirements of HSA eligibility include not being covered by another 
medical plan and limiting HSAs to high -deductible plans, which could complicate eligibility if the 
individual would otherwise qualify for MaineCare. The Department questions how monitor ing the 
plan/program for fraud and exploitation would work, what would happen with services covered by 
MaineCare but not by commercial insurers, how to determine appropriate account amounts, what “high 
cost” services would be covered by Maine Care, and how much staff and what extent of claims and 
eligibility system changes would be required to operationalize the program. Given the complexities and 
myriad of competing regulations, development would take years to complete, and we suspect CMS 
approval would be difficult to obtain. If approval was granted, the Department would have to provide 
every MaineCare applicant with the choice to enroll in this alternative program and track involvement so 
that services and programs do not overlap, requiring major systems c hanges and more staffing.  
 
This proposal would also be problematic for members with very complex medical needs or who 
experience a catastrophic event so that their account does not cover the cost of their care needs.  
 
Finally, MaineCare is unclear whether this bill is intended to be a savings or cost neutral. If cost neutral, 
account amounts are set on average, so half of members would get money left over to use and the other 
half would have insufficient funds to cover the cost of their care (not accounting  for differences in 
 
 insurance plan costs). If this bill is intended to establish  savings, the member -level repercussions could be 
even greater . 
 
If you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

