 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
April 7, 2023 
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee on Health and Human Services in 
opposition of the following bills; 
• LD 778, An Act Regarding Work Requirements for Able-bodied Adults Without Dependents Under the 
Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program 
• LD 784, An Act to Establish Welfare Work Requirements for Able-bodies Adults Without Dependents 
• LD 1194, An Act to Improve Work Requirements Under the MaineCare Program 
• LD 1269, An Act to Empower Patients and Eliminate Welfare Cliffs in the MaineCare Program by 
Establishing a MaineCare Savings Account Pilot Program 
To Chairperson Baldacci, Chairperson Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services.  
My name is Rebekah Lane and I am the Community Organizer for Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine. I am 
here today to express our opposition to LD 778, LD 784, LD 1194, and LD 1269. 
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access to nutritious 
food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the public in the fight to end 
hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 600 organizations to help distribute food 
to community members in need. Our network of partner agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior 
centers, school programs, and healthcare facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working 
with communities of color to address food security in a culturally responsive way.  
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with the state 
legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make Maine a stronger, better 
place to work and live.  
I want to begin by talking about my personal experiences as a recipient of SNAP, MaineCare, and the TANF 
programs. I have been off and on MaineCare and SNAP going on 13 years. During that same timeframe, I also 
received some TANF benefits to support myself and my two children.  
You might be wondering why I needed these supports for so long. Here is why. I am disabled. Now, I’m not 
disabled according to the Social Security Administrations definition of a “severe disability” nor would I qualify 
now or any time in the near future under that definition. But I am disabled according to the Department of 
Labor’s definition of “having a substantional impediment to employment” and the American with Disabilities 
Act definition of “having a physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.” I 
have multiple physical conditions that have made attaining and sustaining employment a barrier throughout 
my whole life.  
 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
Those conditions impacted me the most during the 4 months I was on TANF in Spring of 2019, and were the 
reason I had to leave the program. In less than a weeks time, I went from being a substitute teacher, full-time 
college student, president of the PTA, and single mother of two, balancing it all, to sleeping 20+ hours a day, 
unable to hold my own body upright, and struggling to even meet the basic needs of my young children. But 
because I didn’t meet the definition of disabled according to the Social Security Administration, there was no 
medical documentation that was sufficient to waive the work requirements and continue to receive TANF. 
Due to my inability to meet work requirements, I lost all financial support, my SNAP benefits were cut by half, 
and I needed to turn to the charitable food network in order to survive.  
I share all of this, not to gain sympathy for my own situation, but to share with you the face of who these bills 
would impact the most. I understand your intention in proposing these bills. However, the impact will be that 
people like me who utilize these programs when they don’t have any other options, including the ability to 
work, look for work, or volunteer 20 hours or more per week, will no longer qualify. SNAP, MaineCare, and 
TANF are there to catch our most vulnerable, but the definitions of “able-bodied” do not match the reality 
of living life in a body or brain that impede work but not severely enough to meet the most limited of 
definitions.  
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. 
Sincerely, 
Rebekah Lane 
Community Organizer 
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine  
  
 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
 
 
