Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
April 10, 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney , Chair  
Representative Matthew Moonen , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1414, An Act to Ensure Involvement of Adopted Youth in the Determination of 
Continuing Financial Support Under the Adoption Assistance Program . 
 
Dear Senator Carney , Representative Moonen  and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide input and express our opposition to LD 1414 , An Act to 
Ensure Involvement of Adopted Youth in the Determination of Continuing Financial Support 
Under the Adoption Assistance Program . 
 
First, OCFS is not awar e of the impetus for this bill, but we are more than willing to work 
together with the sponsor and any interested constituents in order to work together to ensure the 
best possible support and outcomes for adopted children and their caregivers.  
 
LD 1414 would make a number of substantive changes to the law regarding adopted minors, 
specifically around adoption assistance . These changes include  requiring the Department to 
ensure an adoptee that is 16 years of age or older  be physical ly present or represent ed by a 
Guardian ad Litem (GAL) for any discussion or determination of whether to continue adoption 
assistan ce (including providing written consent to a determination to continue assistance), 
allowing the legal guardian to participate in the annual redeter mination of adoption assistance 
and a transfer of the assistance to a new legal guardian or the child’s GAL upon the death or 
termination of parental rights of the adoptive parents, and requiring that adoption assistance 
continue regardless of the state th e child and legal guardian may reside in .  
 
Adoption assistance is a federal program under Title IV -E of the Social Security Act. There are 
eligibility requirements related to the child meeting the federal definition of a “special needs 
child .” Maine’s def inition is codified in 18 -C MRSA § 9-401. The definition is broad and 
virtually every child adopted from state custody in Maine qualifies under one or more provision 
in the definition.  In order to continue to receive funding for the adoption assistance prog ram 
Maine must remain in compliance with all applicable federal regulations.  
 
Section one of this bill would require the appointment of a GAL for a child subject to a petition 
for termination of parental rights (TPR)  under Title -C. Title 18 -C is only appl icable to private 
 
 termination proceedings in the Probate Court, not terminations in the District Court that result 
from a Protective Custody case whereby the Department has removed children from the care and 
custody of their parents and placed them in Stat e custody. These child protective terminations are 
governed by Subchapter 6 of the Child and Family Services and Child Protection Act located in 
Title 22. OCFS would point out that funding is likely required to support the appointment of a 
GAL in every 18 -C TPR unless the intent is for the party seeking termination to fund the GAL. 
Children in child protective custody cases have a GAL appointed at the beginning of the case 
(when the Department files court action against the parents) and continue to have a GAL until 
they are adopted .  
 
Section two of the bill enacts new provisions related to TPR under Title 18 -C. Once again, OCFS 
would reiterate that  these are private termination proceedings. This section speaks to adoption 
assistance  which is generally a program for children adopted from state custody (or, in rare 
cases, adopted from a nonprofit private licensed child -placing agency). Children subjec t to 
private 18 -C TPR proceedings are not eligible for adoption assistance . Section two also requires 
that the adoptee be informed of the adoption assistance program ( even though  the program does 
not apply to them).  
 
Furthermore, even if the adoption assi stance program did apply, the agreement is between the 
adoptive parent or guardian and the assistance  is paid to them for the benefit of the youth, not to 
the youth directly. In situations involving termination under Title 22 , after termination of 
parental  rights, the children continue to be cared for in the Department’s custody until such time 
as they are adopted. In completing the adoption pro cess the topic of adoption assistance  is 
discussed and negotiated with the prospective adoptive parents. This is t he same process even for 
children who were previously adopted from the Department’s custody and later if those first 
adoptive parents’ rights are terminated  and the child is now being adopted for a second time.  
 
Section four of the bill enacts new require ments in the adoption assistance  program, including 
that the Department ensure certain requirements are met for adoptees age 16 and older. OCFS is 
unsure what the intent of this section is given that the  subsidy agreement is between the adoptive 
parents on  behalf of a minor. Children who “age out” of State custody at age 18 are eligible for 
the Voluntary Extended Care Program which includes financial and other support up to the age 
of 23. Section four also references redeterminations but those are no longer  included in OCFS’ 
adoption assistance  process. Instead,  adoption assistance  continues for as long as a child is 
placed in the adoptive placement. If that adoptive placement is disrupted, the child would come 
back into State custody and be provided for the same as all children in care.  
 
Adoption assistance  does not automatically go to a new guardian (for example, in the case of the 
death of an adoptive parent) because federal regulation requires that the placement be licensed 
and there must be a new adoption assistance  agreement between the new guardian and the 
Department. Section  four speaks to the “adoptee’s rights in making the determination to continue 
or not continue adoption assistance .” OCFS is unsure what motivations a youth would have to 
want to discontinue their adopted parents’ adoption assistance , but ultimately it is t heir adoptive 
parent or guardian’s choice whether they want to receive adoption assistance . 
 
 
 Section five of the bill speaks to adoption assistance  transferring between states. That is already 
the case . Both adoption assistance and MaineCare coverage conti nues no matter what state the 
child and their adoptive parents live in. If the State where the child and adoptive parent resides 
participate in the Interstate Compact on Adoption and Medical Assistance (ICAMA) , then the 
child receives the equivalent of Mai neCare in that state.  
 
Section six of the bill would allow  adoption assistance to transfer  to the legal guardian or GAL 
upon the death of the adoptive parent or TPR occurring pursuant to Title 18 -C. It is not 
permissible under federal regulation for adopt ion assistance  to automatically transfer . OCFS also 
has concerns about the adoption assistance  being paid to the child’s GAL as the GAL’s role in 
this is not clearly defined and GALs are not appropriate entities to receive funds on behalf of the 
children whose interest they represent.  
 
Again, thank you for the opportunity to provide input. If we can be of help or answer any 
questions for the work session, please reach out.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Todd Landry, Ph.D  
Director  
Office of Child and Family Services  

