 
 
 
 53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202   |  Portland, ME 04101  
 Phone: 866 -554-5380  | Fax: 207-775-5727  | TTY: 877-434-7598  
 aarp.org/ me  |  me@aarp.org  |  twitter: @aarp maine  
 facebook.com/ aarpmaine  |  instagram.com/aarpme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 April 25, 2023  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1 690  "An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking 
of Absentee Ballots " 
 
Senator Hickman , Representative S upica,  and honorable members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee : 
 
AARP is the nation’s largest nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated to empowering 
Americans 50 and older to choose how they live as they age. On behalf of our more than 200,000 
members statewide, thank you for the opportunity to share testimony.  To day I am testifying to 
express our support for LD 1 690 , a bill that amends the provisions of law regarding ongoing 
absentee voter status . 
 
All Americans should be able to exercise their right to vote freely, easily, and safely in the manner 
they choose, including  the ability  to cast an absentee ballot. Election officials should make absentee 
voting easy and convenient. This includes seamless processes for requesting, returning, and 
verifying absentee ballots.  
 
Legislation passed during the 130th Maine Legislature put into place the policy of ongoing absentee 
voter lists in Maine. As of November of this year, a voter who will be at least 65 years of age by the 
next election or who self -identifies as having a disability may a pply for status as an ongoing 
absentee voter. Each qualified applicant will then automatically receive an absentee ballot for each 
ensuing election and need not submit a separate request for an absentee ballot each time.  
This law was a step in the right direction  and AARP Maine believes that all voters should have 
access to join the ongoing absentee voting list.  
 
AARP  members and older voters in general turn out overwhelmingly in every election. An AARP 
survey conducted shortly after the 2022 midterms showed that in 63 of the most competitive races 
for the U.S. House of Representatives, voters 50+ made up 61 percent of the ballots cast.  Since the 
outbreak of the pandemic, Maine voters have increasingly voted by absentee ballot, a safe and 
convenient way to exercise their  right to  vote .  
 
Allowing voters the choice  to become ongoing absentee voters will make the election process 
simpler for those voters and will likely lead to less administrative burden for clerks, as well. As 
word spreads about the option of ongoing absentee voting and the list grows, clerks will h ave fewer 
absentee applications to process each time.  
 
Absentee voting is safe, secure, and recent increases in absentee voting have led to improved voter 
turnout in Maine and across the nation. Maine has a long history of leading the nation in sensible 
 
reforms that promote ballot access and participation. Passage of LD 1690 would be another 
prudent step in that direction.  
 
AARP believes that the right to vote is a fundamental human right. Free and fair elections are 
essential to democracy and older voters  are a key group that participates at high levels every 
election.  We hope you will take the concerns of older voters to heart when deliberating on LD 
1690 .  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on this important bill . If you have question s for 
me, I can be reached at aanderson@aarp.org  or at 207 -330 -1147.  
 
Sincerely,  
Alf Anderson  
Associate State Director, Advocacy & Outreach  
AARP Maine  
 
