..A~ 
MAI N ERS for 
ELECTIONS 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee. my name is Alysia Melnick, I'm here today to testify on behalf of Mainers for 
Modern Elections in support of LD 1690. An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and 
Tracking of Absentee Ballots. 
Mainers for Modern Elections is a coalition committed to ensuring that our right to vote safely 
transcends politics and partisanship and that every eligible Mainer has the opportunity to cast 
a ballot in the manner that they choose. without fear of violence or intimidation. 
Coalition members include the ACLU of Maine. AARP of Maine, the Center for Secure and 
Modern Elections. Common Cause, Defend Our Health, Gateway Community Services, the 
League of \X/omen Voters of Maine, the Maine AFL—C|O, Maine Citizens for Clean Elections. 
Maine Conservation Voters. Maine Education Association, Maine Equal Justice. Maine 
Immigrant Rights Coalition, Maine People's Alliance, Maine Service Employees 
Association-SEIU Local 1989. Maine \X/omen's Lobby, Maine Youth Power, Planned Parenthood 
of Northern New England, and RepresentUs. 
Ongoing absentee voting is a policy that actively promotes voter participation. it allows voters 
who know they want to vote absentee to simply make one request to receive absentee ballots 
for future elections. Ongoing absentee voting is safe, secure, and convenient for voters. and we 
know voters like it — 
in states that have long had ongoing absentee voting, the rates of voter 
usage have increased over time. indeed, when the Maine Secretary of State's oﬂﬁce conducted 
an ongoing absentee pilot program. the study reported that "voters found it convenient."1 
Additionally. this will reduce time for clerks who no longer have to process the same absentee ballot 
request forms every year from the same voters. 
In 2021. the Legislature took a positive step forward when it funded LD 148 to implement 
ongoing absentee voting for voters with disabilities and voters over 65. This is a promising ﬁrst 
step, but we ﬁrmly believe ongoing absentee voting should be available for all eligible 
votersregardless of age or disability status. Passing LD 1690 will put Maine among the growing 
number of states offering this commonsense. pro-voter measure. Please vote Ought To Pass 
on LD 1690 to ensure all Maine voters are able to use ongoing absentee voting. 
1https:// www.google.com/ url?q=http:// www.mai nelegislature.org/ leg is/ bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?i 
d%3D143342&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1682518o07586392&usg=AOvVawOTmFEOd17b0rTw70auuVkq
