' 
e "ml 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: Wednesday, April 26, 2023 
RE: LD 159O—An Act to Require Disclosure of Campaign Funding Sources 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica and honorable members of the 
Committee on Legal and Veterans Affairs. 
My name is Anna Kellar. I’m a resident of Portland. I am here today as the Executive Director 
of Maine Citizens for Clean Elections. I am testifying in support of LD 1590. 
Maine Citizens for Clean Elections has been the leading campaign ﬁnance organization in Maine 
for over twenty years and one of the nation’s most respected state~based organizations 
advocating for democratically funded elections. We are proud of our national reputation. But we 
are all Mainers, and our nonpartisan mission has always been with and for the people of this 
state. 
LD 1590 would require the disclosure of the true source of money being used in political 
campaigns. This bill is crucial for the integrity of our democracy and the trust of the public in our 
political system. We routinely hear from all corners of the state, and their message is simple. 
Mainers want to know who is spending money to inﬂuence our democracy. ‘ This bill is our effort 
to address that demand. 
As Senator Bennett pointed out, disclosure is not only constitutionally permissible, it is essential 
for political accountability in a democracy. 
This bill would require political action committees that spend more than $50,000 in one election 
cycle to disclose the true sources of their funds if the nominal contributor is not the true source. 
It has no effect on committees that only accept small contributions or on committees that don’t 
participate in the shell game. 
1 
Center for Responsive Politics (February 12, 2021); Poll: 90% of Americans support disclosure of politicai 
donations. 
https://www.opensecrets.org/news/2021/O2/poll-90-of-americans-support~disclosure-of-political-donations/. 
PO Box 18187, Portland, Maine 04112 l Tel: (207) 831-MCCE (6223) 
_www.mainecleanelections.0rg | in i'o({iEiiii1iiiecl<:ane3e4:ti0iis.0rg
MCCE Action to VLA 2 
LD 1590 April 26, 2023 
The bill works within the current disclosure system, but it adds a deﬁnition of “original source.” 
An “ori inal source” of funds is mone earned throu h business dealin s salaries or similar Y 8 > , 
compensation. It also includes small recurring payments such as membership dues, union dues, 
or similar periodic contributions. When someone receives money from an “original source,” the 
bill does not require them to do anything. The bill only comes into play when a contributor is not 
an “original source.” 
What kind of contributor is not an “original source”? Over the years, political players have 
developed a network of nonproﬁts, shell corporations, and other entities that exist entirely to 
gather together political funds and pass them through to other recipients. These entities do not 
make proﬁts, do not earn salaries, and do not have investment income or inheritances. Their 
money comes from other entities that sometimes extend back in a chain of intermediaries leading 
to a single individual or corporation which was the “original source.” Sometimes, this complex 
system exists for the sole purpose of concealing information from the public. 
This manipulation of the campaign ﬁnance ecosystem has exploded since the Citizens United 
decision, resulting in large amounts of “dark money” ﬂowing unaccountably through our 
democracy. We cannot have meaningful disclosure until the entire chain is disclosed back to the 
original source. 
This deﬁnition of “original source” is central to the new disclosure requirement. We believe it is 
no longer sufficient to report the name of a direct “contributor ” to a party committee, political 
committee, or ballot question committee unless that contributor is the true “original ” source of 
the funds. 
If an entity that currently reports to the Ethics Commission only receives original source funds or 
contributions under $ 10,000, it does not have to do anything differently. The new disclosure is 
targeted speciﬁcally at the big players who operate in the shadows. 
Each of you ﬁled campaign ﬁnance reports with the Ethics Commission. ‘Whether it was a seed 
money report for a Clean Elections candidate or a regular report for a privately funded candidate, 
you had to report the name of any individual contributor, the date, and the amount they 
contributed. But for individuals, you had to report more than that. You also had to report the 
person’s occupation and place of employment. This is to reveal any possible ﬁnancial interest 
that the contributor might represent. 
The disclosure in LD 1590 is based on the same idea, except applied to contributors that are 
nonproﬁts or other types of entities. Just as we require reporting of an individual person’s source
MCCE Action to VLA 
LD 1590 April 26, 202 
of funding — their employer -— the source of funding for a political entity is equally relevant 
and must be reported under this proposal. 
The public is deeply concerned about the influence of money in politics and wants transparency 
in the political process. Improved disclosure is supported by folks from all parts of the political 
spectrum. There are groups on the left, right, and center that take advantage of the cloak of 
anonymity to spend huge amounts to achieve objectives that, without such spending, they have 
not been able to secure. 
Disclosure is not a partisan issue. The “right to know” where this money is truly coming from is 
a powerful force across the political spectrum. 
The need for transparency in the political process is more important now than ever before. Who 
is trying to spend money to inﬂuence our democracy? The public has the right to know. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the 
Committee.3
3
