 
 
 
 
April 26, 2023  
Testimony of Barbara Smith Warner , Executive Director, National Vote at 
Home Institute  (NVAHI) in Support of LD 1690 : 
Adding an Ongoing Absentee Ballot option  for all Maine’s voters,                     
plus Ballot Tracking  
Co-Chairs  Hickman , Supica  and Members  of the Committee  on Veterans  and 
Legal  Affairs : My name  is Barbara  Smith  Warner,  Executive  Director  of the 
National  Vote  at Home  Institute.   
Our goal is to increase  voters’  access  to, use of, and confidence  in voting  at home.  
Besides  my official  role, I am testifying  today  both as a resident  of Oregon,  where  
we created  the first vote at home  system  and have  used it successfully  for over 
twenty  years,  and as a former  legislato r who served  in the Oregon  House  (the 
lower  chamber)  from  2014 -2022.   
In LD 1690 , your committee,  and the legislature  as a whole,  has the opportunity  to 
pass meaningful  election  reform  that is good  for voters,  good  for elections  
officials,  and good  for democracy.  By adopting  an ongoing  absentee  ballot  choice  
for all Maine’s  voters,  plus ballot  tracking,  you will join many  other  states  in 
installing  reforms  that both increase  turnout  and increas e election  integrity.   
I will briefly  walk  through  the benefits  for voters,  election  officials  and democracy  
for both elements  of LD 1690 , starting  with establishing  ongoing  absentee  
registration,  as it will have  the greatest  impact.   
Ongoing  Absentee Option  
Good for Voters  
Today in Maine  all voters have the option of voting “absentee” without having to 
provide an “excuse.”  This places the State squarely in the mainstream of current 
policy nationally, as 3 5 states + DC do not require a specific reason for a voter to 
receive their ballot by mail.  In addition,  Maine recently passed an “ongoing 
absentee” option for those voters 65+, which was a  positive step.  
 
 
 
However, there is an increasing movement to supplement “no excuse” absentee 
with a full “single sign -up - SSU” or “ongoing  absentee” provisions  for all voters .  
Sixteen  states of those 3 5 already provide that convenience to their voters, 
including New Mexico passing it (HB 4) in their current session.  Minnesota (HF 
3) has passed that provision in their House, now awaiting Senate approval .  Alaska 
also h as a bill in flight (SD 19).  
As can be seen on the map below, eight states plus DC automatically send the 
voters their ballot for every election, while another eight  offer the SSU - ongoing 
absentee option whereby voters can opt into that model individual ly.  
 
The benefit of ongoing absentee  for all  voters is having decided to “vote at home,” 
they do not need to remember to reapply for a mailed -out ballot for every election 
or every year.  They get their ballot delivered to them for every subsequent election 
automatically unless they move or change their mind.   
This provides voters not only with convenience but also with a small “d” 
democratic nudge every election. The arrival of their ballot reminds voters that 
there is an election a few weeks out and encourages them to pay attention and 
participate.  This is particularly important in local elections, special elections , and 
primaries, where voter turnout is often a factor of 2x -4x lower  than in a general 
election.  
AK
WA
OR
HICA UTNV CO
DCVT
MT
AZILMI
VA MDNJND MN WI
ID WY SD IA
NM KSNE
OKOH PAMA RIME
NC
GA
FLMO KY WV
LA MS ALAR TNIN
TXSCDECTNH
NY
State Mailed-Out Ballot Policies -2023
March 2023
 
 
 
Good for Elections Officials  
Today in Maine , elections officials and administrators must process absentee ballot 
requests from many of the same voters, election after election, year after year.  
That duplication of effort is clearly wasting vital resources that could be directed to 
other requirements.   
In fact, recent research across multiple states revealed that ~50% of those  who vote 
absentee are “repeaters” – choosing to vote that way over and over  (see the 
research report here ). Maine’s Department of Elections was kind enough to a ssist 
with that research, showing a full 66% of its voters were “repeater” absentees.  
Yet elections officials had to process all those applications, the cost and labor for 
which would have been saved with ongoing  absentee in place. By allowing voters 
to sign up for ongoing  absentee status, elections officials would see a reduction in 
paperwork and administrative impact across  their organizations.  
At the same time, the use of ongoing  absentee list voting has been proven to be 
highly secure , as Maine  has seen with its current no-excuse  and 65+ ongoing 
absentee polic ies. With the issues surrounding voter mail address maint enance 
well-executed, the system will be both fair and verifiable .  
Good for democracy  
Anything that reduces friction in the process of elections tends to increase voter 
engagement and turnout.  And allowing voters to not have to explicitly request an 
absentee ballot election after election, year after year, certainly reduces friction.  
The turnout impact of this policy is most evident in the two states that currently 
have had the most experience with it, Arizona and Montana.  With now decades of 
that policy in place for both states, they have seen slow b ut steady growth in voters 
opting in, and the result has been turnout numbers rivaling the full “vote at home” 
states.   
Finally,  there  is a strong  national  trend  for better  access  to mailed -out ballots,  with 
the SSU - ongoing  absentee  model  at the forefront  of that movement.  
 
 
 
 
 
It’s not surprising,  then,  that a number  of “no-excuse”  states  have  serious  bills 
under  consideration  in their current  legislative  sessions  to add an SSU option  for 
their voters.  If both MN and AK pass, the percentage  of US voters  in states  where  
voters  have  a choice  to have  their ballot  always  delivered  to them  will reach  40%.  
 
By passing  LD 1690,  Maine  would  be in good  company,  while  still being  a 
leader  in this movement.   
 
Now,  on to the other  part of LD 1690 : Ballot Tracking . 
 
Ballot Tracking  
Good for Voters  
Today in Maine , when voters are sent mailed -out (aka: absentee) ballots, there are 
few tools available for them to know the status of that ballot.  Has it been sent to 
me yet?  Was it delivered to me?  Does the post office (or drop box) have my 
completed ballot in their s ystem on the way back to the elections office?  Has it 
been received by the elections office?  Has it been approved for counting?  
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
2018 2023Statewide mailed-out ballot policies (% of all US voters)
Excuse required
for all
Excuse with age
waiver 60+/65+
No Excuse for all
Permanent
Absentee option
Vote at Home
Policies as of Jan. 1, 2018, and March 15, 202318.418.533.017.512.819.8
21.0
39.4
14.1
5.6Five years of significant progress for Vote at Home
37% of all US voters 
now have the 
opportunity tohave 
their ballot delivered 
automatically, every 
election
 
 
 
These questions and more create anxiety in the minds of voters, and that anxiety 
can feed into concerns about the total electi ons process.  
But voters do not face those same questions and concerns when they have ordered 
something from a supplier and can track it easily, as shipping vendors such as 
FedEx and UPS allow. It is even more important for voters to be able to do this 
with their ballot.  
The good news is this has been solved already in a number of states, and there are 
multiple vendors with software available to make the process straightforward of 
offering this service to voters.   
And the response from voters is overwhelmin gly positive, regardless of political 
persuasion.  Research done by Capitol Weekly in 2020, published by BallotTrax, 
showed that:  
• 78% of Republicans  
• 94% of Independents  
• 97% of Democrats  
agreed that the “ability to sign up for notifications of when your ballot was 
received would give them more confidence.”  
Good for Elections Officials  
Not only do voters care about the status of their ballot, but elections officials do, 
too.  Ballot tracking gives those public servants a powerful tool to monitor the f low 
of ballots, outbound and on the return path.  This can be especially true when some 
external event suddenly causes the potential for a major negative impact.   
But the advent of ballot tracking mostly helps elections officials manage the day -
to-day pro cess of administrating their roles.  Denver, CO was one of the first to 
institute proactive ballot tracking as part of their 100% mailed -out ballot (vote at 
home) model. They found calls into the office from voters fell from something 
approaching 1 in 5 re gistered voters to 1 in 20 or 25.  That was an enormous drop 
in workload, freeing those people for other important tasks.  
Here's an example  from BallotTrax  (a leading tracking software vendor) of which 
states and jurisdictions offer robust ballot tracking using their software today.  This 
 
 
 
is not to say other suppliers are not also quite capable. Here’s an infographic  from 
Ballot Scout, another software vendor, showing how the process works.  
Good for democracy  
Anything that reduces voter  anxiety and uncertainty  in the process of elections 
tends to increase voter engagement and turnout.  Providing mailed -out ballot 
tracking is a fundamental step to improve confidence in our elections process, 
something that is needed now more than ever.  
According to BallotTrax data, states that use their ballot tracking software see 
meaningful jumps in turnout among mailed -out ballot voters who sign up to be 
able to monitor their ballot, versus mailed -out ballot voters who do not.  While 
there is undoubtedl y some self -selection bias in those who sign up as having a 
higher propensity to cast their ballot, the numbers are still rather remarkable.  It 
appears that when voters have more confidence their ballot will be counted (that 
the tracking software gives th em) they are much more likely to vote.  
Here are some examples from the 2022 general election.  
Jurisdiction  Increase in turnout: 
tracking vs. non -tracking  
California  21.3%  
Colorado  5.9%  
District of Columbia  31.3%  
Hawaii  39.0%  
Nevada  23.8%  
Utah  33.9%  
Arizona counties (2)  25.7%  
Florida counties (24)  21.6%  
Oregon counties (3)  33.9%  
 
By passing  LD 1690 , Maine  would  join a diverse  set of states  that have  already  
adopt ed this policy,  with proven  positive  results.  According  to NVAHI  research,  
today  11 states  offer  full statewide  ballot  tracking  coverage,  with pro-active  voter  
notifications,  with about  another  10 offering  partial  coverage  (sometimes  at the 
individual  county  level.)   More  states  and counties  are adding  this feature  to their 
election  systems  every  year.  
 
 
 
 
In Summary:  The two proposed  reforms  combined  would  move  Maine  forward  
into the forefront  of policies  that are “voter  centric,”  while  improving  the lives  of 
elections  officials  and strengthening  democracy  overall.  
 
Putting  voters  first, as LD 1690  will do, is both the right  thing  and the timely  thing  
to do.   
 
I enco urage  you to pass this bill. 
 
