Maine Conservation Voters 
I rzjbrm. Vote. Protect. 
Testimony of Maine Conservation Voters 
“An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking of Absentee Ballots” 
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
April 26, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Members of the Veterans and Legal 
Affairs Committee, 
My name is Beth Ahearn and I am the Director of Government Affairs for Maine 
Conservation Voters. I am Writing today to express our strong support for LD 
1690, "An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking of Absentee 
Ba1lots." 
Maine Conservation Voters is an organization with more than 13,000 members and 
supporters. We work to build an inclusive democracy and to make conservation 
and climate action a political priority. Expanding ongoing absentee voting is 
essential to ensuring that all Mainers have access to the ballot box and can make 
their voices heard in our great democracy. 
The legislature recently passed a law creating ongoing absentee voting in Maine— 
but only for people who are 65 or older or have a disability. All eligible voters 
should have the option to enroll in ongoing absentee voting. 
When Mainers ﬁnd something they like, they tend to keep doing it, and that 
includes absentee voting. In 2018, two-thirds of voters who voted absentee also 
voted absentee in 2016. Yet most of these voters must ﬁll out the same form every 
election to get their ballot. This creates additional, unnecessary work for the voters 
and town clerks. Ongoing absentee voting is easier, faster, and more convenient.
In addition to allowing more eligible voters to enroll in ongoing absentee voting, 
this bill also provides funding for election security measures including veriﬁcation 
tools, such as list maintenance, ballot tracking, and early ballot processing rules 
that cut down on cost and labor while producing accurate results earlier. 
For these reasons, Maine Conservation Voters urges you to vote “ought to pass” on 
LD 1690, to make voting more accessible, secure, and convenient for Mainers. 
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony.
