 
 
 
 
 
April 26, 2023 
 
Sen. Craig Hickman, Chair 
Rep. Laura Supica, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 1690 An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking of Absentee Ballots 
Chair Hickman, Chair Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs: My name is David O’Brien and I am Policy Director for RepresentUs, the nation’s leading 
nonpartisan anti-corruption organization. RepresentUs is submitting testimony today in support of LD 
1690, and we thank Senator Daughtry for bringing forward this important legislation.  
RepresentUs is a nonpartisan advocacy organization dedicated to the idea that the government 
should be representative of and accountable to the people. It advocates for policies to 
strengthen our democracy and provides activists with the resources and training to bring 
meaningful change. Regarding the electoral process, we work to pass powerful state and local laws that 
expand voter access, make elections more representative, and enhance election security.  
Legislation passed during the 130th Maine Legislature put into place the policy of ongoing absentee voter 
lists in Maine. As of November of this year, a voter who will be at least 65 years of age by the next 
election or who self-identifies as having a disability may apply for status as an ongoing absentee voter. 
Each qualified applicant will automatically receive an absentee ballot for each ensuing statewide 
election, municipal election, and any other election for which the voter is entitled to vote and need not 
submit a separate request for each election. This was an excellent step forward in making elections 
more accessible for some Maine voters. LD 1690 would build on this progress and ensure that the 
option of joining the ongoing absentee list is an option for all voters. 
In Maine, the majority of absentee voters use the absentee mailing option repeatedly - 66.5% of 
absentee voters in 2018 also voted absentee in 2016. In addition, absentee voting is on the rise in 
Maine, with 2022 absentee ballot requests surpassing 2018 numbers. In the 2022 General Election, 
approximately 22% of Maine voters utilized absentee ballots. 
The practice of offering ongoing absentee voting lists is growing across the country. Six states and the 
District of Columbia have on-going absentee mailing lists: Arizona, Illinois, Maryland, Montana, New 
Jersey, and Virginia. Maine is often looked at as a laboratory for democracy, and expanding our use of 
ongoing absentee lists would further cement this reputation. 

Allowing voters to join an ongoing absentee voting list will increase access to the ballot, especially for 
voters in rural areas, voters with disabilities, and others who struggle to access polling places. It will 
create ease and simplicity in the voting process and align well with the way Mainers are increasingly 
choosing to take part in elections – via absentee voting. 
For these reasons, we urge you to support LD 1690. Thank you. 
