Q I 
126 Sewall Street E Dina Ma|ua| 
?;51;')5t6a2I6M;lon5e8o4330'6822 Policy Advocate
' 
. - d'
. 
www-maineequaliustice-org People Policy Solutions [ maiuai@meJp org] 
MEJ Testimony in Support of LD 1690, An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting 
and Tracking of Absentee Ballots 
April 26, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans 
and Legal Affairs Committee. My name is Dina Malual, I use she/her pronouns, and I’m 
a Policy Advocate with Maine Equal Justice, a nonproﬁt legal aid provider Working to 
increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. I am testifying 
in suppoit of LD 1690. 
Maine Equal Justice is committed to increasing access to voting because it is critical for 
all eligible Mainers to be engaged in choosing our elected leaders. We should be proud of 
our consistently high voter turnout and by maintaining different methods for Mainers to 
cast votes, we can ensure voting is accessible to all eligible voters resulting in even 
higher voter participation. LD l690 increases access to the ballot for all voters, especially 
voters with disabilities, voters who live in rural areas, and voters with work or childcare 
challenges that impede participation. 
In Maine, eligible voters may request an absentee ballot; however, they must do so again 
and again, and this bill removes that unnecessary burden. With LD 1690, voters Will be 
able to sign up for the ongoing absentee list and automatically receive absentee ballots in 
all eligible elections. This system is both safe and reliable and makes it easier for 
vulnerable communities to exercise their right to vote. 
Maine consistently has one of the highest voter participation rates in the nation, and in the 
2022 midteim election, 75% of registered Maine voters voted.‘ This speaks to our state’s 
commitment to civic engagement by ensuring there are multiple methods to access voting 
so We can meet the needs of voters. By making absentee voting easier for voters, we can 
strengthen our already high voter turnout. At Maine Equal Justice we are deeply 
committed to protecting voter rights and making absentee voting more accessible is 
essential to maintaining an equitable Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to share our 
thoughts with you today. We urge the committee to vote Ought To Pass on LD 1690. 
1httos:i1 ’w\1vw.newscentermaine.com/article/ ‘news/oolitics/elections/sec-of-state-maine~voter-tumout-could- 
be~be-st-in-us~2022~e1ection-resuits/97~449e9e12-bdb4~49b7-b418-dfca<:i3db7cie3
