PO Box 7860 
' 
Portland, ME 04112 
- 
(207) 774-5444 
www.aclumaine.org 
AMERICAN GIVH. LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ." 
_ LD 1690 - Ought To Pass 
An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking of Absentee 
Ballots~ 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
April 26, 2023' 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning. My name“ 
is Meagan Sway, and I am Policy Director at the American Civil Liberties Union of 
Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil 
liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
members, I urge you to support LD 1690 because it would strengthen our 
democracy. 
Your committee has the critical responsibility of overseeing the statutes that 
govern elections in Maine. We urge you in all of your deliberations to seek ways to 
expand the right to vote, to promote rather than restrict participation, and to 
protect the integrity of our elections, so that the elections reﬂect the will of the 
citizenry, rather than the power of a few. 
LD 1610 would make two changes in Maine’s election laws.’ First, it would 
allow any Maine absentee voter to remain absentee voters without having to verify 
that status before every election. Second, it would add details to the existing 
requirement that the Secretary of State establish an online absentee ballot tracking 
service. 
Last session, the legislature extended ongoing absentee voting to those who 
are over age 65 and those with disabilities. Thisi year, we urge legislators togo
further and remove a needless administrative burden from the shoulders of all 
voters. This has the potential to especially aid nursing mothers, working parents, 
and those in rural areas who do not have access to reliable transportation. Passing 
LD 1690 would likely mean that more voters participate in each election, ensuring 
that our government reflects the will of as many voters as possible, and not the 
whims of a few.' 
_. 
The right to vote is a cornerstone of our democracy. This bill would deepen 
and strengthen that right. For the reasons stated above, We urge you to vote ought 
to pass. - 
Thank you for your attention.
