Maine Town & City Clerks’ 
Association
Local Government Center  60 Community Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486
1-800-452-8786 (In Maine)  207-623-8428
Fax 207-626-5947
Representing Over 400 
Municipalities 
  
Date: April 19, 2023 
 
To: Senator Craig Hickman, Senate Chair 
Representative Laura Supica, House Chair 
And members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
 
From: Patti Dubois, Chairperson, Legislative Policy Committee  
Maine Town and City Clerks’ Association 
 
Re: LD 1690 – An Act Regarding  Ongoing  Absentee  Voting  and Tracking  of Absentee  
Ballots  
 
Position: OPPOSE 
 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association is strongly opposed to LD 1690 and we thank you 
for the opportunity to outline our points for your committee. 
 
Newly enacted legislation that becomes effective on November 1, 2023 will allow for a voter 
who will be at least 65 years of age by the next election or who self-identifies as having a 
disability to apply for status as an ongoing absentee voter.  This designation requires that 
each voter be automatically sent an absentee ballot for each ensuring statewide election, 
municipal election, and any other election for which the voter is entitled to vote.  Clerks 
have expressed concern that absentee ballots will be mailed to voters who have moved, 
since an estimated 25% of the population moves every year.  In addition, ballots would 
need to be printed in an amount to satisfy the number of ongoing requests, even if the 
estimated turnout for a special municipal election would be much lower. Postage costs for 
these smaller municipal elections would see a significant increase than if ballots were only 
mailed to those who are interested in voting and returning the ballot for any given election.  
The additional costs to municipalities in staff time, postage and printing costs is not 
insignificant. 
 
Although the ongoing absentee program for 65+ voters hasn’t even been implemented yet, 
clerks express concern regarding the costs for printing all of these ongoing absentee ballot 
applications for each election and worry that the integrity of the entire election process 
could be questioned if ballots are being mailed to voters who have recently died or moved.  
The safeguard of having the voter submit a request for each election ensures that the voter 
is interested in the election and also allows clerks to verify the voter’s residence and mailing 
addresses.  Members feel it prudent to wait until the ongoing absentee program for 65+ 
becoming effective later this year can be evaluated before expanding the program to all 
voters. 
  
Maine Town & City Clerks’ 
Association
Local Government Center  60 Community Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486
1-800-452-8786 (In Maine)  207-623-8428
Fax 207-626-5947
Representing Over 400 
Municipalities 
  
 
 
Section 1 will strike two reasons that a voter can be removed from ongoing absentee voter 
status: the voter failed to vote by absentee ballot in a general election, and that the voter 
has been designated as inactive in the central voter registration system.  Periodic voter list 
maintenance inactivates thousands of voters across the state.  Those inactive voters, if 
enrolled in ongoing status, would have to remain in the program and would be 
automatically mailed ballots.  Members are strongly opposed to the removal of these two 
provisions. 
 
Section 2 requires automatic notification for every action taken regarding an absentee ballot 
for voters enrolled in the ongoing status, which is expected to add additional costs to be 
incurred by the Secretary of State.  The establishment of a telephone hotline by the 
Secretary of State would likely require additional resources too. 
 
Before expanding an ongoing absentee ballot request program that hasn’t even been 
implemented yet, clerks respectfully request a pause to allow for evaluation of the 65+ 
program.  Requesting an absentee ballot is already very convenient and provides the 
opportunity for clerks to verify key information before processing the request.   
 
Although clerks would not be fielding calls from voters to request a ballot, we fully expect 
calls from voters verifying that they are still in the program and inquiring when they will be 
mailed their ballots.  Also anticipated are voters questioning why they are being sent ballots 
for a certain election, since they may not remember applying for ongoing status. 
 
Although ongoing status would add some additional convenience to some voters, our 
members feel that it comes at a very high cost if Maine’s stellar reputation in election 
administration is tainted by the perception of a lack of integrity in the process. 
 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association appreciates the opportunity to share its  
testimony with the Committee. Should any questions arise, please feel free to contact  me at 
207)680-4210 or by email: pdubois@waterville-me.gov  . 
