 
 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
In Support of LD 1690, “An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking of Absentee 
Ballots 
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
April 26, 2023 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee: My name is Sarah Woodbury. I am a native Mainer and the director of advocacy for 
Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health’s mission is to make sure that everyone has equal 
access to safe food and drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-free and 
climate friendly.  Please accept this testimony in support of LD 1690, “An Act Regarding 
Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking of Absentee Ballots”. 
 
The right to vote is one of our most fundamental rights as Americans. It may seem curious that 
an organization that works on environmental health issues would engage in issues around 
voting rights and access to the ballot. As we see it, a functioning democracy is necessary to 
protect the health and environment of its citizens. Voting is an integral part of that functioning 
democracy, and we should do everything we can to make sure that voting is easy and 
accessible for all citizens.  
 
LD 1690 will make it easier for all voters to vote absentee. The number of voters who make the 
choice to vote absentee both in Maine and nationally continues to rise with more people voting 
absentee in 2022 than in 2018. Over 66% of Mainers who vote absentee here in Maine do so 
continuously. Having the ability to mail in a ballot increases voter turnout in both presidential 
and off-year election cycles. Ongoing absentee also increases the likelihood that an individual 
will participate in the next election cycle. All of this is good for the health of our democracy. 
 
The legislature should do all it can to protect the fundamental right to vote for all citizens and 
make the process easier. Making it easier for people to vote absentee will increase voter 
participation and engagement in our democracy. Therefore, Defend Our Health urges the 
committee to unanimously vote “ought to pass” on LD 1690. 
 
Thank you for your time. 
 
