 
1  
  131st Legislature 
Senate of 
Maine  
Senate District 23 
    
Senator Mattie Daughtry 
Assistant Majority Leader 
3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
Office (207) 287-1515 
 
Testimony of Senator Mattie Daughtry introducing 
LD 1690, An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking of 
Absentee Ballots 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
April 26, 2023 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Mattie Daughtry, and I proudly represent 
Senate District 23, which includes Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, 
and part of Yarmouth. Today I am pleased to introduce LD 1690, “An Act Regarding Ongoing 
Absentee Voting and Tracking of Absentee Ballots.”  
 
Before I begin, I want to thank the advocates from Democracy Maine, the League of Women 
Voters, and Represent Us who asked me to sponsor this bill. You ’ll be hearing from some of 
them today. I also want to thank the Secretary of State and her dedicated team who described to 
me Maine ’s current efforts to modernize our election and voting systems. I expect that Secretary 
Bellows will describe those efforts to all of you – if you haven ’t learned about them already. 
Additionally, I want to thank Secretary Bellows and her team who have taken time to meet with 
myself and supporters of the bill and helped us become more aware of what Maine is doing to 
keep our elections safe and accessible.  
 
LD 1690 is a straightforward bill. It would make voting more accessible and convenient in 
Maine. Recently, the 130th Legislature moved to make voting more accessible by establishing 
ongoing absentee voting last session through a bill from Speaker Fecteau. An Act to Establish 
Ongoing Absentee Voting allowed Mainers over age 65 and those with disabilities to opt in to 
have their absentee ballots sent to them for every election. It began as a successful pilot program 
in Maine and was beloved by local election clerks for its convenience. This bill went into effect 
on Jan. 1, 2023. 
 
LD 1690 would allow every registered Maine voter the option to apply for ongoing absentee 
ballot status, beginning in November 2025. Too often, voters miss an election because they have 
to show up at the polls on Election Day. There are barriers like work, transportation, and life. It 
 
2 also can be difficult to apply for an absentee ballot for each and every election. If a voter can 
apply once and then get their ballot in the mail without filling out a form each time, they will 
likely vote more regularly. In fact, they ’ll be reminded that there ’s an election. When you get a 
bill, you pay it. When you get a ballot, you cast it. Each election matters, and all registered voters 
should be able to cast their ballots every single time. 
 
There are numerous benefits to implementing ongoing absentee voting. Mail ballot voters turn 
out at higher rates than polling place voters, participate in off-year elections at a higher rate, and 
increase the likelihood that a voter will participate in the next election. Nationwide, some states 
already offer ongoing absentee ballot voting. These states include Montana, Arizona, Illinois, 
Virginia, Maryland, and New Jersey. Washington, D.C. also offers ongoing absentee voting. I 
hope that Maine can joining this growing number of states that are embracing ongoing absentee 
ballot voting.  
 
In Maine, as different phases of the new Central Voter Registration system are rolled out, there 
are great changes underway, including some of the absentee ballot tracking and notification 
system features in the second part of the bill. I believe that Secretary Bellows will go into more 
detail about these features. At this time, parts of the bill in the second half may need to be 
delayed to fit with Maine’s current improvements. I defer to the Secretary and her elections staff 
on which aspects would fit with their timeline. At the very least, let ’s ensure that ongoing 
absentee ballot voting is one of these improvements to Maine ’s election and voting systems. 
 
I thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have. 
 
 
Mattie Daughtry 
Assistant Senate Majority Leader, Senate District 23 
Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth 

