Department of the Secretary of State 
Bureau of Corporations, Elections and Commissions 
‘Q- G‘ 
She Be“ Ju1ieL. Flynn ma ows 
Deputy Secretary of Slate 
Secretary of State 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
April 26, 2023 
Testifying in favor 
L.D. 1690, “An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking of Absentee Ballots” 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
officer. I am speaking today in support of L.D. 1690. 
To begin, we would like to offer a friendly amendment, which has been reviewed and approved by the 
sponsor and attached to our testimony. 
We should all be very proud that Maine ranks consistently at the very top of the list in voter 
participation in the nation. While other states have introduced and enacted laws that roll back voter 
rights and inhibit voter participation, here in Maine, we have done the opposite. L.D. 1690 is another 
bill that would make it even easier for eligible Maine voters to exercise their constitutional right to the 
ballot box. 
Ongoing absentee is a concept we have supported for a longtime and if enacted we would join ﬁve 
other states — like Arizona, Maryland, and New Jersey — who have already implemented what is also 
known as permanent absentee ballot. There are many reasons why someone may choose to vote via an 
absentee ballot — they could be home bound, have physical limitations, or just have a busy life and 
want to make sure they do not miss out on the opportunity to vote. Whatever the reason, we know that 
here in Maine we already have a strong absentee voting system in place and can build upon it to 
include ongoing absentee. 
We share Senator Daughtry ’s enthusiasm to safeguard the integrity of the ongoing absentee ballot 
process and willingness to push out implementation to 2025 to allow our Elections Division enough 
time to coordinate implementation with the new CVR. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
I01 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Ma1' ne.gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
L.D. 1690 - An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking of Absentee Ballots 
AMENDMENT 
April 26, 2023 
Sec. 1. 21-A MRSA §753-A, sub-§8. Application for ongoing absentee voter status. 
¢ Strike lines 13-16. 
0 Retore lines 27 & 28 
Sec. 2. 21-A MRSA §765. Absentee ballot tracking and notification system 
¢ Strike this section. 
Sec 3. Effective date. N0 later than December 31, 2025.
