L LEAGUE 0F women VOTERS" 
. F iifi/5% 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: April 26, 2023 
RE: LD 1690 — An Act Regarding Ongoing Absentee Voting and Tracking of Absentee Ballots 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica. 
My name is Will Hayward. I'm a resident of Portland. l am here today as the Advocacy Program 
Coordinator on behalf of the League of Women Voters of Ivlaine. l am testifying in support on LD 1690. 
The League of Women Voters of Maine is a nonpartisan political organization that has been working for 
over 100 years to encourage informed and active participation in government, to increase understanding 
of major public policy issues, and to influence public policy through education and advocacy. We never 
support or oppose any political party or candidate. 
Ongoing absentee voting is a forward-thinking election policy that improves access and increases 
turnout. Ongoing absentee status offers voters a system in which ballots are automatically delivered to 
requesting voters before every election. Participants don't need to fill out an application every time, and 
receiving the ballot can be a helpful reminder to the voter of an upcoming election. Voters can stay on 
the list as long as they are an active voter and request to be removed at any time. 
Ongoing absentee ballots particularly serve Maine voters who face competing priorities and additional 
obstacles, including voters with limited means, bilingual households, voters with disabilities, and voters, 
often elderly citizens, who live alone. in 2021, the Legislature took the first step in bringing this policy to 
Maine by funding LD 148 in the budget, allowing voters over 65 or self-declaring as having a disability to 
apply for ongoing absentee status. By expanding ongoing absentee voting to all voters, there will be 
equal access to this pro-voter measure, which will benefit many other voters facing challenges. 
According to the National Vote at Home Institute, 66% of absentee voters in Maine are repeat absentee 
voters. Implementing full ongoing absentee voting will make each election more convenient for many of 
these voters. 
in addition to its benefits for individual voters, LD 1690 also has the opportunity to broadly increase 
turnout, particularly in local and special elections. Across the state, we uniformly see drastically lower 
turnout in elections that do not coincide with a statewide election. With ongoing absentee voting, the 
voters who have requested to receive ballots automatically will be invited to participate in those 
elections by receiving a ballot in the mail; this will encourage increased participation in these elections. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info @1wvme.org 207.622.0256 www.1wvme.org
LWVME to VLA April 26, 2023 
LD 1690 
Across the country, ongoing absentee voting is an increasingly popular proposal. States such as Montana 
and Arizona have offered this service for well over a decade, and several states have adopted the 
measure as voters have increasingly embraced absentee voting since 2020. It is time for Maine to join 
the states fully embracing this pro-voter measure. We urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1690. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
P0 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@lwvme.0rg 207.622.0256 www.lwvme.0rg
