The Healing Community 
To: Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs March 13th, 2023 
From: Alex McMahan 
Lewiston, Maine 04240 
Subject: Testimony against LD 845 
Good afternoon Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Honorable Members of the VLA 
Committee, my name is Alex McMahan and l’m testifying today on behalf of MEDCo. 
l’m here today to testify against LD 845. 
This bill is simply absurd, which I'm sure most of the committee is already aware of. Chocolate 
bars are fatal to dogs, however you don’t see warning labels on chocolate bars. Alcohol is 
harmful for animals, yet there is no statement on alcohol bottles warning about the effects on 
animals. Even grapes are highly dangerous for dogs (far more dangerous for dogs than 
cannabis could ever be), but nobody is advocating for warning labels on grapes. Not everything 
needs a law. Common sense still has its place in society. 
Requiring cannabis stores to display a portion of the warning label on a sign is equally 
ridiculous. The rest of the warning label doesn't need to be displayed on a sign, so there’s no 
reason this absurdity should either. Anti-cannabis relics who fell for the reefer madness A 
propaganda like Senator Cyrway would rather the State ignore the will of the voters in the 2016 
referendum and prohibit cannabis entirely, however since that is not an option, this is what they 
resort to. Please shoot this bill down into the dirt where it belongs. Better yet, please consider 
using it to make a change to the warning label that actually makes sense. 
Right now, the adult use warning label reads: “There may be additional health risks associated 
with the use of this product for women who are pregnant, breastfeeding, or planning on 
becoming pregnant." I would like to ask the Committee to please consider what the possible 
“additional health risks” might be for women who are planning on becoming pregnant. I wonder 
what evidence the state uses to justify this portion of the warning label, as the entire concept 
seems to defy all logic. Does a state of mind truly increase a nonpregnant woman's health risk 
from cannabis? What about a woman who is planning on becoming pregnant in 10 years? l urge 
the Committee to reject the ridiculous animal language proposed by this bill, and perhaps use 
this opportunity to ﬁx the language on women planning on becoming pregnant.
The Healing Community 
MEQCQ Thank you very much for your time and consideration. 
Respectfully, 
4%???/Q 
Alex Mclvlahan 
The Healing Community MEDCo
