March 12, 2023
Esteemed members of the Veteran’s & Legal Affairs Committee – 
My name is Heather Sullivan, I’ve been working in the legal marijuana industry for 7 years on 
compliance, licensing and the real-world impacts of the laws and regulations our industry is required to 
work within. 
I am also a member of the Hollis Planning Board.  Hollis is located in Rep. Nathan Carlow’s district,  we 
voted to allow a limited number of cannabis businesses in 2021. Most of these businesses are owned by 
Hollis residents, and all of them employ Hollis residents.  None of them are owned by large out of state 
operators. 
Last year, a resident of Hollis spoke to the Planning Board about his experience with a beloved pet 
potentially ingesting THC while walking on public property.  I personally spent time learning about this 
resident’s scary experiences, and his desire that cannabis retailers do a better job of informing 
consumers and patients of the risks of pet consumption of cannabis.  I attempted to find OCP or 
Department of Health materials related to this subject online, unfortunately, there is no easily found 
materials available on the subject.  
There are 2 aspects of LD 845 I will address here - a labeling requirement, and a requirement for signage 
to be placed in retail stores.  
Maine labeling requirements include no less than 8 specific items to be included on all labels, including 
the state approved cannabis “Logo” indicating that the product contains THC.  This Committee has heard 
lots of testimony on the expenses related to operating a legal cannabis business. Changing the current 
label requirements will add to those costs, requiring cannabis businesses to reprint packaging, utilize 
employee labor to repackage products, and render the inventories of packaging a business already 
purchased as trash. 
Cannabis products are already labeled as containing THC, there is no reason to restate that fact simply 
to add a statement that small amounts are toxic to pets. First and foremost, there is not enough federal 
research on cannabis toxicity in pets to support the statement.  Cannabis may be toxic to pets, but I 
don’t believe the legislature should make that determination without the scientific data to back those 
claims. 
Further, reported impacts of cannabis ingestion by pets include the following: 
Stumbling and crossing over feet
Dull and lethargic
Dilated pupils
Urinary incontinence
Vomiting
Tremors and shaking
Agitation
There have been very few pet deaths that have been attributed to cannabis ingestion. Unlike the 7 foods 
that cause the greatest number of pet deaths: 
Chocolate
Xylitol – a sweetener in many foods
Onions, Garlic, Leeks and Chives
Alcohol
Grapes and raisins
Hops
Macadamia Nuts
Not a single one of these food products require a label or statement that these items are toxic/deadly to 
pets.  Why would we further stigmatize cannabis but requiring such a label on cannabis products. 
Finally, the proposed labeling requirement doesn’t address the cannabis products that contain hemp-
derived THC such as Delta 8, Delta 10 and THC-O, products that are sold throughout the state in 
convenience stores and gas stations, with no labeling, license or other requirements.  As such, this bill is 
discriminatory against licensed cannabis retailers, who already follow a bevy of burdensome regulations 
and expectations. 
With respect to signage to be placed in retail stores, I believe that should be at the store owner’s 
discretion.  Is it nice to do? Yes. Is it the right thing to do? Probably.  Neither OCP or Dept of Health 
offers vetted information or signage to retailers, which, if signage is required, those agencies should 
help stores provide vetted and consistent information to customers, especially given that there are 
budgets for creating consumer education materials baked into the distribution of taxes collected on the 
sale of legal cannabis.  Additionally, requiring only storefronts, and not medical marijuana caregivers 
that sell from their homes or by delivering cannabis products directly to patients, is again, a 
discriminatory measure against those that choose to take on the additional cost and regulatory 
requirements of having a store. 
For these reasons, I ask the VLA to consider voting this bill “ought not to pass”. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
Sincerely, 
Heather Sullivan
62 Bar Mills Road, Hollis Maine
 
