Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
_ 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Melrose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Ernest Carle 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Mulliken Court O PO Box 836 O Augusta, ME 04332-0836 OTe|ephone:207-6260005 O Email: info@mainewoodlandowners.org O Website: www.mainewoodlandowners org ‘E 
DLAN OWNERS COMMUNITY Q ADVOCACY Q KNOWLEDGE 9 LEGACY 
Testimony of Karla Black 
Deputy Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
In Favor of 
LD 845 
“An Act to Require Labeling and Signs to Warn Consumers About the Harmful 
Effects of Cannabis on Animals” 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Karla Black, I am the 
Deputy Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today in favor of LD 
845, “An Act to Require Labeling and Signs to Warn Consumers About the Harmful 
Effects of Cannabis on Animals. ” 
This bill requires cannabis stores to label their cannabis and carmabis products witha 
message that the products contain THC which is harmful to animals even in residual 
amounts, and to place signs in the store with the same message. 
It only takes a simple internet search to ﬁnd countless articles on the harmful effects of 
THC on animals, dogs in particular. The American Society for the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals has stated that as more and more states legalize marijuana the 
number of calls they receive regarding pets who have ingested marijuana has 
continued to grow. While many of the calls relate to pets that have ingested marijuana 
in the home, it is a growing concern that indirect exposure is occurring more 
frequently Where the pet ingests marijuana remnants improperly disposed of on trails, 
in parks, or along sidewalks. 
Maine has a longstanding tradition of landowners making their lands available to the 
public for various recreational activities, including dog walking and hunting with 
dogs. Dog Walkers, hunters and other pet owners should feel conﬁdent when using 
these lands that their pets are free from exposure to marijuana. Unfortunately, that 
isn’t always the case. even on private lands. We have heard some concerns from our 
members of instances where they were on private lands and their dog unwittingly 
accessed marijuana. A carelessly discarded joint or other marijuana remnant leﬁ bya 
user along a trail, while barely noticeable to a human, is attractive to animals and can 
prove harmful. Doing more to increase awareness that THC is detrimental to animals, 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - IRC 501(c)(3)
by labeling products and adding store signage, will hopefully cause consumers to be more 
cautious about where and how they dispose of their marijuana products. 
For these reasons, Maine Woodland Owners supports LD 845 and urges this Committee ’s 
favorable consideration. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
