March 13, 2023 
Ld 845 (opposed), Susan Meehan 
Good morning Chairperson Hickman and Chairperson Supica and honorable members of the 
Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee. Thank you for hosting this hearing. My name is Susan 
Meehan, and i live in Sweden Maine. I am a registered identification card holder in the Maine 
Medical Use of Cannabis Program, a caregiver from 2017 to 2023, and a founding member of 
the Cannabis Council of Maine. I am writing in opposition to LD 845. Generally, I monitor and 
testifying in regard to Maine Medical Use of Cannabis bills; however, I do not agree with 
changes that stem from partial information or hearsay, especially when such change will place 
an unfounded statement on product labels and in stores in Maine inaccurately demonizing 
cannabis. 
Cannabis CAN be safely used in animals, and vertebrate animals speciﬁcally have an 
endocannabinoid system. The American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) publishes a 
dosing guide for dogs for cbd and thc, two specific cannabinoids found in hemp and cannabis. 
"Veterinary cases of cannabis toxicosis in dogs stem most commonly from exposure to edibles. 
In these cases, there may be additional toxic ingredients involved - such as chocolate, raisins, 
or xylitol - which result in a poorer prognosis. Cats may also directly consume the plant 
material." On page 13 of the AVMA Cannabis Resource Report (Sent as separate file from my 
testimony.) dated 12/07/2020 there is a cannabis dosing guideline chart for cbd and thc. Cbd 
can be a lifesaver for dogs with arthritis; CBD salve (made with pet safe ingredients) can 
alleviate "hot spots" on cats and dogs. When used with a veterinarian's guidance, Cannabis is 
not always harmful to pets, and it can be beneficial. ._ 
Unintentional ingestion does not mean that cannabis is harmful to pets. It means that 
consumers need to be more careful where they store and leave cannabis whether they are 
using it for medicine or recreation. A warning such as "Keep out of reach or pets and children," 
is far more appropriate and is a truthful and useful statement. If we are to fix a problem, please 
let's correctly identify the problem and analyze an appropriate solution or action. Please amend 
ld845, or please deem it ought not to pass. We require truthful labeling. 
Thank you for your consideration today. 
Susan Meehan 207-861-1945
