My name is Terry Walters. I am a resident of Hollis and a supporter of LD#845 "An Act to 
Require Labeling and Signs to Warn Consumers about the Effect of Cannabis on Animals." My dog 
Moxie has been poisoned twice by picking up cannabis residue that was disposed of improperly. The 
first incidence occurred last summer. I took her to the Saco River for a brief, cooling swim. Several 
hours later she became disoriented and distressed. The emergency veterinary sen/ice diagnosed her 
with THC poisoning.- 
The second event occurred this fall while on a hike at a local trail system. Moxie apparently 
picked up some residue in the parking lot and several hours later became ill. This necessitated another 
trip to the emergency veterinarian. This visit required an overnight stay and intravenous treatmenti The 
total bill for the two visits exceeded $1200.00. Both of these events occurred on private property that is 
open to the public and to dogs. Cannabis use is not legal on these properties. 
The vet explained that cannabis is sweet smelling and attractive to many dogs. She said that 
since cannabis was legalized, veterinarians have become familiar with the symptoms as THC poisoning is 
now "common place." An article by veterinarian Matt Townsend in the February issue of the Maine 
Sportsman does an excellent job of describing THC poisoning. He states, ”Most recently, legalization of 
marijuana has resulted in a new wave of toxicities. With marijuana we see some raw products being 
consumed (buds), but frequently we treat animals for ingestion of food such as brownies, edibles and 
vape cartridges. He further states that typical signs of ingestion are uncoordinated movements, urinary 
incontinence and various levels of mental stupor. In severe cases you could have nervous depression to 
the point of seizures, and even death."_ 
Needless to say, I find this appalling. I did forestry work for my career and I always had a dog at 
my side. My biggest concerns were porcupines and ticks. Now dog owners must worry that a simple 
walk in the park could severely sicken their pet. There is something fundamentally wrong with the 
system when the irresponsible pot user can get a buzz, the dealer makes a profit and the dog owner is 
left with a sick dog and staggering veterinary bills. 
After these poisoning, I started to research the issue. A basis internet search under Cannabis 
Effects on Dogs resulted in pages of articles by vets and dog owners discussing the issue. I have 
provided you with an article from the Washington Post that clearly describes this expanding problem. I 
looked up the cannabis labeling laws in Maine and found no mention of animal toxicity. I then contacted 
the Office of Cannabis Policy. They confirmed my concern and inferred that it was an oversight that 
required legislative action to correct. 
LD 845 provides a common sense approach to providing public awareness to the dangers of 
inappropriate THC use. it requires warning labeling on products containing THC. It also requires vendors 
to post informational signs to advise consumers of the potential hazards of the products. This seems 
very little to ask of an industry that sold approximately $160,000,000.00 of adult use recreational 
cannabis last year. I would like to see this initiative go further. The Office of Cannabis Policy has 
educational funds available. I recommend that they be required to produce and distribute to veterinary 
offices informational materials to alert and inform pet owners. 
In summary, I thank you for permitting me to ramble on about a subject that I am passionate about.l 
find itmorally wrong that the State of Maine allows a product that is a known toxin to be distributed 
without adequate warning labels. Please pass LD 845 to raise public awareness and to help protect 
Man's Best Friend.
