A A STATE or MAINE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE °"i'Y' AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 L/)l‘l‘l_Cv3Z (:07) 287-1440 
AMYBARATA Cell: (:07>333_1s17 
A§§]§T mt HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADER Fax: (3071 3 $ 7-14%’ 
E — M ai I I A|n).A1‘ala<'{r ]e1 __'isl;m1re.1n nnc gm 
May 22, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1930 
"Resolve, to Authorize the Exchange of Interest in Certain Lands Owned by the 
State in Piscataquis County" 
Senator Ingwerson, Representative Pluecker, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, my name is Amy Arata andI 
represent House District 104, which includes New Gloucester and part of Gray. 
It is my pleasure to present LD 1930, "Resolve, to Authorize the Exchange of Interest in 
Certain Lands Owned by the State in Piscataquis County" . This spring, my constituent, 
Dennis McCann_,;_approached me for help with an issue regarding his camp at 3 Lake St., 
Chesuncook, which is in Piscataquis County. l\/Ir. McCann is one of the most respected 
and generous members of my community, having played an essential role in the founding 
of the New Gloucester Veterans Monument, so it is my privilege to assist him with this 
problem. . 
A recent survey of Mr. McCann’s camp showed that an issue exists that is very common 
in real estate: Years before Mr. McCann purchased the property, his cabin was built partly 
over the property line. This is in spite of having a title inspection and title insurance. 
Normally, this can be easily remedied with a land swap. However, the abutting land is 
owned by the State of Maine as conservation land. The Maine constitution says in Article 
IX, Section 23: “State park land, public lots or other real estate held by the State for 
conservation or recreation purposes and designated by legislation implementing this 
section may not be reduced or its uses substantially altered except on the vote of 2/3 of all 
the members elected to each House.” 
Mr. McCann has been working with Jacob Guimond, the Northern Regional Lands 
Manager in the Maine Bureau of Parks and Land, to reach a solution. They have agreed 
that l\/Ir. McCannwill swap 10,560 square feet of his side yard in exchange for 10,560 
square feet of back yard that cuts through his cabin and is owned by the State of Maine.
The state will have no net loss of conservation land. In fact, the state will gain land that 
is more suitable for conservation since it doesn’t have a building on it. I’ve included a 
picture of this proposal with my testimony, and Mr. McCann is available to answer any 
questions. 
It’s unfortunate that such a simple problem has such a complex solution. I respectfully 
request that you unanimously pass LD 1930 so that this problem, which was not his fault, 
can be resolved quickly for this very deserving Maine citizen. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions 
you may have. 
Respectfully, 
Amy Arata 
State Representative
]#
