1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Support to L.D. 1657,  
An Act to Amend the Law Governing Certain Sexual Offenses 
April 24, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
distinguished Committee on Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey. I am the 
Chief of the Cumberland Police Department, and President of the Maine Chiefs 
of Police Association. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs 
of Police Association in support to LD 1657.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill changes the terms "expressly or impliedly acquiesced" and 
"acquiesced" to "consented"  in  the  elements  of  the  criminal  offenses  of  
gross  sexual  assault,  unlawful sexual contact and unlawful sexual touching 
and provides a definition of consent for these offenses as "a word or action 
by a person that indicates a freely given agreement. 
The Maine Chiefs strongly support LD 1657 because common sense changes to the 
statute are important to align the law with practice.  
The word “consent” is a word that our community has accepted as a common term. 
For example, students are taught in school to always ask for consent with their 
sexual partners and learn how to seek consent in different situations that they might 
encounter. So, when our law enforcement officers arrive to a scene and begin 
investigating the crime, they aren’t asking the survivor if they “acquiesced” because 
that word is often foreign to them. Instead, the officers are asking if there was 
consent given.   
However, there is an inconsistency in the sexual assault statutes with some referring 
to “acquiesce” and others referring to “consent.”  LD 1657 would change it all to 
“consent” so there is consistency in the statute with the word that is most commonly 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 used in the community.  This important change would align the conversations that 
we are having with sexual assault survivors in the field with the standard that needs 
to be proved to charge and convict the offender.  
We want to thank the bill sponsor for bringing forward this important piece of 
legislation. And we would ask you to support LD 1657 and vote ought to pass 
on this bill. On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to 
thank the committee members for your work on this Committee.  
