131st Legislature 
Senator Donna Bailey 
Se 3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 043 3 3 -0003 
0fMaing Ojﬁce (207) 287-1515 
Senate District 31 
Testimony of Senator Donna Bailey introducing 
LD 1657, An Act to Amend the Law Governing Certain Sexual Offenses 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Donna Bailey, and I proudly 
represent Senate District 3l, which includes Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco. Today I am 
pleased to introduce LD 1657, “An Act to Amend the Law Governing Certain Sexual Offenses. ” 
LD 1657 has two main components. First, it changes the term “expressly or impliedly 
acquiesced ” to the word “consent. ” The teim “expressly or impliedly acquiesced ” is only found 
in some of our sexual assault laws and nowhere else in statute. However, the word consent is 
throughout our statutes, including in other places of our sexual assault statute. Expressly or 
impliedly acquiesced is not a term that the general public uses and may actually have very 
different meanings to different people. By changing that term to consent, we are using 
terminology that is common and consistent. About 14,0001 Mainers a year experience sexual 
violence. It is likely that none of those survivors said they did not expressly or impliedly 
acquiesce. 
Second, the bill goes a step fuither and statutorily defines consent as “a word or action bya 
person that indicates a freely given agreement ” for all Title 17-A, Chapter ll crimes. Statutory 
deﬁnitions can help establish and affirm social norms, and can serve as a backbone for public 
messaging and education. While the legal definition of consent, by itself, is unlikely to reduce 
rates of sexual violence, it is an essential component of efforts to redeﬁne cultural expectations. 
That is, it would help emphatically establish that sexual violence is not acceptable. Effective 
legal and social frameworks for understanding consent are essential for a society that broadly 
rejects sexual violence. 
This bill looks to hold offenders accountable and provide the best victim safety. To do that, we 
need to use language in our statute that is accessible, easily understood, and gives our law 
enforcement and prosecutors a chance to prove the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. This bill is 
supported by our sexual assault advocacy groups, prosecutors, and law enforcement in Maine. 
1 
Statistic from MECASA
Thank you for your time, I would be happy to answer any questions 
(>49-\\ Donna BaileyX 
State Senator, Senate District 31 
Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco
