KATHRYN SLATTERY 
DISTRICT I 
JACQUELINE SARTORIS 
DISTRICT II 
NEIL MCLEAN 
DISTRICT III 
IVIAEGI-IAN IVIALONEY STATE OF MAINE 
air 
".1.r 
.a..,.»» 
1 3" 
" ,"' ,*i‘4_r R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY 
DISTRICT V 
NATASHA IRVING 
DISTRICT VI 
ROBERT GRANGER 
DISTRICT VII 
TODD R. COLLINS 
DISTRICT VIII DISTRICT IV' 
,£;g|;.- .-*",g;'g-5; “; 
_. .;@'§tr-i." fl,-,' 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION 
SHIRA BURNS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
“An Act to Amend the Law Governing Certain Sexual Offenses ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Public Hearing Date: April 24, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1657 
Senator Beebe‘-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety. My name is Shira Burns and I represent the Maine Prosecutors 
Association. I am here to testify in support of LD 1657. 
First, I want to thank Senator Bailey for her leadership in combatting sexual violence and looking at 
it on a multi-faceted approach, knowing this is one way that we can start to make a difference. 
Second, this bill is supported by our sexual assault agencies, Maine Chiefs of Police, Maine Sheriffs 
Association, and Maine Prosecutors Association. 
LD 1657 eliminates the term “expressly or impliedly acquiesced ” in our sexual assault statutes and 
replaces it with the word “consent” that is currently being used in other parts of our sexual assault 
statutes. For example, if you are charged with Gross Sexual Assault pursuant to 17-A M.R.S.§ 
25 3(2)(D), the State has to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that a person engages in a sexual act 
with another person and “the other person is unconscious or otherwise physically incapable of 
resisting and has not consented to the sexual act.” In comparison, you can be charged with Gross 
Sexual Assault pursuant to 17-A M.R.S. § 253(2)(M) and the State has to prove beyonda 
reasonable doubt that a person engages in a sexual act with another person and “the other person 
has not expressly or impliedly acquiesced to the sexual act and the actor is criminally negligent with 
regard to whether the other person has acquiesced. ” It does not make sense that we use the word 
consent in some of our sex assault statutes and then use the term “expressly or impliedly 
acquiesced ” in other parts. Consent is a word that is commonly used by survivors of sexual 
violence, defendants accused of the crime, law enforcement officers, and prosecutors. Common and 
clearer terminology will lead to better investigations, easier interviews of all parties, and wording 
that makes sense to our jurors. 
Currently, jury instructions are offered in different ways depending on who the judicial ofﬁcer is 
presiding over the case. In some circumstances, since “expressly or impliedly acquiesced ” is not 
deﬁned in statute, a judge will tell the jury to use their “cormnon, everyday deﬁnition for those 
words.” However, the average juror does not have a common, everyday deﬁnition for “expressly or 
impliedly acquiesced. ” In other cases, the judge will look up the dictionary deﬁnition of those 
words and use those deﬁnitions in the jury instructions. Attached is an actual transcript of jury 
instructions given regarding “expressly or impliedly acquiesced ” from a sexual assault case this 
past summer where the defendant was found not guilty because the State could not prove the
elements of the crime, which includes “expressly or impliedly acquiesced ” beyond a reasonable 
doubt. Depending on the complexity of the case, jury instructions last from around 20 minutes, 
which is on the very short end, to up to an hour. This means the jury sits and listens to everything a 
judge has to say about what the law is and how to apply it in this speciﬁc case. VVhen we start using 
terms that are unfamiliar or complicated, it will always weigh in favor of the accused as the State 
bears the burden of proving the elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. 
This bill also takes the word “consent” a bit further by statutorily deﬁning it as “a word or action by 
a person that indicates a freely given agreement. ” Scholars and legal experts believe clear statutory 
deﬁnitions of consent promote healthy social norms with respect to reducing sexual violence. 
Deﬁnitions that include the concept of freely given or affirmative consent may further bolster 
efforts to establish consent as the norm for any sexual violence. Jurisdictions vary widely in their 
statutory approach to deﬁning consent. Eleven states and the District of Columbia have deﬁnitions 
that include the concept of freely given or affirmative consent. The Military Code of Justice deﬁnes 
sexual consent as “freely given agreement. ” 
With the change of these words and consent being deﬁned, the Maine Prosecutors Association 
believe that more sexual assault offenders will be held accountable for their crimes and more 
victims will ﬁnd safety Within the criminal justice system. 
For these reasons, the Maine Prosecutors Association supports LD 1657. 
Shira S. Burns, Esq. 
Executive Director 
Maine Prosecutors Association
1 
Now, I will give you this one page that I have 
drafted here concerning the elements of the offense just 
to have with you while you're deliberating if you want 
it. It's not that complicated. It's not that lengthy, 
but I'll give it to you. I'm not stressing this over 
other parts of the charge, but it does contain a 
definition. You might want to have it right with you 
when you're deliberating. 
So, a person commits the offense of unlawful —— 
gross sexual assault or gross sexual assault if the State 
proves beyond a reasonable doubt that the person, one, 
engages in a sexual act with another person; and, two, 
the other person has not expressly or impliedly 
acquiesced to the sexual act. That's it, two elements -- 
sexual —~ engaging in a sexual act with another person, 
and the other person has not expressly or impliedly 
acquiesced to the sexual act. 
Now, a sexual act includes any act between two 
persons involving direct physical contact between the 
genitals of one and the genitals of the other. 
And, then, concerning the term expressly or implied 
acquiesce, I'm not instructing you on any special 
definition of expressly, and you should use a common, 
everyday definition for that word. Acquiesce means to 
accept or comply tacitly or passively. And implied
2 
acquiescence means engaging in an act or conduct, making 
a gesture or gestures, or saying a word or words, and the 
acts, words, conduct, or gestures indirectly indicate or 
suggest acquiescence. 
That's it for the —- for the elements of the offense 
and the definitions —— the particular legal definitions 
you need to know. And, again, that will be in writing. 
As soon as I get done, I'll print it off, and you'll all 
get a copy.
