  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKe e 
 
Secreta ry 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
 April 18, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
RE: LD 1657 --  An Act to Amend the Law  Governing Certain Sexual Offenses  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice  and Pu blic Safety Committe e: 
 
MACDL oppose s LD 1657 . 
 
This bill is sim ilar to a b ill that was rejec ted back in 2017.   
 
This bill would  change  longstanding Maine law that addresses the unique nature of 
sexual offenses and the issue of whether someone who is involved in a sexual act was 
doing so voluntarily.  This bill eliminates the term “expressly or impliedly 
acquiesced” and puts in its place “consented.”  While this may seem at first blush to 
be relatively minor , it injects in the determination of whether a sexual offense has 
been committed the notion that there must be some specific, definitive act of 
“consent” when a person is involved in a sexual act.   
 
Maine law as it stands right now uses the term “expressly or impliedly acquiesced” in 
recognition of the fact that when persons engage in sexual acts there are o ften not 
direct and specific discussions about which sexual acts will be engaged in under 
which circumstances.  People simply do not have those direct, person to person 
communications when involved in sexual acts.  
 
Right now if a person tells another person that they cannot engage in a sexual act with 
them then there is no question that the person has not “expressly or impliedly 
acquiesced” in engaging in a sexual act.  “No” still means “no” under Maine law as it 
has for decades.  This  bill eliminates the tried and true terms of “express or implied 
acquiescence” and would have sexual acts take place only where there were specific 
and detailed discussions between two people prior to engaging in sexual acts.  That 
should not be Maine law because it is not the way that sexual acts take place, fully, 
freely and voluntarily, around the world, each and every day.  
 
The proposed changes in this bill seem small, but would have substantial impact on 
voluntary sexual acts.  Maine law already has a working, successful system of 
addressing sexual offenses where a person has not expressly or impliedly acquiesced 
to the sexual act.  The law should not be changed.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this issue.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee  
