Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
May 5, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 364 – An Act to Prohibit the Use of General Assistance as a Replacement for Available 
Resources   
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 364, An Act to Prohibit the Use of General 
Assistance as a Replacement for Available Resources . This bill seeks to create a definition in General 
Assistance statute for “potential resource.”  The bill  requires that applicants apply for potential 
resources and are not eligible for General Assistance benefits to replace the loss of available resources 
when the applicant has intentionally refused those resources or caused a reduction in resources that 
would have otherwise reduced the amount of General Assistance required by the applicant. The bill 
also creates a penalty of 120 days or the amount of time it takes to replace the benefit, whichever is 
greater.  
 
General Assistance statute  already  requires a recipient to make a good faith effort to secure a potential 
resource.  Statute further provides examples of such resources,  and should the recipient fail to  utilize a 
potential resource, they are disqualified  from receiving assistance until the applicant has  made a good 
faith effort to secure the resource.  
 
This bill is duplicative  of current  statue  and imposes  an overly  burdensome  penalty  on the recipient  
should  they cure their disqualification  prior  to 120 days. A structure  is already  in place  for addressing  a 
violation  of this rule.    
 
For these reasons, the Department is opposed to this bill. DHHS is committed to working with 
stakeholders to review and make recommendations for improving the General Assistance program. We 
wanted you to be aware of  the above information as you consider this bill going forward.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Anthony Pelotte, Director  
Office for Family Independence  

