Testimony in Support of LD 484: 
“An Act to Prevent a Conflict of Interest in State Elections by Requiring the Secretary of State to 
Resign Before Running for Elected Of fice"
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover , and distinguished members of the Committee on 
State and Local Government, thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony regarding LD
484.
According to the Maine Secretary of State (SOS) website, The Of fice of the Secretary of 
State “s
upervises and administers all elections of
federal, state and county of fices and referenda, 
and in that capacity advises election of ficials from 500 municipalities, 600 candidates and the 
general public regarding election laws and procedures; prepares, proofreads and distributes 1,800
separate ballot types and other elections materials; tabulates of ficial elections results; supervises 
recounts in contested races; and oversees the application of state laws pertaining to candidate and
citizen initiative petitions.”
From registering voters to certifying nomination petitions to supervising recounts, The 
Secretary of State is heavily involved in all aspects of elections conducted in Maine. While a 
Secretary of State can hypothetically recuse themselves from any election in which they are a
participant, public trust would still be deeply eroded by the concept of the State’ s highest election 
official supervising the of fice that manages their own election.
This type of public distrust has occurred in other states that do not prohibit their 
Secretaries of State from running for higher of fice. This practice has been controversial on both 
sides of the aisle.
In 2018, then Secretary of State Brian Kemp ran for the position of Governor of Geor gia. 
He did not resign his position as Secretary of State until after the gubernatorial election took
place. All of his actions as Secretary of State in the years leading up to the election came under 
intense scrutiny . The voters of Geor gia were rightfully concerned that Kemp’ s actions as 
Secretary of State were impacted by his desire to attain higher of fice.
Public trust in elections was again negatively impacted during the 2022 Arizona 
Gubernatorial Election. Then Secretary of State Katie Hobbs was in char ge of the of fice 
supervising her own election. Like in Geor gia, many of Hobbs’ s decisions as Secretary of State 
during the time of her gubernatorial candidacy concerned the public as they rightfully questioned
whether her candidacy was the basis of her decisions as Secretary of State.
As elected of ficials, I’m sure you are all acutely aware of how important the Maine 
Secretary of State’ s work is in regards to elections. There is simply no way for an incumbent 
Secretary of State to separate their SOS obligations from their candidacy . This conflict of interest 
can be easily avoided by the passage of LD 484.
Jared H. Hirshfield
Kennebunk
