TO:The Honorable Tim NangleThe Honorable Holly Stover, Co-ChairsMembers of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government
DATE:March 2, 2023
RE:LD 484 - An Act to Prevent a Conflict of Interest in State Elections by Requiring theSecretary of State to Resign Before Running for Elected Office
Good afternoon Senator Nangle and Representative Stover.
My name is Will Hayward.  I’m a resident of Portland. I am the Advocacy Program Coordinator for theLeague of Women Voters of Maine. I am submitting testimony in support on LD 484, An Act to Prevent aConflict of Interest in State Elections by Requiring the Secretary of State to Resign Before Running forElected Office.
The League of Women Voters of Maine is a nonpartisan political organization that has been working forover 100 years to encourage informed and active participation in government, to increase understandingof major public policy issues, and to influence public policy through education and advocacy. We neversupport or oppose any political party or candidate.
The League of Women Voters believes that responsible government should be responsive to the will ofthe people and that it should be free from undue influence, corruption, and the appearance ofcorruption. We support measures that encourage governmental ethics and that give citizens confidencethat public affairs are being conducted in the public’s best interests. When this proposal previouslyappeared before the Legislature in 2013, we supported it, and we again support it today.
The Maine Secretary of State is our highest election official, responsible for the conduct of state andfederal elections. The office of the Secretary of State shapes policy regarding elections in countless ways,large and small, from the introduction of agency legislation, through rulemaking, enforcement, setting ofprocedures, providing guidance, and deploying of state resources.
It could be seen as a conflict of interest for the State’s highest election official to have a vested interest inthe outcome of their own election. Therefore, it is reasonable to include in statute language to prevent achief election official from overseeing an election where they are a candidate. One way to achieve this,as provided in this legislation, would be to require the Secretary of State to resign their office when theybecome a candidate for state or federal office. Alternatively, the Legislature could codify a requirementthat the Secretary of State recuse themself from overseeing an election where they are a candidate, andturn over all functions to their Deputy. Statutory recusal might be a preferable and more narrowlytailored approach because it would minimize disruptions in the other divisions overseen by the officeand prevent a vacancy in a constitutional office. Either of these approaches would be more formal and
PO 18187
Portland, ME 04112
info@lwvme.org
207.622.0256
www.lwvme.org

LWVME to SLG
March 2, 2023
LD
484
visible to the public than the practice we have seen: a verbal reassurance that the candidate Secretary ofState will keep the election at arm’s length.
The League is not aware of any abuse of official power In the previous instances in Maine where a sittingSecretary of State has been a candidate for another office. Nonetheless, LD 424 or the alternativeapproach of formal recusal we have outlined both provide opportunities to strengthen public trust in ourelections by removing any appearance of conflict of interest when a Secretary of State chooses to run foranother office. We would support either approach to this issue.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee.
PO 18187
Portland, ME 04112
info@lwvme.org
207.622.0256
www.lwvme.org
