Dear Committee 
When 16 years ago we had purchased the land and had built a beautiful home in the 
wonderful state of Maine we thought it will be a great place to raise a family, to work and 
study. Unfortunately, all our dreams were crushed by a tyrannical removal of religious and 
philosophical exemptions. The tragedy of this really hit hard in the past 3 to 4 years when 
thousands of healthy kids were locked out of taxpayer funded or private schools, even online 
ones, and thousands of people lost their jobs, simply based on their VACCINATION 
STATUS!  
Vaccines, just like any other pharmaceutical products, carry risks and can cause injury 
or death. As of January 1, 2023, the United States Government has paid out more than $4.9 
billion dollars to vaccine victims through the National Vaccine Injury Compensation 
Program (VICP). As of 1/13/2023, there were 43,431 deaths and 2,407,011 adverse events 
reported to the US government's Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System (VAERS). 
Clearly, there are serious dangers associated with vaccines that should not be ignored! 
Furthermore, any person refusing to take that risk shouldn’t be discriminated for such 
choice!  
Just in the last 100 years, many products/procedures were promoted as beneficial and 
useful but were proven to be very harmful later. For example: lead paint, asbestos, 
radioactive drinks, tobacco, X-rays for shoe stores use, bloodletting, lobotomy, LSD-
therapy, tape worm therapy for weight loss, cocaine included in medicine and drinks, 
mercury, EMF radiation, opioids based medications and many more chemicals or substances 
in agricultural, pharmaceutical and household use. The trust that people had put in these 
products, procedures, therapies had been broken again and again, many lives were 
irreversibly damaged or even lost. 
During the past 3 years thousands of healthy and capable workers were fired simply 
because they didn’t want a pharmaceutical product! These discriminating practices caused 
shortages of medical, military, emergency personnel, teachers, policemen, pilots and many 
others! Discrimination of them negatively affected all of us in many ways! Not to mention 
all the workers who got the product to keep their jobs but became disabled or even suddenly 
passed away! Law-abiding taxpaying citizens and residents got persecuted for simply 
sharing their experiences, pointing out to valid scientific researches and raising questions. 
It’s been forgotten that, quote “Asking questions is at the heart of science. Science is not an 
institution and not an authority. Science is never settled. It is forever evolving through 
conjecture and criticism. Questions form the basis of all scientific inquiry and scientific 
progress. Without challenging existing concepts – usually held by a majority – there is no 
new knowledge creation. Censoring dissenting voices eliminates the mechanism of error 
correction and pushes humanity back into the dark ages.”- by Abir Ballan, MPH, 
https://www.pandata.org/question-everything/ 
 The only requirements that should be applied to any individual for employment or 
enrollment into a school are the status in the country and their ability to fulfill work or 
school responsibilities! Not a race, not a familial status, not an ethnicity, a religion, gender 
and surely not vaccination status! 
It seems like we rolled back many decades ago to the times of segregation when 
horrific civil discriminations of African Americans and Native Americans took place or the 
time of WW2 when Jewish people were segregated on a pretext of a disease spreaders and 
later had been subjected to horrendous experimentations and exterminations in camps! Since 
the removal of religious and personal exemptions and the COVID19 measures unvaccinated 
people became new Rosa Parks, African Americans, Native Americans and Jews! This 
should never happen in a free democratic society with liberty and justice for all!  
If any individual can refuse even a lifesaving medication, procedure or surgery based 
on his/hers personal convictions concerning their life and body why the choice in regards to 
products labeled as vaccines becomes a reason for retaliation, segregation, censorship, 
employment termination and inability to enroll into a school or even travel? All that people 
need is to be able to continue to choose for themselves and not to be persecuted, singled out, 
cut off from services, work and education because of their choice in medical interventions.  
Besides, when it comes to vaccines, nobody else, but a person taking it and their 
immediate family will be burdened 24/7 with any adverse consequences or spiritual 
emotional anguish as a result, therefore, nobody should force this choice and retaliate for it. 
Why a suffering of a small number of individuals with gender dysphoria who may not been 
able to do sports or use a restroom with the gender they think they are is getting a national 
spotlight while real injuries and sufferings of the whole population coerced to accept a 
pharmaceutical products in a form of vaccines seem to be totally ignored, downplayed and 
censored?! Whether you are black or white, straight or gay, old or young, native or 
foreigner, male or female, healthy or disable, religious or not we all can get discriminated 
based on our choice concerning vaccines! By including VACCINATION STATUS in 
protected classes we are protecting them all, because it is a common denominator for 
all them!   
Stop discrimination and tyranny by protecting vaccination status and by reinstating all 
exemptions! Make America the land of Freedom again with Liberty and Justice for All!   
Please, SUPPORT: LD 1501/HP 596  as well as: 
LD 1098/HP 693, LD 1209 (HP769), LD 869/SP366, LD51/HP26, 
LD1148(SP475), LD1228/HP776, LD 172/HP113, LD59/HP34, LD601/HP378 
 
I  thank you for respectfully adhering to our first amendment rights guaranteed as 
citizens of the United States of America by her great Constitution and reinforced on a state 
level by the fourteenth amendment without prejudice. 
Respectfully, 
 Elena Gino 
 
Elena Gino
Island Falls
LD 1501
Dear Committee
When 16 years ago we had purchased the land and had built a beautiful home in the 
wonderful state of Maine we thought it will be a great place to raise a family, to work 
and study. Unfortunately, all our dreams were crushed by a tyrannical removal of 
religious and philosophical exemptions. The tragedy of this really hit hard in the past 
3 to 4 years when thousands of healthy kids were locked out of taxpayer funded or 
private schools, even online ones, and thousands of people lost their jobs, simply 
based on their VACCINATION STATUS! 
Vaccines, just like any other pharmaceutical products, carry risks and can cause injury
or death. As of January 1, 2023, the United States Government has paid out more than
$4.9 billion dollars to vaccine victims through the National Vaccine Injury 
Compensation Program (VICP). As of 1/13/2023, there were 43,431 deaths and 
2,407,011 adverse events reported to the US government's Vaccine Adverse Events 
Reporting System (VAERS). Clearly, there are serious dangers associated with 
vaccines that should not be ignored! Furthermore, any person refusing to take that risk
shouldn’t be discriminated for such choice! 
Just in the last 100 years, many products/procedures were promoted as beneficial and 
useful but were proven to be very harmful later. For example: lead paint, asbestos, 
radioactive drinks, tobacco, X-rays for shoe stores use, bloodletting, lobotomy, 
LSD-therapy, tape worm therapy for weight loss, cocaine included in medicine and 
drinks, mercury, EMF radiation, opioids based medications and many more chemicals
or substances in agricultural, pharmaceutical and household use. The trust that people 
had put in these products, procedures, therapies had been broken again and again, 
many lives were irreversibly damaged or even lost.
During the past 3 years thousands of healthy and capable workers were fired simply 
because they didn’t want a pharmaceutical product! These discriminating practices 
caused shortages of medical, military, emergency personnel, teachers, policemen, 
pilots and many others! Discrimination of them negatively affected all of us in many 
ways! Not to mention all the workers who got the product to keep their jobs but 
became disabled or even suddenly passed away! Law-abiding taxpaying citizens and 
residents got persecuted for simply sharing their experiences, pointing out to valid 
scientific researches and raising questions. It’s been forgotten that, quote “Asking 
questions is at the heart of science. Science is not an institution and not an authority. 
Science is never settled. It is forever evolving through conjecture and criticism. 
Questions form the basis of all scientific inquiry and scientific progress. Without 
challenging existing concepts – usually held by a majority – there is no new 
knowledge creation. Censoring dissenting voices eliminates the mechanism of error 
correction and pushes humanity back into the dark ages.”- by Abir Ballan, MPH, 
https://www.pandata.org/question-everything/
 The only requirements that should be applied to any individual for employment or 
enrollment into a school are the status in the country and their ability to fulfill work or
school responsibilities! Not a race, not a familial status, not an ethnicity, a religion, 
gender and surely not vaccination status!
It seems like we rolled back many decades ago to the times of segregation when 
horrific civil discriminations of African Americans and Native Americans took place 
or the time of WW2 when Jewish people were segregated on a pretext of a disease 
spreaders and later had been subjected to horrendous experimentations and 
exterminations in camps! Since the removal of religious and personal exemptions and 
the COVID19 measures unvaccinated people became new Rosa Parks, African 
Americans, Native Americans and Jews! This should never happen in a free 
democratic society with liberty and justice for all! 
If any individual can refuse even a lifesaving medication, procedure or surgery based 
on his/hers personal convictions concerning their life and body why the choice in 
regards to products labeled as vaccines becomes a reason for retaliation, segregation, 
censorship, employment termination and inability to enroll into a school or even 
travel? All that people need is to be able to continue to choose for themselves and not 
to be persecuted, singled out, cut off from services, work and education because of 
their choice in medical interventions. 
Besides, when it comes to vaccines, nobody else, but a person taking it and their 
immediate family will be burdened 24/7 with any adverse consequences or spiritual 
emotional anguish as a result, therefore, nobody should force this choice and retaliate 
for it. Why a suffering of a small number of individuals with gender dysphoria who 
may not been able to do sports or use a restroom with the gender they think they are is
getting a national spotlight while real injuries and sufferings of the whole population 
coerced to accept a pharmaceutical products in a form of vaccines seem to be totally 
ignored, downplayed and censored?! Whether you are black or white, straight or gay, 
old or young, native or foreigner, male or female, healthy or disable, religious or not 
we all can get discriminated based on our choice concerning vaccines! By including 
VACCINATION STATUS in protected classes we are protecting them all, because it 
is a common denominator for all them!  
Stop discrimination and tyranny by protecting vaccination status and by reinstating all
exemptions! Make America the land of Freedom again with Liberty and Justice for 
All!  
Please, SUPPORT: LD 1501/HP 596 as well as: 
LD 1098/HP 693, LD 1209 (HP769), LD 869/SP366, LD51/HP26, LD1148(SP475), 
LD1228/HP776, LD 172/HP113, LD59/HP34, LD601/HP378 
I  thank you for respectfully adhering to our first amendment rights guaranteed as 
citizens of the United States of America by her great Constitution and reinforced on a 
state level by the fourteenth amendment without prejudice.
Respectfully,
 Elena Gino
