 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April  25, 2023  
 
Senator  Anne M. Carey , Chair  
Representative  Matt Moonen , Chair  
Members  of the  Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1501 - An Act to Protect Maine Citizens from Discrimination by Including 
 Vaccination Status as a Protected Class  
 
Dear Senator  Carey , Representative  Moonen , and Members of the  Committee on Judiciary : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1501 , An Act to Protect Maine Citizens from 
Discrimination by Including Vaccination Status as a Protected Class , and the potential impact of 
the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Preven tion (Maine CDC)  oppose s this bill  and offers 
the following information for your consideration . 
 
LD 1501 adds vaccination status as a protected class under the Maine Human Rights Act.  
There is cautiousness to expand ing protected classes around discriminat ion when it comes to 
other areas of the law, yet this bill does exactly that, creating a new protected class around the 
unvaccinated. The Maine Human Rights Commission has its process for considering ‘protected 
classes,’ which can be up to two years  before action and  enforces Maine’s anti -discrimination 
laws.  
 
If enacted, e mployer s (including independent business  owners , healthcare  organizations , or 
government  entities ), will be prohibited from taking action to ensure the safest workplace and 
protec ting their employees and customers from an employee who has not yet received a vaccine.   
 
Additionally, healthcare facilities caring for patients will be unable to enforce current healthcare 
worker immunization requirements, putting Maine’s most vulnerabl e citizens at risk for disease. 
Educational institutions also will be unable to enforce vaccine requirements which would 
undermine existing school requirements that have been in place to keep students and teachers 
safe for decades.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends this bill  ought not to pass . Vaccines not 
only protect the individual , but families, neighbors, and communities. They are especially 
important for children, older adults, for those who are immunocompromised, and those who may 
not be able to get vaccinated. Vaccinations , including those available under emergency use 
 
 authorization,  protect individuals from severe illness, hospitalization and death , and have helped 
Americans get back to work and to our daily lives.  We should w ork together to encourage all 
individuals to receive all recommended vaccines . 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

