Roberta Manter
Fayette
LD 1501
Ladies and Gentlemen of the committee on Judiciary,
My name is Roberta Manter and I live in Fayette.  
These who have chosen not to be vaccinated for COVID may in fact be less of a risk 
to others than those who have been vaccinated.  It has come to be known that those 
who are vaccinated can still get COVID, and can still transmit it to others, but may 
not even know they have COVID.  Therefore they can continue to spread it to others 
without even knowing that they should be staying home.  
Many of those who have not been vaccinated have had COVID and have recovered 
from it.  We now know that their immunity is better than the immunity produced by 
vaccines.  While the unvaccinated who have not already had COVID are at higher risk
of catching it, they are more likely to know they are sick and to stay home than those 
who have been vaccinated.  They may be more at risk themselves, but they are less of 
a risk to others than those who have had the vaccine.
My daughter's family has chosen not to get vaccinated due to a family history of 
adverse reactions to vaccines.  Last summer my grand daughter, who had tested 
positive for COVID several weeks earlier, was denied the opportunity to go to fiddle 
camp because she was not vaccinated.  Her mother, who also had tested positive for 
COVID at the same time, was unable to go help at the camp's kitchen so as to get 
reduced tuition for herself and her daughter.  Yet, having recently had COVID and 
thus having high immunity, they were less at a risk of getting it again and spreading it
than those who were vaccinated, who were allowed to attend camp.  This was grossly 
unfair.  A person should not be denied educational or cultural opportunities because 
they do not have a slip of paper saying their form of immunity is approved by the 
government.  
I myself was forced to obtain the vaccine in order to return to my usual summer 
employment as a camp counselor for Maine Robotics.  My husband and I live on our 
Social Security Income, and the several weeks of employment by the camps gives us 
a much needed boost.  I didn't feel that I could forego working for the summer, and 
therefor had to get the vaccine.  My religious convictions prohibit my taking the 
Moderna vaccine which was developed from fetal stem cells, so I took the J & J 
vaccine.  After I took it, it was disclosed that it is associated with an increased risk of 
blood clots.  I had a stroke a dozen years ago, and now have two small aneurisms in 
my brain that could shed a clot at any time, leading to another stroke.  So I do not dare
take another dose of the vaccine.  The following summer I was dreading not being 
able to return to camp because I had not had a booster.  Fortunately, Robotics camp 
deemed a single J & J vaccine as being "fully vaccinated."  Otherwise I would have 
missed out on that needed income.
We currently have a huge shortage of nurses, largely because so many left the state 
when they were fired due to not having been vaccinated.  We do not have enough 
staffed beds in Maine's hospitals.
Please vote LD 1501 Ought to Pass.  Thank you.
