_, STATE OF MAINE 
PUBLIC UTlLlTlES COMMISSION 
J.- 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR 
Patrick J. Scully 
OOMMtSSIONERS 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
In Support of 
LD 1065, An Act to Improve the Telecommunications Relay Services Council by‘ 
Reducing Its Membership and Allowing for the Hiring of an Executive Director 
"' 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying insupport 
of the sponsor’s amendment to LD 1065, An Act to Improve the Telecommunications Relay'Services 
Council by Reducing Its Membership and Allowing for the Hiring of an Executive Director, on behalf of 
the Public Utilities Commission. V "' 
LD 1065 directs the Telecommunications Relay Service Council (Council) to hire and compensate a 
part time Executive Director, Within its existing allowable budget, to assist the Council in carrying out 
its duties. The amendment establishes the duties of the director.' 
The Commission has been one of the members of the Council since its inception and is supportive of 
this legislation. The Council assists the State in providing critical services to deaf, late-deafened, hard- 
of-hearing, or speech-disabled citizens. The Council has no paid staff to address the administrative 
requirements of providing services to these communities. A part time executive director Will allow the 
Council to meet its statutory obligations much more effectively and will help_ ensure the Council meets all 
state government administrative requirements such as procurement policies and procedures. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the Work session. 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY users call Maine Relay 71 l FAX: (207) 287-1039
