LB 1065 “An Act to Improve the Telecommunications Relay Services Mame Council by Reducing its Membership and Allowing for the Hiring of an Q°NN5c1'|u|'|'y 
Executive Director" 9‘-"'"°F""'V 
April 13, 2023 
SUPPORT 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology, 
My name is Kiera Reardon, and I am the lnteragency Broadband Manager for the Maine Connectivity Authority. 
Today, I testify in support of LD 1065, “An Act to improve the Telecommunications Relay Services Council by 
Reducing its Membership and Allowing for the Hiring of an Executive Director. ” 
As initially proposed, the bill seeks to improve an important council that serves the deaf, hard of hearing, and the 
late-deafened community by adding a part-time executive director and eliminating two vacant positions on the 
Council. The Council is composed of twelve seats, 5 of which are currently vacant, making reaching a quorum 
very difficult. These seats have been vacant for several years and impact the Council's ability to conduct 
business. The Council will beneﬁt from adding a dedicated staff member to manage contracts and promote 
services to Mainers. Hiring a part-time Executive Director will provide stability and functionality to the Council as 
its members rotate regularly. 
As amended, the bill additionally seeks to add Maine Connectivity Authority (MCA) to the Council, changing the 
total membership from 12 to 11. As telecommunications relay services migrate fully from analog services to 
digital and require broadband connectivity, now is the time for this integration. MCA is working to advance digital 
equity: ensuring that ALL Mainers, especially those that are most impacted by the digital divide, have access to 
and are able to use information and communications technologies so they can fully realize all of the civic, 
economic, health, educational, social and other beneﬁts that they provide. Digital equity and inclusiveness are 
critical components in all broadband planning and investments across Maine. 
Without access to sufﬂcient broadband, the digital divide will prevent members of the deaf community from 
communicating and interacting with all facets of society. Through conversations with MCA's Digital Equity 
Taskforce, the Broadband Action Planning process, and the Maine Broadband Coalition, it is clear that internet 
service providers need to be actively engaged in this arena. MCA can help by promoting relay services when 
meeting with lSPs and communities. 
Thank you for your consideration and attention to this critical issue. The Maine Connectivity Authority will be 
available for the work session. 
Maine Connectivity Authority 
Maine Connectivity Authority info@maineconnectivity.org | (207)370-7439
