 
 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
April 13, 2023  
 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Chair  
Representative Stanley Paige Zeigler, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
Cross Office Building, Room 211  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: LD 1065, An Act to Improve the Telecommunications Relay Services 
Council by Reducing Its Membership and Allowing for the Hiring of an 
Executive Director  
 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Stan ding 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology:  
 
My name is Riley Albair, and I am the Deaf Services Co -Director at Disability Rights 
Maine.  I write in support of LD 1065, An Act to Improve Telecommunications Relay 
Services Council by Reducing its Mem bership and Allowing for the Hiring of an Executive 
Director.  
 
DRM is Maine’s federally funded Protection and Advocacy agency. Our mission is to advance justice and equality by enforcing rights and expanding opportunities for people 
with disabilities in M aine. DRM’s Deaf Services division was formed in 2015, when the 
programs and staff of the former Maine Center on Deafness (MCD) joined the agency. 
DRM has historically served on the Telecommunications Relay Services (TRS) Council in 
the seat for a disability rights organization in Maine; I currently act as a pending member in this role. DRM also provides  outreach and training services  to Maine citizens 
and businesses  about relay services and how to use them.  
 
LD 1065 would allow the Telecommunications Relay Services Council to hire a part -time 
Executive Director using existing funds. It would also reduce the number of Governor -
appointed members on the Council from 8 to 6.  DRM believes these changes are 
critically necessary to ensure that the TRS Council can continue to function effectively 
and to administer high -quality TRS services for Mainers who are Deaf, Hard of Hearing 
or have speech disabilities.  
TRS services and captioned telephone service (CapTel or CTS) are telecommunications 
services that allow people who are deaf, hard -of-hearing, or speech -disabled to 
communicate via the telecommunications system, and thus have telephone access 
comparable to other citizens. These are essential services for many, enabling people to 
work, live, and stay connected to family and community.  
 
In 2018, the Maine Legislature established the Maine TRS Council as the entity that is responsible for ensuring that these services are continuously and reliably provided throughout the state, in compliance with state and federal laws and regulations. In s o 
doing, it changed the Council’s role from primarily advisory in evaluating services, to one of developing and executing programs and policies. This was a significant change.  
 
Although the Council is now tasked with directly administering the Telecommunic ation 
Relay Services (TRS) program within the state, the Council has no staff. Most other 
states have between one and three paid staff involved in administering their state relay 
programs. However, Maine continues to rely on volunteer Council members, who 
cannot be compensated for their time or duties.  This now includes  developing budgets, 
evaluating services, entering  into contracts for services in coordination and accordance 
with state purchasing laws and rules, and developing pilot programs, among others. This work is sophisticated and complex, and requires a very significant time commitment to 
learn and carry out.  Unfortunately, the Council has limited ability to train new members and officers in this work due to its lack of staff. When officers resign or terms expire, they take their knowledge with them. These challenges are having serious impacts on 
the Council. Changes are necessary.  
 
We believe a part -time Executive Director, directed by the Council, is necessary to 
enable the Council to more effectively administer relay services and carry out its  work.  It 
would also allow  officer and members  roles and tasks to be streamlined  and supported , 
removing barriers that are preventing community members from volunteering for these 
impo rtant positions. The Council has the funds to hire an Executive Director within its 
existing budget limits.   These changes would strengthen both the Council and the 
administration and oversight of relay services in Maine.  
 
For these reasons, we urge you to  vote ought to pass on LD 1065.  
 Sincerely,  
  Riley Albair  
Program Director  
Disability Rights Maine  

 
