cg .,. 2" 7’\.
, 
T61”6S€l S. Pl6I‘C€ THE MAINE SENATE ‘ 
6 Waitgg Landing Rgad 
Senator, District 25 13 l st Legislature F almouth, ME 04105 
Testimony of Senator Teresa S. Pierce introducing 
LD 1065, An Act to Improve the Telecommunications Relay Services Council by 
Reducing Its Membership and Allowing for the Hiring of an Executive Director 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Esteemed Members of the Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology Committee, my name is Teresa Pierce, and I represent Senate District 25, encompassing 
Falmouth, Cumberland, North Yarmouth, Yarmouth (majority), Gray, and Long Island. Today I am 
pleased to introduce LD 1065, An Act to Improve the Telecommunications Relay Services Council 
by Reducing Its Membership and Allowing for the Hiring of an Executive Director. 
Telecommunications Relay Services (TRS) and captioned telephone service (CapTel or CTS) are 
telecommunications services that allow hearing people and people who are deaf, hard-of-hearing, or 
speech-disabled to communicate via the telecommunications system. The Maine Legislature has 
established the Maine Telecommunications Relay Services Council as the entity that is responsible 
for ensuring that these services are provided throughout the state on a continuous and reliable basis 
for a reasonable cost and in compliance with state and federal laws and regulations. 
The need to improve this council is great, Telecommunications relay services are very important for 
those in the deaf, hard-of-hearing, late defend or speech-disabled to continue to communicate. With 
an aging population, the work of the Council is all the more vital. This bill would allow for the 
necessary improvements. Currently, the council is all-volunteer, charged with ensuring the relay 
service continues throughout the state. Plagued by the retirement of the council Chair and other key 
council members, the TRS council has had trouble recruiting and retaining ofﬁcers to conduct the 
business of the Council. 
This bill would reduce positions on the council, which historically have been very difﬁcult, and make 
it nearly impossible for the Council to have a quorum, which is necessary to conduct business. In its 
current form, the Council is also operation without key directions, such as a Chair, Vice Chair, and 
Secretary, which puts the continuation of TRS at risk. By hiring a dedicated, part time Executive 
Director, the council would be able to keep up with demand and function in a manner that will 
eliminate the risk of a decline in the quality of services. 
There is no increase in funds necessary to create this position, as the existing fund, administered by 
the PUC. It is my understanding that the existing budget has sufﬁcient funds to cover this position. 
Thank you for your consideration and I am sure that others that will follow me will be able to answer 
questions in more detail. 
Chair, Comnzir/ee on Housing * Education and Cizitizraf Ajjfairs COI!1i?li1i8 € 
(' e1'i: (207) 415-8631 * State House (207) 287-1515 * Fa.r{2/17 ’) 28.7-1585 * Toll Free I-8013-423-6900 * TTY 7.11 
Teresa. Pierce@1 ’egisia!ure. 121a1' ne.gm> * legislature.maiizegov/isenriie
