Testimony of Terry Morrell  
Director for the Division for the Deaf, Hard of Hearing, and Late Deafened  
Maine Department of Labor  
 
In Support of LD 1065  
An Act to Improve the Telecommunications Relay Services Council by Reducing Its Membership and 
Allowing for the Hiring of an Executive Director  
To the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 
April 13 , 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator  Lawrence , Rep. Zeigler and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Techn ology. My name is Terry Morrell,  and I am the Director of the Division for the Deaf, Hard 
of Hearing, and Late Deafened (DHHLD) within the Maine Department of Labor. I am here today to testify 
in support of LD 1065,   An Act to Improve the Telecommunicatio ns Relay Services Council by Reducing Its 
Membership and Allowing for the Hiring of an Executive Director . 
As part of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Services  at the Maine Department of Labor , our division provides 
vocational rehabilitation services, as well as information, referrals,  and advocacy on behalf of Mainers 
who are Deaf , hard of hearing  and late deafened .  Telecommunications Relay Services (TRS) and captioned 
telephone service (CapTel or CTS) allow people who are Deaf, hard of hearing  or have speech  difficulties 
to communicate with hearing people.   With TRS, an individual can call a single number, 7 -1-1, which 
connects them to the TRS provider for the state who acts as a translator between the hearing  and the 
deaf or hard of hearing  individual in t he  telephonic communication.   An important benefit of the system 
is that it does not require both parties on the call to have assistive devices.   This service is vital , not only 
for health and safety, but the emotional wellbeing of our communit y members  who are able to stay 
connected with family, friends,  and colleagues .    
The TRS Council, of which I am a member, is mandated to evaluate and oversee Maine’s 
telecommunication relay services program as certified by the Federal Communications Commission .   In 
recent years, Council operations - including meeting facilitation, budget preparation, contract 
management, invoice processing and reporting – have been strained  because of the limited  capacity of  
the m embers  who are  all volunteers .  This bill would allow the Council to hire a parttime  Executive Director 
using existing funds to ensure that the Council is able to carry out its duties effec tively  and in com pliance 
with state and federal regulations. It would also encourage members to be more willing to serve in the 
officer roles of chair, vice chair and treasurer , knowing that the time -intensive operational functions were 
being performed  by an executive director.  The bill also reduces the number of members by removing the 
requirement for representatives from a telephone association and a telecommunications relay services 
company, which have been difficult to fill, but could sit in one of the vacant General Public seats should a 
representative become available.  
Thank you for  the consideration of this information.  I would be happy to atten d the Wo rk Session and 
answer any questions that you may have . 
