      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
May 5, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1426, An Act to Secure Housing for the Most Vulnerable Maine Residents by Amending the 
Laws Governing Municipal General Assistance, and LD 1732, An Act to Expand the General 
Assistance Program  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services Committee,  
my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine (CHOM) .  
CHOM houses Maine’s most vulnerable people and advocates on behalf of these broader populations .  I 
am a member of the State wide Homeless Council and also chair the Maine Homeless Policy Committee 
and the Maine Continuum of Care Board of Directors.   
 
My testimony is in support of LD 1426, An Act to Secure Housing for the Most Vulnerable Maine 
Residents by Amending the Laws Governing Municipal General Assistance, and LD 1732, An Act to 
Expand the General Assistance Program.  Th ese bills would both make a number of changes to the 
General Assistance (GA) program . 
 
LD 1426:  
1. Requires an overseer, no later than the 120th day following appointment or election, to complete 
training on the requirements of the municipal GA program;  
2. Replaces, for determining the maximum level of assistance, the fair market value determination 
with setting the assistance at the equivalent amount of rental assistance provided for tenant -based 
housing choice vouchers under Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 except that the 
benefit level may not be less than the difference between the applicant's income and 110% of the 
area's fair market rent;  
3. Provides that if GA is being used to pay rent for an applicant whose rent is subject to a lease an  
overseer may redetermine the applicant's eligibility annually;  
4. Increases from 70% to 90% the amount of state reimbursement for the costs of GA incurred by a municipality and each Indian tribe;  
5. Directs the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to reimburse each municipality for 5% of the direct costs of paying benefits incurred through its GA program;  
6. Directs DHHS to establish and provide overseers with access to a statewide database for tracking applicants for the GA program and expenses relating to the program; and  
7. Requires DHHS to provide assistance to municipalities with regard to processing applications for 
the GA program and directs the Department to establish a hotline that is available 24 hours per day 
in order to provide consistent, accurat e advice to overseers. It also requires the department to 
respond to requests for assistance within 24 hours.  
LD 1732:  
1. Requires overseers and designated or appointed municipal officials administering the program to 
complete training within 120 days of elec tion or appointment;  
2. Requires municipalities to accept applications for general assistance during regular business hours;  
3. Amends provisions governing the municipality of responsibility to increase the provision of 
assistance from 30 days to 6 months when a  municipality assists an applicant in relocating to another 
community and from 6 months to 12 months when an applicant is residing in a group home, shelter, rehabilitation center, nursing home or hospital or in a hotel, motel or other temporary housing;  
4. Increases, from 70% to 90%, the amount of state reimbursement for the costs of general assistance 
incurred by each municipality and Indian tribe. It also provides that, if a municipality elects to 
determine need without consideration of funds from a municipa lly controlled trust, the State is 
required to reimburse the municipality for 2/3% of the amount in excess of expenditures;  
5. Provides state reimbursement for additional program costs, including emergency general assistance, 
temporary housing, interpreter se rvices and administrative expenses; and  
6. Requires the Department of Health and Human Services to provide the services necessary to support 
municipalities, including education and training for certain state employees, 24 -hour technical 
assistance, written de cisions and a database.  
 
Both of these bills would ensure there is an adequate safety net through common sense changes to the 
GA program.  These bills improve and streamline GA laws/policies to remove barriers and simplify 
access/use specifically for housi ng. 
  
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Sarah Derosier  
Asset  Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
    
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
LD 1426 and LD 1732 would both improve  GA law  by making it eas ier to read , interpret, and follow, with special emphasis on 
emergency assistance and 24-hour access .  Additional training is also included which would ensure GA is more accurately  
understood.  The bills would ensure there is consistent e nforcement of GA policies.   These bills also importantly increase the 
presumptive eligibility period, which is of particular importance for  housing assistance.   
 
GA administration  varies greatly throughout Maine.  These bills would improve  uniformity across  the state , make it  more 
equitable,  and create a  reasonable  rate of State reimbursement for GA costs borne by municipalities.  And this bill would solve 
many programmatic inconsistencies, improving  our system of care and our safety net for Maine’s most vulnerable people.  
 
General assistance is Maine’s safety net o f last resort.  It protects thousands of Mainers by keeping a roof over their heads when 
they have nowhere else to turn.  We will all be better for having an improved General Assistance program in Maine . People would 
be better served by their local GA prog rams  if these bills pass . 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
 
