   
 
 
 
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony in Support  of LD 1426 – “An Act to Secure Housing for the Most Vulnerable Maine 
Residents by Amending the Laws Governing Municipal General Assistance” 
 
April 25, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services . My name is Deborah Laurie, Bangor City Manager, and I’m providing 
testimony on behalf of the Bangor City C ouncil in support of LD  1426, An Act to Secure Housing for the 
Most Vulnerable Maine Residents by Amending the Laws Governing Municipal General Assistance . 
 
As Maine’s third largest city and a service center community, we have a robust General Assistance 
program.  In the past five years, our program has served over 2,100 households with total expenditures of 
$5,659,522.  These numbers are actually a bit deceiving as our caseload decreased significantly during the 
two plus years our clients were eligible for COVID rent relief.  Now that those funds have been depleted, 
our caseload is rising rapidly, and we have replaced a retiring part -time caseworker with a full time one.  
In addition to our traditional clients, we are begi nning to see more immigrant households.  While these 
individuals and families bring welcomed diversity to our community, they tax the GA program not only 
in terms of benefits received but also in administrative costs such as interpreters and the increased 
caseworker time required to process their applications.  
 
General Assistance programs in Maine are as different as the communities they serve.  Despite the fact 
GA statute and ordinance are in place to guide programs, there is wide variance in how municipa lities 
determine eligibility and grant benefits.  This is due in part to a lack of required training for GA 
administrators and also a lack of consistent oversight from the State.  LD 1426 will require that all GA 
administrators complete a training program within 120 days of hire. It will also require that DHHS provide 
technical assistance to municipal GA programs 24 hours per day.  This is critical as GA programs are 
required by law to accept applications 24 hours per day, and quick clarification f rom the s tate on complex 
issues during non- business hours is of the utmost importance.  It is not only important that municipalities 
get answers to their questions, but also that those answers reference GA statute, thereby making 
communications with clients easier.   These two elements can help ensure all Maine residents have fair and 
reasonable access to General Assistance regardless of their municipality of residence.   
 
LD 1426 will also change the way in which General Assistance maximums are determined.  Current 
maximums have not kept up with rapidly rising rental costs, and an increasing number of households that 
could cover their rent with GA can no longer do so.  Replacing the current maximums with a value 
equivalent to the amount of rental assistance provided b y Section 8 will help alleviate this shortfall and 
ensure that more Mainers don’t fall into homelessness.   
 
 
GA expenditures for both benefits and program administration are on the rise in Bangor and other service 
center communities.  In FY ’22, the City of Bangor awarded $ 475,852 in GA benefits and was reimbursed 
$333,096 by the State.  That left Bangor taxpayers responsible for $142,756.  It is unfair to expect the 
residents of high- need, service center communities to pay such a large share of the regional and statewide 
cost of General Assistance.  Raising the reimbursement rate to 90% and adding a 5% reimbursement for 
the direct cost of  program administration will make GA a more equitable program for all municipalities.   
 
Finally, GA  administrators currently lack  the ability to communicate with other GA administrators via a 
database in order to track services provided or other referrals /interventions surrounding the individuals 
and families seen in our offices. This puts us behind other state services such as vehicle registration and 
MaineCare and often leads to a more complicated use of administrator and client time as information 
requi red to determine eligibility is tracked down via phone and email . The creation of a statewide General 
Assistance database that interfaces with other state service providers w ill enhance our level of care to both 
our clients as well as stewardship of resour ces. 
 
Bangor has been and continues to be committed to our citizens in need of General Assistance.  We believe, 
however, that the program can be run more equitably and efficiently if the above mentioned changes are 
enacted.  Therefore, with the full suppor t of the Bangor City Council, I urge you to pass LD 1426.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. Please do not hesitate to reach out with questions.  
 
Deborah Laurie, City Manager, debbie.laurie@bangormaine. gov 
Courtney O’Donnell, Assistant City Manager/ Director of Human Resources, 
courtney.odonnell@bangormaine.gov   
Richard Fournier, City Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov  
 
 
