District 1 51: Kittery   
May 5 , 2023  
 
Testimony of Representative Kristi Mathieson  presenting  
LD 1426 , An Act to Secure Housing for the Most Vulnerable Maine Residents 
by Amending the Laws Governing Municipal General Assistance  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on  Health and Human Services   
 
Good afternoon Senator Ba ldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee  on Health and Human Services. My name is Kristi Mathieson . I have the 
distinct pleasure of representing the beautiful  seaside community of Kittery, Dist rict 151. I am 
here to present LD 1426, An Act to Secure Housing for the Most Vulnerable Maine 
Residents by Amending the Laws Governing Municipal General Assistance . 
 
I started my community volunteer work in  my early 20 s working  Sunday night s at a local 
homeless shelter for women and children . The shelter h ad a TV room where we would gather 
and mostly just  talk. I heard many stories about why the fam ilies ended up at the shelter. Many 
were hard working people who were  living paycheck to paycheck and were  just one unexpected 
expense away from ending up at the shelter .   
 
General A ssistance  (GA)  programs at the municipal level can be one key tool to provide 
temporary financial assistance to those  experiencing a crisis or  financial hardship. The programs 
are intended to be a safety net for those in need . Unfortunately , the GA program has many 
barriers , not just for  those in need , but also for  the municipalities and CAP agencies working so 
hard to try to help those in need.    
 
I have had multiple  conversations over the last three years  regarding general assistance. I met 
with constituents  trying to access GA funds, with  local CAP  agenc ies, municipal leaders, GA 
administrator s, local nonprofits and local landlords. The issues that came up over and over again 
in these conversations around general assistance were:  
 It’s an  underfunded  mandate . 
 Administrative  costs or GA and supplying the workforce is  difficult for the towns to 
budget . 
 These administrative costs differ between municipalities depending on  need /use of GA 
funds . 
 The rules  around administrating GA funds is confusing  and inconsistent.   
Kristi Mathieson  
26 Haley Road  
Kittery, ME 03904  
 Phone:  (603) 969-7496 
Kristi.Mathieson@l egislature. maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE   04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 

District 1 51: Kittery   The rules around rental maximums are confusing  for GA administrators  and those trying 
to stay hous ed. 
 Rental maximums are not covering current rental rates . 
 The barriers to accessing the program  (eligibility, location of the GA office, stigma and 
shame) causes  additional stress for individuals already struggling .   
 CAP agencies  find it hard to  support multiple municipalities with the inconsistencies 
around GA administration .  
 Landlords don’t feel comfortable accepting  GA funds with the rental maximums being 
lower than other rental assistance programs .  
 
The combination of these issues cause  significant stress and uncertainty for individuals who are 
already struggling to make ends meet . They  cause stress for the municipality  and CAP agencies 
trying to help their community members . They cause  isolation of  people in our communities  
who, without  access to these resources , cannot  become self -sufficient , or (like one of my elderly 
residents ) cannot stay housed . To address these issues, general assistance programs need to be 
reevaluated and restructured . They need to p rovide support and reduce barri ers to accessing 
assistance . Our neighbors need to be in stable homes!    
 
This bill would do  the following:    
 
 Requires  the State to reimburse municipalities for 90% of their General Assistance costs.  
 Requires that General Assistance rental maximums align with every other rental 
assistance program in Maine .  
 Requires that eligibility determ inations occur every 6 months to a  year. 
 Requires  GA administrators to complete a training course within 120 days of 
appointment or election.  
 Requires the  State provide a  5% reimbursement for municipal administrative costs .  
 Requires the Department of Health and Human Services  to provide necessary services  to 
support municipalities . 
 
General assistance support is crucial for providing a safety net  for our vulnerable neighb ors. We 
need to keep our community members housed to avoid the devastating consequences of 
homele ssness and housing insecurity. I know you are considering many bills and appreciate your 
thoughtful attention  today . I ask the committee to vote Ought to Pass  on LD 1426.  
 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions.  
