District 123: Cape Elizabeth   
 
May 5, 2023  
 
Testimony of Rep. Rebecca Millett supporting  
LD 1426, An Act to Secure Housing for the Most Vulnerable Maine 
Residents by Amending the Laws Governing Municipal General 
Assistance  
Before the Joint Standing  Committee on Health and Human Services  
 
Good morning , Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and honorable  members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services . My name is Rebecca Millett, and I 
represent House District 123, which makes up most of Cape Elizabeth. Thank you for the 
opportunity to come before you as a cosponsor in support of  LD 1426 , An Act to Secure 
Housing for the Most Vulnerable Maine Residents  by Amending the Laws Governing 
Municipal General Assistance . I am grateful to my colleague Rep. Kristi Mathieson for 
bringing this bill forward.  
Many times, as I’ve sat on my local school board, chaired the Children’s Caucus and served on 
the Education an d Cultural Affairs Committee, I’ve heard from educators about how they find 
themselves being asked to solve some of society’s most difficult problems, fundamental issues 
that they can’t truly address in the classroom, as they try to educate our kids.  
Our e ducators know that, in order to succeed in school and in their lives, children and families 
need their most basic needs to be met. But far too many families are struggling to meet those 
basic needs, unable to afford a safe, stable home or to put enough foo d on the table , preventing 
them from reaching their full potential and putting them at risk for a host of harmful outcomes . 
This is the perspective with which I approach our work in the Legislature to tackle the 
interconnected challenges that face our state.  
We have a lot of work to do to address these issues in the longer term, but one of our first order s 
of business should be ensuring that our most universal safety net, the General Assistance  
Rebecca Millett  
50 Market St., Ste 1A PMB 162  
 South Portland, ME 04106  
Residence: (207) 415 -3770  
Rebecca.Millett@legislature.maine.gov   HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA,  MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 

Program, is strong enough to protect vulnerable Mainers whi le we as policymakers race to put 
durable solutions in place. That is what LD 1426 aims to do.  
LD 1426 increases reimbursements to the municipalities that administer this important program 
and ensures that local officials receive training. It also increase s the state resources available to 
those local officials, providing them with an around -the-clock hotline an d timely responses to 
requests. Finally, it brings assistance levels more in line with other programs and, more 
importantly, the reality that Mainer s face.  
Let’s  commit to ensuring that all Mainers – our children and families, our older adults, everyone 
– have a safe place to call home and the support they need to thrive. We can begin to show that 
commitment today by supporting LD 1426.  
Thank you for  your consideration.  
