i'. 
<1»zn 
‘*»~'-; IIQIHIBGTGI I)!»lKQi ¢,~ », ; l 
5, 
Ll ‘-1 
I-SSC OQIKTIQN l€lllTll§" 
---—--~“-w-' 
wvzi?g§;; ﬁ 
\vur1r.nnta.cus ~f 
(zemza-412: 
TESTIMONY OF ~ ~ * ~ 
Timothy S. Doyle 
ON 
L.D. 652, “An Act to Allow the Reinstatement of Certain 
Commercial Driver’s Licenses ” 
Good afternoon, Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and 
members of the Transportation Committee. My name is Tim Doyle 
and I am the Vice President of Maine Motor Transport Association. 
The Association is comprised of over 1,700-member companies, 
whose employees comprise a large portion of the nearly 34,000 
people who make their living in the trucking industry in Maine. 
I am here today to testify in support of LD 652. 
Federal regulations in 49 CFR Part 383.51 (table 1) require thata 
driver with a CDL or CLP be disqualified from operating commercial 
vehicles for 1 year, for refusing to take an alcohol test as required 
under a State or local jurisdiotion ’s implied consent law, when 
operating a commercial or non-commercial vehicle. A second or 
subsequent refusal to test would result in a lifetime disqualification of 
the CDL. » 
This type of disqualification is not limited in the federal regulations to 
refusal to submit to an alcohol test, but to several combinations of
violations in Table 1 (b)(1) through (8), which are considered “major 
traffic violations ” under the regulations. 
Part 383.51 (a)(6) allows for reinstatement after a lifetime 
disqualification after 10 years if the person has voluntarily entered 
and successfully completed an appropriate rehabilitation program 
approved by the State. Any person who has been reinstated in 
accordance with this provision and who is subsequently convicted of 
a disqualifying offense in (b)(1) through (8) of this section must not be 
reinstated. 
Title 29A § 2523 is modeled after 49 CFR Part 383 and includes 
refusal to test for the presence of a drug or drug metabolite or for 
alcohol when there is probable cause to believe the operator of the 
commercial motor vehicle is under the influence of drugs or is .04 or 
higher bac. The suspensions periods imposed for violations of Title 
29A §2523 mirror those in federal regulations. 
The federal regulations allow for reinstatement after 10 years when 
rehabilitation has taken place after appropriate treatment. The 
Association believes that this pathway gives hope to disqualified 
drivers to allow for driving commercial motor vehicles again within 
their lifetime. The key to getting the CDL privilege back would be 
successfully completing an appropriate rehabilitationprocess that is 
approved by the State.
The bill as written allows for disqualified persons to request a hearing 
under Title 29A §2483 from the Secretary of State. In our opinion, 
however, that section was not written to accommodate 
disqualifications for violations of Table 1 violations or of Title 29A 
2523. 
Should the Committee determine that CDL holders be eligible for 
reinstatement after for lifetime disqualifications, after 10 years, and 
with appropriate rehabilitation, we recommend inserting specific 
language to Title 29A to address these specific disqualifications. 
Thank you and l would be happy to answer any questions the 
committee may have.
