A MQ;,~,€,'5 A THE UNIVERSITY or 
PUZJIIQ 
Q2 
, 2» MAINE Universities , 
uurvsrésrt ﬂr or mum: srsrsm I 
C°0PeI'?1 ﬁV9 Extension 
Testimony of Behalf of the University of Maine System 
Presented by Samantha Warren, Director of Government Relations 
in Support of LD 1021, An Act to Enhance Awareness of Laboratory 
Testing of Ticks for Lyme Disease — March 20, 2023 
Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry: My name is Samantha Warren 
and l am the Director of Government Relations for Maine’s public universities.'
b 
ln 2014, the Legislature and voters statewide generously funded the construction of the 
University of Maine Extension Diagnostic and Research Laboratory (DRL), which brings 
together under one roof world-class aquatic animal health research, veterinary diagnostic 
services, plant disease testing, insect identification, and tick identification and pathogen testing. 
Since opening in 2018, each year the tick lab has received an increasing number of samples 
from Mainers who want to know the type of tick they have encountered and what diseases it 
may carry. This surge in demand for the lab’s services has been driven both by climate change 
expanding ticks’ range and resilience, and people spending more time outdoors. In 2022, 5,274 
ticks were submitted to the lab from 380 Maine communities, and more than half tested positive 
for at least one pathogen, including 43.5% of submissions being positive for the causative 
agents of Lyme. 
As this Committee is aware, an annual appropriation of $250,000 directly supports the 
operations of the tick lab (less than the $500,000 initially proposed by Gov. Mills). This 
important ongoing State investment enables us to charge just $15 for the testing of each tick 
for the causative agents of Lyme disease, anaplasmosis, babesiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever, ehrlichiosis, tularemia and hard tick relapsing fever. This nominal fee is significantly less 
than other public universities charge, including the‘ 
University of Connecticut ($87-$127) and 
the University of Massachusetts ($50-$200). 
Starting next month, our lab will raise its tick testing fee to $20 to cover the increasing cost of 
materials (reagents, tubes, plates, pipettes, etc.) and to further expand our testing panels to 
also detect the pathogens for Powassan virus and heartland virus. Cases of Powassan virus 
have been reported in Maine for more than two decades and have recently resulted in several 
human fatalities. While no human cases of heartland virus have been reported in Maine, the 
virus has been detected widely in Maine wildlife and we want to be proactively monitoring for 
those pathogens which may emerge in humans in the near future. 
We appreciate Rep. Smith’s recognition that our tick lab is a critical state asset, and her 
commitment to expanding public awareness and investment. While the University of Maine 
System did not request a funding increase for the lab in the FY24-25 biennial budget, if the 
Committee wants to further support the lab as LD 1021 proposes, one option is to increase its 
annual appropriation byat least $30,000. Depending on the Legislature ’s-timing, this amount 
could mitigate our need to increase tick testing fees and help us continue to maintain affordable 
access to testing so Mainers can take proactive steps to engage their healthcare providers and 
seek necessary treatment earlier. We welcome other ideas and investment to enhance and 
expand the essential services our lab provides Maine people. 
Thank you for your continued commitment to University of Maine Cooperative Extension and 
to Maine's public universities.
4 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of' Maine at Fort Kent 
University of Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque Isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
