                                                          TESTIMONY OF ANDRE LEVESQUE. 
 
                                                                       In favor of LD 1809 
                                 An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent 
                                 BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
                                                                           Sponsored by : - Rep. Jeffrey Adams of Lebanon 
                                                                         Public Hearing May 5, 2023 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary. 
My name is Andy Levesque I’m a resident of Gorham, a faithful Catholic, a member of the Knights of 
Columbus, and a board member of Maine Right to Life. 
So we meet again, after Mondays historic show of pro-life Mainers opposing LD1619 which would 
terminate the life of a newborn baby. 
I hope and pray that our sheer numbers will give you affirmation that the majority of Mainer’s do not 
support the Governor’s Bill to kill our newborns. 
Today I support LD494,771,1197,1249,1614 and 1809. 
I support this bill for the following reasons: 
This bill requires parental consent and the provision of parental notification before a minor can obtain 
treatment for all health care services, including but not limited to:  
1. Giving blood;  
2. Preventing or treating a sexually transmitted infection;  
3. Preventing or treatment for substance use disorder, including psychological, counseling or social 
work services;  
4. Collecting sexual assault evidence through a sexual assault forensic examination;  
5. Providing health services associated with a sexual assault forensic examination;  
6. Providing family planning services;  
7. Providing an abortion;  
8. Treating emotional or psychological problems;  
9. Providing direct and indirect services by school counselors and school social workers; 
and 10. Providing a substance use assessment, education or support group service when a student 
has been determined to be in violation of school rules governing substance use or alcohol or drug 
possession. The bill repeals the provision of law authorizing a surrogate to provide consent for the 
health care of a minor. 
When a child dies, Abortion is NOT Healthcare. 
I urge you to vote for LD 1809, It’s the right thing to do.  
Andy Levesque  
200 Ossipee Trail 
Gorham, Maine 
