 Executive Committee  
 President  
 Angie Buker , MSN, RN, NCSN  
 Immediate Past President  
 Melinda Nadeau, BSN, RN  
 President Elect  
 Vacant  
 Secretary  
 Jessi W oodman, BSN, RN, NCSN  
 Treasurer  
 Donna Jordan, BSN, RN, CCM  
 Historian  
 Janet Rivard, BSN, RN, NCSN  
 NASN Director  
 Lisa Mckenna, MSN, RN, NCSN  
 MDOE School Nurse Consultant  
 Emily Poland, MPH, RN, NCSN   May 5, 2023 
 Testimony of the Maine Association of School Nurses in Opposition of 
 LD 1809 “An Act to Prohibit Healthcare Services Without Parental 
 Consent”. 
 Angie Buker, MSN, RN, NCSN 
 President, Maine Association of School Nurses 
 abuker@aos94.org 
 Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and honorable members of the 
 Judiciary Committee:  My name is Angie Buker and I am president of the 
 Maine Association of School Nurses (MASN) and a member of the National 
 Association of School Nurses (NASN). MASN represents more than half of 
 Maine’s Pre K-12 school nurses.  Our mission is to optimize student health 
 and learning by advancing the practice of school nursing. 
 It is the position of NASN that prevention, early identification, intervention and 
 care of child maltreatment are critical to the physical/emotional well-being and 
 academic success of students. You cannot read a newspaper or journal lately 
 without seeing an article about the increase in the mental health needs in 
 Maine, especially in students. Access to healthcare is already challenging. 
 LD 1809 would only create additional barriers to care for Maine students. 
 Ideal care involves parents and/or guardians and students.  However, in 
 situations where parents and/or guardians may be perpetrators, how would 
 these students get help? 
 As a high school nurse myself, I see daily the stressors that teens are 
 learning how to manage. The number of stressors that affect high school 
 students are nearly insurmountable. Students may also have unresolved or 
 continuing trauma, untreated mental health needs and/or substance use 
 issues. There are times that students can feel overwhelmed by the 
 continuous stress that feels never ending and unresolvable. Unfortunately, we 
 have seen in the news as well as know personally and professionally when 
 these times have ended in tragedy.  We need to intervene before these 
 tragedies happen and provide the resources that students need for their 
 mental and physical wellness. 
 For these reasons, MASN urges the committee to vote  Ought Not to Pass 
 on LD 1809.  Thank you for hearing the concerns of MASN as we strive to 
 keep Maine students healthy and ready to learn. 
 www .maineschoolnurse.nursingnetwork.com  

