 
 
HealthReach urges “ought not to pass” on  LD 1809 ,  
“An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent”  
Our children deserve more  access to care, not less.  
Senator Carne y, Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary – my 
name is Ed Molleo, and I am the Director of Communications for HealthReach Community Health Center s. 
 
HealthReach is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit network of 12  Community Health Center s, located throughout Central 
and Western Maine. On an annual basis, we se rve more than 26,000 patients  through services that run the 
gamut of general preventative healthcare, dental care, and behavioral health services.  Our locations are 
situated in otherwise medically underserved communities  within this most rural state of all th e United 
States. Our clinics span a large service area , bounded by Albion and Whitefield to the east, Bingham to the 
north, Rangeley and Bethel to the west, and Richmond to the south.  We serve patients that come from 9 of 
Maine’s 16 counties, and our Connector Program further links  both patients and clients with support services  
– including health insurance, food bank re sources, transportation, and more  – that allow them to live 
healthier, more enjoyable lives . 
 
The last three  years have presented a huge number of challenges to our youth,  both  in Maine and globally. 
We know that demand for mental health services outstrips available supply  at a time when rates of anxiety 
and depression – as well as attempted suicide  – have each risen. We also know that prevent ative 
healthcare has taken a back seat to other priorities , as demonstrated by both decreased vaccination rates 
and increased spread of preventable disease . As a state and a community, we must do everything we can 
to recover from this slump  and begin to better  serve our youth with timely, safe, and effective healthcare . 
 
As members of the  same  communities we serve, we are acutely aware that our services stand as  a lifeline 
for many rural peopl es – and particularly our children.  Access to healthcare is an existential concern for 
those that live far from service centers like Portland, Lewiston/Auburn, and Bangor.  Increasing barriers to 
care only serves to de lay, or at worst, de ny care for the most vulnerable members of our communities.  
 This bill is , first and foremost, unnecessary.  Trusted licensed clinicians following a code of ethics already 
evaluate minor patients’ capacity to consent to treatment.  The American Medical Association elaborates on PR@HealthReach.org  
DATE: May 2023  
 Contact: Communications Department  
Tele:        ( 207 ) 660 - 9913 
 

the point of confidential healthcare for minors : “A minor’s decision -making capacity depends on many 
factors, including not only chronological age, but also emotional maturity, and the individual’s medical 
experience.”  Providers do, on a case -by-case basis,  gently urge children to confide in their parents whe n 
safe to do so –  unfortunately, real risk here is all too common for many of our youth. The clinicians in our  
health centers carefully evaluate each situation presented before them and proceed accordingly.  
 
The bill before you  would be regressive . While we believe the intentions are good, the bill as written would 
immediately restrict access to care for some of the children needing it most.  This bill does not consider 
the situation many children in our communities unfortunately face  on a daily basis . While we fully respect 
the special nature of the parent -child relationship  – many of us being parents ourselves –  this bill presents 
a number of unintended consequences.  
 What will happen i f a child seeks care after a s exual assault, and their parent was the attacker  – is their 
consent required for forensic examination and treatment?  What i f a child requires urgent care, and their 
parent is neglectful , under heavy influence of substances,  or otherwise  does not answer good faith attempts 
by the provider to reach out  – shall they go  untreated ? This bill would take us down such paths.  
 
We know that many health issues affecting our youth are further complicated by widespread stigma – 
• If a youth cannot safely disclose whatever they want  or need to , the clinician  may not have enough 
information to know what kind of help the child needs.  
• Not all parents have unconditional love for their child . Some parents abuse or disown a child for a 
variety of reasons outside the child ’s control . If certain  information is dis closed, it could make a 
patie nt vulnerable to a range of punishments – from unkind treatment  to homeless ness , or worse . 
• Some parents may worry that “secrets” will undermine their relationship with their child. But, when a child can openly discuss their feelings with a trusted clinician, their relation ships  with others –  
including their parents –  may improve.  
This bill –  as wr itten – will not  convince a youth to disclose a situation around which they feel shame or 
embarrassment; rather, it will prevent them from accessing timely healthcare services to treat all 
manner of issue or injury.  
 On behalf of HealthReach and our communities throughout Central and Western Maine , I thank you for your 
consideration of our testimony . LD 1809  does not serve the best interest of either our youth or our society . 
Please choose to support the health and wel lbeing of our children with your “ought not to pass” vote.  
 
 Should you have any questions or seek further insight, please feel free to reach out to me.  
 
 
Edward Molleo (he/they)  
Director of Communications , HealthReach  
( 2 0 7 )  6 6 0 – 9 9 1 3  
Edward.Molleo@HealthReach.org  
 
 
-END- 
