Testimony of  Emily Albee	Distinguished members of  the Judiciary Committee. My name is Emily Albee. I am a resident of  Orono and the 2022 Penobscot County Teacher of  the Year. I am an educator and a proud member of  the Maine Education Association. Please accept my written testimony against LD 1809. This bill, rooted in fear and controlling mentalities, sets a dangerous precedent negatively impacting students in Maine and I urge the Committee to unanimously vote ought not to pass. 	 As we learned during and post pandemic, our public schools continue to serve as a massive equalizing and stabilizing force for all students. Our schools provide access to food, internet, trusted adults, and resources for all students to achieve academic, emotional, behavioral, and social success. Schools serve as a safe place for students to access help when they recognize the need or allows trained professionals to guide students to help. Students are struggling now more than ever in our post pandemic world with many issues impacting their physical and emotional health. To name a few, students are engaging in using destructive substances, struggling with depression & anxiety , grappling with feelings of  anger & aggression, and quite frankly , trying to reconcile how to have hope against their hopeless dystopian world view reﬂective of  our current national climate. Our administrators ﬁght the daily battle of  young people who are sadly struggling with addiction to vaping and do not understand the long term impacts yet of  their addiction. Punitive responses are not the answer to supporting students. Students should be connected with School Counselors and the Nurse who can better understand and access supports to help them work through vaping addictions. It is too simplistic to state that our young people are going through a tough time. Without the consistent support and resources our school professionals offer, our young people would experience even more harm during these challenging times. If  students were aware their parents would be notiﬁed before they received help and guidance from school professionals, it would create an access barrier creating fear of  negative consequences at home or worse, for their challenges to be cast aside as not important. 	 Our public schools are ﬁlled with highly qualiﬁed and licensed professionals who are there to support our students in their greatest time of  need. This is especially vital for students who do not feel they have supportive and trusted adults in their lives outside of  school. Building trusted relationships between school personnel and students is the foundation of  supporting students with the most difﬁcult challenges in their lives. Without trust and appropriate conﬁdentiality , our students would avoid seeking out guidance or help with sensitive topics such as birth control, pregnancy , resources for sexual assault, suicidal ideation, reporting abuse, or seeking help for substance abuse issues. Ideally , with student permission, school ofﬁcials and families work collaboratively to support students but that is a process that is worked towards instead of  starting as a barrier. Putting the legal requirement of  parental consent onto trained school ofﬁcials before assisting students in their time of  need would serve as a deterrent to students reaching out for help. Trained professionals at schools are skilled at triaging the order of  response to assist students in crisis. Pausing the process when a student reaches out for help to ensure parental permission, impacts response time and resources available for the student. Please let our school ofﬁcials use their best professional judgement on when and how to include families in supporting students. Mandating that parental permission needs to come ﬁrst before students can access support and services will create harm for our young people and that is the ultimate disservice to our students. I urge the Committee to unanimously vote ought not to pass on LD 1809.  	
Emily Albee
Orono
LD 1809
Distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee. My name is Emily Albee. I am 
a resident of Orono and the 2022 Penobscot County Teacher of the Year. I am an 
educator and a proud member of the Maine Education Association. Please accept my 
written testimony against LD 1809. This bill, rooted in fear and controlling 
mentalities, sets a dangerous precedent negatively impacting students in Maine and I 
urge the Committee to unanimously vote ought not to pass.
As we learned during and post pandemic, our public schools continue to serve as a 
massive equalizing and stabilizing force for all students. Our schools provide access 
to food, internet, trusted adults, and resources for all students to achieve academic, 
emotional, behavioral, and social success. Schools serve as a safe place for students to
access help when they recognize the need or allows trained professionals to guide 
students to help. Students are struggling now more than ever in our post pandemic 
world with many issues impacting their physical and emotional health. To name a 
few, students are engaging in using destructive substances, struggling with depression
& anxiety, grappling with feelings of anger & aggression, and quite frankly, trying to 
reconcile how to have hope against their hopeless dystopian world view reflective of 
our current national climate. Our administrators fight the daily battle of young people 
who are sadly struggling with addiction to vaping and do not understand the long term
impacts yet of their addiction. Punitive responses are not the answer to supporting 
students. Students should be connected with School Counselors and the Nurse who 
can better understand and access supports to help them work through vaping 
addictions. It is too simplistic to state that our young people are going through a tough
time. Without the consistent support and resources our school professionals offer, our 
young people would experience even more harm during these challenging times. If 
students were aware their parents would be notified before they received help and 
guidance from school professionals, it would create an access barrier creating fear of 
negative consequences at home or worse, for their challenges to be cast aside as not 
important.
Our public schools are filled with highly qualified and licensed professionals who 
are there to support our students in their greatest time of need. This is especially vital 
for students who do not feel they have supportive and trusted adults in their lives 
outside of school. Building trusted relationships between school personnel and 
students is the foundation of supporting students with the most difficult challenges in 
their lives. Without trust and appropriate confidentiality, our students would avoid 
seeking out guidance or help with sensitive topics such as birth control, pregnancy, 
resources for sexual assault, suicidal ideation, reporting abuse, or seeking help for 
substance abuse issues. Ideally, with student permission, school officials and families 
work collaboratively to support students but that is a process that is worked towards 
instead of starting as a barrier. Putting the legal requirement of parental consent onto 
trained school officials before assisting students in their time of need would serve as a
deterrent to students reaching out for help. Trained professionals at schools are skilled
at triaging the order of response to assist students in crisis. Pausing the process when 
a student reaches out for help to ensure parental permission, impacts response time 
and resources available for the student. Please let our school officials use their best 
professional judgement on when and how to include families in supporting students. 
Mandating that parental permission needs to come first before students can access 
support and services will create harm for our young people and that is the ultimate 
disservice to our students. I urge the Committee to unanimously vote ought not to 
pass on LD 1809. 

