Emily Fortin
Resident of Wayne
LD 1809
TESTIMONY 
LD 1809 (Opposed) 
TO: Senator Anne Carney; Representative Matt Moonen; Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary 
FR: Emily Fortin, Licensed Master Social Worker, Licensed Clinical Social Worker 
(conditional clinical), School-Based Social Worker 
RE: LD 1809 - An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent
DA: May 5, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
I write you today in opposition of LD 1809, An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services 
Without Parental Consent. 
I have practiced social work for the last twelve years and since 2021 I have worked at 
a public school in Maine that serves over 800 students district wide. I am responsible 
for providing services to students from kindergarten through the twelfth grade at three
separate schools, and I work with students who receive special education services 
with Individualized Education Plans, students with disabilities that are supported 
through 504 plans, as well as students from the general population. Our district has 
two school nurses (one for the grade school and one for the middle school and high 
school), and each school employs one school counselor (previously referred to as 
“guidance counselor”). COVID funding allotted in 2021 allowed our district to 
employ a second district social worker for a two year contract and together she and I 
have served 26% of the school population for the last two school years.
Our data shows the top five root causes of students seeking social work services are as
follows: 
1. Trauma including Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, acute trauma and second 
hand-trauma;
2. Emotional disturbance resulting in underdeveloped social skills and conflict both at
school and at home;
3. Family Member struggling with Alcohol/Substance Misuse or Mental Illness, either
historically or current;
4. Learning challenges negatively impacting grade level academic/social 
achievement;
5. Family conflict negatively impacting academic and/or social achievement. 
Although we are now coming out of the COVID pandemic, the social, emotional and 
behavioral needs of our students are not going away. In January 2022, the U.S. 
Surgeon General declared a national youth mental health crisis, due to the pandemic’s
toll on children. In addition, current mental health research shows the average age of 
being diagnosed with depression is now 14.5 years old; 49.5% of adolescents are 
diagnosed with a mental disorder; the public health crisis of violence in schools has 
seen a significant increase over the past decades; and suicide is the third leading cause
of death for young people. Additionally, in recent studies, excessive smartphone use 
in children and adolescents has been connected with insecure attachments, poor 
cognitive-emotional regulation, problems with communication, impaired cognitive 
functioning, and medical complications including sleep, eyesight, fitness and pain. 
Smartphone use has also been connected with anxiety, depression, obsessive 
compulsive disorder (OCD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and 
alcohol use disorder. I give you this information to put into perspective why 
school-based social work is so important to the lives of minors. If restrictions are 
placed on that service that make it harder for students to access it, students will be the 
ones to suffer and we will we see an increase in poor mental and physical health 
outcomes.
Being a school-based social worker means that if a student experiences a mental 
health crisis at school, they are able to receive immediate and appropriate intervention
and referral services. Some need only short term supports, but the majority of students
I work with, need intervention services on a regular basis to be able to then focus on 
academic and social challenges. Additionally, waitlists (often 3-6 months long) for 
out-patient counseling services are currently at an all time high so we are now 
working with students who cannot access support services outside of school. I make 
every effort possible to include parents/legal guardians in the treatment services of the
minors I work with, as do all of my colleagues, since we know that in order for 
long-term change to occur, a student’s support system must be involved. There are a 
number of situations however, when communicating with parents/legal guardians 
would put the minor student in direct danger, many of which I know have already 
been addressed by other testimonies today.
As this bill reads, it is an attempt to limit access to early intervention services, would 
put vulnerable populations at further risk, increase stigma for mental health services, 
and decrease student well-being, actually placing many students in direct danger. 
Additionally, it appears to be written in an effort to limit and coerce access to certain 
forms of medical treatment. It is extremely inappropriate to consider repealing these 
allowances to support the well-being of minors. For these reasons, I hope you will 
vote Ought to Pass. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Sincerely, 
Emily Fortin, LMSW/LCSW-cc, School-Based Social Worker
