 
 
 
May 4th, 2022 
 
Dear Members of the Judiciary Committee 
 
My name is Gita Rao, and I am writing testimony in opposition of LD1809—An Act to Prohibit 
Health Care Services Without Parental Consent.  
 
As a Pediatrician practicing in School Based Health Centers, I bear witness to the true hardship 
many youth experience with their health. On a daily basis, I meet teens struggling with mental 
illness, substance use disorders, and high-risk sexual health behaviors.  Many of these youth face 
poverty, trauma, and homelessness which have strongly influenced their own health behaviors.  It 
is my privilege to provide care to some of the most vulnerable and resilient youth in our 
communities.  I am certain that a law requiring parental consent for mental health services, 
substance use treatment, and sexual health services would pose a dangerous barrier to minors 
seeking critical, time-sensitive healthcare.   
 
I have heard many reasons why minors will not seek parental consent to access behavioral health 
or family planning services- fear of emotional abuse, fear of losing housing, fear of physical 
violence, concern it will trigger a parents own mental health symptoms, and lack of any consistent 
contact with a parent or legal guardian. Youth who have already had adverse childhood 
experiences face the most barriers to communicating with parents on aspects of their mental health 
and sexual health.  In essence, laws requiring parental consent for substance use treatment, mental 
health services, and family planning services close healthcare doors for youth who are the most 
vulnerable. 
 
Youth deserve quick access to healthcare services that are low barrier, judgement-free, and 
effective.  Youth often experience shame and fear when asking for confidential healthcare, and if 
the answer is “we must call your parent first”, teens will walk away from services and likely not 
return. This would cause a delay in identifying medical and behavioral health symptoms leading 
to progression of serious illnesses; illnesses that can result in school absenteeism, substance use, 
self-injurious behaviors, suicidal ideation, and medical hospitalization.   
 
One example illustrating how a minor’s right to confidential care can be particularly supportive of 
the family unit involves a 16y/o youth experiencing worsening hopelessness, trouble with sleep, 
persistent low mood, and cutting.  In a medical visit, she disclosed these symptoms and stated “I 
have never told anyone this before”.  She was ready to engage in critically-needed counseling 
services.  She was connected to a licensed social worker for treatment.  Within counseling, this 
youth explored language on how to communicate her struggles with a parent; with courage, she 
began to share her mood symptoms with her parent, and asked the social worker to contact the 
parent.  In addition, the parent was connected to their own healthcare resources.  The goal was 
parent involvement in this critical moment in a minor’s life where they needed help.  However, 
the pathway to parent engagement was providing the confidential care necessarily for the minor to 
first engage in treatment, and with that, help the youth facilitate safe parent involvement.   
 
 
 
Requiring parental consent for mental health services, substance use treatment, and sexual health 
services puts adolescent lives in danger.  We need trusted healthcare providers who can help youth 
in their most vulnerable moments seek healthcare without additional barriers to delay critical care.  
This approach supports youth and families. 
 
For these reasons, I oppose LD1809—An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental 
Consent.  
 
 
  
Gita Rao, MD, MPH 
Medical Director, School Based Health Centers 
Greater Portland Health 
180 Park Avenue, Portland ME 
 
 
 

