Greg Marley
NAMI Maine
LD 1809
POSITION STATEMENT AGAINST PASSAGE
LD 1809 An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine 
stands firmly against LD 1809.  This law seeks to change carefully considered Maine 
law and regulations governing the conditions under which a minor child can provide 
consent to access services to support their health; physical, behavioral, and care 
related to substance use treatment.
Under most circumstances, a medical, behavioral health or substance use treatment 
clinician working with a youth under age 18 will work collaboratively with the youth 
and their parents or legal guardians to provide needed and appropriate care. Current 
Maine law does not specifically require consent of guardians prior to or during 
clinical work. This allowance gives the clinician latitude to make informed decisions 
on the situations youth face that make prior parental consent potentially risky for the 
minor. This includes situations of potential sexual, physical, or emotional abuse or 
neglect. The current latitude for clinicians creates a situation where a youth can step 
forward and access support and treatment for potentially serious or life-threatening 
conditions or situations that are emotionally difficult to discuss with privacy from 
parents. Without this latitude, a young person might avoid speaking about potentially 
life-threatening conditions for fear of parental involvement.  
NAMI Maine’s suicide prevention and youth education teams engage in considerable 
efforts to prevent and address suicide risk across all populations in Maine. We work 
extensively with school staff, clinicians, and students to deliver education building 
awareness about risk, increased comfort in managing difficult conversations and skills
to recognize risk and to connect a suicidal individual with the help they need. We 
provide similar training and resources for primary care and specialty practices, 
hospital staff and community healthcare programs working with high-risk populations
across the lifespan throughout the state.  Maine loses someone to suicide every 36 
hours, and a young person dies by suicide approximately every 10 days. Our suicide 
rate is 12.5 times higher than our rate of homicide. We need a clinical workforce able 
to immediately respond to risk.
The prevention of suicide rests on the foundational belief that most suicides are 
preventable if we have the opportunity to engage with an individual in crisis, break 
their sense of isolation and offer help and hope to the person in despair and 
hopelessness. In 2021, 18.5% of Maine high school students acknowledged seriously 
considering suicide over the previous 12 months and 9% reported making a suicide 
attempt. If a youth in a state of suicidal crisis feels they cannot speak with a provider 
in confidence OR if that provider who is approached by a youth in crisis must first get
written consent from a parent before engaging services we will face an increased risk 
of significantly more youth dying by suicide. NAMI Maine urges this committee to 
vote ought not to pass on LD 1809.  
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental 
Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) is the state’s largest grassroots mental health 
organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the agency is 
dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health 
concerns. NAMI Maine engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to 
improve the state’s mental health system through collaboration and education. 

