 
 
 
mepca.org State of Maine | 131st Legislature Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary Testimony of Hannah Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  May 5, 2023  In opposition to: LD 1809, “An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent”  Sponsored by Representative Jeffrey Adams  Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA).   MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs). Maine's CHCs make up the largest independent primary care network in the state, providing high quality and equitable primary and preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6 Mainers).  Community Health Centers are located in high need communities that are designated as either medically underserved areas or populations. We oppose LD 1809 as we believe it would significantly restrict access to necessary medical and behavioral health care.   Health centers promote health equity by ensuring that everyone has a fair and just opportunity to be healthier. They are focused on increasing access to care by reducing barriers that can have a negative impact on a patient’s health and survival. In addition to providing comprehensive primary care services, CHCs offer a host of other services that include transportation, translation, and case management services. They are further required to provide this care without regard to a patient’s insurance status or ability to pay.   We urge you to oppose this legislation as the State should be breaking down barriers to care, not building new ones. The people of Maine deserve the ability to access health care when care is needed.  On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org with any follow up questions.   Hannah Hudson, MA Policy & Communications Manager Maine Primary Care Association 
