Jeri Stevens PhD, LCPC, CCS 1580 Pond Rd Sidney, Me 04330  207-872-7558   Testimony re: LD 1410: “An Act to Hold School Employees Civilly Liable for Failure to Notify Parents Regarding Medical Issues of Students Under 18 Years of Age” and LD 1809 “An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent” – OUGHT NOT TO PASS   Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary:  Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment in opposition to both LD 1410 and LD 1809.  I am Jeri Stevens, PhD, LCPC, CCS. I started my career as a school counselor over 43 years ago and have been a clinical mental health counselor and clinical supervisor for 40 years. I am an assistant professor and clinical coordinator for the graduate counseling program at Husson University and provide clinical supervision to school counselors and school based mental health counselors.  Although parental consent is preferred, encouraged and desired, it is not always best practice. Many minors are confronted with sexual, emotional and physical abuse where gaining parental consent is either unsafe, inappropriate or not available.  By taking away minors right and imposing a civil liability upon school employees, minor will no longer have a safe environment to explore even normally developing issues like fears, shame, guilt, anxiety, etc.   It is not the norm for school employees to disregard parents and parents have the right to explore curriculum, partner with schools and become a part of the school community. It is unfortunately that some parents and community members believe that taking minors and school employees rights away is the best approach, this will only increase distrust.  With the clearly documented increase in suicidality, depression, anxiety, and substance use among youth, it is paramount that minors have trusted adults in their lives.  It takes a village to raise safe, healthy children.  Please DO NOT PASS LD 1410 or LD 1809.     Jeri W Stevens, PhD, LCPC, CCS   
Jeri Stevens
Sidney
LD 1809
I am submitting this testimony for both LD 1809 and 1410.
