Joanne Russell
North Yarmouth
LD 1809
An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent, LD 1809
 
Position: Support 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Joanne Russell, from North Yarmouth, ME. I submit this testimony in 
writing today to speak in Support of LD 1809, An Act to Prohibit Health Care 
Services Without Parental Consent.  
There are laws in Maine requiring parental consent for minors to do something as 
simple as getting their ears pierced, establishing it as a civil offense and applying a 
monetary fine to each offense when parental consent is not legally attained. These 
laws also establish standards required for those performing piercing procedures, not 
only establishing proper sanitizing of medical equipment, but also requiring specific 
lawful and licensed status for those performing the piercing procedure, as well as 
standards that must be met and maintained by the piercing establishment. These same 
laws even specify what sort of water supply and bathroom facilities they must 
maintain in order to meet the legal standards required to perform something as simple 
as ear piercing. 
Abortion is a medical procedure that is final, irreversible, and is a completely 
voluntary procedure that ends the life of another human being, more specially the life 
of that own young woman’s unborn child. The abortion procedure has many well 
known life altering possible side effects and potentially life threading outcomes. 
No adolescent should ever enter into a choice of this magnitude without the proper 
consent, support, and guidance of those who are legally and morally responsible for 
them. No adolescent should ever be encouraged to handle a situation where they enter
into a medical procedure of any kind, let alone one that caries such enormous and life 
altering consequences as an abortion procedure without the legal and informed 
consent of their parents.
There are countless numbers of young women who find out all too late exactly what
an abortion procedure entails, as they stare down at the tiny body of their now 
deceased child, having passed it into a toilet alone at home, often with no one they 
can turn to in their pain, shame, and grief. We see the tragic result of this in the rising 
numbers of drug abuse, alcohol abuse, suicides, and so on. They are all interrelated. 
These young women must know what they are consenting to when they agree to an 
abortion and they must have the opportunity to discuss their present situation with 
their parents before they agree to something as morally and physically life altering as 
having an abortion. 
They must be given the opportunity to see their child via ultrasound before they 
agree to the procedure that will end its life, they must be given adequate counseling 
and information as to what exactly will happen if they chose to proceed with the 
procedure, and they must be given as much information about alternatives such as 
adoption and be given time to consider these options before proceeding with the 
procedure. They must also be required to have legal permission from their parents 
who are legally responsible for them and have time to discuss the situation with them 
prior to receiving their consent. This is true for any other medical procedure and is 
even more so imperative in the case of an elective abortion procedure.
 For these reasons, I ask the committee to vote: Ought to Pass on LD 1809.
Thank you! God bless.

