Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
V
ice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
T
reasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
S
ecretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
I
mmediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
B
oard of Directors  
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward**  
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, 
NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
*
Resident Board Rep s
**Medical Student
Representatives
Staff Dee Kerry, BS Ed  
Executive Director 
E
mily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinat or 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
www.maineaap.org  TESTIMONY in OPPOSITION:  LD 1809: “An Act  to Prohibit  Healthcare Services 
Without Parental Consent” 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Judiciary 
Committee: m y name is Jonathan Fanburg and I am submitting my comments as a physician 
who has practiced in Maine as a specialist in adolescent medicine for over 20 years.   I also 
make my comments with  the endorsement of Main eHealth and the Maine Chapter of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics, both organizations that represent providers, the interests of 
many p arents, and the health  and interest of  teenagers across the state of Maine. 
I am completely AGAINST LD 1809. 
1.This proposed legislation conflicts with many aspects of present Maine law.
2.It takes away from the ability of some teen agers from accessing health care at times of need.
3.It breaks the relationship between providers and their teenager patients.
4. It unravels the progress we have made with advocating for adolescents over the last
40 years.
Providers who see teenagers include parents with the health of their teenager in nearly all 
circumstances .  However, some teenagers will not seek care if that confidentiality is 
offered.  This may leave some teenager s at risk of untreated chlamydia, substance abuse, or 
depression.  All of these could put the teenager at risk of greater damage to the teen’s health, and possibly life. 
Parents should be involved with their child’s health, but they also nee d to recognize the 
importance of allowing their growing teenager to learn to advocate for their own health.  Sometimes this means trusting their teenager to make educated decisions with their provider’s guidance in the teenager’s best interest.  
Although most parents advocate for the best interest of their teenager, the proposed legislation would empower parents to refuse to treat their child who is positive for chlamydia.  It would empower a parent to refuse substance abuse counseling for a child who sought care for substance use.  It would empower a parent to obstruct an assault exam that a teenager consents to, even when the perpetrator could be the parent themselves.  
LD 1809 is an inappropriate legislation that obstructs healthcare and is dangerous to the health of minors.   I join the Maine AAP leadership, with support of my employer, 
MaineHealth, and submit this testimony in strong opposition to this legislation.  
Signed, 
Jonathan Fanburg, MD, MPH 
Pediatrician, Adolescent Medicine Specialist  
Director, Division of Adolescent and Young Adult Medicine, Maine Medical Center Member and former president, Maine Chapt er of the American Academy of Pediatrics  
