Kimberly Ray
Chelsea
LD 1809
I am writing to you both as a School Counselor and as a parent.  I want to express my 
deep concern over the recently proposed Legislative bill: LD 1809. By passing and 
act that requires parent consent to provide direct or indirect services of a school 
counselor, we risk losing a safeguard that identifies child abuse and neglect by 
removing our ability to speak to students without explicit parental consent.  It would 
also limit a School Counselor's ability to advocate for students' academic needs within
student assistance teams up to and including special ed referrals, which would fall 
under indirect services.  School counseling is a part of a district's curriculum, which is
approved at the school board level.  This bill will not only severely impact my work 
but also some of the students I care for on a daily basis. 
Allowing a minor confidential access to school counselors is essential.  As a 
mandated reporter, confidentiality is limited when there is a danger self, others, or 
abuse/neglect of a minor.  The vast majority of parents that I work with are 
collaborative and responsible when it comes to student safety concerns and general 
supports.  Unfortunately, I also have students who come to me with concerns directly 
related to abuse and neglect of a parent which are reported through DHS.  Parents 
who have concerns about abuse or neglect coming to light are often the ones who 
would deny their child access to me.   My job is to not only care for these students' 
academic, social and emotional needs while at school but also to make sure that they 
have a safe space that they may not have at home. 
While I always encourage students to involve their parents in discussion, I also 
recognize that there are situations where it is not in the student’s best interest. 
For example, if LD 1809 were to pass, a student who confides in me that they have 
been abused (verbally, physically, or sexually) by their parent/guardian, then must I 
must obtain that person's consent for any sort of intervention. No abuser would agree 
to let their victim talk to someone when they are risking the exposure of their 
maltreatment. 
If I need to call a parent about any and every conversation I have with a student then 
the parent will be on alert and may intimidate the student to change their story prior to
an investigation by DHHS.
While I acknowledge that I want to be notified of concerns involving my own child, I 
can also recognize the fact that my child may not feel comfortable telling me 
everything.  I would hope that he has access to a school counselor, nurse, or social 
worker that would provide support when he can not get it from me.  
Please vote no on this bill and say yes to supporting and helping our young people, 
especially those who are at risk for abuse and neglect.
