 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee on the 
Judiciary, my name is Nicole Clegg, I serve as the Interim CEO at Planned Parenthood of 
Northern New England, and I am here today to submit testimony in opposition to LD 1809. 
 
Planned Parenthood of Northern New England provides comprehensive reproductive and 
sexual health care to more than 14,000 people in Maine at four health centers located in 
Biddeford, Portland, Sanford and Topsham. People turn to us for affordable, high-quality care 
including wellness exams, birth control, disease testing and treatment, cancer screenings, 
abortion care as well as a variety of primary care services. We see everyone who comes to us 
regardless of ability to pay, and in a typical year, we provide more than $4 million in free and 
discounted care to our communities in Maine.   
 
As a mission driven health care provider, we fundamentally believe everyone should be able to 
get affordable, high quality sexual and reproductive health care in their communities, no matter 
where they live or how much money they make, and we advocate for policies that help make 
this vision a reality.   
 
By stripping minors of their right to make their own medical decisions, the LD 1809 represents a 
dangerous break from more than three decades of established law and medical practice in 
Maine. If implemented, LD 1809 would prohibit or conflict with existing law for minors to 
consent for mental health, reproductive health, substance use, blood donation, abortion and 
even treatment for sexual assault. In doing so this bill would force Maine’s health care 
providers to abandon best medical practice as defined by the American Medical Association, 
the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists, the 
Society for Adolescent Medicine, and the American Public Health Association. 
 
For more than thirty years, Maine’s current adult involvement law has encouraged family 
involvement in a young person’s decision to seek abortion, while providing those who cannot 
involve a parent with guidance and support by trained professionals.  The outcome of such an 
approach would put people’s health at risk. We want young people to have health care, 
information and resources, not barriers and delays. We want them to have the support and 
resources to make important decisions that are best for their health, lives and future 
opportunities and to be able to decide who to seek out for support and guidance to be safe, 

healthy, and affirmed. It is for all these reasons that I urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 
1809.  
 
 
 
