District 16: Blue Hill, Brooksville, Castine, Sedgwick, Surry, Trenton 
  
Testimony of Rep. Nina Milliken in opposition to 
LD 1809, An Act To Prohibit Healthcare Services Without Parental Consent. 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
  
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and colleagues on the Joint Standing 
Committee on the Judiciary. I am Nina Milliken and I have the honor of representing the towns 
of Blue Hill, Brooksville, Castine, Sedgwick, Surry, and Trenton in the Maine House. I am here 
today to offer my testimony in opposition to LD 1809, An Act To Prohibit Healthcare Services 
Without Parental Consent. 
 
I will not mince my words here and just let you know that I think that this entire bill is 
extraordinarily dangerous, but for my testimony, I will focus on the part of the bill that would 
prevent young people from accessing sexual assault forensic exams without parental consent. 
Why should we allow young people to access these exams without parental consent?  The 
quickest and hopefully most impactful answer that I can offer here is that it is not uncommon at 
all for men to rape their children. And those men would almost certainly not allow for those kids 
to get a sexual assault forensic exam if they were required to sign off on it. 
 
But the mom would allow an exam, right?! Well, to be honest, you would be surprised, perhaps. 
Over the course of my years working for Sexual Assault Services, I came across a number of 
moms who were very upset with their tween or young teenage daughters for “seducing” mom’s 
partner. They would refer to these girls as “sluts” occasionally and even throw the girls out 
because of their own assaults. I even had a mom tell me that she wished her boyfriend had 
waited till her daughter was 14, because then it would have been legal, a false understanding, and 
one that I hope clearly indicates to you the need to allow persons under the age of 18 to make the 
decision for themselves on whether or not they should receive this vital care. 
 
There are also occasions on which children have been impregnated by their fathers, or even their 
older brothers. For these occasions, and many, many others, I believe that it is not in the best 
interest of our state to prohibit access to gynecological care or abortion care without permission 
from their parents.  
 
This bill is extremely dangerous. Please vote Ought Not Pass on LD 1809. I'll be happy to 
answer any questions.  
   
Nina Azella Milliken 
276 Turkey Farm Road 
            Blue Hill, ME 04614           
           Phone: (207) 412-8828 
Nina.milliken@legislature.maine.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 

