Representative Katrina  Smith
Palermo
LD 1809
Senator Carney, representative Moonen and members of the judiciary committee. My 
name is Katrina Smith and I represent district 62 China Palermo, Windsor, Somerville
and Hibberts gore and I am here today to speak to support LD 1410.
I believe a Parent is the primary person in a minor child’s life who is  “all in” for their
child. All in to love them, all in to care for them emotionally, physically and mentally.
Every parent I know would give their life for their child, literally throw themselves in 
front of a bus for a child without a moments thought. 
I ask you… would a school employee give their life for a child in school without 
thinking about it? If not, are they the best one to guide that child in a medical 
decision?  This bill is establishing the fact that a parent should always be involved in 
any medical decision made by a school employee because they are the ones who fully 
love and care for their child.  Detractors will say not all parents care about their child 
in that way. I completely understand abuse happens in homes throughout Maine but i 
also challenge that statement and say it is a minority that would harm a child.  instead 
of teaching a child to hide their fears and concerns from their parents we need to teach
them healthy patterns and work through the issues they have with their parents right 
then and not years down the road.  50 year old still go to therapy because they have 
issues with their parents..why not start at the beginning of the issue and help that child
to live a healthy life. 
If we are talking more serious issues like violence then a school employee is a 
mandated reporter and that issue should absolutely be dealt with swiftly. No one 
wants a child to be harmed at home,  but no one wants a child to be harmed at school 
either. 
If a school employee initiated medical treatment or prescriptions without the input of 
a parent I believe they should be held civilly liable for any medical complications that
arise down the road from that decision.  A school employee will be long gone by the 
time a child has complications that arise from decisions made when they were minors 
but who will almost certainly be there? Their parent. 
Thank you for your time. 
