Roberta Manter
Fayette
LD 1809
I am horrified that LD 1419 and LD 1809 are even necessary, but I am convinced that
they are.  Without these bills, a male teacher can rape a minor student, then when she 
becomes pregnant, whisk her off to an abortion clinic without the parents even being 
notified.  Are our laws supposed to protect the rapist, or the innocent child?
Without these bills, a male teacher can take a minor student to get put on the pill 
without her parents knowing, so that he can continue molesting her without her 
becoming pregnant.  Are our laws supposed to protect the molester, or the innocent 
child?
Without these bills, a school can take a student for surgery and then send that student 
home without the parents knowing that their child has just had surgery and needs to 
be monitored for possible post-surgical complications that could lead to death.
Without these bills, a child could be taken for irreversible surgeries such as sex 
change surgeries without the parents' knowledge or consent.  Science has shown that 
the human brain is not fully developed until somewhere after twenty years of age.  A 
child whose brain is not fully developed cannot be expected to make life decisions 
that are best for them.  Neither can school employees make the best decision for a 
child who is not their own child.  Only the parents know the history and current 
events in the life of that child that are relevant to that child's medical issues.  
Similarly, the medical professionals to whom the school employees take that child 
may not be that family's doctor who is familiar with that child's medical history and 
family situation.  And neither school employees nor medical professionals have the 
lifelong commitment to a child that a parent does.
It is a well established principle of law that, "It is not what has been done, or 
ordinarily would be done, under a statute, but what might be done under it, that 
determines whether it infringes upon the constitutional right of the citizen. The 
constitution guards against the chances of infringement. It is evident that under this 
statute the citizen might in some cases be practically deprived of all remedy." Bennett
v. Davis (1897) 90 Me. 102, 105, 37 A. 864, 865; Sleeper, Applt. (1952) 147 Me. 
302, 308, 87 A.2d 115, Jordan v Canton, 265 A.2d 96 (1970).  
Before voting on these two bills, please ask yourself, what MAY be done under 
current statutes if the protections afforded by these to bills are NOT enacted?  Ask 
yourself, if this were my daughter and a teacher raped her, would I want that teacher 
to be able to take my daughter for an abortion so I would never know about the rape?  
Or would I want that to happen to my neighbor's daughter so that that teacher could 
continue his behavior undetected, and perhaps my daughter would be next?  Please 
vote LD 1410 and LD 1809 Ought to Pass.
