Hello and thank you so much for your time.  
My name is Sarah Morrill. I am a mother of four kids. The oldest is 16 and the 
youngest is 11. I am also a registered nurse. I am the Director of the Maranacook 
School Based Health Center in Readfield, ME. 
I am testifying in opposition of LD1809. Legislation, such as LD1809 effectively ties 
the hands of healthcare providers when it comes to supporting students’ access 
to healthcare. I am asking you to trust in the professionalism of the healthcare 
community and school staff. Please allow us to continue to use our skills and 
clinical judgment to protect the health of every student, without restrictions. 
I am very concerned that healthcare has become polarized and politicized, to the 
detriment of both healthcare workers, and those we care for. Over the past 
several years, between the impact of the pandemic, and the state of our national 
politics, I worry that we have lost trust in one another. 
I assure the members of this committee that healthcare workers did not arrive in 
our positions overnight. Nor do we have some political agenda, directing our 
decision making.  
Let me also say that the healthcare workers serving our school communities show 
up every day because they are committed to helping kids through whatever 
they’re facing. And trust me, our kids are facing a lot… every day. Our kids need to 
trust that the caring adults at their schools have their backs. And they need to 
gain trust in themselves as opportunities for critical thinking and decision making 
arise.  
I can’t speak for the staff at every school, but I feel comfortable saying here that 
literally everything goes better when there are supportive and engaged parents 
involved in kids’ lives. Certainly, in healthcare situations, but also everything else 
too. When we are caring for a student, we encourage parental involvement every 
step of the way. I think that is worth repeating: we encourage parental 
involvement every step of the way. 
That said, sometimes obtaining parental consent is a barrier to care, for almost as 
many reasons as there are unique situations. But I say again that we don’t take 
this lightly and we do our due diligence in exploring the options every time. 
In closing, I am asking you all not to restrict the clinical judgement of healthcare 
providers working in schools. LD1809 will prevent some students from accessing 
care that they need in order to succeed.  
Sarah Morrill
Wayne
LD 1809
Hello and thank you so much for your time. 
My name is Sarah Morrill. I am a mother of four kids. The oldest is 16 and the 
youngest is 11. I am also a registered nurse and the Director of the Maranacook 
School Based Health Center in Readfield, ME.
I am testifying in opposition of LD1809. Legislation, such as LD1809 effectively ties 
the hands of healthcare providers when it comes to supporting students’ access to 
healthcare. I am asking you to trust in the professionalism of the healthcare 
community and school staff. Please allow us to continue to use our skills and clinical 
judgment to protect the health of every student, without restrictions.
I am very concerned that healthcare has become polarized and politicized, to the 
detriment of both healthcare workers, and those we care for. Over the past several 
years, between the impact of the pandemic, and the state of our national politics, I 
worry that we have lost trust in one another.
I assure the members of this committee that healthcare workers did not arrive in our 
positions overnight. Nor do we have some political agenda, directing our decision 
making. 
Let me also say that the healthcare workers serving our school communities show up 
every day because they are committed to helping kids through whatever they’re 
facing. And trust me, our kids are facing a lot… every day. Our kids need to trust that 
the caring adults at their schools have their backs. And they need to gain trust in 
themselves as opportunities for critical thinking and decision making arise. 
I can’t speak for the staff at every school, but I feel comfortable saying here that 
literally everything goes better when there are supportive and engaged parents 
involved in kids’ lives. Certainly, in healthcare situations, but also everything else 
too. When we are caring for a student, we encourage parental involvement every step 
of the way. I think that is worth repeating: we encourage parental involvement every 
step of the way.
That said, sometimes obtaining parental consent is a barrier to care, for almost as 
many reasons as there are unique situations. But I say again that we don’t take this 
lightly and we do our due diligence in exploring the options every time.
In closing, I am asking you all not to restrict the clinical judgement of healthcare 
providers working in schools. LD1809 will prevent some students from accessing 
care that they need in order to succeed. 

