Maine Chapter
l\(.1 )1ii( )ii..\t tli) I\ Nti\i\ti
Arnerican Acadcml' of Pcdiatrics7r.:.ffil)i:r:l.',1 l:! i{} : r11 iir,\, i l: \)l 1l I i iiii iilt:i
Executive Committee
President
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP
Vice President
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP
Treasu rer
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP
Secreta ry
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP
lmmediate Past President
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP
Board of Directors
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP
Riley Heroux**
JenniferJewell, MD, MS, FAAP
StephanieJoy, MD, FAAP
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP
Maria Libertin, MD*
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP
ALlstin Wheeler Steward**
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP
Aaron Wallace, MD*
* Resident Boa rd Representatives
** Medical Student Representatives
Staff
Dee Kerry, BS Ed
Executive Director
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN
Admin & Project Coordinator
30 Association Drive, Box 1"90
Manchester, ME 04351
office:207-480 4185Testimon)r dgainst LD 1809 -- limiting adolescent confidentiality
Sydney R. Sewall, MD MPH Hallowell
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen and members of the .Tudiciary Committee:
I am writing as a representative of the Maine Chapter of the American Acaderny of
Pediatrics, anorganization ofover 300 health care practitioners distributed
throughout the state who focus on the care of inf-ants, children, teens and young
adults. I am NOT a specialist in adolescent rnedicine. 6ut have 40 years
experience dealing with teens in the Central Maine area.
Tl're great majority of patliology confronting teens today relates to social pathology
- toxic stress, emotional disorders, risky behavior. These three areas are oflen
linked. Sure, we also see a lot of acne, asthma, spolts injuries - but the degree of
impairment in these cases pales in comparison to the effects of teens' ongoing
psychosocial conditions.
Some teens live in supportive families that encourage disclosure. and have parents
that can empathize with their issues, even if their behaviors clash with parental
erpectations. When we adlllts look back on our teen years" how, many of us can
say this was true tbr us? Adolescents may not recognize this to be the case even
rvhen it is true, and stili be reticent to disclose a brewing crisis to their families.
The American Academy of Pediatrics believes that confidentiality is an essential
component. of adolescent health care - especially conceffling sexuality, substance
use, and unmet mental health needs. Research supports the conclusion that
without the provision of confidential health care. teens will not seek out
prescription contraceptives despite being sexually active, will not get screened for
STD's, & will not discuss substance use u,ith their provider. fi Adotesc Htth 2018:62;
36-43)
while it makes pediatricians MUCH more comfbrtable u,hen we can involve
parents in all aspects of their child's care. we do not live in a perfect world. Our
primary responsibility is the health and well being of the child, and at times patient
autonomy is in conflict with parental rights. Up to this point. Maine law has
supported our current guiding principal - w.hich is to maintain confidentiality at the
teen's request. UNLESS the patient is at risk of-harming his/herself or someone
else.
Even with this backdrop, getting sensitive information from teen patients and
initiating appropriate interventions is a challenge. With the passage of LD 1 809
it would be close to impossible. with severe consequences to adolescent health.
Sincerely,
Sydney R. Sewall, MD MPH
Instructor of Pediatrics - Maine-Dartmouth Family Medicine Residencywww"maineaap,qrg
