 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
May 5, 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney,  Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1809  – An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding OCFS’ opposition to LD 1809 , An Act to Prohibit 
Health Care Services Without Parental Consen t. This bill would require parental consent and the 
provision of parental notification before a minor can obtain treatment for all health care services.  
 
OCFS is in opposition to this bill as it would radically change the law regarding consent for health 
care services (including medical, behavioral, and mental health treatment, as well as substance use 
treatment). While OCFS’ hope is that all children can live in a nurturing  and supportive home with 
their parents, we know from our work that there are youth in this state for whom requiring parental 
consent would undoubtedly jeopardize their access to care. Whether this is because they do not have 
a positive r elationship with their parents, they are homeless, their parent opposes or disagrees with 
the treatment they are seeking, etc.  
 
This bill would leave some youth who do not have contact with their parents unable to obtain 
medical care as well as jeopardizing care for youth who are worried about their parents being aware 
of the care (this is a particular issue for mental health, subs tance use, gender identity, and sexual 
health related care).  
 
OCFS believes that to the greatest extent possible we should be maximizing youth’s access to all 
types of health care . Instead,  this bill would limit access to medically necessary services, run ning 
counter to broad national support for the concept of allowing minors to consent for their own care.  
 
OCFS also has two concerns we wanted the Committee to be aware of related to the inability of 
youth to obtain consent. First, is for urgent situation s where  a youth is at imminent risk but cannot 
receive treatment due to a lack of available parental consent. Second, and somewhat related, is 
OCFS’ concern that this bill would drive an increase in the number of children in State custody. 
While it is diff icult to estimate the number of children  that would be impacted, it appears probable  
that if a youth is unable to obtain parental consent for healthcare from a parent or guardian 
(regardless of the reason) , the Department could be required to bring them in to State custody to 
consent for routine care.  This is not an issue currently as the law allows youth to consent to their 
own treatment.  
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as  you consider this bill going forward. If you 
have any further ques tions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
      
      Dr. Todd A. Landry  
      Director  
      Office of Child and Family Services
 

