Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330
Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968
Website: www.msmaweb.com
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO
L.D. 1410—AN ACT TO HOLD SCHOOL EMPLOYEES CIVILLY LIABLE FOR FAILURE TO NOTIFY
PARENTS REGARDING MEDICAL ISSUES OF STUDENTS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE
AND
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST
L.D. 1809—AN ACT TO PROHIBIT HEALTH CARE SERVICES WITHOUT PARENTAL CONSENT
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee. I am Victoria Wallack,
director of communications and government relations for Maine School Management Association, testifying
on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School
Superintendents Association, in opposition to L.D. 1410 and neither for nor against L.D. 1809.
We are combining these testimonies because both bills do essentially the same thing when it comes to minor
students.
Schools have direct contact with more than 90 percent of Maine’s young people aged 5 to 17 years, for about
6 hours per day and up to 13 critical years of their social, psychological, physical, and intellectual
development. Schools play an important role in promoting the health and safety of children and adolescents
by helping them to establish lifelong health patterns.
Healthy students are better learners. Our schools are an ideal setting to teach and provide students with
opportunities to improve their dietary and physical activity behaviors and manage their chronic health
conditions (asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, food allergies, and poor oral health). When school health policies and
practices are put in place, healthy students can grow to be healthy and successful adults. School-based health
education helps our students acquire functional health knowledge, and strengthens attitudes, beliefs, and
practice skills needed to adopt and maintain healthy behaviors throughout their lives.
School nurses are the traditional “backbone” of school health services and are often the only health care
providers at the school site on a regular basis. The school nurse typically provides population-based primary
prevention and health care services such as:
administer first aid;
administer medication provided by the parent based on a physician’s script.
development and implementation of health care plans for students with special health care needs;
monitor vital signs when needed;
case management for chronic health problems (assisted by the school physician)
mandated screenings, such as vision, and hearing;
provide immunizations at schools ONLY with the parent’s consent
monitoring the presence of infectious conditions among students and enforcing public health
precautions to prevent spread of infections;
skilled nursing services for students with complex health care needs;
case management of students with chronic and special health care needs;
outreach to students and their families;
interpretation of the health care needs of students to school personnel;
development and implementation of emergency care plans and provision of emergency care and first
aid;
serving as liaison for the school, parents, and community health agencies;
collaboration with other school professionals—particularly counselors, psychologists, and social
workers—to address the health, developmental, and educational needs of students.
Our Association’s positions on these bills was based on a variety of reasons. The Associations oppose section
1, sub-§2 of LD 1809 as noted in the second bullet below, and are neither for nor against other aspects of L.D.
1809.
The 10 medical functions in the summary are not performed at schools.
The requirement to obtain parental consent before a guidance counselor or social worker meets with a
student directly conflicts with Chapter 117 and Title 20-A, Chapter 201 section 4008.
In order to participate in a School Based Health Center, parents must sign their child up for these
services and provide health insurance information.
Education regarding substance abuse and sexually transmitted diseases are part of the Maine Learning
Results and taught accordingly following statutory requirements.
https://www.maine.gov/doe/sites/maine.gov.doe/files/inline-
files/Health%20Education%20Standards%20Revised%20April%202022_0.pdf
Schools have policies that pertain to the use of drugs, physical examinations and sexual abuse
prevention;
oPolicy JLCA requires parent or guardian consent for physical examinations, if given by the school
physician or under the auspices of the school. Parents/guardians and eligible students (students 18
years of age or older) shall be notified annually and have the opportunity to opt the student out of
any non-emergency, invasive, physical examination or screening.
oPolicy JLFA Maine law requires every school unit with a Pre-K through 5thgrade program to
adopt a policy for child sexual abuse prevention education and response. This policy outlines
reporting requirements schools must follow.
oPolicy JICH supports a safe and healthy learning environment for students that is free of the
detrimental effects of drugs and alcohol. Accomplishing this goal requires a cooperative effort
among school staff, students, parents, law enforcement and organizations concerned with the use
of drugs and alcohol by school-aged youth. In order to promote the safety, health and well-being of
students, the School Board endorses a three-pronged approach to address the issue of drug and
alcohol use; prevention/education; intervention and discipline. The Superintendent is responsible
for developing appropriate administrative procedures, curricula and programs to implement this
policy.
Title 20-A: EDUCATION
Part 3: ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION
Chapter 201: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§4008-A
§4008. Privileged communications
1. Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following terms have
the following meanings.
A. "Client" means a person who has actively sought or is in the process of seeking professional help from a
school counselor or school social worker. [PL 1989, c. 396, §1 (AMD).]
B. "School counselor" means a person who is employed as a school counselor in a school setting and who:
(1) Is certified as a school counselor by the department; or
(2) Possesses a minimum of a master's degree in an approved program in guidance and counseling. [PL
1981, c. 693, §§5, 8 (NEW).]
C. "School social worker" means a person who is employed as a school social worker in a school setting and
who:
(1) Is licensed as a social worker by the State Board of Social Worker Licensure; or
(2) Possesses a bachelor's degree and has been granted a conditional license from the State Board of Social
Worker Licensure. [PL 1989, c. 396, §2 (NEW).]
[PL 1989, c. 396, §§1, 2 (AMD).]
2. Privileged communication. A school counselor or school social worker may not be required, except
as provided by this section, to divulge or release information gathered during a counseling relation with a
client or with the parent, guardian or a person or agency having legal custody of a minor client. A counseling
relation and the information resulting from it shall be kept confidential consistent with the professional
obligations of the counselor or social worker.
[PL 1989, c. 396, §3 (AMD).]
3. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the extent that disclosure of information is necessary:
A. To comply with Title 22, chapter 1071 ; and[PL 1983, c. 781, §1 (AMD).]
B. To report to an appropriate authority or to take appropriate emergency measure when:
(1) The client's condition requires others to assume responsibility for the client; or
(2) There is clear and imminent danger to the client or others. [PL 1983, c. 806, §42 (AMD).]
[PL 1983, c. 806, §42 (AMD).]
SECTION HISTORY
PL 1981, c. 693, §§5, 8 (NEW). PL 1983, c. 485, §21 (AMD). PL 1983, c. 781, §1 (AMD). PL 1983,
c. 806, §42 (AMD). PL 1989, c. 396, §§1-3 (AMD).
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/NCLB Code: JLCA
PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS OF STUDENTS
The Board is aware of the relationship between student health and success in school.
Recognizing that parents/guardians bear the major responsibility for attending to the
health needs of their children and that the school system has an interest in the well-being
of its students, the Board adopts the following policy.
A. Physical Examinations and Screenings
Parents/guardians shall be encouraged to have their children physically examined
prior to entering school and again prior to the [insert appropriate interval, e.g.,
grades 4, 7 and 10]. Dental examinations shall also be encouraged.
[NOTE: The Board should insert any provisions for physical examinations to
be offered through the schools, whether available to all students or to those
without funds or insurance coverage.]
Vision and hearing screenings will be conducted as required by Maine law.
Parents will be notified of any suspected health problems identified through
screening.
School staff is encouraged to be alert to the general well-being of students and
should refer any concerns to the building principal [AND/OR: school nurse] .
B. Participation in Athletics
Students who wish to participate in middle school or high school athletics are
required to have a physical examination and medical approval before doing so.
The physical examination must have been given within 90 days [OR: within
______] prior to participation. Thereafter, students participating in athletics must
have a physical examination on a schedule recommended by their health care
provider, but not less frequently than once every two years. A student will not be
allowed to participate in practice or competition without the required physical
examination and medical approval.
[The Board should insert any provisions for sports physicals to be offered
through the schools.]
Page 1 of 2
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCA
C. Parental Consent
Parent/guardian consent shall be required for physical examinations if given by the
school physician or under the auspices of the school.
Parents/guardians and eligible students (students 18 years of age or older) shall be
notified annually and have the opportunity to opt the student out of any non-
emergency, invasive, physical examination or screening that is:
1. Required as a condition of attendance;
2. Administered by the school and scheduled by the school in advance; and
3. Not necessary to protect the immediate health and safety of the student, or
of other students.
For the purpose of this policy, “invasive physical examination” means any medical
examination that involves the exposure of private body parts, or any act during such
examination that includes incision, insertion, or injection into the body, but does not
include a hearing, vision or scoliosis screening.
[NOTE: The two paragraphs immediately above reflect requirements of the No
Child Left Behind Act; see 20 U.S.C. § 1232h(c).]
Legal Reference: 20-A M.R.S.A. §§ 6402-A, 6451-6453
20 U.S.C. § 1232h(c)
Cross Reference: JLCB - Immunization of Students
Adopted: ________
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a
starting point for a board’s policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board’s policy serve
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful
analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and
suitability to the individual school system.
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and
are not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board’s own legal counsel.
Page 2 of 2
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/NSBA Code: JLFA
CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE PREVENTION AND RESPONSE
The Board recognizes that Maine law requires every school unit with a Pre-K through 5th
grade program to adopt a policy for child sexual abuse prevention education and
response. The Board adopts this policy in the interest of promoting the well-being of
students and providing a supportive learning environment as well as compliance with the
law.
For the purpose of this policy,“child sexual abuse” means any sexual engagement either
through “hand on” or “hands off” activities between an adult and a child. Sexual
engagement between children can also be sexual abuse when there is a significant age
difference between the children involved or if the children are very different in
development, size, or other power differential.
[Note: There is no universal definition of “child sexual abuse.” For the sake of
simplicity, MSMA has elected to use the definition in the DOE’s model policy.]
I. REPORTING CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
A. Any employee of the school unit who has reason to suspect that a child has
been sexually abused is to immediately notify the building principal or
designated agent.
1. In addition to notifying the building principal/designated agent, the
employee may also make a report directly to the Department of
Health and Human Services (DHHS).
2. School volunteers who have reason to suspect that a child has been
sexually abused may report their suspicions directly to DHHS.
3. Neither the employee or volunteer nor the building
principal/designated agent should attempt to further question or
interview the child nor otherwise undertake an investigation.
B. If the reporting employee or volunteer does not receive written
confirmation from the building principal/designated agent or
Superintendent within 24 hours of his/her report that a report has been
made to DHHS, the employee or volunteer shall make an immediate report
directly to DHHS. In such cases, the employee or volunteer shall then
complete a copy of the school unit’s Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect
Reporting Form (JLF-E).
Page 1 of 4
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JLFA
C. If the reporting employee or volunteer does receive written confirmation
from the building principal/designated agent or Superintendent within 24
hours of his/her report (i.e., a copy of the Suspected Child Abuse and
Neglect Reporting Form (JLF-E)), he/she shall sign the form as
acknowledgement that the report was made and return it to the building
principal/administrator or Superintendent.
D. The administrator reporting and confirmation duties shall be the same as
provided in Section III of the Board’s policy JLF, Reporting Child Abuse
and Neglect.
II. CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE AWARENESS AND PREVENTION EDUCATION
FOR SCHOOL PERSONNEL
All school personnel [OR: All school personnel who are required to be
certified, authorized or approved by the DOE] shall be required to complete a
minimum of one hour of training in child sexual abuse awareness and prevention,
with training to be updated at least once every four years thereafter. New
employees must complete training within six months of hire.
[NOTE: Although the alternative language is used in the DOE model policy,
the Board may wish to “go wider” with the training requirement, since bus
drivers and custodians may also be in a position to suspect child sexual abuse
based on their own contacts with students.]
Training must be “evidence-informed” (i.e., based on research and best practices)
and delivered by a qualified instructor (i.e. a person with appropriate knowledge,
skills, and experience or training in child sexual abuse awareness and prevention).
The trainer may be an employee or volunteer with an agency/organization
specializing in sexual assault and/or child sexual abuse or an employee of the
school unit (e.g., school social worker, guidance counselor, school nurse, health
educator) who has received appropriate training from such an agency/organization.
The goals of the training for school personnel are:
Increased awareness of developmentally appropriate and inappropriate
sexual behaviors in children;
Increased ability to recognize indicators of child sexual abuse;
Page 2 of 4
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JLFA
Enhanced ability to respond effectively when a student or student’s friend
or peer discloses sexual activity or the staff member suspects child sexual
abuse has occurred; and
Awareness of local resources available to students, parents, schools, and
community members, and how these resources may be accessed.
Training should also address confidentiality/disclosure concerns (beyond the
mandated reporting).
[NOTE: This last bullet is not in the DOE model policy, but is an important
issue.]
III. CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE PREVENTION EDUCATION IN THE PRE-K
THROUGH 5THGRADE CURRICULUM
The school unit will provide child sexual abuse prevention programming to its
Pre-K through grade 5 students. Such instruction will be aligned with the health
education standards of Maine’s system of Learning Results for this grade span,
and incorporated into the written school health education curriculum.
Programming of appropriate scope and sequence will be delivered by qualified
instructors, who may be from a local or regional agency/organization with
experience and expertise in sexual assault and child sexual abuse of by a school
unit employee deemed competent by the Superintendent/designee to deliver such
instruction. If the instructor is a school unit employee, the Board anticipates that
this will be a person with the knowledge, skills, sensitivity and “comfort level”
necessary to deliver the curriculum in the classroom setting, i.e., school nurse,
school social worker, guidance counselor, or teacher with experience in health
education. Any instructor who is a school employee is expected to take full
advantage of the evidence-informed educational resources available on websites
hosted by the DOE and/or MECASA. Any instructor who is a school employee
should be familiar with the local community-based agencies/organizations that
provide assistance or services to children and families that are experiencing or
have experienced sexual assault or child sexual abuse.
It is the intent that the curriculum, as delivered in the classroom, will:
Include age-appropriate education regarding physical and personal
boundaries; including biologically accurate body terminology;
Page 3 of 4
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JLFA
Help children identify unsafe or uncomfortable situations including a range
of feelings, touches, or violations of physical boundaries;
Help children identify safe adults with whom they can talk about unsafe or
uncomfortable situations; and
Help children identify and develop skills to support a friend who may be
experiencing safe or uncomfortable situations.
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA §§ 254(18), 4502(5-C)
22 MRSA §4011-A
20-A MRSA §§ 5051-A(1)(C); 5051-A(2)(C)
20 USC § 1232g, Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
Cross Reference: JLF – Reporting Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect
JLF-E – Suspected Child Abuse/Neglect Report Form
[NOTE: The Board should be aware that JLF-E is for documenting and confirming
to a school employee that the principal or other designated agent has in fact made a
report to DHHS based on the employee’s reporting his/her suspicions to that
principal or designated agent. This form is not to be sent to DHHS. If DHHS wants
more information, it will initiate contact.]
Page 4 of 4
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATIONPLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a starting
point for a board’ s policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board’ s policy serve exactly to
address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful analysis of the need
and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and suitability to the individual school
system.
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not
intended as a substitute for the advice of a board’ s own legal counsel.
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/NSBA Code: JICH
DRUG AND ALCOHOL USE BY STUDENTS
The School Board and staff of the school unit support a safe and healthy learning
environment for students that is free of the detrimental effects of drugs and alcohol.
Accomplishing this goal requires a cooperative effort among school staff, students,
parents, law enforcement and organizations concerned with the use of drugs and alcohol
by school-aged youth.
In order to promote the safety, health and well being of students, the School Board
endorses a three-pronged approach to address the issue of drug and alcohol use;
prevention/education; intervention and discipline. The Superintendent is responsible for
developing appropriate administrative procedures, curricula and programs to implement
this policy.
A. Prohibited Conduct
No student shall distribute, dispense, possess, use or be under the influence of any
alcoholic beverage, malt beverage, fortified wine or other intoxicating liquor. Nor
shall a student manufacture, distribute, dispense, possess, use or be under the
influence of “bath salts;” any narcotic drug, hallucinogenic drug, amphetamine,
barbiturate, marijuana, anabolic steroid; any other controlled substance defined in
federal and state laws/regulations; any look-alike substance; or any substance that
is represented to be a controlled substance.
These prohibitions apply to any student who is on school property, who is in
attendance at school or at any school-sponsored activity, or whose conduct at any
time or place directly interferes with the operations, discipline or general welfare
of the school.
B. Disciplinary Action
Principals may suspend and/or recommend expulsion of students who violate this
policy, based upon the facts of each case and in accordance with established
disciplinary procedures. Students may also be referred to law enforcement
authorities for investigation and/or prosecution.
C. Prevention/Education
The school unit will provide students with appropriate information and activities
focused on educating students about drugs and alcohol and preventing their use.
Programs shall teach students that the use of drugs and alcohol is wrong and
harmful; how to resist peer pressure; and address the legal, social and health
consequences of drug and alcohol abuse.
Page 1 of 2
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JICH
D. Intervention
The school unit will establish a team approach [OR other approach as
determined by the school unit] to intervene with students with drug/alcohol
problems. Students will be assisted in addressing their drug/alcohol problems and
in continuing their educational program. Students will be provided with
information and referral, if necessary, to aid them in obtaining assistance from
appropriate community organizations. Student records concerning such
interventions shall be kept confidential as required by state and federal laws.
E. Policy Communication
The school unit shall distribute this policy and appropriate related information to
staff, students and parents on an annual basis through handbooks and/or other
means selected by the Superintendent and building administrators.
Legal Reference: 21 USC § 812 (Controlled Substances Act)
21 CFR Part 1300.11-15
P.L. 101-226 (Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act
Amendments of 1989)
17-A MRSA § 1101
22 MRSA §§ 2390-2394
42 USC § 290dd-2
42 CFR § 2.1 et seq.
20-A MRSA §§ 1001(9); 4008
Cross Reference: GBEC – Drug-Free Workplace
JICIA – Weapons, Violence and School Safety
JKD – Suspension of Students
JKE – Expulsion of Students
JLCD – Administering Medication to Students
JRA – Student Education Records
Adopted: ________
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a
starting point for a board’s policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board’s policy serve
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful
analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and
suitability to the individual school system.
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and
are not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board’s own legal counsel.
Page 2 of 2
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
