STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
 
 
 
  
  
AUGUSTA BANGOR PORTLAND PRESQUE ISLE 
17 STATE HOUSE STATION 106 HOGAN ROAD, SUITE 6 312 CANCO ROAD 1235 CENTRAL DRIVE, SKYWAY PARK 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0017 BANGOR, MAINE 04401 PORTLAND, MAINE 04103 PRESQUE ISLE, MAINE 04769 
(207) 287-7688 FAX: (207) 287-
7826 (207) 941-4570 FAX: (207) 941-
4584 (207) 822-6300 FAX: (207) 822-
6303 (207) 764-0477 FAX: (207) 760-3143 
 
website: www.maine.gov/dep 
 
MELANIE LOYZIM
COMMISSIONER
JANET T. MILLS
GOVERNOR 
April 21, 2023 
Senator Stacy Brenner, Chair 
Representative Lori Gramlich, Chair 
131st Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re: LD 304, An Act to Establish Statewide Standards for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances 
 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Committee: 
 
I am writing to express the Department of Environmental Protection’s (Department) position regarding 
LD 304, An Act to Establish Statewide Standards for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
(“PFAS”). While still a concept draft, the title and concept description of the bill indicates its purpose 
would be “to establish statewide standards for testing and acceptable levels of PFAS.” The Department is 
opposed to this bill. 
 
This concept bill is broad and vague and there is no language to clarify what the bill is aiming to 
standardize. Is the intent of this bill to standardize testing procedures for the sampling of surface water, 
groundwater, soil, leachate, milk, other consumer crops, or something else altogether? Is it intended to 
apply to homeowners, farmers, or some other class of landholder in the State?  In creating “acceptable” 
PFAS levels, is the bill intended to impact allowed levels in water (already in process at both the Federal 
and State levels), in soil, in milk or consumer crops, or something else? Is this intended to impact the 
frequency of testing for PFAS of public water systems and/or mandate a frequency of testing for private 
water wells? Any of the changes above would impact existing programs and would undoubtedly include a 
sizeable fiscal note. 
 
Currently the Department is undertaking a statewide groundwater and soil investigation of sites 
previously licensed for the land application of sludge and septage pursuant to Public Law 2021, Chapter 
478. Sites often include multiple fields with large acreages. The investigation also includes sampling 
nearby residential private drinking water wells in proximity to the areas where land application took 
place.  Groundwater sampled is measured against the state’s existing interim drinking water standard for 
PFAS. Soil sampled is measured against screening levels based on an evaluation of the proposed use and 
function of the property. The evaluation of soil is more complicated as Maine does not have enforceable 
soil “standards” like there are for drinking water standards.  Soil standards would need to encompass a 
multi-faceted approach.  For example, soil in a public park may have a different type of exposure pathway 
Letter to Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
LD 304, An Act to Establish Statewide Standards for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
 
2 
 to both humans and the environment than soil used for crops at a farm or soil used underneath a building 
for a new commercial enterprise.  
 
Working with farms on managing PFAS in soil is a process led by the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry (DACF).  Each farm that has undergone PFAS soil sampling receives 
assistance on a case by case from DACF. This kind of assistance provided to farms is site specific 
because there is no clear “cookie-cutter” approach available that supports the needs of all farms.  Not 
every farm has  the same types of media that could be impacted by PFAS (water, soil, agricultural wastes, 
crops, milk, beef, feed brought in from off-site, other), and thus media to sample will vary, as well as the 
standards necessary to meet to get a farm to return to viability.  For example, Maine already has screening 
levels created by the DACF and Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for milk and 
beef, and screening levels for other specific crops are under development by both of these agencies.  
 
It is too early to scientifically determine uniform acceptable levels of PFAS in all types of media and it is 
also too soon to determine a uniform frequency of sampling that should be required for all media.  These 
types of determinations are ongoing with strong involvement at both the federal and state levels. At the 
state level, developing these types of uniform criteria would likely fall to several agencies including the 
Department, DACF, and Maine CDC.  Requiring this to occur at a pace accelerated from what is being 
done currently will require significant staff and resources from the Department, DACF, and CDC. To be 
clear, these are determinations currently being evaluated by multiple federal agencies, all of which have 
much more resources and capacity than Maine.  Maine simply does not have the extensive resources and 
capacity that would be required to do this. Nor does Maine have access to enough laboratory capacity to 
allow for research to be conducted in quick time to achieve these determinations.   
 
The Department has already estimated that it has completed about 15% of its soil and groundwater 
investigation pursuant to Public Law 2021, Chapter 478 .  Should this bill require changes to how 
sampling is conducted, the frequency of sampling, and standards used to measure, the investigation will 
in essence have to be re-started and Department will have to revisit all Tier 1 and 2 sites that have been 
completed. Moreover, DACF will have to revisit work completed at all of the farms to ensure it meets a 
uniform standard of some sort that may not even apply to the specific circumstances at that farm. Doing 
this will require significant time and resources by both agencies, both of which are already stretched thin 
to achieve the aggressive sampling schedule set forth in Public Law 2021, Chapter 478 .  
 
One final point is that setting uniform standards across the state as opposed to guidance-based screening 
levels and performance-based goals will create a new compliance program.  While this may be a good 
idea once the science is better understood about PFAS, at this time it could result in some challenging 
liabilities for farmers and other landowners. Sites not meeting the new uniform standards or who don’t 
sample at the frequency mandated would be out of compliance.  Contaminated lands may now become 
remediation sites. Lack of sampling would result in issuance of Notices of Violations and enforcement 
actions.  The legislature would have to determine which agencies would administer these new programs, 
provide staffing resources and dollars to support implementation.   
 
In closing, the Department does not support this concept legislation because it is broad, vague, 
overreaching, and will pose some overwhelming challenges for state agencies to implement.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this letter. I will be available to answer questions of the 
committee at the work session. 
 
Letter to Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
LD 304, An Act to Establish Statewide Standards for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
 
3 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Susanne Miller 
Director, Bureau of Remediation and Waste Management 
