,.~ _=;_.-.._
\ 
1 
/,<Ma1neHous1ng _ MAINE STATE HOUSING AUTHORITY 
131“ Legislature, 1“ Session 
Testimony of Erik Jorgensen 
To the joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business In support of 
LD 184, "An Act to Provide for the 2023 and 2024 Allocations 
of the State Ceiling on Private Activity Bonds" 
February 10 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, members of the ]oint Standing Committee on Innovation 
Development, Economic Advancement, and Business, my name is Erik jorgensen, and I serve as 
Senior Director for Government Relations and Communications at the Maine State Housing 
Authority (l\/[a_ineHousing). 
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 1969. 
We are an independent state authority created to address the problems of unsafe, unsuitable, 
overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. We are authorized to issue bonds to ﬁnance single family 
mortgages for ﬁrst tiine homebuyers and for affordable multi-family housing. 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, including rental 
subsidies, Weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-income housing tax 
credit program, and homeless grant programs. We receive state general fund revenue for homeless 
programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing 
Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund. 
We support LD 184 and urge its passage. 
This is a bill that comes before you on an annual basis, and is needed in order for MaineHousing, 
FAME and other agencies to issue private activity bonds. These are federally authorized tax-exempt 
bonds, so—called because the federal government determined many years ago that there are certain 
private activities that have a public purpose. Among others, these activities include homeownership 
and affordable housing construction. 
States are allowed to issue a limited number of these private activity bonds up to a ceiling set by the 
Federal Government. For most states, the amount of bonds that can be sold is determined by a per
capita calculation; for smaller states such as Maine, there is a small state minimum that is now 
indexed annually. 
MaineHousing uses these bonds for two speciﬁc purposes: to purchase mortgages for first~time 
homebuyers and to provide loans to developers for the construction of affordable apartments. 
These bonds are repaid by the mortgagees, not state government funds. 
With an overheated real estate market in Maine these ﬁnancing tools are now more important than 
ever. We are currently in a moment where affordable housing construction, which has beena 
legislative priority for years, is coming online at an increasing rate. Our agency currently has the 
largest construction pipeline in its history. This rising trend is not a coincidence, but a reﬂection of 
various policies made available to us by both the legislature and the Federal government. 
When we say that we use private methods for public purposes, this is what we are talking about. 
When we thank you at ribbon cuttings for providing us with the tools that allow us help Maine 
people solve their housing problems, private activity bonding is one of the most important of those 
tools 
Thank you for your consideration and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have.
