1 Y 
Testimony of 
DANA A. DORAN 
Executive Director 
Professional Logging Contractors of Maine 
Before the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry regarding LD 1678— 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to Study and 
Report on Soil Carbon Sequestration Incentive Programs 
Wednesday, April 26, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry, my name is Dana Doran, and I am the Executive Director of the 
Professional Logging Contractors of Maine. The Professional Logging Contractors of Maine (PLC) is 
a trade association that represents logging and associated trucking contractors throughout the state 
of Maine. The PLC was formed in 1995 to give independent contractors a voice in a rapidly changing 
forest industry. 
As of 2021, logging and trucking contractors in Maine employed over 3,000 people directly and were 
indirectly responsible for the creation of an additional 2,500 jobs. This employment and the 
investments that contractors make contributed $582 million to the state’s economy. Our 
membership, which includes 200 contractor members and an additional 120 associate members, 
employs more than 75% of the individuals who work in this industry and is also responsible for 80% 
of Maine’s annual timber harvest. 
Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify on behalf of our membership in support of LD 
1678 — Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to Study and 
Report on Soil Carbon Sequestration Incentive Programs. I would like to also thank Representative 
Osher for keeping this conversation alive for continued inquiry and dialogue this legislative session. 
As a member of the Natural and Working Lands Working Group of the Maine Climate Council as 
well as the Governor ’s Forest Carbon Program Task Force, I believe that it is important for the 
Legislature to also have a role in the consideration, deliberation, and implementation of 
recommendations for programs and policies that incentivize the sequestration of carbon in soils. 
There were several recommendations made in the final report of the Governor ’s Task Force which 
will help logging contractors and landowners with the sequestration of carbon that have not been 
move forward by the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DACF), and we would 
be very supportive of seeing DACF take formal action to move them forward. I have attached a copy 
of the Carbon Task Force’s ﬁnal report for your review and highlighted the sections that pertain to 
loggers that received unanimous support from the full Task Force. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide the opinion of our membership before you today andI 
would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
G0vernor ’s Task Force 
on the 
Creation of a Forest Carbon Program 
Final Report 
October’ 29, 2021
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Maine Forest Carbon Task Force Members 
Executive Summary 
Section 1. Review current harvest levels and carbon stocking data 
Section 2. Review practice-based carbon programs throughout the U.S. 
Section 3. Identify a suite of climate-friendly forest management practices 
Section 4a. Identify technical assistance activities to increase carbon sequestration 
Section 4b. Identify ﬁnancial incentives to increase carbon sequestration 
Section 5. Identify incentives for loggers and promote low-impact harvesting 
Section 6. Recommend updates to the Open Space Current Use Taxation 
Section 7. Explore partnership opportunities with commercial forestland owners 
Section 8. Consider participation opportunities in multi-state forest carbon initiatives 
Section 9. Recommend a numeric goal or targets for increased carbon sequestration 
Appendix A. Analysis of Maine’s Small Landowner Forest Carbon Mitigation Potential 
Appendix B. Acres, Harvest Levels, and Carbon Storage within 10-10,000 acres 
Ownerships 
Appendix C. Abbreviations Page
3
4
6 
10 
ll 
14 
17 
20 
2l 
24 
25 
26 
30 
44
50
Maine Forest Carbon Program Task Force 
C0-Chairs 
Tom Abello, Legislative Director, Ofﬁce of the Governor 
Amanda Beal, Commissioner, Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Members 
Mark Berry, The Nature Conservancy 
Barrie Brusila, Mid-Maine Forestry 
Adam Daigneault, University of Maine 
Tom Doak, Maine Woodland Owners 
Dana Doran, Professional Logging Contractors of Maine 
Ivan Fernandez, University of Maine Climate Change Institute 
Alec Giffen, New England Forestry Foundation 
Stacy Knapp, Maine Department of Environmental Protection 
Donald Mansius, Maine Forest Service 
Ryan Robicheau, Maine Department of Inland Fisheries &Wildlife 
Melissa Shea, Mountain Farm 
Patrick Strauch, Maine Forest Products Council 
Karin Tilberg, Forest Society of Maine 
Facilitator/Report Writer 
Jo D. Saffeir, Consultant 
Staff Support 
Tom Gordon, Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry
Executive Summary 
The Governor ’s Task Force on the Creation of a Forest Carbon Program was established by 
Executive Order on January l3, 2021. The Executive Order directs the Task Force to develop 
incentives to encourage forestland management practices that increase carbon storage 
speciﬁcally on woodland owners of 10 to 10,000 acres while maintaining harvest levels overall. 
It notes the negative impacts climate change is having on Maine, and recognizes that Maine’s 
forests, which cover 89% of the state, currently sequester an amount of carbon equal to at least 
60% of the state’s annual carbon emissions, or 75% when durable forest products are included. It 
also notes that Maine is losing an estimated 10,000 acres of natural and working lands to 
development each year, and that this development is a direct source of carbon emissions and 
hinders the growth of natural climate solutions. The work of the Task Force advances that 
recommendation of the Maine Climate Council’s Natural and Working Lands Work Group to 
develop incentives that increase carbon storage on this forestland size category while 
maintaining harvest levels. 
The Task Force also identiﬁed certain overarching principles that are foundational to the success 
of Maine’s forests in sequestering more carbon. These include: 
- Maintaining existing forestland (“keeping forests as forests”) is fundamentally important if 
forests are to make a growing contribution toward achieving the State’s climate goals. The 
Task Force supports increasing state, federal, and private funding for forestland protection, 
including funding for conservation easements or fee purchase. To monitor Maine’s progress 
in this regard, the Task Force recommends that the Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry (DACF) be permanently tasked with tracking the amount and type of conserved 
land in Maine (including municipal, NGO, state, and federal lands), and also tracking 
forestland loss. 
' It is equally important to increase forest carbon on existing forestland by improving forest 
condition through the widespread adoption of sustainable forest practices that increase 
carbon sequestration, both through more intensive silvicultural management of stands that 
will increase forest growth, and by delayed harvests that allow trees to mature into older 
forest, resulting in greater carbon storage, which also increases the opportunity to store more 
carbon in long-lived forest products. 
~ The adoption of carbon-enhancing forest practices depends on the existence of economically 
viable markets for low-grade wood. Such markets incentivize Maine woodland owners and 
loggers to practice sustainable forestry that results in improved silviculture. The lack of such 
markets is a particular and ongoing challenge for Maine woodland owners and loggers. 
While markets alone do not inherently produce climate beneﬁts, they are a necessary part of 
the equation as they can either reduce the costs of climate-bene ﬁcial practices or even make
4
them proﬁtable. Expanded, ﬁnancially viable markets for low-grade wood will also help to 
counteract pressures to convert forestland to non-forest uses. 
In offering its ambitious recommendations, the Task Force also offers a note of caution, 
acknowledging the signiﬁcant uncertainties that inﬂuence the health and productivity of Maine’s 
forests. These vulnerabilities, exacerbated by climate change, include impacts from pest 
outbreaks, disease, extreme weather events, wildfire and invasives, all of which can havea 
negative bearing on the ability of Maine’s forestland to sequester carbon. Despite these risks, the 
Task Force enthusiastically supports the recommendations in this report, understanding the 
important role Maine’s forests currently play in sequestering carbon, and the potential of Maine’s 
forests to continue to make signiﬁcant contributions to achieving Maine’s climate goals. 
This report is structured to align with the nine directives outlined in the Governor ’s Executive 
Order. These directives provide the framework for actions the Task Force is recommending be 
taken to develop a voluntary, incentive-based program for woodland owners of 10 to l0,000 
acres and forestry practitioners to increase carbon storage in Maine’s forests. In broad terms, 
these actions aim to: 
0 Increase investment in forestland conservation 
0 Encourage, promote, and incentivize the voluntary adoption of climate-friendly forest 
management practices 
0 Promote the expansion of markets for low-grade wood 
0 Highlight the need for better data regarding harvest levels within this broad landowner size 
class, and the relative effectiveness of various forest management practices in increasing 
carbon sequestration 
0 Signiﬁcantly increase technical assistance to landowners by expanding Maine Forest Service 
capacity and engaging licensed consulting foresters 
0 Increase alignment with federal funding programs that support forest carbon sequestration 
efforts 
0 Explore partnerships with a private entity or entities to support the development 
of a voluntary credit-based and/or practice-oriented carbon program 
0 Promote climate-friendly timber harvesting practices and support the use of low-impact 
harvesting equipment 
0 Identity a suite of potential changes to the Open Space Current Use Taxation program that 
integrate carbon management elements into the program 
0 Encourage coordination between landowners of l0-10,000 acres and large, commercial 
forestland owners for mutual learning and beneﬁt 
0 Recognize the potential of collaborating with other states to increase investment in forest 
carbon sequestration 
0 Establish a statewide total forest sector carbon sequestration target
5
These and many other supporting recommendations are further articulated in the report sections 
that follow. 
1. Review current harvest levels and carbon stocking data on woodland owners of 10 to 
10,000 acres. 
To better understand current harvest levels and carbon stocking on l0-10,000-acre woodland 
ownerships, the Task Force first sought information from University of Maine representatives 
and the Maine Forest Service (MFS) on the distinction between carbon storage and sequestration 
how and where carbon is stored in forests, and the capacity of Maine’s forests to sequester more 
carbon. Carbon storage is the amount (stock) of carbon stored in the forest ecosystem and 
in harvested wood products at a speciﬁc point in time. Carbon sequestration is the change 
in that stock over a given period of time, typically one year. 
Non-proﬁt and state agency personnel provided the Task Force with an understanding of Maine 
woodland owner demographics. Maine woodland owners with 10-l0,000 acres comprise a 
highly diverse group. There are approximately 86,000 Maine family woodland owners of l0 
acres or more, and according to the USDA Forest Service’s National Woodland Owner Survey 
(NWOS), family woodland ownerships (l0+ acres) represent 29% of Maine’s private land base. 
There are some corporate owners that fall into this size class category too. Sixty percent of 
landowners with between l0 to 10,000 acres are individuals 65 years or older, while only 4% of 
this landbase is owned by individuals 45 years or younger. Only 27% of landowners with 
l0-10,000 acres have a management plan, but 90% of those with a plan report they have 
implemented at least part of their plan. This points to the importance of helping more woodland 
owners develop forest management plans as an effective step toward the adoption of forest 
stewardship practices that increase carbon sequestration and storage. 
Active forest stewardship is considerably less prevalent on the smaller end of the 10-l0,000- acre 
ownership spectrum than on its larger end. Yet taken as a whole, l0-10,000-acre ownerships, 
which account for at least 24% of the private land area and 27% of the standing aboveground 
carbon, produce at least 24% of the state’s annual wood harvest (Table l). Estimates of acres, 
standing aboveground biomass, and harvest vary greatly depending on which data source is 
being used, highlighting that more deﬁnitive data are needed to better understand this ownership 
class. Forest Inventory and Analysis Program (PIA) data on all small private ownerships (family 
and corporate) estimate that the area may comprise 43% of the private forest. However, the 
ownership data that are presently available are incomplete, leaving many acres that could not be 
assigned to an appropriate ownership size class (see Appendix B). Despite the variation between 
data sources, it is apparent that small woodland owners make up a sizable amount of Maine’s 
forest area, stored carbon, and harvest base. These data also support conducting further analysis9
6
to estimate how improving forest stewardship for this ownership size class could inﬂuence the 
state’s forest carbon sequestration. 
Table 1. Task Force estimates of acres owned, stocking, removals, and potential harvested wood 
in long-term storage for Maine’s 10 - 10,000 acres forest ownership size class. 
Estimate Low High Best All Private 
End End Guess Forest % Total Private — Best 
Guess (low, high) 
Total Acres Owned (million acres) 
NWOS acres (famil 
forests only) y N/A N/A 4.7 16.1 29% 
PIA acres (family and 3.9 10.9 6.9 16.1 
corporate) p 43% (24%, 68%) 
Total Carbon Stock (million metric tons of carb on) 
FIA aboveground 78.1 199.3 134.3 289.5 
carbon 46% (27%, 69%) 
T tal carbon stock (million metric tons of carbon dioxide eq uivalents)*0 
FIA aboveground 286.6 731.4 492.9 1,062.5 
carbon (assuming , 
released as CO2 only) 1 46% (27%, 369%) 
Total Harvest (million dry tons) 
FIA bole removals 2.2 6.0 3.8 9.1 
(2019) 42% (24%, 66%) 
Total L0ng- Term Harvested Wood Product Storage (gre en tons) ** 
Sawlog wood products 0.8 1.2 1.0 2.3 44% (36%, 51%) 
NWOS: National Woodland Owners Suivey; FIA: Forest Inventory and Analysis 
*Forest carbon (C) stocks are typically repoited in tons of C (a solid that is a relatively constant proportion of total forest 
biomass), while the standard unit for reporting GHG emissions and removals is metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalents 
of expression has been widely 
adopted to normalize the comparison of different forest C forms or atmospheric GHGs. If we assume C is released into the 
atmosphere as CO. (ignoring minor forms of C gas emissions from forests, such as methane (CH.)), the atomic weight of 
each element (i.e., C and oxygen (0)) in the C0. molecule can be used to calculate the expression of C in the foiin of CO 
(that is the mass of the gas if we add O and C molecules). The atomic weight of C and CO, are 12 and 44 grams per mole, (CO=e). Because the dominant gas phase of C in the atmosphere is CO., the CO.e standard 
respectively; therefore, one ton of C equals approximately 44/12 or 3.67 tons of C0,. 
GHGs include a variety of compounds, most notably carbon dioxide (C0,), methane (Cl-1.), nitrous oxide (N.O) 
hydrofluorocarbons (HFC), perﬂuorocarbons (PFC), and sulfur hexaﬂuoride (SF .). While CO, is the most abundant GHG 
other GHGs also include C (e.g., CH.) while still others contain no C (e.g., N10 or SF.) even though they all have the 
radiative properties that warm the atmosphere. Standard units of CO.e are used to compare GHG emissions and removals 
by calculating the equivalent impact on atmospheric warming based on the unique global warming potential (GWP) of 
each gas as though they were all CO., and thus the concept of a CO1 “equivalent. ”
When C is stored in the form of biomass in a forest, the C molecule is most commonly released back to the atmosphere by 
stem and root respiration from living trees, or microbial respiration resulting from the decomposition of dead organic 
materials dominated by tree mortality in the forest. However, other forms of the C molecule can be released, particularly in 
wet soils (e.g., CH.) or when a tree is burned (e. g., GHGs including CO2, Cl-l., and N.O are released to the atmosphere). 
The type of GHG is important because of the unique GWP of each GHG that encompasses both the radiative forcing of 
that particular molecule and the length of time that it remains in the atmosphere. Converting all GHG emissions into CO.e 
requires knowledge of how much of each gas is emitted as well as the GWP for each gas. Based on the IPCC Sixth 
Assessment Report (2021, Table 7.15), the 100-year GWP (GWP-100) for non-fossil-fuel-based Cl-L is 27.2, for N,O is 
273, and for CO. is l. GHGs must be multiplied by their GWP-100 to be converted to CO,e, thus a single molecule of CO. 
equals l CO.e while a single molecule of Cl-L equals 27.2 CO.e. 
**Sawlogs account for 31% of harvest; assume 60% of sawlog volume at time of harvest goes into long-term 
storage. Accounting for sawlog product decay over time would reduce this ﬁgure. 
Additional data on the known area of small woodland owners provided by the U.S. Forest 
Service’s FIA program (i.e., 4.0 million acres) can be used to better understand how the metrics 
presented above vary by stocking and stand size class, as listed in Table 2. These estimates 
highlight how different combinations of stand classiﬁcations have varying levels of biomass (and 
carbon) stock and density as well as their relative contribution to the total annual removals across 
this speciﬁc landowner size. This infonnation can be used to help identify how forest carbon 
could be enhanced by making changes to the landscape, such as thinning overstocked stands or 
planting poorly stocked forests. As an illustrative example based on these data, the Task Force 
roughly estimates that implementing management practices that shift all 1.5 million acres of 
poorly and moderately stocked stands to well-stocked could increase the FlA’s reported estimate 
of small woodland owners forest aboveground carbon stocks by about 57 million metric tons of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (l\/l'[COz6), a gain of 20% compared to their current state. Assuming 
this transition would occur over 30 years, this could result in about 1.9 MtCO2e/yr in additional 
forest carbon sequestration. To be clear, the Task Force does not expect that every acre will 
experience this change. The Task Force also cautions that the data used to derive these estimates 
have high uncertainty, and thus should not be used to derive a speciﬁc mitigation target. Rather, 
it supports the idea that improving forest stewardship and stocking levels should result in 
increased carbon sequestration and storage in Maine’s small woodlands.
8
Table 2. FIA reported estimaes far abovegrcuncl biomass, removals, and area organized by 
stocking class and stand size class for all known awnerships of 10-10,000 acres 
PIA Size 
C1ass* Area 
(Acres) Ab _ _ 
d Biomass Annual 0‘ egl mm Densitv Removals °/is Total oppommny 
Biomass (dry (aw* 
(G W Removals to Increase 
mus)“ tnuslac) tons!§' _r) Fares‘C 
0_\;e2'sr0c bed ___ 
L arge 
Medium 
Small 
Tomi 51,713 
74,820 
216,137 
342,720 5,720,547 111 
4,976,064 67 
4,616,750 21 
15,313,361 13 359
0 
104,496 
117,855 1% 
0% 
5% 
5% Thin 
Thin 
L arge 
Medium 
Small 
Total 777,686 
844,108 
427,575 
2,049,369 45 
Well stocked 
54,9513! 1 71 
42,568,363 50 
8,891,641 '21 
106,417,320 52 145,667 
62 ,570 
322,435 
530,672 6% 
3% 
14% 
23% 
Mar.ieIm»21§' Srecahzd 
L arge 
Medium 
Small 
Total 522,934 
613,812 
150,097 
1,286,843 23,364,121 45 
19,576,937 32 
2,696,456 18 
45,637,513 3 5 627,561 
332,761 
317,020 
1,277,341 28% 
1 5% 
14% 
56% Enrich. Plant 
P0011? smc 
Large 
Medium 
Small 
Total 104,419 
155,394 
16,288 
276,100 3,032,178 29 
3,135,600 20 
123,273 8 
6,291,051 23 
Nowsior ﬁred 121,441 
190,770 
21,559 
333,769 5% 
8% 
1?7 
*0 
15%» Enrich. Plant 
Large 
Medium 
Small 
Non-stocked 
Total 291 
1,157 
1,785 
10,006 
13,2390       
0 
S57
0 
55,304 
56,160 40
0
0 
2,124 
2,124 
I 0-10,1700 .-lcra Lazzalmrner Total 0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% Plant 
Plant 
Plant 
L arge 
Medium 
Small 
Non-stocked 
Total 1,457,043 
1,689,290 
811,932 
10,006 
3,968,272 87,074,157 60 
70,257,825 42 
16,328,120 20 
55,304 6 
173,715,406 44 908,027 
586,101 
765,510 
2,124 
2261,7152 40% 
26% 
34% 
0% 
100% 
* PIA classiﬁcation of the predominant (based on stocking) diameter class of live trees, mixers at least 
10% of stand is forested. Fc-{large and medium classiﬁcation, at least 50'?-*5 ofthe stand is in large and 
medium trees, and classiﬁcation is based on the highest proportion of those two size classes. 
Large diameter: trees atleast ll" diameter for hardwoods, 9" for softwood 
Medium diameter: trees at least 5" in diameter but less than the large diameter trees 
Small diameter: less than 5“ in diameter trees 
Non-stacked: less than 10% of stand is forested 
dry biomass weight can he converted to carbon by multipbring the value by 0,5
9
2. Review available data for practice-based carbon programs throughout the United 
States. 
With information provided by non-proﬁt and University representatives, the Task Force 
considered the essential elements of carbon offsets, the history of carbon offset projects in 
Maine, and the general nature of voluntary and regulatory U.S. carbon markets. In particular, 
information on the following programs was reviewed and discussed: American Forest 
Foundation and The Nature Conservancy ’s Family Forest Carbon Program; FiniteCarbon ’s Core 
Carbon Program; SilviaTerra ’s Natural Capital Exchange; Vermont’s Cold Hollow Carbon; Land 
Trust Alliance ’s Forest Carbon Offset Pilot Program; Maine’s Forest Carbon for Commercial 
Landowners Project; Maine Mountain Collaborative ’s Exemplary Forestry Investment Fund; 
Northeast Wilderness Trust’s Wild Carbon Program; Georgia’s Sustainable Development Carbon 
Registry; and Nova Scotia’s Forest Sustainability regulations. This analysis contributed to the 
speciﬁc recommendations contained in Sections #3 and #4 below, which identify a priority suite 
of climate-friendly forest management practices that could be adopted, and technical assistance 
and ﬁnancial incentives that could be implemented, to maximize carbon sequestration and 
storage on Maine woodlands of 10-10,000 acres.
10
3. Identify a suite of climate-friendly forest management practices that improve carbon 
stocks and maintain current timber harvest levels. 
As noted in Section #1 above, the 10-10,000 acre ownership range includes a very diverse group 
of landowners with signiﬁcantly different levels of engagement with and management of their 
lands, including different harvesting practices. Though sufﬁcient detail is lacking, the Task Force 
believes that signiﬁcantly more harvesting occurs on ownerships of 1,000 acres and larger, and 
that smaller ownerships, particularly in the southern half of the state, are generally less likely to 
have been harvested in recent decades. The Task Force believes more active forest management 
on lands of I0-10,000 acres is an important strategy to achieve increased carbon sequestration 
and storage while maintaining harvest. Given this, the Task Force interprets the Executive Order 
directive of “maintaining current harvest levels” to mean “at a minimum, ” and that it is therefore 
necessary to l) establish what the baseline harvest level is for logical acreage segmentations 
within this broad size class, and 2) identify practices that improve carbon stocks While 
maintaining or increasing harvest levels (at a broad scale, as opposed to on each speciﬁc parcel). 
After reviewing the wide range of emerging voluntary forest carbon programs throughout the 
U.S., as described in Section #2 above, the Task Force concluded that consensus is building 
around the following forest practices having the greatest potential to achieve carbon beneﬁts. 
Signiﬁcantly more research is needed to understand the relative beneﬁts associated with each 
practice as well as implementation costs. However, Maine’s forest carbon program should focus 
on incentivizing a suite of forest practices, including: 
Avoid Forest Conversion 
0 Avoid forestland loss/incentivize forest conservation (through conservation easements 
or fee purchases) to maintain forest ecosystem carbon and the potential for continued 
sequestration. 
Enhance Forest Resiliency 
0 Manage competition from invasives, non-native tree species or species not suited to 
the site. 
0 If relying on natural regeneration, plan the harvest to regenerate the site quickly with 
desired species. 
0 When planting, select species well-suited to the site and a changing climate. 
0 Plan to reduce the risk of carbon losses from disturbances (e.g., wildﬁre, exotic and 
endemic insect infestations).
11
Conduct Intermediate Treatments 
0 Increase stocking in understocked stands. 
0 Conduct thinning in immature and/or overstocked stands to stimulate growth of the 
remaining trees and increase the yield of useful material from the stand (evaluate 
short-term carbon losses against longer-term forest and forest product carbon 
beneﬁts):A 
0 Precommercially thin saplings and small poles. 
0 Commercially thin (uniform thinnings or crop tree releases). 
0 Retain more carbon in thinnings (retain large-diameter live trees, snags, and species 
and age diversity). 
O Focus investments in intensive silvicultural treatments on sites with high carbon value 
potential (superior soils, drainage, aspect). 
Practice Sustainable Harvesting 
I Seek to increase the proportion of harvested materials likely to be used in long-lived 
wood products. 
O Manage partial harvests thoughtfully to retain quality trees and minimize stand 
damage and soil disturbance. 
0 Extend harvest cycles to grow larger trees that are more likely to be used in long-lived 
wood products. 
O Utilize timber harvesting professionals, including licensed consulting foresters 
trained in climate-friendly harvesting practices. 
Establish Forest Reserves 
I Establish forest reserves on sites with high carbon density and in areas of special 
ecological value to allow the development of late-successional forest. 
This suite of sustainable forest practices should be encouraged, promoted, and/or incentivized 
through existing voluntary state forest management programs to incorporate climate objectives 
into these programs. This includes the Forest Stewardship Program and the Open Space Current 
Use Taxation Program (see Section #6 below). 
Efforts should be made to similarly implement these practices through U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) programs. To accomplish 
this, NRCS program funding needs to be increased, with programs achieving higher visibility 
and reaching a much broader cross-section of small woodland owners through targeted outreach 
and technical assistance. NRCS cost-share practices should be developed that are speciﬁcally 
aimed at increasing carbon sequestration and storage, and administrative requirements must be 
simpliﬁed in order for programs to appeal to small landowners. Toward this end, the NRCS
12
program should build off the successes of the NRCS Regional Conservation Partnership 
Program’s efforts nationwide to simplify, streamline and supplement traditional NRCS 
approaches. Moving forward, this will require engagement with Maine’s Congressional 
delegation, the Chief of the NRCS, the State Conservationist, landowners, and other 
stakeholders.
4. Identify a suite of ﬁnancial incentives and technical assistance activities to increase 
carbon sequestration on woodland owners of 10 to 10,000 acres, and carbon sinking in 
wood products, through active forest management. 
The Task Force recognizes that landowners within as broad an acreage category as 10-l0,000 
acres invariably exhibit a wide range of levels of engagement with their forests. Research on this 
population, largely comprised of family woodland owners, indicates that they can be reliably 
segmented according to their motivation for owning forestland. “Woodland Retreat Owners” 
make up 48% of this population, and care primarily about the beauty, nature, and recreational 
value of their woodland. “Working the Land Owners” (19%) value aesthetics and recreation, but 
are pragmatic in that they see the land as an economic asset as well. “Supplemental Income 
Owners” (14%) own land primarily for timber income and investment. And ”Uninvolved 
Owners” (19%) tend not to care about their woodland, are most apt to be willing to sell their 
land, and are least likely to want to see it remain as woodland. ‘ 
Given this range in ownership motivations, it is important to provide technical assistance and 
financial incentives that are relevant to these varying types of landowners. Landowners ﬁrst need 
to become meaningfully engaged in the management of their forests before they can take steps 
toward implementing carbon enhancing forest management practices. As a result, the Task Force 
recommends a two-pronged approach to developing a forest carbon program: 
0 Signiﬁcantly increase technical assistance to woodland owners to reduce threats of 
conversion, and to rapidly expand the number of landowners adopting practices that increase 
carbon sequestration and storage; and 
0 Offer ﬁnancial incentives to engaged landowners to implement carbon-enhancing forest 
management practices, including long-tenn agreements that can encourage practices that 
continue over time. 
4a. Technical Assistance 
Numerous studies over the years have found that family woodland owners place a high value on 
one-on-one access to state forestry agency professionals and licensed consulting foresters to walk 
their land with them and discuss their management alternatives. Engaging as many landowners 
as possible to work with knowledgeable forestry professionals can yield positive results with 
regard to carbon sequestration and storage on their woodlands. Dedicated boots-on-the-ground 
landowner education and engagement can make this happen. 
Maine Forest Service (MFS) data show that providing dedicated, individualized guidance 
through MF S and licensed consulting foresters, coupled with practice and plan incentives, the 
potential number of landowners reached is substantial. In the late l990’s, due to an increase in 
1 
ii”ut_lg!_' ,, ii, cl. a1l.. (~"i'ltIi£-fi ‘.S'ILliI( _/_I' !i§ t{i1_r]_1\ ’<.‘r1g}1{;1g [f_t_l __/till‘/l/’ ,_/1;;/vs! 1$('{)iLV fi{jl17if7(.)( ‘ \7\ 
i Q /.e.§,§_g1{1t§_w{i'r>(z2 .,"~{r,2cirI/ Mai’/reliila ’ 
_j{<;' ,§;f<z1't'/2. Society of./\u_ic_1_'_i _czin if9re>;t<;ifs__Jo1,i_ifiial_i>{_l*<ix'§st1f)~ .___( _)<,:_i./,N<>\./ . 2()() _7_‘
,
14
federal funding, 4,000 forest management plans were completed representing 500,000 acres of 
family woodlands. Today, due to federal funding reductions, MFS now provides cost-share 
assistance for landowners to engage consulting foresters to prepare 100 plans per year, 
representing approximately 7,600 acres. The exponential growth of real estate transfers over the 
past two years points to the signiﬁcant need for increased and sustained landowner engagement 
in order to retain and increase forest carbon beneﬁts. 
The following actions include two key elements: on-the-ground capacity improvement and 
“cost-share ” funding for carbon-friendly practices for landowners and loggers. They provide 
practical and relatively quickly implemented climate solutions, and provide stewardship progress 
for small woodland owners who otherwise have not been engaged in forest management. They 
also take steps towards preventing further annual loss of forestland. 
Action items: 
0 Increase capacity within the Maine Forest Service by hiring a Forest Carbon Specialist 
(Senior Planner). This person, knowledgeable in forest carbon, will be a centralized source 
for forest carbon information for stakeholders and the general public. Duties would include, 
among other activities, developing training modules for landowners, loggers, and foresters 
on climate-friendly forest management practices, and potentially playing a role in a forest 
carbon program described in the Financial Incentives section directly below. 
I Increase District Forester capacity within the Maine Forest Service. MF S currently has l0 
District Foresters. This compares to past staffing levels of 18 Service Foresters, 4 Regional 
Foresters, 2 Watershed Foresters, and a Marketing and Utilization Forester. Increasing 
current forester stafﬁng by 5 would allow for greater outreach to landowners. This number 
includes aSenior Planner position specializing in marketing and utilization to work with 
loggers, foresters, and landowners. The District Foresters would also receive training for 
consistent carbon messaging, building off learnings from Forest Opportunity 
Roadmap/Maine ’s (FOR/Maine ’s) small landowner engagement survey. They would serve as 
a clearinghouse for information and education and would provide on-the—ground statewide 
ﬁeld visits, general advice, and educational services, including a social media presence and 
workshops on climate-friendly practices for all forestry sectors. 
The above actions align with the Maine Climate Action Plan recommendation to, “Increase 
technical service provider capacity by 2024 to deliver data, expert guidance, and support for 
climate solutions to communities, farmers, loggers, and foresters at the Department of 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Maine Forest Service, Department of Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife, Department of Marine Resources, and University of Maine.” The Plan also states, 
“Increasing the number of ﬁeld foresters at Maine Forest Service should support landowner and 
land-manager adoption of climate-friendly practices, as well as efforts to support good forest 
management practices. ” 
0 Provide adequate funding for the Maine Forest Service to market the beneﬁts of 
implementing climate-bene ﬁcial forest stewardship practices, participating in carbon 
markets, and engaging qualiﬁed natural resource professionals.
15
Consistent with the recommendations in Section #3 to make NRCS programs more 
accessible to small woodland owners, increase alignment with NRCS to implement forest 
carbon practice incentives. NRCS is exploring funding half a dedicated position to work 
with landowners to encourage participation in NRCS forestry programs. This will include 
identifying the list of EQIP practices that most closely align with the menu of forest 
practices listed in Section #3 above and working with NRCS to fund those practices ata 
meaningful level. 
Increase allotted amounts for the MFS WoodsWise program by $50,000 to $100,000 per year 
(this program provides cost-share to landowners to work with a licensed consulting forester 
to develop a management plan). This funding could possibly also support cost sharing for 
carbon-friendly practices and would include a carbon planning component to management 
plan incentives. This would also include working with NRCS for input and alignment of 
their CAP-106 plans (Conservation Activity Plans within EQIP) to include carbon planning. 
As part of the duties of the new MF S Marketing and Utilization Forester, support the creation 
of improved markets for low-grade wood through public and private business efforts. 
Maine agriculture may also have a significant interest in climate-based forest management 
practices. According to USDA’s 2017 Census of Agriculture, 5,305 of Maine’s 7,600 farms 
report have woodland as part of their land holdings. Agricultural producers reported owning 
685,529 acres of woodland (52.4 percent of the total agricultural acres in Maine). Outreach 
and technical assistance for small woodlot owners should include Maine’s agricultural 
producers. 
The USDA describes agroforestry as the integration of trees and shrubs into crop and animal 
farming systems to create environmental, economic, and social beneﬁts. Agroforestry 
includes practices such as ally cropping, forest farming, and silvopasture, which facilitate 
agricultural production in a semi-forested or forested landscape, minimizing the need to 
remove trees for livestock and crop production. Farmers can implement agroforestry 
practices as a production and economic diversification strategy, generating income while 
protecting numerous ecological services present in forested landscapes, including ongoing 
carbon sequestration. Maine’s Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry ’s 
Bureau of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources should look for opportunities to develop 
and promote resources to encourage farmers and woodland owners interested in agricultural 
production to consider agroforestry opportunities as an alternative to converting forested land 
to pasture or cropland. 
Outcomes of these actions include: 
Given the current acreage covered by forest management plans, an increase in cost-share 
funding by $50,000/year could significantly increase the acreage impacted annually and 
include carbon inventories, expanding beyond timber resources to cover other forest 
characteristics, including forest biomass and ecosystem carbon content. The current acreage 
for which forest management plans are developed annually using the WoodsWISE program 
is approximately 7,600 acres and does not include a carbon inventory. 
Increased acreage treated with climate-friendly forest management practices that are not
16
economically feasible in today’s markets, contingent upon NRCS investment in carbon- 
friendly practice incentive funding. 
0 Measurable increase in awareness and training of woodland owners, foresters, loggers, and 
the public about the beneﬁts of climate-friendly forest management. 
4b. Financial Incentives 
The Task Force recognizes that there are many innovative voluntary carbon programs currently 
being developed by the private and non-proﬁt sectors throughout the U.S, and that this landscape 
of program offerings is evolving and expanding rapidly. Diverse approaches to incentivize forest 
carbon sequestration are being piloted or otherwise tested. The existence of this dynamic 
environment suggests that the State of Maine may be well served by working in partnership 
with one or more external entities to develop a voluntary credit-based and/or 
practice-oriented carbon program, tailored speciﬁcally to Maine’s unique landowner 
demographics and land ownership patterns. 
The Task Force recommends that the Maine Forest Service: 
- Facilitate the development and/or adoption of a program to enable small woodland owners to 
store more carbon on their forestlands while maintaining or increasing harvest levels, and 
invite parties interested in partnering with the State on such an effort to make themselves 
known 
- Create an advisory committee to interview external entities expressing an interest to solicit 
their feedback on: 
' What the State role should be to increase landowner participation, and increase the 
value of any “offsets” created 
' Alternatives for funding such a program. noting advantages and disadvantages of 
recommended options 
- How such a program would be made available to landowners, including the program’s 
structure and format 
- How carbon storage could be increased while maintaining harvest levels 
~ How forest carbon measuring and monitoring would be conducted 
' How harvest levels could be maintained system-wide (not necessarily parcel by parcel)
17
- How a program could be implemented to maximize its impact, including bridging 
between the current generation of older landowners and the younger generation who 
will be inheriting the land 
Convene structured discussions with potential partners to explore ideas for how sucha 
program might be designed 
Select a partner (or partners) to work with in designing and establishing a program (or 
programs)‘ 
In this regard, the Maine Forest Service could, for example, work with the partner(s) selected to: 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G Deﬁne what business-as-usual management actually is for various ownership size 
subclasses (e.g., l0-l00, 100-500, 500-1000, 1000+ acres) or geographic regions. This 
could be determined via a ﬁeld survey of landowner practices over the last X years, could 
include both harvest and stand-tending activities, and could document harvest and 
residual stocking volumes. 
Determine what outcomes are possible under different circumstances regarding increased 
stocking and harvest volumes given improved silviculture (e.g., thinning in the stands 
where growth rates on the most desirable trees could be enhanced, or another 
carbon-enhancing management practice identiﬁed in Section #3 above). This should 
result in predictions regarding outcomes, e.g., if practice W is implemented in 
circumstances X, it will result in Y for growth and Z for harvest. 
Set a numeric target for additional tons of carbon storage by small woodland owners and 
document how this will be veriﬁed. Note: This target is likely to be only a portion of total 
potential as it will be inﬂuenced by program design. 
Determine the manner of delivery of the program to landowners (agreements, contracts, 
other) and duration. 
Determine what it would cost to implement the practices that would increase carbon 
storage (in the forest and in durable wood products) and substitution beneﬁts. 
Determine what it would cost to subsidize the productive use of small diameter and 
low-quality trees by mills. 
Conduct a detailed program design effort based on learnings from A.-F., identify the 
types of policy instruments that best target the kinds of landowners whose behavior 
can be changed cost-effectively, and detail how these would actually work in terms 
of permanence, leakage‘ , reversal, monitoring, and veriﬁcation. 
2 Leakage occurs when interventions to reduce emissions or harvest in one area lead to an increase in emissions or 
harvest in another area.
18
This could result in a recommendation to focus on a narrower subset of small woodland 
owners (for example, those open to practice changes and who have lands where carbon 
stocks could be increased substantially through management that increases biomass while 
improving stocking). The program might also include: 
0 an element focused on wood processors to increase their use of small diameter 
materials, for instance, via practice-based incentives like those currently used in 
Nova Scotia; 
0 some variant of carbon offsets that addresses the transaction cost issue (perhaps 
through aggregation across smaller ownerships); and/or 
0 a focus on logging contractors to incentivize high-quality harvesting practices as this 
has a direct bearing on stand quality and ultimately on forest carbon storage capacity. 
Secure funding from private parties (e.g., corporations with obligations to reduce 
emissions), federal or state programs, or other states, to implement a program to achieve 
the target for additional carbon storage while maintaining harvest. If funds are generated 
either in full or in part via payments for carbon offsets, the State should ensure that 
offsets issued meet an approved standard that includes third-party veriﬁcation (ensuring 
that the offsets are real, additional “ , veriﬁable“ and lasting), and are recorded in a registry. 
The State should also consider whether it will have standards for the purchasers of 
offsets, such as whether they are executing a plan to reduce their own emissions. 
I Authorize the private partner to implement the program by enrolling landowners, either 
paying landowners for practices or paying contractors directly to implement them on 
lands enrolled. In addition, the private partner could, depending on program design, act as 
a carbon broker, or distribute funds to forest products companies using wood that would 
not normally be part of their feed stocks (e.g., small diameter or low-value trees coming 
off the lands enrolled). 
Through sampling and statistical analysis, accurately document the results of the program 
in terms of additional carbon stored and emissions avoided by substituting wood for other 
materials and harvest levels by comparison to business-as-usual management. 
The possible approach articulated in A.-J. above is intended as initial guidance only, with the 
expectation that this could and likely would evolve as the concept is further reﬁned. 
3 
In this context, "additional" means the carbon beneﬁt realized from a project would not otherwise have happened 
in the absence of the project. 
4 In this context, veriﬁable means that carbon offsets can be quantiﬁed, monitored, and veriﬁed by an accredited 
thud party actor through a standarized system.
19
5 Identify incentives for high-quality, on-the-ground performance by loggers and promote 
the use of low-impact harvesting equipment. 
The Task Force recommends various actions that are intended to directly support logging 
contractors ’ ability to contribute to carbon beneﬁts that will have positive outcomes for 
landowners. These include: 
The proposed Maine Forest Service Forest Carbon Specialist (Senior Planner) is 
envisioned as including loggers among its target stakeholders for technical assistance and 
training on climate-friendly management and harvesting practices. 
Support higher level on-the-ground performance to encourage climate-friendly timber 
harvesting with veriﬁable outcomes by promoting voluntary use of third-party certiﬁed 
harvesting companies. Third-party certiﬁcation provides veriﬁcation that high standards 
are being met at the point of harvest, by utilizing independent licensed consulting 
foresters as veriﬁers, ultimately providing a veriﬁcation model for landowners that 
participate in a carbon program and utilize the services of timber harvesting companies. 
Provide ﬁnancial cost-share resources for harvesting companies to become third-party 
certiﬁed in a similar manner as cost-share resources are provided by the State to 
landowners who create a forest management plan (i.e. the MF S Woodswise 
program).- 
Increase funding for the Direct Link (Clean Water State Revolving Fund) program and 
reassess the elements of the program so as to provide greater availability of reduced 
interest loans for equipment that will minimize soil compaction and disturbance of forest 
soils. 
Provide cost-share resources for landowners and contractors to purchase and implement 
carbon-enhancing best management forest practices (e.g., portable bridges, culvert pipes, 
grass seed, hay, skid trail regrading, road relocation, post harvest stabilization, corduroy, 
gravel, silt fencing). 
Outcomes of these actions include: 
Currently, there are approximately 300 logging companies in Maine and just over 
one-third are third-party certiﬁed. Cost-share resources to support more companies 
becoming certiﬁed will increase landowner awareness and provide greater veriﬁcation of 
climate-friendly harvesting practices.» 
Signiﬁcant increase in the use of trained loggers, logging equipment, and best 
management practices that promote climate-friendly harvesting practices.
20
6. Recommend updates to the Open Space Current Use Taxation program including ina 
manner that incentivizes climate-friendly land management practices. 
The recommendations in this section represent the aspirations of the Task Force, which 
acknowledges that further dialogue with municipalities and other interests will be required 
to ﬁnalize a legislative approach. 
Task Force members have prepared initial concepts for revision of the Open Space Current Use 
program, and gathered initial feedback from representatives of Maine Revenue Services and 
the Maine Municipal Association. It then sought broader feedback on a draft during the public 
comment period. This section is not an attempt to provide complete or ﬁnal language for update 
and revision of the program, but instead focuses on key program elements. 
Priorigg Concepts: 
- 
The Open Space program should be streamlined, with an added emphasis on climate beneﬁt 
' 
The Open Space program should contribute to maintaining forestland and reducing 
forestland loss in the state. It is an important but underutilized option among Maine’s 
current use tax programs. 
- 
The Open Space Program should be made more efﬁcient to increase value to the public, 
attract more landowner participation, and be easier to administer by municipalities, with 
reduced ﬁnancial burden. 
- 
The Open Space program should accommodate a wide range of potential land 
management practices, from intensive silviculture and production of forest products to 
development of old forest and maximizing carbon storage. 
- 
The Open Space program should not create a ﬁscal burden for municipal budgets and will 
require state reimbursement (noting complexity in that municipalities may beneﬁt from 
reduced costs of providing services when lands remain undeveloped and from increased 
revenue sharing as a result of reduced valuation). 
Potential Program Revisions: 
A. Provide state reimbursement to municipalities to reduce ﬁnancial burden on municipalities, 
in acknowledgement of the broad public beneﬁt of maintaining undeveloped lands. 
(Reimbursement could be based on the same formula used for state reimbursement under the 
Tree Growth Current Use Tax program or could use the tax rates for undeveloped acreage used 
by individual municipalities.) 
B. Revise Open Space Program valuation reductions to: 
' 
increase the discount for “Ordinary ” Open Space (which precludes development) in 
order to encourage greater participation in the Open Space program and emphasize its core
21
value of helping to keep land undeveloped. (The Task Force recommended an increase to 
50% from the current 20%) 
Maintain the current discount of 25% for Public Access 
Create two new categories: 
Wildlife Habitat Management: Consider a 20% discount for implementation of a wildlife 
enhancement practice. (Practices to be approved by the Maine Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife in alignment with the State Wildlife Action Plan or with mapped 
Beginning with Habitat features, with landowner attestation of practice implementation.) 
AND 
Carbon Management: Consider a 20% discount, with eligibility based on the following 
concepts: 
Forested land (properties with 10 or more forested acres and greater than 70% forested) 
may qualify with any of the following options. Any qualifying property would 
automatically be considered to provide a public benefit and be eligible for enrollment in the 
Open Space program: 
Adoption of a 10-year forest management plan signed by a licensed forester that 
includes strategies to increase forest carbon and considers carbon stored in forest 
products. (This is essentially the same requirement for the Tree Growth current use 
program eligibility, but the plan here can prioritize forest carbon.) 
Implementation of a forest carbon practice approved by the Maine Forest Service, 
qualifying for the Carbon Management reduction for l0 years, with landowner 
attestation of practice implementation. (This option is intended to facilitate greater 
participation by owners of smaller properties.) 
Properties with permanent ecological reserve restrictions shall qualify for the carbon 
management discount. (The recommended 20% discount is the same discount 
available in the current program, and ecological reserves have demonstrated beneﬁts 
for carbon storage.) 
Non-forested land (properties not qualifying as Forested Land, above) may qualify for 10 
years based on implementation of carbon management practices approved by the Maine 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation, & Forestry, with landowner attestation of 
practice implementation. (Owners of non-forested lands may also have the option to: l) 
choose the wildlife habitat management option, or 2) if eligible, participate in the Farmland 
Current Use program.) 
Maintain the current maximum discount of 95% (note that for forested acres, the current 
program limits the reduction to be no greater than that available through the Tree Growth 
Current Use program).
22
C. Streamline program to rely on % reductions and eliminate the alternative approach of 
individual discretionary assessment based on assumed impacts of enrollment on valuation. (This 
is intended to provide greater clarity and certainty for landowners interested in enrolling in the 
program, and to reduce complexity for assessors and municipalities.) 
D. Allow any landowner to transfer their property from Tree Growth to Open Space without 
penalty for properties in Tree Growth prior to 2021.
23
7. Explore opportunities for partnerships with large, commercial forestland owners. 
The Maine Climate Table, a nonpartisan effort to create a state-based model for climate 
initiatives, has been hosting convenings of commercial forestland owners since March, 2020, to 
explore whether large commercial forestland owners in Maine can store more carbon in the 
forest and in forest products while maintaining harvest rates. Its efforts to date, under a program 
titled Forest Carbon for Commercial Landowners (FCCL), have been focused on whether 
commercial forest could be managed to store more carbon without constraining, or, perhaps 
while even enhancing, a landowner ’s ﬁnancial performance, and if so, using what speciﬁc 
“instruments ” (e.g., the carbon offset market, tax policy, payments from corporations interested 
in securing carbon). 
The Maine Forest Carbon Task Force acknowledges that this parallel process is exploring 
comparable issues to its own charge, though for a larger landowner size class, and with a more 
explicit focus on economic objectives. The Task Force recommends ongoing monitoring of 
FCCL’s work and research outcomes, to potentially inform the design of a forest carbon program 
for family woodland owners as described in Section #4. At the same time, FCCL is not the only 
other process underway that is exploring the potential of large forest ownerships to sequester and 
store more carbon. The Task Force recommends tracking these other emerging efforts as well. 
Clearly, the development of markets for low-quality timber, the importance of which is 
emphasized at the outset of this report, would beneﬁt woodland owners of all sizes, including 
large commercial forestland owners. In addition, the recommended additional Maine Forest 
Service staff (Forest Carbon Specialist, Marketing and Utilization Forester, and District 
Foresters) would support all Maine forestland owners regardless of size. And the development of 
a forest carbon program as envisioned under Section #4 could conceivably result in a program 
that is accessible to large landowners as well.
24
8. Consider opportunities for Maine to participate in multi-state forest carbon initiatives. 
The Co-chairs of the Task Force have been engaged in ongoing discussions with the Governor ’s 
Office of Policy Innovation and the Future, the U.S. Climate Alliance, and the States of 
Massachusetts, Vermont, and New York to identify opportunities and issues related to the 
initiation of a regional collaboration to increase investment in forest carbon sequestration and 
storage. To date, these discussions have focused on ﬁnancing mechanisms that could support 
forest conservation and management at scales aligned with each state's greenhouse gas 
mitigation targets, and the infrastructure that would be necessary to support a regional carbon 
market, including offset protocols, a registry, and accounting frameworks. The Task Force 
supports the continuation of these discussions (including examination of the potential to expand 
the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative) that could advance a regional initiative that is 
complementary to or ultimately replaces individual state-based programs, assuming it proves the 
most efﬁcient way of enabling Maine’s forests to help achieve the state’s greenhouse gas 
reduction goals.
25
9. Recommend a numeric goal or targets for increased carbon sequestration in Maine over 
time. 
Maine’s forests as a whole (i.e., including all landowner sizes and types) have sequestered an 
average of 9 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per year (MtCO2e/yr) over the past 
decade (Bai et al., 2020; Domke et al., 2021). An additional 3 MtCO2e/yr has been sequestered 
on average in harvested wood products manufactured in the state (Bai et al., 2020; Daigneault 
and Frank, 2021). Combined, Maine’s forest sector has been sequestering an average of l2 
MtCO2e/yr, equivalent to removing about 65% of the state’s reported gross Gl-IG emissions 
over the past decade (Figure 1). 
The state’s forest carbon sequestration values have been historically high over the past 
decade as well, averaging nearly double the amount of sequestration in the 1990s. There is 
no guarantee that the current levels will hold indeﬁnitely into the future. Continuing to 
sequester carbon at similar levels is an ambitious goal that will plav a signiﬁcant part in 
helping Maine achieve its 2045 net-zero GHG emissions target, especially as the state 
continues to reduce its gross GHG emissions to 80% below 1990 levels by 2050. 
The Task Force recognizes that there is a balance between achieving the goal of maintaining or 
increasing timber harvests to help grow the forest economy and accumulating carbon on the 
stump as well as minimizing carbon leakage. In addition, the Task Force also recognizes that the 
state’s forests are vulnerable to future impacts from pests, disease, climate extremes, and 
wildﬁre, which could have a negative impact on the ability to sequester carbon. 
It should be noted that forest soils represent a large carbon pool in forest ecosystems, often 
exceeding the sum of all other ecosystem components, including trees. However, total carbon 
stocks change slowly, and there is signiﬁcant uncertainty about the effects of forest management 
and forest disturbance on these stocks and the rates of change for Maine forests. Changes can 
include loss, gain, no change, and combinations thereof at different time scales. For this reason, 
achieving better information in the future about soil carbon changes in Maine is a high priority, 
and sustainable forest practices should be a priority to preserve or enhance soil carbon. However, 
incorporating quantitative changes in soil carbon into a carbon program because of forest 
management or disturbance effects is not justiﬁable at this time.
26
Figure 1. Maine GHG emissions and forest sector carbon sequestration (Sources: DEP, 2020; 
Domke et al., 2021; Daigneault and Frank, 2021).
J 
,2 
~- 
",
‘ . ». 
.,_».
1 
=1
1
.M 
. 4- 
1,.‘
~ 
. 1 I» amines»; ‘l':§i"";S " >1 
2/§.:2" _', ~’ 
, *~ 
snmulmseliivlk 7'-* xii -' \‘ " 
Qua-@<-1-a?;__<;~_;», T i§§'Y~,-3 ‘¥"3i~,L§7. ‘- I 
’§~"i’_ 8*'
I 
0-ii" 
‘,0:-uoﬁna’ 
=aar-H _7I 
I 6'
I 
4:" ' ~' ~-/ ~ — ';"*" -<". ;+~;1=¢»_/~,-1:5:-:' :"*‘ 
4 _ 
5‘! 
I‘ 
ma P4: I.-, 
1 _;.. e7 *.i\ 
,4, <2 ~< "An Q, 
J1 41 I -11- -.. 
g-1 (1 /' Q.-§ vi "“~ #==<1»%,,,,,,m,.; “”"""‘=%<»-a»). .. 
My_ 
__.. . Q’0 
,@I Iv I 1
4
4 
u_& . ‘ 7, 
.I ’¥ ' V4 ” 4' B’ Q‘ =“ 4 ? ~s 
‘$1’ i:=:l 
~> \-4 V’ <w‘ < 
Y* I ..\ AWN/__ . 
-’»%9..~_ -_ —*e 
F; -=.= .1“ , >-‘ ~ 5*‘. .. ~'\, .—“-. -4 ,1 . » -.~ 7 .. *2 -_» '> -9 6*: 5} _-*' ~ 
:if.. W F": .»-e 
<*;- :. 
_,.; .‘1 cw Ti .~ , 1 ,.~; ‘4,\\ 7,‘,        
‘F! 
--; 
-5’? §-F7. 
,~’ 
z“ vi W“ ~» _ .nr 
,,-4 
.~\ 2.4 .¢~i 
.:_ 5; 
eﬁ 
J) 1',
» k.
> IQ 
,» 
5_ 
5* 
>2’) 
>1”. 
_,m 
..». 
QL
27
Figure 2. Maine Forest Sector Carbon Stock and Sequestration (MtCOze) (Source: Daigneault, 
2021). 
.t—t 
Iii
N CI
u J-I 
7-“ 
:5.                     
I A statewide total forest sector carbon sequestration target of no less than 12 MtCO;e/yr 
through 2045, maintaining the past decade’s historically high carbon sequestration 
The several million acres of Maine’s small forestland owners (10 to 10,000 acre ownerships) can 
play an important roie in helping Maine achieve the Task Force’s recommended forest 
sector-wide target. Doing so will require investment in technical assistance and improved forest 
management. Any program needs to be able to demonstrate success and monitor progress over BESS" 
BEEF; 
7S{§~E' 
5818111                    
1    
E51}             
133$‘ 
{:4 Carbon Stock 
‘K M y , ,,,-,,;,,/.,t¢~,v/.i>n'.~~/»~i-- ‘~'       
level.                                                         
‘=2’               
The Task Force recommends the following                                         
.-—.                      
:- -\_- 111 
12 
10        
ii
2 
‘J 
I.'\l 
‘ii Carbon Sequestration 
"T ‘D U] 
‘Fl U! ‘Ill 
£1315 C1 
Q i.'=i 1:! 
r" 
54        
=5 
CJ
R                    
This forest sector target includes carbon sequestered in forest ecosystems (e.g., 
aboveground live, dead wood, soils, etc.) as well as harvested wood products. 
The target should be measured using a 5-year rolling average, recognizing the        
interannual variability in forest carbon sequestration that occurs in natural systems. 
The target should be re-evaluated by an advisory committee every 5 years as new data 
and knowledge about Maine’s forests and harvested wood products become available, 
while retaining the goal of maintaining or increasing total carbon sequestration. 
time with whatever metrics are used. Increasing the number of MFS district foresters by 50% 
will have a corresponding impact on the number of landowner contacts and forest management 
plans they assist with. Providing information and technical assistance for Maine forest ownersto
improve management of Maine forests on a voluntary basis will enhance their ability to achieve 
landowner objectives while also enhancing rates of carbon sequestration over the next several 
decades. Forests managed based on the best available science will also be more resilient to 
stressors that include a changing climate, enhancing their ability to retain carbon that would 
otherwise be lost back to the atmosphere. Further, the state should utilize other mechanisms for 
developing forest management plans, such as the Tree Growth Tax and NRCS cost-share 
programs to increase carbon sequestration and storage through more targeted improvements in 
forest management. 
The Task Force also conducted a preliminary analysis using secondary data sources to estimate 
the carbon sequestration potential if Maine’s small woodland owners implemented a mix of the 
recommended practices (Appendix A). The preliminary analysis identiﬁed a number of key 
uncertainties, including the total ownership area, landowner participation, current distribution of 
practices, harvest, and carbon leakage impacts, and mitigation potential for each of the 
recommended management practices. As a result, the Task Force was unable to provide a 
speciﬁc numerical target for this speciﬁc ownership type.
29
