Written Testimony in Support of LD465 
An Act to Provide for an Electronic Permit for the Disposition of Human Remains. 
Good Afternoon Representative Thorne, Sen Baldacci and members of the Health & Human Services 
Committee. 
My name is Joseph Kiley, I live in Holden and own and operate Kiley & Foley Funeral Service in 
Bangor and Brewer and my business serves the greater Bangor/Brewer community. I have beena 
licensed funeral director since the early 90’s, have served as President of the Maine Funeral Directors 
Association and I am representing our association. I/we support LD465 — An Act to Provide for an 
Electronic Permit for the Disposition of Human Remains. 
All deaths in the State of Maine are registered in the Electronic Death Registration System (EDRS) 
managed and maintained by the state Ofﬁce of Vital Records that operates the larger system, 
Database Application for Vital Events (DAVE) and are no longer registered on paper. The 
implementation of this system began a little over 12 years ago and is still being improved, debugged 
and becoming a fully electronic system. This system was implemented to make ﬁling vital records 
easier, more efﬁcient and most importantly to offer real time statistical information. The EDRS has 
been proven through the recent pandemic and is most helpful in monitoring mortality trends (causes 
and manners of death) especially fatal drug overdose statistics. The Maine Funeral Directors 
Association has partnered with the Vital Records office to streamline its permitting process. 
Upon the electronic ﬁling of a death certiﬁcate, a requirement for all deaths in Maine, the EDRS 
allows funeral homes/funeral directors to electronically order certiﬁed copies of the record, 
electronically complete the required permitting from the Ofﬁce of the Chief Medical Examiner and 
generate the disposition permit for the various types of disposition. It does not allow us to 
electronically ﬁle the disposition permit but requires written signatures, the upload of the completed 
document creating a redundancy and time lags in the ﬁling of these permits and adds staff time to the 
process. 
The passage of this bill will allow the electronic signature and ﬁling of this permit in the system and 
the ability to pass the permit on to the cemetery or crematory for disposition electronically or on 
paper. (Again, it eliminates the printing, signing and uploading of a paper document to the system). 
Passage of this bill eliminates ﬁling paper disposition permits with municipalities because it would 
already be integrated into the EDRS and available to the public through municipalities or funeral 
homes, it eliminates the redundancy of municipalities tracking paper and an electronic receipt copy 
or paper copy can be generated for the cemetery in the event that the cemetery requests one for 
record purposes. This will not create any additional hardships for funeral directors or municipalities 
because they are already registered users of the EDRS, cemeteries and crematories will still have the 
ﬁled documents required by law and we do not anticipate any unforeseen problems with this process. 
This will be a continuation to fully implement the capabilities of the EDRS and reduce staff time to 
funeral homes, municipalities and Vital Records Ofﬁce and allow for real time records and statistics. 
On behalf of the Maine Funeral Directors Association, we thank you for your time, and would be 
happy to answer any questions you may have.
