 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 30, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative  Michele M eyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 465 - An Act to Provide for an Electronic Permit for the Disposition of  Human Remains  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committe e on 
Health and Human Serv ices: 
 
This letter is to provide info rmation about  LD 465, An Act to Provide for an Electronic Permit 
for the Disposition of Human Remains , and the potential impact of the proposed legislation , if 
enacted.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  support s this bill  and offers 
the following information for your consideration . 
 
LD 465 seeks to authorize a funeral director or authorized person present at a burial or crematory 
in Maine to electronically affirm the disposition of human remains.  It also directs the Depart ment 
to adopt routine technical rules to implement th e electronic permit process.  
 
The body  of a dece dent cannot be buried, cremated, disposed of, or removed from the State 
without a permit. Although Maine has been using an electronic death registration sy stem since 
2010, this permit process is still a paper -based system. Maine CDC  - Data, Research, and Vital 
Statistics (DRVS) is looking to have a fully electronic process operation al within the next couple 
of years. The language in this bill aligns with this goal by creating language to allow electronic 
affirmations.   
 
The authorization form for the burial of cremated remains, although well intended as a way to 
track when these remains are buried, has been an added burden on funeral directors, 
municipali ties and to DRVS staff. In many cases these reports are provided to the sexton to 
complete and return to the State Registrar. The State is not receiving these forms consistently , 
and when they are received, they are often incomplete or illegible. This bill  repeal s the 
requirement for the authorization form , making a way to paper -less tracking . LD 465 changes the 
existing language that requires  the sexton, who is the person in charge of the burying ground, to 
endorse or affirm to the funeral director or auth orized person present at the burial. There are data 
fields already contained in the electronic registration system to record much of the information  
from the authorization form. Many of the funeral directors are completing these fields in addition 
to compl eting the authorization form. Sextons do not have access to the database. Once the 
 
 system is upgraded to accommodate the electr onic permit process , then all the data items 
currently captured in the authorization form will be added.  
 
In summary, the Maine C DC respectfully recommends this bill  ought to pass. The language in 
the bill will set the groundwork for allowing electronic affirmations  as DRVS moves toward 
modernizing  the paper permit process. It will create efficiencies by reducing dupli cative 
reporting  and eliminating  paper forms.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration.   
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Deputy  Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

