€~‘;'l*§
M 
Q @i£§A
' 
/ "1 _ 4. $7 Q. E *2 ‘T 1 47,i 
~ M, "*- /Al, 
Richard A. l.>c1ir1ct. , rt 3 .>-ta-.e - HOQ1- ﬁ>tar.ion 
- - 
W . r- 2,: :. n 1- 
Senator, District lo Aug.1st¢,. ;$'}.ai ;1e '~.-'4l./ ‘33 
Y‘' 
E/ilAITi ‘E SEN _!¥£l‘l‘E; 
E3 lst Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
In Presenting of LD 1723, “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and 
Contracts in a Sale of Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to Amend 
the Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public 
Drinking Water Commission ” 
1 May 2023 
Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources. I am Senator Rick Bennett of 
Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate. I 
am here to present LD 1723, “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and 
Contracts in a Sale of Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to Amend the 
Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public Drinking Water 
Commission. ” 
As we all know, our waters are one of the most distinctive and important resource in our state, 
and protecting this asset is of critical importance to the future of Maine people. We are specially 
blessed in Maine to have reliably pure and abundant water — something that is not available in 
many other parts of the world. LD 1723 proposes several initiatives to ensure that this resource 
is protected for generations to come. 
Most of this bill is based on the December 2022 recommendations by the Commission to Study 
the Role of Water as Resource in Maine. There are additional provisions as well. 
Speciﬁcally, this bill does the following. First, it amends the membership of the Water 
Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission by 
prohibiting a person who has received income from an entity engaged in the export from the 
State of water extracted in the State or has an immediate family member who has received 
income from such an entity from serving as a member. 
Second, it amends the duties of the Water Resources Planning Committee to include planning for 
the sustainable use of water resources by encouraging the consolidation and centralization of 
collected state water resources information within a single state agency, ensuring public access to 
that information and identifying opportunities and resources to enhance or supplement the 
collection of state water resources information. It requires the Water Resources Planning 
Committee to submit a report to relevant joint standing committees of the Legislature including a 
summary of the Water Resources Planning Committee's activities during the prior calendar year 
and any ﬁndings and recommendations. 
Third, it amends the duties of the Maine Agricultural Water Management Board to include 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 * TT)’ (207) 287-1583 * Message Service I-800--123-69/)0 * Web Site: legislature.mainegov/senate
recommendations for measures to enhance drought preparedness and drought resilience by 
agricultural producers and requires the board to submit a report to the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation including a summary of the board’s activities during the prior calendar year and any 
ﬁndings and recommendations. 
Fourth, it re-establishes the Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of 
Maine — per the commission ’s own recommendation — to develop ﬁndings and 
recommendations, including any suggested legislation, to ensure that there is adequate clean, 
safe, and accessible drinking water for the State's residents and to meet the needs of commercial 
and business interests now and in the future. This study is designed to build off the work of the 
Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine that was established 
pursuant to Resolve 2021, chapter 185. The commission is also required to review proposed 
major substantive rules regarding the transfer of a permit or contract in the sale of assets of an 
entity engaged in the exporting from the State of water extracted in the State and making 
recommendations, if any. 
Fifth, it requires the Maine Drinking Water Commission to adopt major substantive rules 
regarding the transfer of a permit or contract in the sale of assets of an entity engaged in the 
exporting from the State of water extracted in the State and to submit the proposed rules to the 
Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine established under 
this bill for review before submitting the proposed rules for legislative review." 
I have read Maine CDC’s testimony on this bill and agree with their regarding the adoption of 
the rules related to water extraction permits. I agree this Commission is not the proper entity to 
propose these rules. Whereas permitting of signiﬁcant groundwater wells is conducted by the 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), that department is much better 
positioned to add this rulemaking to their existing authority. 
I believe these changes will ensure that policymakers have the data, the analysis, the disclosure, 
and other tools necessary for Maine to protect our waters well into the future. Thank you.
