lcanne M. I..-ambrew, l’h.l). Janet '|‘ 
_ “i||S Nlaine Department of Health and Human Sen nus
M ' t Maine (Ycnter for Disease Control and Pru cntion ' 1 - ~ _‘ —‘-‘ );_r,_~_;sr. —.-;. _ B1 
( o\e| not 
ll State House St mun 
286 Water ‘strut 
( Ommissinner Augusta, Maine 04333 Ollll 
Tel; (207) 287~80l6; Fax (207) 287-9068 
TTY: Dial 7ll (Maine Rel“) 
Testimony of the 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD 146, An Act to Clariﬁt Assessment of Fines for Tattoo Artists, Body Piercers, 
Electrologists and Micropigmentation Practitioners and to Change Requirements for the 
Approval of Public Pool and Spa Plans 
Hearing Date: February 9, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Lisa Silva and I am the program manager for the 
Division of Environmental and Community Health, Health Inspection Program (HIP) within the 
Department of Health and Human Services — Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
(Maine CDC). I am here today to help introduce and provide testimony on behalf of the Maine 
CDC in support of LD 146 - An Act to Clariﬁl Assessment of Fines for Tattoo Artists, Body 
Piercers, Electrologists and Micropigmentation Practitioners and to Change Requirements for 
the Approval of Public Pool and Spa Plans. Our thanks to Senator Baldacci for sponsoring this 
Department bill. 
The Department proposed this legislation to 1) require that, prior to submitting plans for 
constructing a new public pool or spa or construction on existing public pools or spas, the plan 
and speciﬁcations must be reviewed and certiﬁed by a Maine-licensed professional engineer as 
meeting the minimum standard(s) published by the American National Standards Institute and 
the Association of Pool and Spa Professionals; and 2) change the penalty for license violations 
for body artists practicing electrology, tattoo, micropigmentation and body piercing from a civil 
penalty to an administrative ﬁne that the Department may impose, similar to other licenses 
issued under HIP rules. The following information is offered for your consideration. 
Section 1 Public Pools and Spas 
Currently, by law, a person may not begin construction of a public pool or spa or substantially 
alter or reconstruct any public pool or spa without ﬁrst having submitted plans and speciﬁcations 
to the Department for review and approval. The Department review is limited to matters relating 
directly to safety and sanitation and the Department is required to follow the design criteria 
published by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the Association of Pool and 
Spa Professionals in reviewing and approving public pool and spa construction plans. (22 MRSA 
§ 2665.) The design and construction of public pools and spas involves engineering principles 
and practices and HIP does not have the level of training and certiﬁcation as a professional 
engineer (PE) who is the appropriate professional for reviewing plans against ANSI standards.
By having this requirement met as part of the application ensures the plan HIP is reviewing 
sufficiently meets expected standards. The requirement that a Maine-licensed PE must review 
and certify plans for new, reconstructed or altered public pool and spa construction prior to an 
applicant ’s submittal to the Department will help to promote the protection of public health and 
safety. 
Following discussion with the State Board of Licensure for Professional Engineers, the 
Department has a few changes to the language in Section 1 we would like to propose. These 
changes are highlighted at the end of this testimony. 
Section 2-9 Body Artists 
Currently, in accordance with statute, the Department must refer body artist license violations to 
the Ofﬁce of the Attorney General (OAG) to pursue as a civil violation, while HIP has authority 
to assess penalties as administrative ﬁnes for other license types such as restaurants and lodging 
establishments. LD 146 will change "civil violation," which is enforceable only through the 
OAG, to “administrative ﬁnes,” allowing the Department to assess penalties and impose ﬁnes for 
violations of the licensing, sterilization, sanitation or safety standards in rules adopted by the 
Department. The bill also provides that each day a violation remains uncorrected may be counted 
as a separate offense. It also requires the Department to establish a schedule of penalties 
according to the nature and duration of the violation. 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends this bill ought to pass. LD 146 proposes 
to make several important changes and clariﬁcations to Maine’s laws pertaining to public health 
and safety that will assist the Department in applying laws fairly and consistently for its 
licensees. 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from the Committee and I will be available to participate in future 
work sessions on LD 146. 
Amended language for Section l 
Sec. 1. 22 MRSA §2665, 2nd 1], as amended by PL 2007, c. 631, §7, is further 
amended to read: 
Submitted plans and speciﬁcations must be sealed by a professional engineer 
licensed in this State and must include a statement by the engineer indicating that 
the plans and specifications meet the minimum standard for all pools and the 
minimum standard for all spas published by the American National Standards 
institute and the Association of Pool and Spa Professionals, or successor 
organizations, as identified in 10-144 CMR 202 Rules Relating to Public Pools and 
Spas.
