ltl C) E P l “iié. L. l Y 
MAINE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Sen/ices 
February 9, 2023 
In Opposition to LD 146 “An Act to C/ar//it/Assessme/n ‘ofF/‘ nos for Tattoo A/2‘/sts, Bodyfliercers, 
Hectro/og/sts and Micropgmentat/on Practitioners and to Change Requ/rements for the 
Appro val of Pub//c Pool and Spa P/ans” 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Sen/ices, my name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf of 
HospitalityMaine. HospitalityMaine is the state's non-profit trade group representing over 1,000 
restaurant and lodging establishments. 
Our only opposition to this bill is changes made in Section 1. It would change the current practice 
of department review of plans and specifications of “public spas” , and instead would require hiring 
a professional engineer (PE) to check that the plans and specifications meet the minimum 
standards published by the American National Standards Institute and the Association of Pool and 
Spa Professionals. 
This is especially concerning to our smaller members who would have to endure exuberant new 
costs by finding and hiring an engineer for each replacement or new installation of a hot tub. 
According to numbers shared with me from the department, there are 302 lodging places with 
10 or less rooms, however 58 of that 302 are 5 rooms or less, leaving 244 lodging place 
establishments subject to the new inspection requirements. I do not have a specific number on 
how many of those 244 have a spa, but in asking some ofour lodging members, the number is 
not substantial. 
This can be seen as a reasonable requirement for larger corporate lodging places that can afford 
the change, but not for Maine's smaller businesses. We believe exempting 10 rooms or less would 
be a number that fairly weighs public health with what is feasible for owners. This could be done 
by adding “lodging places”with 10 or less rooms to the definition of “residential spa” . I understand 
the intent of this bill is improving public health standards, and certainly not to pin new and costly 
regulations on small lodging operators, however the proposal in front of you makes thata 
consequence of this legislation. I would also like to stress that this bill not require PE approval for 
existing spas as that would be impractical to ask of lodging operators. 
Thank you for your attention. I am happy to answer any questions.
