 
Page 1 of 4 
 
Maple Hill Farm Inn  and Conference Center  
 
 One of “The Best 5 Green Inns and Hotels ” Yankee Magazine, 2017  
“Best Green B & B”  Yankee Magazine Editor’s Pick, “Best of New England” 2011  
Greater Augusta’s “Best Bed and Breakfast”  Market Surveys of Ameri ca, Sixteen years running 2007 -2022 
Maine’s First Certified “Environ mental Leader” Green Lodging Maine Dept. of Environmental Pro tection , 2005 
One of “30 Great U.S. Inns”    Travel+Leisure , June 2002  
“Best of Both Worlds. Editors’ Pick”    Yankee Magazine’s T ravel Guide to New England , 2002 & 2003  
"Best Bed and Breakfast Hand s Down"    Maine Times , 1997  
 
Maple Hill Farm Inc.  
Scott W. Cowger, President and Innkeeper                  11 Inn Road   
Vincent O. Hannan, Vice -President and Innkeeper        Hallowell, M E  04347  
Email: stay@MapleBB .com            Phone (207) 622 -7777  
www.MapleBB.com           Fax (207) 622 -0655  
Reservations 1 -800-622-2708  
 
 
February 12, 2023  
 
Hon. Joe Bal dacci , Senate Chair  
Hon. Michele Meyer , House Chair  
Joint S tanding Committee on  Health and Human Services  
Room 2 09, Cross Buildi ng 
Augusta, ME  04333  
 
Re:  Opposition to  LD 146, An Act to Clarify Assessment of Fines for Tattoo Artists, Body Piercers, 
Electrologists and Micropigmentation Practitioners and to Change Requirements for the Approval of 
Public Pool and Spa Plan s 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Di stinguished Member s of the Committee:  
 
My name is Scott Cowger from Hallowell, and I am the co -owner of the Map le Hill F arm Inn and 
Conference Center , a modest property wit h only eight guest rooms .  My apologies for not presenting 
this testimony  to you  at the public hearing for this bill, but in the se days of labor shorta ges, I’m often 
needed at t he Inn to help with the events that we hold , and could not be here u ntil you had  completed 
the public hearing  last week.  
 
My opposition to LD1 46 is str ictly limited to Sectio n 1 of the bil l, and it is also limited to the 
regulation of free-standing or “self-contained” spas,  but my opposi tion is two -fold.  I speak on beha lf 
of many small bed and breakfast owners and vacation rental pro perty owners  throughout Maine that 
have self -contained spas on their pr operties . 
 
Our inn in Hall owell is open all year -round, and we are  the on e property that ha s consistently offered 
both the leisure and business traveler (and some legislators)  an alternative to the hundreds of hotel 
rooms located in Augusta.  We have been her e since 1989 and the struggle has always been to 
maintain  revenue  and viability  during the winter months .  The addition  of our dry sauna and outdoor 
hot tub  in 2010  was critical t o developing our winter business and it now enables us to keep employees 
year-round.  Any regulation that would cause us to lose our outdoor hot tub  would be d evastating .   
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 4  
 
 
In my testimony, I am using the terms “hot tub” and “spa” interch angeab ly, and equal to the t erm 
“Spa” defined in statue at Title 22 Section 2662.  
 
 
BACKGROUND  
 
Here  is some quick background :  In 2012, the state health inspector showed up a t our inn and informed 
us that our residen tial-style  self-contained  spa unit th at had been inst alled several years earlier  would 
need  to be shut down until it could meet the state standards for commercial pools and spas.  
Unfortunately, there is NO WAY to modify a self -contained spa unit to meet the state standards  
without an exorbitant cost , and in fact  THER E HAS NEVER BEEN A MODIFICATION OF A 
SELF -CONTAINED SPA to meet the state ’s commercial standard.  This is simpl y not practicable or 
in any way economically f easible.   
 
It appears  as if our inn was one of the first of these self -contained  residential  spas to be pushed into 
meeting the state ’s commercial  spa regulati ons, but there were many of these in use throughout the 
state, primarily a t small lodging properties and cottages. While the lodging industry  and vacation 
rental properties expressed  great concern about the regulation of these spas, the Maine CDC issued  a 
guidance in August 2012 that exempted residential spas  from any regulation, BUT REQUIRED ANY 
REPLACEMENT OR NEW SPAS TO  MEET THE COMMERCIAL STANDARDS  as listed in Section 1 
of LD 146.    
 
 
 
OBJECTION TO LD 146  
 
Section  1 of this bill not only continues to apply a national commercial spa stan dard to all properties, 
regard less of size or spa bathing load, but adds a pro fessiona l engineering certification for each new or 
replacement spa, again regardless of the size of the pr operty or  intensity of use of the spa.  This adds 
an unreasonable burden using a 42  page checklist that was d eveloped by the Department  for spas at 
small p roperties and with small bathing loads.   I believe th at there should  be an exemption for any 
self-contained  spa as these are what  are typi cally in use at smaller properties with low bathing loads.   
 
An accurate definition for a self -contained spa  can be found on page 39 of the Department ’s Public 
Spa Design Checklist, and is also de fined by the Nation al Pool a nd Spa Institute , as follo ws: 
 
Self-Contained Spa :  A spa in which all control, water heating and water 
circulating equipment is an integral part of the pro duct.  Self -contained 
spas may be permanently wired or cord connected.   
 
For m ore detail, please see below regarding  the need to permane ntly exempt self -contained spas from 
the requ irement to meet commercial spa s tandards.   
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 4  
 
OBJECTION TO REGULATING RESIDENTIAL SELF -
CONTAINED SPAS  
 
The current law in Title 22 Section 2661 et  seq. requires the D epartment to adopt rules regarding the 
design, construction , and operation of public pool s and spas.  These rule s (10 -144 CM R Chapter 202, 
effective September 1, 2010 ), and th e standards  mentioned in Section 1 of this bill  (the American 
National Standards Institute and the As sociation of Pool and Spa Professionals ) are standards for true 
“commerc ial spa s” that are construct ed underground (in our climate) and are installed where high 
volumes of users are goi ng specifically to use the spa, like a YMCA, a resort, or a larger hotel.  These 
spas ty pically have a surrounding deck, and stairs descending down into the s pa. In northern New 
England , we have a somewhat unique plethora of  bed and break fasts and small inn s relative  to the rest 
of the country , and the applica tion of this one-size-fits-all model is entirel y unreasona ble and not 
practica l.  The small p roperties  that ha ve spas  generally have above -ground self -contained units and 
these national standards wer e not designed for these sorts of spas.   
 
 
LACK OF ACHIEVA BILITY  
No residential sty le self -contained tub has EVE R been retrofitted to conform to these national 
standards.  Mainely Tubs , a major dealer of quality hot tubs with headquarters in Scarborough, has 
been in stalling and servicing hot tubs throu ghout New England for over 40 years, and sold over 3000 
tubs last year alone.  The y have NEVER CONVERTED any se lf-contained spa over to meet the abo ve 
commercial standards .  Furthermore , they don ’t even know what  that potenti al cost could be.  These 
self-containe d spas simply cannot b e retrofitted to meet the s tandards.   
 
The cost of a new quality self -contained spa could cost around $10,000 .  But the cost of an in-
ground  commercial spa  that was compliant wi th the national standards would start around 
$90,000 for a very mode st installation .  (This estimate was provided to me by Premier Pools and 
Spas in Lewiston.)    
 
The current regulation which requires new and re placement spa s to meet commercial st andards is no t 
practicable and is certainly  not economically ach ievable, especially for small p roperties w hich make 
up a large percentage  of lodging properties in Maine.  The current laws and regulations for spa s 
will force small properties  to give up their self -contained spas as they simply won’t be able to 
afford a commer cial installation.   
 
Laws and their associated  rules should be based on what is readily achievable and practical.  The 
current  one-size-fits-all rules for spa s do not re flect th is reality  for self -contained spa s.  I have no 
objection to the commercia l state or national standards being applied t o in-ground or purpose -build 
spas.  My objection  is the unreasonable application  of these  standard to self -contained spas 
predominantly used a t smaller properties.   
 
 
UNF AIR STANDARD  
The Department is only regulating spas  that are a t properties or business es that are othe rwise 
regulated.  A s you well know, there is a growing abundance o f totally unregulate d vacation ren tal 
properties through channels like AirBnB and VRBO, as well as the traditional  vacation  rental 
properties often rented th rough local real estate offices and dedicated rent al agen ts.  Many  of these 
properties have hot tubs, and a simple search on AirBnB shows 979 listings with hot tubs  –  
 
Page 4 of 4  
 
all unregulated  (except for a  small amount  of overl ap with regulated properties).  The same search on 
VRBO com es up with 500 prope rties.  
 
Apply ing a n ational stan dard for high -use comme rcial spas to small inns and bed and breakfasts, while 
not beginning to regulate a ll of these other vacation properties is inher ently unfair. In my opinion, the 
number of spas at regulated/licensed properties is probably much less  than th e number  of spas at 
unregulate d properties.   
 
 
LAC K OF ENFORC EABILITY   
Many of the properties that have self -contained tubs are pr imarily residential in nature, whether  it is 
someone’s home that has been conver ted to a bed & breakfast, or a home or cottage that is rented out 
to hel p genera te some additional income.  The above AirBnB, VRBO, and vacation rental properties 
will not be vis ited by a health inspector an d will not require  any of their spas to be regulated by the 
state.  It will also be difficult to disc ern the personal use of a spa by a homeo wner and their guests a t 
small bed  & breakfas t properties that are quite un ique here in northern New England.   
 
 
SUGGESTED AMENDMENT  
In light of all of th e above, I  suggest that  residential -style self -contained spas become permanently 
exempt from meeting the requirements for commercial spas.  I believe the easi est way to do this is to  
add the definition  of “Self-Contained Spa ” to Title 22, Section 2662, and that the defini tion of Public 
Spa in the s ame section be am ended to read:  
 
6.  Publ ic Spa.  “Public Spa ” means any constructed spa other than a 
residential spa , or medical fa cility spa , or self -contained spa . 
 
Please correct  the existing law to  create something  that is achievable , practical, fair, and enforceable.  
Maine is a unique state, and we should not  force our small businesses who are willing to be regulated 
into losing amenitie s that the ir guests desire.   
 
I am happy to assist in any way on this issue, both in terms of my resear ch and my time.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to present this testimony t o you.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Scott Cowger  
Owner -Innkeeper, Maple Hill Farm Inn  
Email stay@MapleBB.com   
 
 
Cc: Nate Clouti er, Hospitality Maine  
  Lisa Silva, Maine CDC Health Insp ection Program Manager  
