   
 
 
Phone: (207)  287-3282    Fax: (207) 287 -2671  
www.maine.gov /dafs/o cp/  
 
 
 
 
 
April 24, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1680 – An Act to Allow Cannabis Advertising and to Allow Cannabis Delivery  
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica , Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs:  
 
I am John Hudak, Director of the Office of Cannabis Policy (OCP) and I am writing on  behalf of 
our office  to submit the following remarks  neither for nor against LD 16 80.  We are providing 
the following information to assist the committee in reviewing this  bill. 
 
Our comments today are focused on identifying challenges to implementation of the initiatives 
identified in this bill.  Specifically, we have concerns regarding the definition of the new 
authorized delivery locations contemplated in this bill; as w ell as the new standard for assessing 
whether cannabis business advertisements are comp liant with program requirements.  
 
First, LD 1680 would expand the locations where a cannabis business could deliver to consumers 
from a “residential dwelling” to “any re sidential or commercial location, including a location 
used as a short -term rental property”.  While the bill includes a brief definition of a “short -term 
rental property”, this term is not defined elsewhere in the Maine Revised Statutes and it may be 
clearer for the bill to simply state to what kinds of short -term rentals a cannabis business can 
deliver.  Second, the language regarding delivery to a “commercial location” does not 
contemplate the permission of a private property owner  that would prefer not to have their 
parking lots used for the purposes of conducting deliveries of cannabis or cannabis products.   
Overall, we would encourage the committee to amend the language expanding the areas where 
deliveries may be made to clarify what is meant by the ne w terms “short -term rental property” 
and “commercial location”.  
 
Next, we are concerned about the  new standard established for permissible cannabis business 
advertising.  The new standard refers to advertising restrictions that cannot be  “…more restricted 
than the advertising or marketing that promotes an alcohol, tobacco or prescription drug 
product….”   The advertising requirements for these three industries are different from one 
another and shaped by state and federal statutory and cas e law  and all three industries’ standards 
are also impacted by federal regulatio ns.  We are unclear as to what parts of each regulat ory 
framework we should draw upon in order to develop comprehensive and clear requirements for 
adult use cannabis businesses .   
 
As always, w e thank the committee for the opportunity to provide this information and  we’ll do 
our best to answer any questions you may have  at the work session.     STATE OF MAINE  
OFFICE OF CANNABIS  POLICY  
162 STATE HOUSE STATION  
19 UNION  STREET  
FIRST  FLOOR  
AUGUSTA, MAINE   0433 3-0162 
JANET T. MILLS  
GOVERNOR  
ADMINISTRATIVE & FINANCIAL SERVICES  
 
KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA  
COMMISSIONER  
 
OFFICE OF CANNABIS  POLICY   
 
JOHN HUDAK  
DIRECTOR  
