Good afternoon Chairperson Hickman and Chairperson Supica and honorable members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee. My name is Scotty Ouellette, and I am a registered caregiver and owner/operator of 
a manufacturing laboratory in Maine. I am also in the process of dual certifying my manufacturing laboratory as 
an Adult Use facility. 
I am testifying in favor of LD168O, An Act to Allow Cannabis Advertising and to Allow Cannabis Delivery. I 
strongly support an amendment to this bill that makes it applicable to Title 22, Chapter 558C, Maine Medical 
Use of Cannabis Program. It is rather silly that we see liquor, a far more dangerous substance than cannabis, 
openly sold and advertised in grocery stores and gas stations, pharmaceuticals on prime time that encompass 
a list of horrifying side effects — yet how dare we let the public know, “this is a cannabis store!” Please remedy 
this nonsense. 
Other substances such as tobacco, prescription drugs and alcohol advertise in manners and places I have 
never seen cannabis, like the grocery store. The billboards along the highway in Massachusetts are tasteful in 
my opinion, and l am sure they cause children to ask questions and think - this is not a bad way for the topic to 
be raised in a family. Communication is key to parents relaying their belief systems and expectations upon their 
children. Perhaps ads that trigger these conversations are necessary. One cannot legislate every animal, 
shape or mythical creature out of association. Every day I hear a pharmaceutical advertisement laden with 
warnings and often with cute fluffy dogs, people who look pretty and appeal to the general population, bottles 
of alcohol in the grocery store with mythical creatures like dragons, appealing things like rainbow colors - how 
can the legislature possibly cover every base? There are appealing colorful balls (children tend to like colorful 
balls) all over the Maine Lottery vehicle. Parents need to relay their beliefs to their children. We cannot control 
everything children observe. 
While delivery is explicitly allowed in medical, Title 22 Chapter 558C needs to be clear to municipalities 
(Portland speciﬁcally) that they may not interfere with patient choice by implementing ﬁnes and fees to delivery 
services that operate within the law. 
My patients and clients deserve autonomy and personal choice in the grocery store, in the cannabis market 
and in their homes. I know some industry players may be hesitant to free the market, but home gardens do not 
make grocery stores obsolete. Please be mindful of creating meaningful and sensible laws from which 
meaningful and sensible rules can be derived. Thank you for your time and attention to this very important 
legal market in Maine. 
Scotty Ouellette, January 30, 2023 ScottyOueIIette@qmail.com 207-286-5134
