Good morning Chairperson Hickman and Chairperson Supica and honorable members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee. My name is Susan Meehan, and I am a registry identiﬁcation cardholder who has 
been involved in Maine cannabis since 2013 as advocate, caregiver, consultant, formulator, patient, and parent 
of a patient - the late Cyndimae Meehan. My passion to protect the program stems from my daughter ’s valiant 
battle against Dravet Syndrome Epilepsy and how much cannabis helped herto live, love and laugh and enjoy 
her last 3 years with us in our Maine home sledding the hills and swimming in the cold mountain streams.. 
I am testifying in favor of LD168O, An Act to Allow Cannabis Advertising and to Allow Cannabis Delivery. l 
strongly support an amendment to this bill that makes it applicable to Title 22, Chapter 558C, Maine Medical 
Use of Cannabis Program. It is rather silly that we see liquor, a far more dangerous substance than cannabis, 
openly sold and advertised in grocery stores and gas stations, pharmaceuticals on prime time that encompass 
a list of horrifying side effects — yet how dare we let the public know, “this is a cannabis store!” Please remedy 
this nonsense and break out of the 1930's stigma around this amazing plant. 
While l find billboards lead to distracted driving, one cannot deny the existence all along Massachusetts 
highways, the conversations these cause while on a family drive — these conversations are important. These 
are where parents can inject their two cents. Communication is key to parents relaying their belief systems and 
expectations upon their children. Perhaps ads that trigger these conversations are necessary. Tobacco, 
prescription drugs and alcohol advertise in manners and places l have never seen cannabis, like the grocery 
stores. One cannot legislate every animal, shape or mythical creature out of association. Every day l heara 
pharmaceutical advertisement laden with warnings and often with cute fluffy dogs, people who look pretty and 
appeal to the general population, bottles of alcohol in the grocery store with mythical creatures like dragons, 
appealing things like rainbow colors — how can the legislature possibly cover every base? There are appealing 
colorful balls (children tend to like colorful balls) all over the Maine Lottery vehicle. Parents need to relay their 
beliefs to their children. We cannot control everything children obsen/e as we live in a society, in communities. 
While delivery is explicitly allowed in medical, Title 22 Chapter 558C needs to be clear to municipalities 
(Portland specifically) that they may not interfere with patient choice by implementing ﬁnes and fees to delivery 
services that operate within the law. Municipal authority is cloudy at best in this chapter, and it is causing great 
difficulty in some towns. 
Thank you for your time and attention to this very important legal market in Maine. Patients are the center of 
this program and their choices should color our laws. Please enable their choices by allowing sensible 
advertising and delivery and access to both vital programs in Maine. Thank you for your time and attention. 
Susan Meehan, April 24, 2023 goldenwolf458@qmail.com 207-861-1945
