Testimony of Adam Nordell – Defend Our Health 
In OPPOSITION to LD 1214 “An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances Contamination” 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee. My name is Adam Nordell.  I am a campaign manager for Defend Our Health and 
a PFAS impacted farmer. I submit this testimony in opposition to LD 1214. 
 
In the past several years, your committee has helped make Maine a national leader in the fight against 
PFAS contamination.  As a state we have invested significant resources into the safety of our drinking 
water and our food supply. We have made incredible strides towards preventing future PFAS 
contamination in Maine by passing LD 1503 and LD 2019. These bills give DEP the authority regulate 
products whose frivolous use of PFAS currently expose Mainers to these persistent, toxic chemicals.  LD 
1214 seeks to undermine these two landmark bills and our fight for a safer, healthier Maine. 
The alternate PFAS definition in LD 1214 would shield a vast array of problematic, high production PFAS 
from DEP’s regulatory process and enable chemical manufacturers to continue selling PFAS laden 
products in Maine.   This bill would shield from regulation the PFAS ‘GenX,’ which the EPA has identified 
as highly toxici and is considering listing as a hazardous substance under the Superfund Law.  LD 1214 
would shield from regulation PFAS refrigerants, some of which are 10,000 times more potent 
greenhouse gasses than carbon dioxide.   It would shield from regulation fluoropolymers and precursors 
which transform into PFAS chemicals like PFOA and PFOS inside the products in our homesii, at our 
wastewater treatment plantsiii, inside the soil on our farmsiv, and even inside our bodiesv.  All of these 
PFAS chemicals have at least one fully fluorinated carbon atom.  All of them are persistent, mobile in the 
environment and toxic to human health.  If it looks like a duck and quacks like a duck, let me tell you, it’s 
a duck. 
Since I discovered the contamination of my farm last year, I’ve had the opportunity to meet people who 
have been exposed to these chemicals across the country. Some of them are farmers like me.  Some of 
them have drinking water that has been poisoned by firefighting foam. Some of them live downstream 
from chemical manufacturing facilities.  The universal request of PFAS impacted communities is this: 
“Regulate these chemicals as a class.  Don’t place all of your focus on the ‘legacy PFAS’ like PFOS and 
PFOA that have been phased out of production.  Work to protect us from being further exposed to the 
dangerous newer, understudied PFAS. 
I am incredibly grateful for all of the work the legislature has done to assess Maine’s historic PFAS 
contamination, to clean things up where ever possible, and to support our impacted communities.  We 
can’t add to the size of this problem right as we start to clean it up.  We need to stand by our 
commitment to broad PFAS source reduction and keep our PFAS definition intact. 
I urge you to vote ‘Ought Not to Pass’ on LD 1214.   Thank you for your time. 
Adam Nordell.  Defend Our Health, Portland, ME. 
 
i https://www.epa.gov/chemical-research/human-health-toxicity-assessments-genx-chemicals 
ii https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.estlett.2c00926 
iii https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2021/em/d1em00032b/unauth 
iv link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40726-020-00168-y 
v https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0269749122006923 
