Honorable Stacy Brenner  
Chair, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Cross, Building Room 216 
100 State House Station Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
 
April 11, 2023  
 
 
RE: Support - LD 1214/ SP 495 An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS Contamination 
 
 
Dear Chair Brenner and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources,   
 
AGC Chemicals Americas Inc.  respectfully requests your support of LD 1214/SP 495 that would 
provide clarification to Public Law 2021 chapter 477 which requires reporting of products with 
intentionally added PFAS and would ban products with intentionally added PFAS as of January 
1
st 2030, unless DEP determines that the use of PFAS in the product is an unavoidable use.  
AGC Chemicals Americas Inc.  recognizes Maine’s interest in managing PFAS contamination to 
protect the health of the state’s citizens and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers this goal 
by making the necessary changes to definitions in current law that would address concerns with certain PFAS chemistries while allowing critically  important uses and benefits of these 
chemistries.  
LD 1214/ SP 495 would also enable greater compliance with the law by providing companies a 
one year extension of the deadline for reporting of products containing intentionally added 
PFAS. Although the reporting requirement was scheduled to go into effect on January 1, 2023 , 
the DEP granted thousands of manufacturers an extension in recognition of the complications 
related to reporting including delays in rulemaking,  difficulty in obtaining and protecting 
confidential business information protected by intellectual property laws, disruptions in the global supply chain, and lack of laboratory testing capacity. A one -year extension of the 
reporting requirement date would allow manufacturers and the DEP to work through these 
issues.  
 Lastly, the proposed bill removes the ban on any products with PFAS by January 1, 2030 unless 
DEP identifies it as an unavoidable use. This provision is unnecessary and duplicative given 
that the law states DEP can by rule identify products or categories of products that cannot be 
sold or distributed.  
 
As you know , nearly every sector of the economy , including aerospace, autos, alternative 
energy, healthcare, building and construction, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and agriculture, 
relies on PFAS chemistries for the reliable and safe function of a variety of products .  
 
AGC Chemicals Americas Inc.  encourages the support of LD 1214/ SP 495 as a sensible 
solution to protect health and the environment while providing regulatory clarification and 
certainty to impacted companies.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
   
Ahmed El Kassmi  
Director, Product Stewardship & Regulatory Affairs  
 
AGC Chemicals Americas, Inc. 55, E. Uwchlan Ave. Exton, PA, 19341  
 
  
 
 

