 
  
 
Honorable Stacy Brenner 
Chair, Committee on Environment and Natural Resourc es 
Cross, Building Room 216 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
 
April 24, 2023 
 
RE: Support - LD 1214/ SP 495 An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS Contamin ation 
 
Dear Chair Brenner and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources,   
 
Arkema Inc . respectfully requests your support of LD 1214/SP 4 95 that would provide clarification to 
Public Law 2021 chapter 477 which requires reportin g of products with intentionally added PFAS and 
would ban products with intentionally added PFAS as  of January 1 st  2030, unless DEP determines that 
the use of PFAS in the product is an unavoidable us e.  
Arkema Inc.  recognizes Maine’s interest in managing PFAS to pro tect the health of the state’s citizens 
and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers this g oal by making the necessary changes to definitions 
in current law that would address concerns with cer tain legacy PFAS chemistries while allowing critica lly 
important uses and benefits of PFAS that are not bi oavailable and do not end up in living organisms – i.e. 
PFAS of low concern.  
LD 1214/ SP 495 would also enable greater complianc e with the law by providing downstream users and 
resellers a one-year extension of the deadline for reporting of products containing intentionally adde d 
PFAS. Although the reporting requirement was schedu led to go into effect on January 1, 2023, the DEP 
granted thousands of manufacturers an extension in recognition of the complications related to 
reporting including delays in rulemaking, difficult y in obtaining and protecting confidential business  
information protected by intellectual property laws , disruptions in the global supply chain, and lack of 
laboratory testing capacity. A one-year extension o f the reporting requirement date would allow 
affected businesses and the DEP to work through the se issues. Please note that Arkema complied with 
the reporting requirement prior to the deadline of 1/1/2023 for the chemicals we manufacture, but we 
recognize that it is much more difficult for articl e manufacturers and downstream users. 
 
Lastly, the proposed bill removes the ban on any pr oducts with PFAS by January 1, 2030, unless DEP 
identifies it as an unavoidable use. This provision  is unnecessary and duplicative given that the law 
states DEP can by rule identify products or categor ies of products that cannot be sold or distributed.   
 

 
 As you know, nearly every sector of the economy, in cluding aerospace, autos, alternative energy, 
healthcare, building and construction, electronics,  pharmaceuticals, and agriculture, relies on PFAS 
chemistries, including PFAS of low concern, for the  reliable and safe function of a variety of product s.  
 
Arkema Inc. encourages the support of LD 1214/SP 495 as a sensi ble solution to protect health and the 
environment while providing regulatory clarificatio n and certainty to impacted companies.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Allen Karpman 
Director of Government Affairs 
Arkema Inc. 
900 First Avenue 
King of Prussia, PA 19406 
(610) 205-7077 
 
