ANIMAL 
HEALTH 
|N$T|T'-"E Representing manufacturers of animal health products 
Testimony of Amanda Hagan, Animal Health Institute 
To the 
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
In Support of 
L.D. 1214, An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroall<yl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
Contamination 
April 26, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and Members of the Committee on Environment & Natural 
Resources: 
I am Amanda Hagan, Director of State Government Affairs at the Animal Health Institute and I am here 
today in support of LD 1214, An Act to Clarify that Animal Health Products Are Exempt from the PFAS 
Reporting Law. The Animal Health Institute is the trade association for companies that make 
medicines, vaccines, flea and tick products and medical devices used to keep both food animals and 
companion animals healthy. Our products, by keeping animals healthy, help protect public health, 
promote the human-animal bond, allow pets to live longer, healthier lives and contribute to a safe 
food supply. 
We have previously testified before this committee that the broad definition of PFAS contained in the 
Maine statute means many substances not defined as PFAS until quite recently are now included, 
including some that are used as the active ingredients in animal health products. These include many of 
the products used to control fleas and ticks in companion animals that enable us to enjoy close 
companionship with these animals. 
These uses are unavoidable, as no suitable alternatives currently exist, and they are heavily regulated. 
Animal health products must be reviewed and approved by one ofthree federal agencies depending on 
the type of product: FDA for drugs, USDA for biologics like vaccines, and EPA for pesticide products like 
flea and tick collars. These regulatory frameworks are intense, data-driven processes focused on product 
safety. importantly, they include consideration of the presence of PFAS in those products and an 
analysis of risk versus benefits to animal and human health. 
We have previously testified in support of LD 242, which would exempt animal health products from 
the statute. That bill was introduced and heard prior to development of the bill before you today. LD 
1214, by introducing a new definition of PFAS based on at least two sequential fluorinated carbon 
atoms, would also remove animal health products from being subject to the statute. Accordingly, we 
support enactment of this bill. 
1325 G Street, I-IW I Suite Tllll I Washington, D.C. 2110063104 
Telephone (202) 63?-2440 I Fax (202) 393-‘I66? 
www.ahi.org
The current broad definition in the Maine statute is based purely on chemical structure and 
nomenclature, without any consideration of risk data. Simply being categorized as a PFAS substance 
does not equate to being harmful. In fact, the current Maine statutory definition of PFAS covers 
thousands of substances and only two of those substances -- Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) and 
Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) — have been widely studied. 
The health effects of the remaining thousands of substances varies widely or is unknown, and many of 
these substances may pose no harm to human health or the environment at all. The unintended 
impact of the statute, which would remove from the market now any products that contain 
intentionally added PFAS that have not been reported to the DEP, is dire. For some diseases or 
conditions, active molecules that contain a limited number of fluorine atoms deliver superior 
treatment efficacy or provide the only treatment option. 
The safety and efficacy of both veterinary and human medicines have been extensively evaluated and 
reviewed prior to authorization under regulatory frameworks by federal agencies (e.g., FDA, USDA). 
Further, it is notjust some important medicines that contain PFAS but also certain medical devices 
(including diagnostics) and flea and tick preventatives, which are governed by comprehensive federal 
regulatory frameworks and programs. 
We believe the approach in LD 1214 is a commonsense and practical way for the state to more 
efficiently focus on addressing substances of concern. 
Thank you for the opportunity to present these comments and for your consideration. 
1325 G Street, NW I Suite T00 I Washington, l].C. 20005-3104 
Telephone (202) B3?-2440 I Fax (202) 393-166? 
www.ahi.org
