 
1050 K Street, NW  | Suite 650  | Washington, DC 20001  | AutosInnovate.org  
April 2 6, 2023  
 
Hon. Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Hon. Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Committee on Environment & Natural Resources       
Maine  State Capitol Building  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: Support LD 1214  – PFAS Reforms  
 
Dear Chairwoman  Brenner , Chairwoman Gramlich, and Members of the Committee:  
 
On behalf of the Alliance for Automotive Innovation1 (Auto Innovators), thank you for the opportunity to provide 
testimony in support of Le gislative Doc ument  1214 , legislation that seeks to make commonsense amendments to 
the state’s 2021 PFAS regulation law.  A mong other things , Public Law 2021 , Chapter 47 7, establish es an onerous 
reporting requirement on all uses of PFAS chemicals and institute s a ban on the sale of all consumer products not 
specifically exempted  as an unavoidable use.  Both sections of the 2021 law likely will dramatically impact the 
sale of  consumer goods in the state and both provisions of the 2021 law would be addressed in a positive manner 
by LD 1214.  
 
PFAS in Auto Industry  
The expectations for today’s automobiles are high, and the environments in which vehicles must operate are 
harsh.  F rom the coldest days of winter to summer driving through Death Valley, consumers expect their car or 
truck to get them there safely.  The PFAS family of chemicals has helped provide this resiliency through the 
application of coatings and products that resi st heat, oil, stains, grease, and water.  Such qualities are imperative 
throughout the vehicle.  The heat resistance qualities of PFAS allow flexible fuel lines to safely deliver gasoline 
into a hot engine without causing a fire.  Similarly, heat resistanc e – along with protection from water intrusion – 
protects the integrity of wire looms, sensors, and brake lines on a vehicle that allow today’s advanced safety 
systems to function.  In addition to these safety benefits, modern vehicles have drastically red uced emissions, in 
part because of the chemical and heat resistant protections that PFAS provide to gaskets and O -rings, which keep 
engines tightly sealed, and coatings on cylinder heads and hoses, which reduce fugitive gasoline vapor emissions.  
Nearly ev ery automotive system depends on certain types of PFAS chemicals to provide a durable, reliable, safer, 
and cleaner product to consumers.  
 
Automakers and their suppliers consider the impacts of chemicals used to build today’s vehicles very seriously 
and a re always looking for substitute compounds that can perform the same job with a lower environmental 
impact.  The industry has even recognized areas where it can reduce the use of PFAS chemicals in specific 
applications, as it has already ceased use of long -chain PFAS products.  Despite all this, however, there are some 
uses that cannot yet be replicated by any other known chemical.  
 
1 From the manufacturers producing most vehicles sold in the U.S., to autonomous vehicle innovators, to equipment suppliers, 
battery producers, and semiconductor makers – the Alliance for Automotive Innovation represents the full auto industry, a 
sector sup porting 10 million American jobs and five percent of the overall economy.  Active in Washington, D.C. and all 50 
states, the association is committed to a cleaner, safer, and smarter personal transportation future. www.autosinnovate.org .  
 
 
  
Extension of Reporting Requirement to 2024  
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has identified over 12,000 different chemicals2 within the PFAS 
family.  Focusing on the auto industry alone, today’s vehicle has approximately 30,000 identifiable parts, sourced 
from hundreds (or thousands) of s uppliers across the world.  The obligation on each automaker to analyze and 
collect the exact usages of each of the over 12,000  PFAS chemicals for each of the 30,000 parts on a vehicle will 
be a monumental task, which then must be replicated for each model  of vehicle sold and the numerous 
replacement parts developed to service and maintain previously manufactured vehicles.  Collecting the required 
data to report under the current law is a significant burden that automakers will struggle to complete in the 
timeline envisioned.  The legislation would extend the reporting deadline to January 1, 2024.  This extension 
makes sense from an administrative standpoint as well, as the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)  has 
not yet finalized their regulations to help guide compliance with the law, nor have they established an online 
reporting system for usage data.  
 
Removal of Blanket Ban in 2030  
This legislation would also remove the blanket ban on all consumer products containing PFAS chemicals unless 
granted an exemption as an unavoidable use by DEP.   The decision to ban all consumer products containing PFAS 
before reports on the usage of the chemicals can be reviewed and considered for impacts on health will only lead 
to one outcome - a deluge of requ ests for an exemption as an unavoidable use filed by every manufacturer 
currently using such chemicals.  There will simply be no incentive not to seek an exemption.  While DEP will 
eventually weed through the sea of requests, and appropriately provide exem ptions for unavoidable  uses , it will 
be a huge burden on staff time, likely causing delays in effectuating the goal of the law, to remove harmful 
chemicals from the economy where possible.  The proposed legislation would allow DEP to review the usage 
repor ts once filed and take action based on the information provided, targeting avoidable uses that have the 
most direct pathways to human exposure.  Any other approach will make their task infinitely more challenging.  
 
More Targeted Chemical List  
As drafted,  LD 1214 would amend the definition of a PFAS chemical to exclude certain polymers, gases, and 
volatile liquids,  substances with fewer than 2 sequential fully fluorinated carbon atoms , and chemicals with PFAS 
as byproducts,  thereby targeting the law on chem icals identified as being a more known concern, as opposed to 
all PFAS chemicals.  For example, in the auto industry, automakers have transitioned air conditioning systems to 
utilize refrigerants with ever lower global warming potential (GWP).  After many millions of dollars worth of 
investments, automakers now widely use a refrigerant known as HFO -1234yf.  For comparison, on a scale where 
carbon dioxide is considered to have a GWP rating of 1, R -12 which was widely used for many years, has a rating 
of 2,40 0.  Automakers then transitioned from R -12 to R -134A, which has a GWP of 1,430.  Currently, automakers 
are widely using HFO -1234yf, which has a GWP of 4.  This new refrigerant generates PFAS chemicals  as a 
byproduct of use  and would be prohibited under Maine’s 2021 law without the adoption of this new language.  A 
more limited class of substances will also lower the reporting burden on companies and lower the challenge DEP 
will face when reviewing.  
 
Protection  for Trade Se cret and Intellectual Property Issues  
Finally, t he legislation would add specific protections for confidential business information.  Auto manufacturers 
sign confidentiality agreements with suppliers contractually protecting confidential information and tr ade 
secrets. Without any provisions to enable protection of that sort of information, manufacturers will be forced to 
choose between compliance with the law and regulations and compliance with their contractual obligations.   LD 
1214 rightly recognizes this  tension and provides appropriate clarity for businesses.  
 
 
2 https://comptox.epa.gov/das SBoard/chemical -lists/pfasmaster  
 
  
 
Auto Innovators’ mission is to secure a cleaner, safer and smarter personal transportation future  and as noted 
above, our members take very seriously  the impacts of chemicals used to manufacture the modern vehicle and 
are always looking for alternate compounds that can provide a similar role with a lower environmental impact.  
We believe these modifications to the statute will result in a more streamlin ed PFAS regulatory program , 
improving the quality and usefulness of information received by DEP  to fight PFAS contamination , and 
appropriately reduc ing the burdens on both manufacturers and the agency.   
 
Thank you for your consideration of our views.  If I  can provide any further information, please feel free to 
contact me at wweikel@autosinnovate.org .  
 
Kindest regards,  
 
   
 
Wayne Weikel  
Vice President , State Government Affairs  
 
cc: Members, Joint Committee on Environment & Natural Resources       
 

