 
 
April 26, 2023  
 
Sen. Stacy Brenner, Chair  
Rep. Lori Gramlich, Chair  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: CTA Support for LD 1214 – An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination  
 
Dear Chai r Brenner, Chair Gramlich, and Members of the Committee on Environment and 
Natural Resources:  
 
On behalf of the Consumer Technology Association  (CTA), we’re writing to support LD 
1214 , an Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
Contamination. CTA is North America’s largest technology trade association. Our members 
are the world’s leading innovators – from start ups to global brands – helping support more 
than 18 million American jobs. Our member companies have long been recognized for their 
commitment and leadership in innovation and sustainability, often taking measures to exceed 
regulatory requirements on envir onmental design and product stewardship.  
 
We support this bill’s work to make common sense revisions to Maine’s new law regarding 
PFAS in products.1 The law’s initial design created a number of unintended consequences 
which made it difficult for the Depa rtment of Environmental Protection  (DEP)  to implement 
and incredibly challenging for many electronics companies to comply  with as written . The 
changes in this bill are a positive step forward toward remedying some of the issues with the 
law passed in 2021.   
 
We strongly support extending the timeline for reporting PFAS in products  and especially for 
complex products like electronics. PFAS includes a broad class of thousands of chemicals 
that are often essential to the manufacture and function of electronic products. Electronics are 
complex articles, and a single product can have thousands of components sourced from 
multiple suppliers across the glob e. DEP has already had to grant thousands of  reasonable  
extension requests to manufacturers and will likely have to undergo the burden of granting 
more unless the reporting deadline is extended. The Department is still engaged with 
rulemaking and there is currently little to no guidance for how manufacturers are supposed to 
comply with requirements which went into effect in January.  
 
1 Public Law c. 477 
https://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/getPDF.asp?paper=HP1113&item=5&snum=130   
 
2 
  
We also strongly support removing the blanket ban on all products containing PFAS in 2030. 
If kept in the law, this would ef fectively ban the sale of all products with electronic 
components unless DEP grants permission  by rule for each product. DEP  already  has the 
authority to determine by rule which products to prohibit from containing PFAS, and we 
believe that this is a more effective procedure instead of an all-out ban. DEP will be able to 
use their expertise, engage with other experts, and take a steady approach through 
rulemaking to determine how best to limit exposure to consumers.  
 
We support the inclusion of language pr otecting confidential business information. 
Companies will be required to submit detailed information regarding the materials making up 
their products, and often these contain confidential business information and trade secrets. It 
is essential to have cle ar protections for companies submitting this data to the Department.  
 
Finally, we support the proposed definition for “PFAS.” This definition will more effectively 
target the PFAS chemicals which should be the focus for protecting consumer health without 
unnecessary testing for the entire class of all PFAS chemicals. If left unaltered, the law 
would require testing for thousands of chemicals. Currently there isn’t lab capacity in the 
United States to handle the volume of testing envisioned by the original law.  
 
For the reasons specified above, CTA urges the  Committee to Vote Ought to Pass on LD 
1214. We appreciate the opportunity to provide comment  on this bill, and i f you have any 
questions about our testimony, please do not hesitate to contact me at dmoyer@cta.tech .  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dan Moyer  
Sr. Manager, Environmental Law & Policy  
Consumer Technology Association  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
