 
April 25, 2023 
The Honorable Stacy Brenner  
Chair, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Cross, Building Room 216  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine  04333  
re: SUPPORT – LD 1214/SP 495 –  An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS Contamination  
Dear Chair  Brenner : 
The Outdoor Power Equipment Institute (OPEI)1 respectfully requests your support of LD 1214/SP 495  to 
provide clarification to Public Law 2021 chapter 477 which requires reporting of products with 
intentionally added PFAS and would ban products with intentionally added PFAS as of January 1, 2023, unless DEP determines that the use of PFAS in the produc t is an unavoidable use.  
OPEI recognizes Maine’s interest in managing PFAS contamination to protect the health of the state’s citizens and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers this goal by making the necessary changes to definitions in current law that  would address concerns with certain PFAS chemistries while allowing 
critically important uses and benefits of these chemistries.  
LD 1214/SP 495 would also enable greater compliance with the law by providing companies with  a one-
year extension of the deadl ine for reporting of products containing intentionally added PFAS. Although 
the reporting requirement was scheduled to go into effect on January 1, 2023, the DEP granted thousands 
of manufacturers an extension in recognition of the complications related to  reporting including delays in 
rulemaking, difficulty in obtaining and protecting confidential business information protected by 
intellectual property laws, disruptions in the global supply chain, and lack of laboratory testing capacity. A one -year extensi on of the reporting requirement date would allow manufacturers and the DEP to work 
through these issues.  
Lastly, the proposed bill removes the ban on any products with PFAS by January 1, 2030,  unless DEP 
identifies it as an unavoidable use. This provision is unnecessary and duplicative given that the law states 
DEP can by rule identify products or categories of products that cannot be sold or distributed.  
As you know, nearly every sector of the economy, including aerospace, autos, alternative energy, health care, building and construction, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and agriculture relies on PFAS 
chemistries for the reliable and safe function of a variety of products.  
 
1 OPEI is an international trade association representing the manufacturers and their suppliers of non- road gasoline 
powered engines, personal transport & utility vehicles, golf cars and consumer and commercial outdoor power 
equipment (“OPE”). OPE includes lawnmowers, garden tractors, trimmers, edgers, chain saws, snow throwers, 
tillers, leaf blowers and other related products. OPEI member companies and their suppliers contribute approximately $16 billion to US GDP each year. OPEI members currently distribute their prod ucts across all 50 
states, through a diversity of retail outlets including independent dealers who are authorized to sell and service 
their equipment through a contractual arrangement.  
 
OPEI encourages the support of LD 1214/SP 495 as a sensible solution to protect health an d the 
environment while providing regulatory clarification and certainty to OPEI members.  We thank you for 
your consideration of these comments and we are always available to answer any questions you may 
have.  
Best regards,  
 
Daniel J. Mustico  
Senior Vice President, Government & Market Affairs  
dmustico@opei.org  
cc: Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
