HM |\|3ti0na| Marine es? @therea|nmma i nmma.org 2027379750 
M30Ul3ClUTE- ‘T3 A3$0Cl3.ll00 650 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Suite 520, Washington D C 20001 
Testimony regarding LD 1214, PFAS and related legislation 
Before the 
Joint Standing Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources 
by 
David Dickerson, Vice President of State Government Relations 
National Marine Manufacturers Association 
April 26, 2023 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members on the Joint Standing Committee of 
Environment and Natural Resources 
Thank you for the opportunity to present the concerns of the National Marine Manufacturers 
Association regarding LD 1214, An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perﬂuoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination, and related legislation. NMMA has many concerns 
and a few requests regarding the legislation before the committee today. 
NMMA is the leading trade association representing the recreational boating industry in North 
America. NMMA member companies produce more than 80 percent of the boats, engines, 
trailers, and accessories used by boaters and anglers throughout the United States and Canada. 
Importantly, an-estimated 95 percent of traditional power boats (outboard, sterndrive, inboard and 
jet boats) sold in the U.S. are made in the U.S. 
?_ 
Boating is big business in Maine, with an estimated annual economic impact of $3.0 billion and 
118,000 registered boats. The Maine boating industry supports about 14,000 jobs and 619 
businesses.' 
As an industry, recreational boat manufacturers recognize the need to determine the presence of 
PFAS chemicals in various products, as well as the need to reduce wherever possible the use of 
these chemicals. However, we also believe that the bills before you present signiﬁcant roadblocks 
to that goal. 
Nearly 90 percent of manufacturers in the recreational boating industry are small businesses. The 
production numbers of this industry make that clear. Fewer than 200,000 new boats are built ina 
year — and that total includes every aluminum jon boat, family runabout, offshore cruiser and 
personal watercraft sold in the United States and exported abroad. 
Boats, for today’s purpose, are not manufactured as much as they are assembled. Once the hull is 
fabricated, most of the parts are bought from distributors or catalogues. The steering units, electric 
components, marine engines, fabric, and accessories are bought from hundreds of vendors across 
the globe and assembled to make a boat. We have very limited information regarding the 
chemical content of these parts. 
The herculean task the State of Maine has put before us — to identify every wire, washer, 
component, and system that contains PFAS chemicals, and how much down to the microgram — is 
shockingly broad, expensive, and expansive. We know from direct information that a laboratory 
charges $5,000 to test one item for one PFAS chemical. Testing thousands of SKUs to determine 
if they contain any of 14,000 listed PFAS chemicals is an impractical expense for any business.
1
To provide the data on PFAS, we need Maine law to designate us as compilers of PFAS data from 
other sources, not as manufacturers required to originate testing. We ask that you amend LD 1214 
to require that PFAS content data be provided by the actual manufacturers and importers of parts 
and components. 
We request that the committee make several other amendments as you consider LD 1214 and 
related legislation. 
Focus reporting mandates on importers and actual manufacturers. If boat builders can 
access these data, we can compile a list of the parts we have used to build a marine product 
and forward that to MDEP. But our members are concerned that it is beyond their capability to 
be the originator of PF AS testing. If the experience of European manufacturers is an 
indication, the data may never be complete. European manufacturers typically receive data 
from no more than 40 percent of the manufacturers they survey for PFAS data, despite mandates 
in place by the EU. Please amend LD 1214 to require the actual manufacturers of components 
and parts that supply companies selling into the State of Maine the need to report to Maine DEP 
about any intentionally added PFAS. 
Set a priority on the most relevant data: We ask that you implement a risked-based model that 
assesses hazard plus exposure to determine priority. This methodology follows the US EPA’s 
protocols for evaluating risk. The more Maine can harmonize with federal standards the better. A 
primary concern is the breadth of the information sought by the state of Maine. For this ﬁrst step 
in assessing the prevalence of PFAS, we ask that you focus on the data you need to determine 
threats to Water and soil. I must ask, is it essential that you know the milligrams of a PFAS 
chemical that may be present in the gears of a steering assembly that is enclosed in a waterproof 
housing under a helm? Please focus on enacting a law that focuses on the greatest threats to soil, 
water and people. 
Decide which PFAS chemicals matter most. Please require that MDEP provide the CAS 
numbers of the chemicals they determine are the greatest threat to water and soil. The US EPA 
manages chemicals of concern in a three-step process, which starts with the prioritization of 
chemicals for evaluation. They post their priority list (with CAS numbers) years in advance of 
proposed regulations. If you tell assemblers like boat builders and other businesses which 
chemicals cause the greatest concern, we at least have a starting point. But if the list includes 
every one of the 9,000 chemicals in the definition used by LD 1214, it will be exceedingly 
difficult to provide the data required by law, even with a year’s lead time. 
Extend the deadline as much as possible. Given the mandates included in LD 1214, we need the 
reporting deadline to be more than one year after MDEP adopts the regulations that implement 
these laws. We will have to depend on manufacturers and importers to supply us with the 
information required by Maine law. These companies are located all over the world. It will takea 
tremendous amount of time for us to receive these data, if we can get them at all, and even then, 
there is no way to verify their accuracy. The information you require must come from those who 
manufacture or import the components and parts we buy. 
How are we supposed to accomplish this mammoth task? Most recreational marine businesses 
are small. Whether they are small companies making a few boats or companies selling well- 
known boat brands, many of them have fewer than a few hundred employees. Many have fewer 
than 50 employees. Please require the Maine DEP to provide training and clear guidelines on how
we are to gather these data, the format, and other information. We need your help to minimize the 
expense and manpower needed to do our part. 
Thank you very much for your consideration of our request for amendments to LD 1214 that 
address these serious concerns of the recreational boating community. The recreational marine 
industry would welcome an opportunity to work with the legislature and MDEP on this issue. 
Please contact me at ddickerson@nmma.org or (301) 793-2001 with any questions or concerns.
/
