Testimony regarding LD 1214 and LD 1537: Products Containing Perﬂuoroalkyl and Polyﬂuoroalkyl 
Substances 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, Members of the Committee: 
My name is Diana Rondeau. I am the Director of Product Compliance at IDEXX Laboratories 
and reside in Raymond. lam here today on behalf of IDEXX in support of LD 1214 and LD 
1537, with recommendations for further amendments. 
Allow me to again thank the legislature and this committee's engagement with the global 
effort to eliminate the use of PFAS substances. lDEXX continues to support these efforts 
and through our testimony today, we hope to assist you in developing an effective and 
practical policy. Our comments today are focused on two specific areas that we believe can 
be improved to make effective policy, these areas include the notification requirements 
and the unavoidable use exceptions. 
Let me start by affirming that IDEXX does not directly work with PFAS chemicals or add 
them to our products. But, we do source over 12,000 components from other suppliers 
that are critical to the manufacturing of our products. Section 7 of the existing legislation 
immediately bans the sale of any products in the state if the manufacturer is unable to 
meet the notification requirements. However, industry tests necessary to meet the stated 
requirements are not available, causing manufacturers to rely on indefinite extensions. 
Specifically, the notification requirements call for manufacturers to identify the amount of 
each PFAS in an exact quantity and since this testing is only available for approximately 70 
ofthe more than 14,000 PFAS compounds, the notification requirements are unachlevable. 
As such, our first recommendation is that we urge the committee to clarify that reporting is 
required only for those compounds for which commercial testing is widely available. 
Additionally, we encourage the committee to recognize that testing 12,000 components for 
even the 70 compounds that are testable, is likely to take millions of dollars and several 
years, and could result in indeterminate or inconclusive results, due to the complex nature 
of the components. As such, we secondarily urge the committee to allow companies that 
assemble product, such as IDEXX, to utilize material disclosures from their supply chain. 
#1597Z659V1 
15768278.1
5“ i<._lHI<7( (f()l li 
Our third recommendation is in consideration of the legislation's unavoidable use 
exemption. While the current legislation allows the department to exempt products or 
product categories due to unavoidable use, this exemption is broad and undefined. We 
encourage the committee to specifically exempt products that are already regulated and 
critical to the protection of human and animal health. 
The need for an exemption or at least transition periods to allow for the lengthy regulatory 
approvals, is consistent with the positions taken by other global bodies seeking to eliminate 
PFAS from the environment. It is necessary because these products are already highly 
regulated, and critical to human and animal health. Any changes to the products and 
components due to the legislation's PFAS limitations will require substantial testing, taking 
years, to confirm efficacy and safety before the regulations can be changed to allow the 
products use. As written, the current legislation effectively overrides these regulations, 
risking the removal of life-saving products from the market. This puts the public’s health at 
risk, and we encourage the committee to specify the importance of coordinating PFAS 
regulations with regulations aimed at delivering critical and life-saving diagnostic tests by 
exempting regulated products from this law. 
Our final recommendation relates to LD 1537 that grants the department the authority to 
approve PFAS descriptions in situations where a CAS registry number may not be available. 
This is likely to involve the Department in classifying potentially thousands of materials, 
which will result in delays and increases uncertainties for compliance. We therefore 
recommend the use of other regulatory nomenclature, such as IUPAC nomenclature for 
organic chemistry to describe PFAS compounds. 
IDEXX again thanks the Committee for the opportunity to provide comments andI 
would be happy to answer any questions. 
#15972659v1 
15768278 1
