 
 
 1 of 2 
The life science business of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany operates as MilliporeSigma in the U.S. and Canada.  
MilliporeSigma  
Sigma -Aldrich Corporation  
A subsidiary of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany  
3050 Spruce Street  
St. Louis, MO 63103  
USA Phone +1 (800) 521 -8956   
 
 
  
 
Honorable Stacy Brenner  
Chair, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Cross, Building Room 216  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
April 25, 2023  
 
RE: Support - LD 1214/ SP 495 An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS 
Contamination  
 
Dear Chair Brenner and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources,   
 
MilliporeSigma respectfully requests your support of LD 1214/SP 495 that would provide 
clarification to Public Law 2021 chapter 477 which requires reporting of products with 
intentionally added PFAS and would ban products with intentionally added PFAS unless DEP 
determines that the use of PFAS in the product is an unavoidable use.  
 
MilliporeSigma recognizes and supports Maine’s interest in managing PFAS contamination to 
protect the health of the state’s citizens and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers this 
goal by making the necessary changes to definitions in current law that w ould address 
concerns with certain PFAS chemistries while allowing critically important uses and benefits 
of these chemistries.  
 
As stated in our extension request letter, our use of PFAS , mainly fluoropolymers such as 
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and po lytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE),  is critical to  the 
production of pharmaceuticals and lifesaving therapies, as well as for research and 
innovation.  These uses can be divided into two main subgroups:  
1. PFAS used in the production of articles used in laboratory settings, including the 
research, development, and production of critical vaccines and therapies within the 
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries.  
2. PFAS contained in equipment and articles used for manufacturer of products used in 
laboratory settings, including the research, development, and production of critical 
therapies.  
 
Specifically, MilliporeSigma uses PFAS to produce filtration membranes used in the 
development and manufacturing of a variety of specialty products that require high puri ty.  
 
 
 2 of 2 
The life science business of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany operates as MilliporeSigma in the U.S. and Canada.  
 
 
This includes pharmaceuticals, biologics, vaccines, and novel therapies including cell and 
gene therapy; in articles and equipment used in production where equipment needs to be 
chemically inert, heat resistant, oil and liquid repellent; and as coatin gs on single -use 
articles.  We also supply many universities, laboratories, and analytical departments with 
PFAS and PFAS containing reagents in very small quantities for use in scientific research, 
routine analytics, and reference materials.  
 
LD 1214/ SP  495 would enable greater compliance with the law by providing companies a 
one-year extension of the deadline for reporting of products containing intentionally added 
PFAS. Although the reporting requirement was scheduled to go into effect on January 1, 
2023, the DEP granted MilliporeSigma, and additional manufacturers, an extension in 
recognition of the complications related to reporting including delays in rulemaking, 
difficulty in obtaining and protecting confidential business information protected by 
intellectual property laws, disruptions in the global supply chain, and lack of laboratory 
testing capacity. A one -year extension of the reporting requirement date would allow 
manufacturers and the DEP to work through these issues.  
 
Lastly, the proposed bill  removes the ban on any products with PFAS by January 1, 2030,  
unless DEP identifies it as an unavoidable use. This provision is unnecessary and duplicative 
given that the law states DEP can by rule identify products or categories of products that 
cannot b e sold or distributed.  
 
Nearly every sector of the economy, including aerospace, autos, alternative energy, 
healthcare, building and construction, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and agriculture, relies 
on PFAS chemistries for the reliable and safe function of a variety of products.  
MilliporeSigma encourages the support of LD 1214/ SP 495 as a solution to protect health 
and the environment while providing regulatory clarification and certainty to impacted 
companies.  
 
Sincerely,    
  
  
  
Ellen Baker   
Senior Regulatory Affairs Expert, North America   
Life Science, Hazard Communication and Chemical Regulations   
   
  
A business of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany   

