 
April 24, 2023 
 
Honorable Stacy Brenner 
Chair, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Cross, Building Room 216 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
 
RE: Support - LD 1214/ SP 495 An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS Contamination 
 
Dear Chair Brenner and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources,   
 
PRINTING United Alliance respectfully requests your support of LD 1214/SP 495 that would provide 
clarification to Public Law 2021 chapter 477 which requires reporting of products with intentionally 
added PFAS and would ban products with intentionally added PFAS as of January 1st 2023, unless DEP 
determines that the use of PFAS in the product is an unavoidable use.  
As background, the Alliance represents the interests of facilities engaged in producing a wide variety of 
products through screen printing, digital imaging, flexographic, and lithographic print processes.  The 
print industry is comprised primarily of small businesses, with approximately 95 percent of the printing 
industry falling under the definition of a small business as described by the Small Business 
Administration 
The Alliance recognizes Maine’s interest in managing PFAS contamination to protect the health of the 
state’s citizens and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers this goal by making the necessary changes 
to definitions in current law that would address concerns with certain PFAS chemistries while allowing 
critically important uses and benefits of these chemistries.  
LD 1214/ SP 495 would also enable greater compliance with the law by providing companies with a one 
year extension of the deadline for reporting of products containing intentionally added PFAS. Although 
the reporting requirement was scheduled to go into effect on January 1, 2023, the DEP granted 
thousands of manufacturers an extension in recognition of the complications related to reporting 
including delays in rulemaking, difficulty in obtaining and protecting confidential business information 
protected by intellectual property laws, disruptions in the global supply chain, and lack of laboratory 
testing capacity. A one-year extension of the reporting requirement date would allow manufacturers 
and the DEP to work through these issues. 
 
Lastly, the proposed bill removes the ban on any products with PFAS by January 1, 2030, unless DEP 
identifies it as an unavoidable use. This provision is unnecessary and duplicative given that the law 
states DEP can by rule identify products or categories of products that cannot be sold or distributed.  
 
 
2 
 As you know, nearly every sector of the economy, including aerospace, autos, alternative energy, 
healthcare, building and construction, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and agriculture, relies on PFAS 
chemistries for the reliable and safe function of a variety of products.  
The Alliance encourages the support of LD 1214/ SP 495 as a sensible solution to protect health and the 
environment while providing regulatory clarification and certainty to impacted companies.  
Sincerely,  
  
Gary A. Jones  
Vice President, EHS Affairs  
gjones@printing.org   
703-359-1363  
 
 

