 
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION  
LD 1214  
An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and  
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination  
Public Hearing  
April 26, 2023  
 
Honorable Senator Brenner, Chair; Honorable Representative Gramlich, Chair; and Honorable 
Committ ee Members:  
 
 Thank  you for the opportunity to submit testimony IN OPPOSI TION TO LD 1214 . My 
name is Jacquelyn Elliott and I live in Waterboro  and have  followed the unfolding horror  in 
Maine with PFAS forever chemicals contamination  of our wat ers, lands, wildlife, and human 
bodies . I am a long -time environmental  health and justice advocate dedicated to the best 
achievable  regulation  as can be accomplished  for PFAS and other toxics . My advocacy has 
included recogni zing the threats posed by glyphosate  and other pesticide application s. 
Pesticides1 are dangerous toxics in and of themselves and pose additional hazards from 
unregulated proprietary  ingredients  and the addition of PFAS in f ormulations. It has been 
particularly distressing to witness the wide spread use of these toxic pesticide s and herbicides  
in the practice of si lviculture  of our valuable forest resources . An issue that has ra ised the 
concerns of Senator Jackson.  
 LD 1214  has the effect of weak ening regulation and extending  the timel ine to regulate  
the toxic PFAS elements of pesticides . That is untenable . PFAS are a class2 of thousands of 
hazardous  persisten t chemicals found ubiquitously in the environment  and bodies  all over 
 
1 Pesticide Action Network North America, Pesticides 10 1: 
 https://www.panna.org/pesticides -big-picture/pesticides -101  
2 National Institute of Environmental H ealth Services, Your Environment. Your Health . Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS):  
https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/materials/perfluoroalkyl_and_polyfluoroalkyl_substances_508.pdf   
the world . We must respond intelligently  and urgently to this situation . Therefore,  I would 
ask the Committee to VOTE OUT NOT TO PASS . Thank you for considering my comments.  
Jacquelyn Elliott  
Waterboro ME  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com   
