Jared Bornstein 
Manufacturers of complex products 
Support of LD 1214, with 2 modifications 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Testimony by Jared Bornstein on behalf of Complex Product Coalition 
in support of LD 1214 
April 26, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and esteemed members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Jared Bornstein and I am 
representing a coalition of manufacturers of complex products, in support of LD 1214, with2 
modifications allowing for more informed compliance with the proposed regulations. Our 
coalition members manufacture equipment and products assembling tens to hundreds of 
thousands of parts, components, and raw materials to provide, in many cases, critical services to 
society. Commercial and consumer products such as appliances, electronics, vehicles, vessels, 
refrigeration and heating and cooling systems must meet strict, uniform design standards due to 
performance, safety, and other considerations, including for replacement parts. 
Manufacturers of Complex Products wish to note that they greatly appreciate the efforts of the 
Department of Environmental Protection to incorporate sensible consideration into their 
proposed rulemaking under the current statute. We support proposed modifications through LD 
1214, in addition to more transparency, which will provide for a more targeted policy approach. 
The modifications that Complex Products manufacturers support to improve the legislation are: 
0 First, to require the Department to establish a list of reportable PFAS chemicals that they 
want to control under the definition in the legislation, with their specific CAS numbers 
included. This is how manufacturers downstream identify and search for ingredients in
their products — by CAS number. These companies are not in the business of 
understanding or interpreting a complex chemistry definition. They make equipment, not 
chemicals. The Department has indicated already in guidance that they only expect 
reporting for chemicals with CAS numbers and having a list will improve the process. 
Second, we would like the legislation to specify that complex product manufacturers can 
notify their suppliers that their components are in products sold in Maine and have the 
supplier notify the Department directly on that basis. Again, we think this will make the 
program more efficient. 
We appreciate your support for LD 1214 with these modifications. Thank you.
2
