 
 
700 2nd Street, NE  • Washington , DC 20002  
The Honorable Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
The Honorable Lori Gramlich, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Cross, Building Room 216  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
April 26, 2023  
 
RE: Support LD 1214/ SP 495 An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS 
Contamination  
 
Dear Senator  Brenner , Representative  Gramlich,  and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources : 
 
The American Chemistry Council’s Performance Fluoropolymer Partnership 
respectfully requests your support of LD 1214/SP 495 . The Partnership’s members are 
some of the world’s leading manufacturers, processors, and users of fluoropolymers, 
including fluoroelastomers, and polymeric perfluoropolyethers.1 The Partnership’s 
mission is to promote the responsible production, use, and management of 
fluoropolymers, while also advocating for a sound science - and risk -based approach to 
regulation.  
 
Fluoropolymers possess a unique combination of properties that al lows them to 
perform in harsh, demanding environments. They are resistant to extremes of heat and 
cold, chemical corrosion, physical abrasion, and moisture, while also possessing 
desirable electrical properties. As such, they are a critical enabling group of substances 
for the manufacture and performance of electronics, medical devices, semiconductors, 
pharmaceuticals, automobiles, aircraft, telecommunications, and renewable energy 
technologies, among others.  
 
LD 1214/SP 495 would provide clarification to Public Law 2021 chapter 477 
which requires reporting of products with intentionally added PFAS and would ban 
products with intentionally added PFAS, including fluoropolymers, as of January 1, 
2030, unless DE P determines that the use of PFAS in the product is an unavoidable 
use. The Partnership recognizes Maine’s interest in managing PFAS contamination to 
protect the health of the state’s citizens and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers 
this goal by makin g the necessary changes to definitions in the current law that would 
address concerns with certain PFAS chemistries while allowing critically important uses 
and benefits of others, such as fluoropolymers .
 
1 The Partnership’s members are 3M, AGC, Inc., The Chemours Company LLC, Daikin America, Inc., ExxonMobil, 
Gujarat Fluorochemicals Limited, Honeywell, MilliporeSigma, Porex, Shamrock Technologies, Sherwin Williams, 
Solvay, T -Lon Products, W.L. Gore , and Zeus . 
Performance Fluoropolymer Partnership  
Maine LD 1214/SP 495  | April 24, 2023  
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
 
700 2nd Street, NE  • Washington , DC 20002  Fluoropolymers are large, stable molecules that have been demonstrated to 
meet criteria developed by governmental and intergovernmental regulators to identify 
polymers of low concern for potential impacts on humans and the environment.2,3 The 
criteria were developed to identify polymers with physical and chemical attributes that 
would not raise concerns about potential hazard traits and include evaluation of:  
 
• Structure and elemental composition;  
• Molecular weight and the consistency of molecule size in a sample;  
• Particle size;  
• Presence of low molecular weight residuals that might leach from the 
polymer;  
• Electrical charge;  
• Presence and nature of reactive functional groups;  
• Resistance to physical, chemical, and biological transformation; and  
• Resistance to degradation by heat and other environment al stressors.  
 
Fluoropolymers ’ chemical and physical properties should not raise concerns 
about potential impacts on humans and the environment. They are insoluble substances 
and therefore do not exhibit  the mobility of much smaller, highly water soluble P FAS 
substances. Importantly, fluoropolymers are neither bioavailable nor bioaccumulative 
and do not transform into long -chain non -polymeric PFAS like PFOA and PFOS in the 
environment.  
 
LD 1214/ SP 495 would also enable greater compliance with the law by pr oviding 
companies with  a 1-year extension of the deadline for the reporting of products 
containing intentionally added PFAS. Although the reporting requirement was scheduled 
to go into effect on January 1, 2023, the DEP granted thousands of manufacturers 
extension s in recognition of the complications related to reporting , including delays in 
rulemaking, difficulty in obtaining and protecting confidential business information 
protected by intellectual property laws, disruptions in the global s upply chain, and lack 
of laboratory testing capacity. A 1-year extension of the reporting requirement date 
would allow manufacturers and the DEP to work through these issues.  
 
We have commented repeatedly that the DEP must articulate far more clearly 
than it has done to date how CBI will be managed in the notification process and 
protected thereafter by both the DEP and the Interstate Chemicals Clearinghouse (IC2). 
 
2 Henry, B.J., Carlin, J.P., Hammerschmidt, J.A., Buck, R.C., Buxton, L.W., Fiedler, H., Seed, J. and Hernandez, O. 
(2018), A critical review of the application of polymer of low concern and regulatory criteria to fluoropolymers. Integr 
Environ Assess Manag, 14: 316 -334, https://doi.org/10.1002/ieam.4035 . 
3 Korzeniowski, S.H., Buck, R.C., Newkold, R.M., El kassmi, A., Leganis, E., Matsuoka, Y., Dinelli, B., Beauchet, S., 
Adamsky, F., Weilandt, K., Soni, V.K., Kap oor, D., Gunasekar, P., Malvasi, M., Brinati, G. and Musio, S. (2022), A 
critical review of the application of polymer of low concern regulatory criteria to fluoropolymers II: Fluoroplastics and 
fluoroelastomers. Integr Environ Assess Manag,  https://doi.or g/10.1002/ieam.4646 . 
Performance Fluoropolymer Partnership  
Maine LD 1214/SP 495  | April 24, 2023  
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
700 2nd Street, NE  • Washington , DC 20002  We are encouraged that LD 1214 / SP 495 provides explicit protection for confidential 
busines s information, and we look forward to further clarifying those protections.  
 
Lastly, the bill removes the ban on any products with PFAS by January 1, 2030 , 
unless DEP identifies it as an unavoidable use. This provision is unnecessary and 
duplicative , given  that the law states DEP can by rule identify products or categories of 
products that cannot be sold or distributed.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this written testimony to the Joint 
Committee.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Jay West  
Executive Director  
Performance Fluoropolymer Partnership  
Jay West
ACC Performance Fluoropolymer Partnership
LD 1214
Please find attached written testimony from the American Chemistry Council's 
Performance Fluoropolymer Partnership. Thank you for the opportunity to share our 
views.
