 
 
 
 
 
April 24, 2023  
The Honorable Stacy Brenner  
Chair, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Cross  Office Building , Room 216  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
 
RE: Support - LD 1214/SP 495 An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination  
 
Dear Chair Brenner and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources : 
The National Association of Chemical Distributors (NACD)  respectfully requests your support of 
LD 1214/SP 495 , An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances Contamination,  that would provide clarification to Public Law 2021 chapter 477 , 
which requires reporting of products with intentionally added Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoro alkyl Substances  (PFAS) and ban s all products with intentionally added PFAS as of 
January 1 20 30, unless  the Department of Environmental Protection  (DEP) determines that 
the use of PFAS in the product is an unavoidable use.  
NACD  recognizes Maine’s interest in managing PFAS contamination to protect the health of 
the state’s citizens and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers this goal by making 
necessary  changes to definitions in the current law that would address concerns with certain 
PFAS chemistries while still allowing critically  important uses and benefits of similar  
chemistries.  
LD 1214/SP 495 would also enable greater compliance with the law by pr oviding companies 
with a one -year extension of the deadline for reporting products that contain intentionally 
added PFAS. Although the reporting requirement was scheduled to go into effect January 1, 
2023, the DEP has granted thousands of manufacturers an extension in recognition of the 
complications related to reporting . These complications  includ e delays in rulemaking, 
difficulty in obtaining and protecting confidential business information protected by 
intellectual property laws, disruptions in the globa l supply chain, and lack of laboratory 
testing capacity. A one -year extension of the reporting requirement date would allow 
manufacturers and the DEP to work through these issues.  
 
Lastly, the proposed bill removes the January 1, 2030,  ban on any products with intentionally 
added PFAS except those that the  DEP identifies as having an unavoidable use. This provision 
is unnecessary and duplicative given that the law already gives the  DEP the authority to 
identify products or categories of products that cannot be sold or distributed.  
 
 
Nearly every sector of the economy, including aerospace, autos, alternative energy, 
healthcare, building and construction, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and agriculture, reli es on 
PFAS chemistries for the reliable and safe function of a variety of products. Due to the critical 
nature of these materials, it is necessary for bills restricting the use of PFAS chemicals to use 
gradual  methods  and not be overly burdensome.  
 
NACD  encourages the support of LD 1214/SP 495 as a sensible solution to protect health and 
the environment while providing regulatory clarification and certainty to impacted 
companies.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Jennifer C. Gibson  
Vice President, Regulatory Affairs  
Nationa l Association of Chemical Distributors  
 

