 
     
   April 26, 2023   Honorable Stacy Brenner      Honorable Lori Gramlich  
Cross Building, Room 216     Cross Building, Room 216 
100 State House Station     100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333      Augusta, ME 04333  
 RE: Support -  LD 1214/ SP 495, An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS Contamination  
 Dear Chair Brenner , Chair Gramlich,  and Members of the Committee on Environment and 
Natural R esources,   
 The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers (AHAM) appreciates the opportunity to provide our views on LD 1214, which would provide clarification  to Public Law 2021 Chapter 
477 which requires reporting of products with intentionally added PFAS and would ban products with intentionally added PFAS . We would like to express our support to LD 1214. 
 
AHAM represents manufacturers of major, portable and floor care home appliances, and suppliers to the industry.  AHAM’s membership includes over 150 companies throughout the world.  In the U.S., AHAM members employ tens of thousands of people and produce more than 95% of the household appliances shipped for sale. The factory shipment value of these products is more than $30 billion annually. In Mai ne, the home appliance industry is a significant and 
critical segment of the economy.  The total economic impact of the home appliance industry to Maine $437.4 million, more than 3,200 direct and indirect jobs, $66.5 mi llion in state tax 
revenue and more t han $ 138.3 mi llion in wages.  Home appliances also are a success story in 
terms of energy efficiency and environmental protection.  New appliances often represent the most effective choice a consumer can make to reduce home energy use and costs.  
 AHAM’s mem bers produce hundreds of millions of products each year. They design and build 
products at the highest levels of quality and safety. As such, they have demonstrated their commitment to strong internal safety design, monitoring, and evaluation/failure analy sis systems. 
AHAM recognizes Maine’s interested  to protect consumers against all unreasonable risks, 
including those associated with the exposure to potentially harmful chemicals. AHAM also firmly supports the appropriate use of PFAS chemicals in appliance s. Together with industry 
design practices, test requirements, and redundant safety mechanisms, PFAS chemicals play an important role in the safety of household appliances. LD 1214 furthers this goal by making the 
necessary changes to definitions in current law that would address concerns with certain PFAS chemistries while allowing critically important uses and benefits of these chemistries.   
 AHAM  conducted a member survey in a good faith effort to determine the extent to which PFAS 
is used in home applia nces and the estimated time needed to phase out of PFAS in those use 
  
p 2 
cases . To the best of AHAM members ’ knowledge, as indicated appliances contain PFAS 
chemicals but in low amounts  compared to the complete appliance weight . In some cases, PFAS 
are used for their  self-lubricating properties and great resistance to high temperature but was also 
confined to internal components and parts, such as bolts and washers, plastic brackets, and wire 
terminals with no direct exposure to consumers during use . This mater ial is added during the 
manufacturing process , which reduces the potential for any consumer exposure during use or 
transmission to the environment.   AHAM supports LD 1214 especially around  the redefinition of "perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl  substances" as a group of synthetic perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances that contain at least 2 sequential fully fluorinated carbon atoms, excluding polymers, gases and volatile liquids. This seeks to model Environmental Protection Agency actions. Among the several issues with the  current  broad ban, t he PFAS ban would include the 
prohibition of hydrofluoroolefins (HFOs). HFOs are ultra -low global warming, climate friendly 
alternatives for  use as refrigerator insulation foam blowing agents. In fact, Maine enacted a law 
in 2021 (LD 226) phasing down the use of HFCs and an HFO is one of the alternatives  that is 
being used to help achieve these state’s climate change mitigation goals. Prohibition or restriction of HFOs would require a total re -design of models and retooling of entire appliance 
manufacture facilities at significant cost. This new  definition would exclude HFOs and we 
strongly support this update.  
 LD 1214 would also enable great er compliance with the law by providing companies a one year 
extension of the deadline for reporting of products containing intentionally added PFAS. Appliance manufacturers employ a complex, global supply chain for thousands of models with hundreds of thousands of components, often involving multi -tiered suppliers located on multiple 
continents with thousands and thousands of components. This  include s an array of 
manufacturers, from small private firms to multinational corporations, providing chemicals, component parts, and assemblies that come together in a final manufactured article . Although the 
reporting requirement was scheduled to go into effect on January 1, 2023, the DEP granted thousands of manufacturers , including many appliance manufacturers , an extension in 
recognition of the complications related to reporting including delays in rulemaking, difficulty in obtaining and protecting confidential business information protected by intellectual property laws, disruptions in the global supply chain, and lack of laboratory testing capacity. A one- year 
extension of the reporting requirement date would allow manufacturers and the DEP to work through these issues.  
 AHAM  encourages the support of LD 1214 as a sensible solution to protect health and the 
environment while providing regulatory clarification and certainty to impacted companies .  
Please feel free to contact me with an y questions or  to further discuss AHAM’s comments.  
 Sincerely,  
 
John Keane  
Manager of Government Relations  

