 
Written Testimony Submitted in  Support of L.D. 1214  
 
Dear Chair Brenne r, Chair Gramlich , Ranking Member Campbell, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources : 
 
Thank you  for the opportunity to submit written testimony for the record to the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  (the Committee)  in support of L .D. 1214, a bill to 
amend current statute relating to the prevention of per - and polyfluoroa lkyl substances (PFAS) pollution. 
Of the bills before the Committee  today , SEMI  member companies  believe L .D. 1214 to be the legislative 
approach that most effectively empowers state regulators to safeguard human and environmental health 
while ensuring tha t Maine continues to foster  a favorable business climate  for the semiconductor 
industry .  
 
SEMI is the leading global industry association that works to advance the business of the electronics 
manufacturing supply chain. SEMI has over 2,500 members worldwi de, including more than 530 
American headquartered companies, and represents the full range of U.S. semiconductor companies, 
including designers, equipment makers, materials producers, and subcomponent suppliers. While SEMI’s 
membership includes many large  companies, more than 85 percent of SEMI members are considered 
small or medium -sized businesses. This vital supply chain supports 350,000 high -skill and high -wage jobs 
across the United States.  
 
PFAS compounds are critically important to the semiconductor  industry because of their low surface 
tension, high heat and chemical resistance, high thermal stability, radiation stability, and compatibility 
with other chemicals. These properties enable them to create the sterile environments required for 
semiconduct or manufacturing. Specifically, they are used in environmental control mechanisms (pipes, 
pumps, valves, refrigerants, etc.), in photolithography to reduce the potential for defects, and in medical 
imaging technologies. They are also integrated into proces s chemicals to bolster corrosion resistance. 
The exceptional combination of their heat and chemical resistance and their chemical inertness also 
makes PFAS essential to  both equipment components (tubing, gaskets, containers, filters, etc.) and 
lubrication (such as various oils and greases).  In short, the semiconductor manufacturing process is 
enormously dependent on PFAS compounds for which there are currently no viable alternative s.  
 
Given the essential role that certain PFAS compounds play in semiconduct or production, SEMI  members 
are inclined to weigh in on a legislative undertaking that could have a profound impact on the 
semiconductor industry’s presence in Maine. With that in mind, I wish to highlight several aspects of L .D. 
1214 that the association believes merit inclusion in any PFAS -related legislation on a pathway to 
enactment.  
 
• Redefinition of “Intentionally added PFAS ” – L.D. 1214 changes the definition of  "intentionally 
added PFAS" by removing the stipulation that thi s term include any “degradation by -products of 
PFAS”. This is an important change since such a degradation would be in very low concentration, 
and so it is no t clear what degradation might occur at extremely low levels. Furthermore, no 
high concentration d egradation is expected as this would impact the performance of the 
fundamental product.  
 
 
• Redefinition  of “PFAS ” – L.D. 1214 narrows the definition of “PFAS” to mean “a group of 
synthetic perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances that contain at least 2  sequential fully 
fluorinated carbon atoms, excluding polymers, gases and volatile liquids.” SEMI welcomes this 
redefinition because it narrows the scope of covered compounds and makes compliance 
feasible. As currently defined in statute, “PFAS” covers rou ghly 15,000 different compounds. This 
establishes a regulatory standard that is impossible to meet both from a practical and financial 
standpoint as the associated costs are enormous and neither the requisite lab capacity nor  
testing technology currently e xist. To further strengthen this definition, SEMI suggests the 
following: clarifying that excluding polymers also excludes additives that might be in the 
polymers; clarifying the conditions under which the material is considered a gas (e.g., 
temperature an d pressure); and defining “volatile liquid”.  
 
• Effective Date  – SEMI members also support the proposal  to move the date of the law’s 
effectiveness  from January 1, 2023 to January 1, 2024. The delay in making the law effective 
would allow the Department of Environmental Protection to create a well -considered and 
publicly informed regulatory framework with which businesses can more effectively comply.  
 
• Protecting Confidential Business Information – SEMI members welcome the inclusion of a 
provision directing manufacturers to designate confidential business information claims. This will 
give businesses confidence that their trade secrets will be protected in the course of their 
compliance with the law.  
 
• Repealing the Ban on Products with Intentionally Added PFAS – Lastly, SEMI  members  welcome 
the repeal of the 2030 ban on products with intentionally added PFAS. Codification of such a ban 
in statute would deny regulators the flexibility required for adapting to any changes  that may 
occur  in the evolving landscape of high -tech manufacturing. More fundamentally, these 
compounds are essential to the semiconductor manufacturing process  and there are  currently 
no functionally equivalent alternatives. An ab solute ban on such products would unequivocally 
crush the semiconductor industry in Maine. This is doubly concerning  and perplexing  because 
the State stands to benefit greatly from new Federal policy, as articulated through the CHIPS and 
Science Act , aimed  at revitalizing the domestic semiconductor industry th rough a robust 
investment initiative .  
 
Once again, SEMI ’s member companies  thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony  in 
support of L.D. 1214 . I hope you will consider our association  to be a resource as you continue to craft 
policy relevant to the semiconductor industry  and I stand ready to provide additional information or 
assistance should you request  it.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
John Cooney  
Vice President of Global Advocacy and Public Policy  
SEMI  
 
