'a_,» 
Rl 
Joseph Baldacoi THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 9 13 1 st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Joe Baldacci introducing LD 1214 “An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat 
Perﬂuoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Enviromnent and Natural Resources. 
April 26, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. I am Senator Joe Baldacci, and I proudly 
represent Senate District 9, which is made up of Bangor and Hermon. I am here today to present LD 
1214, “An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances Contamination. ” 
L.D. 1214 is a high-level surgical approach to help ease the burden on the regulated community, 
but also achieve the goal of limiting the amount of PFAS in our land, Water, food, and natural 
resources — and limit human exposure to PFAS. It proposes to make four common-sense 
solutions to the original law. First — it changes how PFAS are currently deﬁned to narrow the 
scope and make the law more realistic to comply with. Right now, we simply do not have the lab 
capacity or the technology to test for the deﬁnition in current statute. Right now, PFAS are 
deﬁned as 15,000 different chemical compounds. It is simply not possible to test for most PFAS, 
and the associated costs are enormous. We need to narrow the scope. 
Next, it protects conﬁdential business information. Third - it pushes out the effective date of the 
law l year to allow the DEP and various regulators to have rules adopted both for the reporting 
requirement, but also the rulemaking on “unavoidable uses” — this addresses the current problem 
where we have an effective law, but no way for the regulated community to comply. This would 
allow businesses to have a better understanding of how they are impacted and what is required of 
them. Last - it removes the 2030 ban on products with intentionally added PFAS because in our 
opinion, through the “unavoidable uses” rulemaking, the DEP is going to be able to make the 
determination of what products can or cannot be sold in Maine. And we believe this is a better 
way to address that than an all-out ban. We believe the regulators who will have moreA 
information available are better qualified to make these decisions. An all-out ban would be very 
problematic to the economy in Maine and the products that could be available. 
The broad deﬁnition of PFAS currently treats all PFAS substances the same, regardless of the 
health and safety proﬁle or potential to migrate into the environment. For example, because 
ﬂuoropolymers (which are a family of plastic resins) are based on a carbon/ﬂuorine bond, these 
substances meet the broad deﬁnition of PFAS even though they are negligibly soluble in water, 
non-mobile, non-bioavailable, non-bioaccumulative and non-toxic. Another analogy would be to 
consider the potential regulation of “hydrocarbons. ” Both gasoline and a plastic milk jug could 
Chair, Health and Human Services Committee * Stale and Local Governnlent Committee 
State House: (207) 287-1515 * Fax." (207) 287-1585 * To/lFree.'1-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Joe. Baldacci@legislatz1re. marine. gov * /egislatztlemuine. gov/senate
=/f’i""\1» 
*1
_ _,_ -=~»=~ .x 
er __,_r.;~ ‘e 
“7?aits@‘ 
Joseph Baldaeei THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 9 l3 lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
be classiﬁed under a broad “hydrocarbon ” family deﬁnition, but each would be regulated entirely 
differently given their health/safety proﬁle and potential impact on the environment.1 
The proposed deﬁnition of PFAS would include: 
1. The legacy long-chain PFAS, including but certainly not limited to PFOA and PFOS, two 
phased-out substances that have been found to be widespread in the enviromnent; and 
2. Many short-chain PFAS, including those currently being examined by the U.S. EPA for 
human health effects (PFBA, PFBS, PFHXA, PFHXS, and HFPA dimer acid) 
The proposed deﬁnition excludes: 
l. Polymeric PFAS, which are large, highly stable molecules. ~ The amended deﬁnition would, 
however, capture PFAS used to create PFAS polymers, as well as their non-polymeric 
breakdown products.‘ 
2. PFAS that are gasses and volatile liquids: ~ Those PFAS are largely used as refrigerants or as 
foam blowing agents, uses that are already highly regulated under the Clean Air Actl and subject 
to both human health and environmental risk assessments. 
Please support L.D. 1214 to help protect Maine’s business community and economy. If no 
improvements are made to the current law, it will be absolutely devastating for Maine’s economy 
and we run the risk that our citizens in Maine will no longer have access to the same products or 
services that they are used to, and that would be problematic for all of us. 
Chair, Health and Human Services Committee * State and Local Government Commiﬂee 
Slate House: (Z07) 287-1515 * Fax: (207) 287-1585 * T011Free.' 1-8011423-6900 * TTX: 711 
Joe.Baidacci@legislaf21re. maine.g0v * Zegis/an./re. nzaine. gav/senate
