‘aw: Ms x 
ikorzgwnsiizie industry for $3; A M E pl ; E; /_\ "3, _g_\____.,@)<;:2t?/'1-¢.> —,.,/,:_:~ 
:3 Sound Eiwironnimit ’ " 
/' 
April 26, 2033 
Senator Stacy Brenner, Chair Hand Delivered 
Representative Lori Gramlich, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Karen Reardon, Vice President, Public Affairs, RISE (Responsible Industry for a Sound 
Environment) before the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Re: Legislative Document 1214, An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyﬂuoroalkyl 
Substances Contamination 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Environment and Natural Resources, 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on L.D. 1214, which would reﬁne the laws governing 
perﬂuoroalkyl and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances in l\/lalne. Today l am representing the trade associations 
RlSE and CropLife America. We support this legislation and ask the committee for a "YES" vote. 
As currently written, the state's products in PFAS law within the Department of Environmental Protection 
(DEP) cannot be implemented nor can entities deﬁned as manufacturers comply due to: the overly broad 
"one carbon" deﬁnition, absence of secure registration and conﬁdential business information protection 
processes, and appropriate time frames for manufacturers to comply given the complexity of global 
supply chains. 
The Deﬁnition of PFAS is Overly Broad and Lacks a Scientiﬁc Basis. The "one carbon" deﬁnition of PFAS 
in existing Maine law makes it unworkable for DEP to implement and makes compliance unachievable by 
those required to register their products. The science around the issue of PFAS substances is still 
emerging. However, we do know that within this broad class of chemistry all substances are not alike and 
should not be treated as such — this is what the ”one carbon" deﬁnition does. Reﬁning the deﬁnition of 
PFAS to "two carbon” across Maine's state laws takes a good ﬁrst step towards the scientiﬁc recognition 
that all PFAS substances are not alike. Without any discernment or context, a public facing database 
listing any substance meeting the ”one carbon" deﬁnition will be meaningless to its intended audience— 
the consumer. Adopting the “two carbon" deﬁnition also brings the state's programs closer to alignment 
with federal-level scientiﬁc inquiry and regulatory prioritization goals. 
Time is Needed. Reﬁning existing law to provide more time for DEP, manufacturers, and product 
registration technology to be developed is essential to providing accurate information in a secure 
manner. Time is necessary for DEP to acquire the information technology infrastructure and to develop 
and adopt the formal processes necessary for designation, submission, evaluation, protection, appeal,
and later disposition of manufacturer's conﬁdential business information and trade secrets. Further, time 
is needed for DEP to develop expertise beyond the state's Uniform Trade Secrets Act as the basis for such 
protections. Products such as pesticides have speciﬁc statutory protections for conﬁdential business 
information in Maine law within the Board of Pesticides Control and in federal law under the Federal 
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act. 
We support this legislation to reﬁne the scope of Maine's laws governing products containing PFAS 
substances. We ask the committee to support this necessary legislation along with harmonization of its 
provisions across all state laws governing PFAS products in Maine. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide our perspective on L.D. 1214. 
RISE is the national not-for-pro ﬁt trade association representing more than 220 producers and suppliers 
of specialty pesticide and fertilizer products to both the professional and consumer markets. RISE 
member companies manufacture more than 90 percent of domestically produced specialty pesticides 
used in the United States, including a wide range of products used on lawns, gardens, sport ﬁelds, golf 
courses, and to protect public health. Learn more at www.pestfacts.org. 
Established in 1933, CropLife America (www.croplifeamerica.org) represents the developers, 
manufacturers, formulators, and distributors of plant science solutions for agriculture and pest 
management in the United States. CropLife America's member companies produce, sell, and distribute 
virtually all the crop protection and biotechnology products used by American farmers.
