Kiera Callahan
BP Polymers
LD 1214
         On behalf of BP Polymers, we would like to extend our thanks to Chair Brenner 
and Chair Gramlich, and distinguished members of the Joint Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources for the opportunity to submit this written 
testimony. We are a US-based company that focuses on providing eco-friendly resin 
and packaging alternatives to fluorination. Though it may seem that we are somewhat 
detached from this issue, our work brings us close to the fight against PFOS and 
PFOA as we have seen the sweeping detrimental effects of these substances on 
consumers and businesses alike. 
         Our testimony today is against LD 1214, “An Act to Clarify the Laws to 
Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination”. Supporters 
may say this legislation is beneficial because it narrows the scope of what is 
considered perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances as businesses are forced to 
bear the burden of transitioning away from these chemicals. However, there is a 
growing body of robust, sound scientific research highlighting the tremendous harms 
of perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances on our environment and public 
health. These substances have shown to be endocrine disrupters, cancer-causing, and 
immune suppressing to the point where vaccine efficacy is affected. There is no point 
where perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances are not pernicious. They are 
bioaccumulative and notoriously difficult to eliminate. Furthermore, they are 
everywhere – from your containers to your clothing to your food to your water.  
       Thus, this legislation that walks back previous iterations of PFAS regulation in 
the state is extremely concerning. Proponents have advocated for LD 1214 under the 
guise that it ensures availability of products in the marketplace and makes it easier for
compliance purposes. But, if we are aware of the expansive harms that perfluoroalkyl 
and polyfluoroalkyl substances cause, why would we not seek to reduce and eliminate
them from our world? The marketplace is ripe with alternatives and new, 
revolutionary technologies are being developed every day. Moreover, we belittle the 
consumer when we assume they would seek to continue to engage with a product that 
is actively injuring them. 
       This legislation is simply a way for producers of perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances to avoid accountability for the very damage they have 
created. It narrows the scope to limit liability and allows producers to exempt 
themselves under the wording of “intentionally added.” Yet, the science is clear. 
Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances are what make antiquated barrier 
methods like the fluorination of HDPE products “work.” These perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances are inherit to the very chemical processes that are taking 
place. Make no mistake, the loudest supporters of LD 1214 are not seeking to protect 
small businesses and consumers. They are the voices of polluters seeking to protect 
themselves. 

