Good morning Senate Chair Stacy Brenner, House Chair Lori Gramlich, 
and Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. 
My name is Kim Lindlof and I'm the president and CEO of the 
Mid-Maine Chamber of Commerce, which represents 23 communities 
in southern Somerset, northern Kennebec, and western Waldo 
counties, and approximately 625 businesses and nonproﬁts in the 
greater Waterville area. I am also a proud resident of Fairﬁeld. I'm 
here today to testify in support of LD 1214. 
As I mentioned, I live in Fairﬁeld, the PFAS capital of the US. 
Let's face it—this PFAS situation is emotional. Fairﬁeld, I get it. There 
is a lot of confusion, misinformation, and fear around PFAS and the 
potential harm that may come to those exposed to these substances. 
Not all PFAS are the same, but in the fury of last year's concerns and 
proposed legislation, all types of PFAS and PFOAs got thrown together 
in an attempt to do something to make Mainers safe. Maine is the ﬁrst 
state in the nation to pass a ban on products containing PFAs. In fact, 
Maine has passed legislation in advance of the federal government. 
Because of the uncertainty and lack of federal guidance and 
understanding on this issue, the DEP has struggled to write rules and 
guidance for business around PFAS and PFOS in manufacturing and 
the sale of products by Maine businesses. 
As often happens, laws are passed with the best intentions to 
take care of Maine people. It is the unintended consequences that are 
unforeseen, or information that was not provided that comes to light 
after the fact that we are forced to contend with now. Testing of every 
single product that is sold in Maine for PFAS is completely unrealistic. 
It will be expensive; I cannot imagine that my small business members 
in particular will have the bandwidth to sustain testing thereby forcing 
them out of business. If you think about the places that you shop,
1
hospitals that you frequent, your workplace — imagine the 
undertaking it would be, not to mention the expense that would be 
incurred by these businesses and nonproﬁt organizations, to test. As 
typically happens, those expenses would need to be passed on to the 
consumer, thus driving up prices. And that will only impact the 
elderly and those struggling to begin with. In short, it would hurt the 
neediest among us, and drive businesses out of business. 
Moreover, unless this LD is enacted, providing more common 
sense into this process, I would argue that this would be a signiﬁcant 
deterrent to business attraction. Businesses want to grow and expand 
in a welcoming and sustaining environment. We need to provide that 
if our economy is to grow. 
The state of Maine is therefore in a unique position. If we're 
going to be ﬁrst in the nation, then let's be excellent. We do not have 
to make a choice between protecting the health of Maine citizens and 
retaining jobs and strengthening the economy. LD 1214 allows us to 
slow down and get this right. We need to act on fact, understand the 
differences between long-chain and short-chain PFAS, and put 
guidance in place the does not cripple our business but also protects 
our citizens. We can become the model that the federal government 
and other states look up to as best practice. Let's enact this 
legislation so that we can do just that as opposed to the alternative 
where other states look to us as what not to do. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
2
