X g_2 
1' 
April 26, 2023 
Committee Chairs Brenner & Gramlich 
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Sugport for LD 1214 and Opposition to LD 1537 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Joint Committee on Environment and 
Natural Resources, 
The Juvenile Products Manufacturers Association (JPMA) is writing to support LD 1214 and oppose LD 1537, 
which would both address modiﬁcations to Maine’s ﬁrst-in-the nation PFAS reporting and ban law. JPMA 
appreciates that both of these bills recognize that LD 1503, from 2021, urgently needs changes to address the 
complexities of this issue. JPMA supports LD 1214 because it practically addresses PFAS while being protective 
of children ’s health; while LD 1537 would expand the current law to mandate a product category a year be 
banned for PFAS. 
The Juvenile Products Manufacturers Association is a national not-for-profit trade organization representing 95% 
of the prenatal to preschool industry including the producers, importers, or distributors of a broad range of 
childcare articles that provides protection to infants and assistance to their caregivers. JPMA collaborates with 
government officials, consumer groups, and industry leaders on programs to educate consumers on the safe 
selection and use of juvenile products. 
Our comments on this bill are grounded in the juvenile products industry ’s commitment to the safety of children 
and caregivers. This commitment to safety goes down to the level of chemicals that are present in children ’s 
products. 
Safetv Remains the Juvenile Products IndustI'v ’s Prioritv 
In addition to meeting stringent internal product safety requirements, juvenile products sold in the U.S. must also 
comply with numerous federal and state safety and environmental requirements under a variety of laws and 
regulations including: 
~ The Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act [CPSIAL 
~ The Federal Hazardous Substances Act [FHSAL 
~ The Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCAL and 
- The Lautenberg Chemical Safety Act [LCSA1 signed into law in 2016. 
}lJVEMILE PRQDUCTS MANUFACTURERS ASSQCIATICJN, INC. 
1120 Root<;~ 73, Suite 200 = Mt. inure], N} 08054 
TEL: 8S6.(>38.042C> ~ FAX:856.=139.0525 
jpmo@jpr'nci.org ~ www.jpmo.org
Under this network of requirements, it is illegal to sell juvenile or children ’s products containing various 
substances known to be harmful to children and to which children might be exposed. 
Necessarv Issues to Reform the PFAS law 
JPMA strongly believes that LD 1214 properly reforms the PFAS law from 2021, by providing a clear set of 
chemicals, providing additional time for reporting, protecting conﬁdential business information and ﬁnally 
removing a blanket ban of all PFAS chemicals in 2030; while continuing to authorize the Department of 
Environmental Protection (DEP) to ban PFAS chemicals under regulatory authority. Regardless of the legislative 
vehicle the following issues must be addressed, for companies to be able to effectively comply with this law and 
to ensure some consistency with other laws. 
1. 
2. 
3. Defining the Universe of PFAS Chemicals: It is critical that the law clearly deﬁne an identiﬁable 
set of chemicals that qualify as PFAS. The current law does not do this and the Department of 
Environmental Protection has been unable to clearly identify which chemicals are actually impacted. 
Some estimates put the ﬁgure over 14,000 different chemicals. For complex products, like juvenile 
products, it is critical that we actually have a deﬁned list of what chemicals we must test or require 
information from suppliers for. The current law does not do this and LD l537’s reliance on the 
presence of “total organic ﬂuorine” deﬁnes a larger universe of chemicals that might trigger a 
positive test report. Therefore, we urge the Committee to consider the deﬁnition of PFAS from LD 
1214 or direct the DEP to clearly identify or prioritize which PFAS chemicals require reporting and 
are impacted by the law. 
Timeframes: As currently written, the law required reporting of PFAS in all products by January 1, 
2023. However, as the Committee knows over 2400 extensions have been granted due to challenges 
with compliance given the breadth of this law. Some of these extensions have been for JPMA 
member companies. Therefore, as this law is reformed, there must be signiﬁcant additional time to 
allow for proper testing and documentation to ensure compliance for reporting. Additionally, it is 
not possible to control the length of time a product would remain in commerce. JPMA requests that 
any effective date for a ban, in the law and via regulations must be based on a manufacturing or 
import date as opposed to a date of sale. Otherwise, the date of manufacture would essentially 
subject all items currently in the market to a “recall” at the retail level. 
Intentionallv Added Thresholds: The absence of a speciﬁc threshold within the deﬁnition of 
PFAS in law is also concerning for JPMA and its members. The phrase “contains intentionally added 
PFAS” is vague and requires clariﬁcation to ensure proper compliance. The deﬁnition of PFAS 
chemicals should include a threshold of at or above 100 parts per million, which would target 
products with intentionally added PF AS chemicals and align with existing laws in other states. This 
approach is intended to avoid situations where the PFAS in the product is the result of trace 
contaminations that may occur in the manufacturing process, in the supply chain or during sample 
testing. Omitting thresholds greatly increases the probability that even products designed without 
any intentionally-added PFAS would be subject to the prohibition. Therefore, a speciﬁc threshold
outlined in the deﬁnition of PFAS chemicals is necessary for our members to effectively comply 
with this law. 
4. Inaccessible Components: We also urge the Committee to keep this legislation consistent With 
other chemicals laws, in Maine, and clearly exempt inaccessible components products. Any 
legislation addressing PFAS chemicals should include a clear exemption for inaccessible 
components of products. Internal components, such as inaccessible electronic components (which 
may contain thousands of subcomponents and elements) are specifically designed never to come into 
contact with a child. This is a high standard that considers the real-world use of the product. Other 
states including Washington, California and Vermont have exempted inaccessible components from 
similar laws. 
Conclusion 
Product safety is the top priority for JPMA and our members and we understand and support preventing exposure 
to dangerous chemicals. We appreciate the opportunity to discuss LD 1214 and 1537 and express our support for 
balanced reform to Maine’s PFAS law. Thank you for your consideration in this important matter and we would 
be happy to answer any questions or our suggestions for amendments. 
Respectfully Submitted,
Z (M /Z Ma/@ 
Lisa Trofe, CAE 
Executive Director
