Honorable Stacy Brenner  
Chair, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Cross, Building Room 216  
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
April 24, 2023  
 
RE: Support - LD 1214/ SP 495 An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS Contamination  
 
Dear Chair Brenner and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural 
Resources,   
 
Yarmouth R esearch and Technology, LLC (YRT) respectfully  requests your support of LD 
1214/SP 495 that would provide clarification to Public Law 2021 chapter 477 which 
requires reporting of products with intentionally added PFAS and would ban products with 
intentionally added PFAS as of January 1st 2023, unless DEP determines that the use of 
PFAS in the product is an unavoidable use.  
YRT recognizes Maine’s interest in managing PFAS contamination to protect the health of 
the state’s citizens and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers this goal by making the 
necessary changes to definitions in current law that would address concerns with certain 
PFAS chemistries while allowing critically  important uses and benefits of these 
chemistries.  
LD 1214/ SP 495 would also enable greater compliance with the law by providing 
companies a one year extension of the deadline for reporting of products containing  
intentionally added PFAS. Although the reporting requirement was scheduled to go into 
effect on January 1, 2023, the DEP granted thousands of manufacturers an extension in 
recognition of the complications related to reporting including delays in rulemaking,  
difficulty in obtaining and protecting confidential business information protected by 
intellectual property laws, disruptions in the global supply chain, and lack of laboratory 
testing capacity. A one -year extension of the reporting requirement date would  allow 
manufacturers and the DEP to work through these issues.  
 
Lastly, the proposed bill removes the ban on any products with PFAS by January 1, 2030 
unless DEP identifies it as an unavoidable use. This provision is unnecessary and 
duplicative given that the law states DEP can by rule identify products or categories of 
products that cannot be sold or distributed.  
 
As you know , nearly every sector of the economy , including aerospace, autos, alternative 
energy, healthcare, building and construction, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and 
agriculture, relies on PFAS chemistries for the reliable and safe function of a variety of 
products .   
 
I created YRT in 1992 with the main purpose to test products in the petro/c hemical market 
to reduce  pollution  (ie. Fugitive emis sions).  We test valves, gaskets and seals that are used 
in refineries, paper mills, chemical pl ants and many other facili ties.  Before the Clean Air 
Act Amendments  of 1990, leakage from these products at th ese plants was not measured or 
contro lled.  The initial allowable  leakage was 10,000 PPMv of VOC ’s from any device.  
Throughout the last 30 + years, the petro/chemical industry has written many standards 
and have reduced t he allowa ble leakage in most tests to no more than 100 PPMv.  The 
manufactu rers of these products have made great strides in reducing green house gases 
and other pollutants .  So, what does this have to do with the Act?  Most of the seals t hat are 
used in these facilities, whether in a gasket, valve, pump, heat exchanger or other piece of 
equipment contain a polymer or elastomer that would not be allowed if this Act was to not 
pass.  And in most if n ot all of these applications,  there are no avai lable alternatives.   
 
YRT encourages the support of LD 1214/ SP 495 as a sensible solution to protect health and 
the environment while providing regulatory clarification and certainty to impacted 
companies.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Matthew Wasielewski  
President and General Manager  
Yarmouth Rese arch and Technology, LLC  
434 Walnut Hill Road 
North Y armouth, ME 04097 
(207) 829- 5359  
matt@yarmouthresearch.com  
 
 
 

