                                                                                              
Augusta, ME 04332 | 207-204-8800  
 
April 26, 2023 
 
Sen. Stacy Brenner Chair  
Rep. Lori Gramlich, Chair  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 1214 – An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
Contamination 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee on Environment and 
Natural Resources 
My name is Matthew Marston and I am a resident of Hampden and am representing both the Maine 
Pharmacy Association and Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists. Together, these two 
organizations address the advocacy, continuing education and professional needs of all licensed 
pharmacists, pharmacy technicians and student pharmacists in Maine. We promote public health by 
advocating for the profession of pharmacy.  I am submitting testimony in support of LD 1214. 
Like many Maine businesses, we share in the concern of how pharmacies would be able to comply with 
Maine’s new law regarding PFAS in products.  Pharmacies both distribute and in the case of 
Pharmaceutical compounding manufacturer medications needed to support the health and well being of 
our communities.  Pharmacies would be included in the current requirement for the testing of all 
products made or sold in Maine for PFAS starting in 2030.  Without rules outlining how pharmacies 
would comply with this requirement or having the lab testing capabilities of meeting this requirement, 
we would be unable to comply with the law as it exists today. 
LD 1214 proposes common sense changes to this well intended law that has represented unforeseen 
challenges for Maine businesses.  I would like to highlight to the committee that the Food and Drug 
Administration has rigorous manufacturing standards and testing requirements that pharmaceuticals 
must undergo in order to be sold in the United States and pharmacies that compound medications must 
adhere to United States Pharmacopeia standards required by the FDA to ensure the purity and potency 
of the end product used by our patients. The current testing requirements in State law will not 
demonstrably improve the safety of products provided by pharmacies, but may actually result in higher 
costs or reduced access to medications in our State if LD 1214 or meaningful changes on Maine’s law 
related to PFAS are not enacted.  
Thank you for your consideration. If you have any questions prior to your work session, please reach 
out.  
 
 
Matthew Marston, PharmD, MBA, BCPS, BCOP 
Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists and Maine Pharmacy Association 
 

