188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
 
April 26 , 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Senate Chair  
Representative Gramlich, House Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: AGC Maine’s Comments on  LD 1214 “An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination ” 
 
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
Environment and Natural Resources my name  is Matthew  Marks,  I am a Principal  at Cornerstone  
Government  Affairs,  and submitting this letter  on behalf  of my client  The Associated  General  
Contractors  of Maine.  AGC  Maine  is a statewide commercial construction  trade  association  and a 
Chapter  of AGC  America . 
 
AGC  Maine  would  like to communicate  our initial experience  after  the passage  of LD 1503  which  became  
public  law in July 2021. Nearing  the deadline  for reporting products  that have  intentionally  added  PFAS,  
we recognized  some  of the challenges  with  ensuring we reached  all parties  subject  to the law. Our 
members , as you would  expect,  purchase  products  required  to complete  a design ed construction  
project.  We also have  members  who  supply  those  products,  but not necessarily  the manufacturer as 
defined  in the law, “the person that manufactures a product or whose brand name is affixed to the 
product .” Where construction products can often be comprised of many components,  the list of 
businesses to reach continued to grow far outside our membership.  
 
To assist  with  notification,  we accelerated  our outreach  efforts  in the Fall of 2022 as we neared  the 
December  deadline,  asking  for members  to distribute  within  their  supplier  networks.   We directed  
everyone to the DEP website but also answered  a plethora  of questions,  some  of which  we could  
determine easily  and others  that were not particularly  clear.  When  we couldn’t  determine if the product  
met the qualified  reporting,  we suggested  they  register to ensure  compliance.   
 
We published  a list based  on various  resources  of suspected  products  by category  to assist  with  the 
determi nation  including;  roofing  material,  weatherproofing  membranes,  paints,  metal  coatings,  wood 
lacquers, plastic coatings, carpet and rugs, resilient and hard flooring, grout/tile/ stone and concrete 
sealers, O-rings , adhesives, caulking, windows, doors, glass, ceramic fixtures, lightbulbs , electrical 
components including wiring, cable, plumber’s tape,  seismic damp ing systems, fiberglass and  film tapes, 
flashing tape, composite wood , and artificial turf.  In addition, we alerted equipment manufacturers that 
could have PFAS -contained materials within their products.  
 
188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741 The construction industry and the millions of various products used to build a structure require a 
complicated supply chain. While we put together outreach and notices it’s clear that additional time, and a stronger definition for intentionally added PFAS would benefit our communication and compliance. While the majority of AGC  members are end -users of the products, not the manufacturers, 
it’s important for our industry to work with vendors to determine the path forward as the state makes 
decisions on which products can be sold and used here in Maine.  
 
We understand the comple xities and challenges associated with managing the state’s response to PFAS. 
As an industry that is charged with building our state ’s infrastructure , we are continually  reviewing  the 
quality, safety , and environmental impacts . As we ’ve explained in this bill, and discussions  with 
advocates who are actively  working on deal ing with PFAS, we believe the state can reduce risks whi le 
accommodating the complex nature o f assembling  products and communicating to our supply chain.  
We appreciate Senator Baldacci’s effort to develop a solution, and appreciate the Committee ’s 
continued work on this matter.  
 
For that reason, we encourage the Committee to pass this bill.  
