1625 Eye Street NW, Suite 700, Washington, D.C. 20006 │ (202) 872 -8110  
  
 
 
April 25 , 2023  
 
The Honorable Stacy Brenner  
The Honorable Lori Gramlich  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333         via electronic transmission  
 
RE:  Support of LD 1214 (SP 495), An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and  
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination   
 
Dear Chair Brenner , Chair Gramlich , and Members of the Joint Committee on Environment and Natural 
Resources :  
 
The Household and Commercial Products Association (HCPA)1 respectfully request s your support of LD 
1214  (SP 108) , which seeks to  clarify obligations under  Public Law c. 477, An Act To  Stop Perfluoroalkyl 
and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Pollution  (LD 1503, 130th Legislature).  HCPA is a voluntary, non -profit 
U.S. trade association representing approximately 240 companies engaged in the manufacture, 
formulation, distribution, and sale of p roducts for the household, institutional, commercial, and 
industrial use.   HCPA member companies manufacture and/or market products that are impacted by 
Public Law c. 477 , and LD 1214 proposes needed corrections to the existing law. 
 
PFAS Nomenclature  
PFAS substances are a large, diverse group of chemical compounds. PFAS properties vary widely and are 
uses and applications. For this reason, it is important to distinguish between PFAS categories, use, 
function, and chemical properties as opposed to treating the substance as a single regulatory group. 
Chemical and structural differences among different types of PFAS may create physical chemical 
properties that underline legitimate concerns over potential health and environmental risks as sociated 
with some substances —this most certainly does not apply to all PFAS chemicals and applications. For 
this reason, PFAS should not be considered as a single group or class, especially given it is possible to 
scientifically define distinct categories  of PFAS based on shared properties.  
 
The current law takes a class approach to regulation which is not scientifically accurate and will lead  to 
unjustified product restrictions. For example, HCPA represents the aerosol industry, as this is a common 
delivery form for many household and commercial products. Aerosol propellants are highly regulated by 
state and federal governments, and producers have gone to great lengths in recent y ears to 
manufacture and innovate more environmentally preferable products, especially reducing global 
warming potential (GWP). Compounds such as hydrofluoroolefins (HFOs) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) 
consist of hydrogen, fluorine and carbon, but are not p ersistent, bioaccumulative, or toxic. Some of 
these technologies play an important role in addressing climate goals. Unfortunately, because some 
HFOs and HFCs have a fully fluorinated carbon, these propellants and solvents are captured in the 
current legal  definition of PFAS. Aerosol propellants are not and have never been considered a PFAS 
substance. The use of such a broad definition will needlessly restrict access to products and technologies 
deemed safe and environmentally beneficial .  
 
1 The Household & Commercial Products Association (HCPA) is the premier trade association representing companies that manufactu re and sell 
$180 billion annually of trusted and familiar products used for cleaning, protecting, maintaining, and disinfecting ho mes and commercial 
environments. HCPA member companies employ 200,000 people in the U.S. whose work helps consumers and workers to create cleane r, 
healthier and more productive lives.  

1625 Eye Street NW, Suite 700, Washington, D.C. 20006 │ (202) 872 -8110  
 Implementation Tim eline Extension  
HCPA is concerned that the current timeline for companies to report is not sufficient, and LD 1214 
serves to correct this by provid ing a one -year extention.  As Maine’s statutory definition of PFAS is very 
broad, many of the substances that  are captured within the definition have never been viewed or 
regulated as PFAS.  The presence of these substances have not been monitored or otherwise controlled 
by many that would be subject to the reporting requirements.  As a result, companies are goin g to need 
to expend significant time and resources working with their supply chains to understand their potential 
reporting requirements.  
  
In addition, once companies have their information and determine that they do have a reporting 
requirement, they’ll need sufficient time to enter the information the Department of Environmental 
Protection  is requesting for each product.  Depending on a com pany’s product portfolio, this has the 
potential to require significant human resources by companies to provide complete notifications.  
Therefore, HCPA urges the legislature  to extend the notification deadline by at least one-year  so that all 
stakeholders have sufficient time to gather and input their information.    
 
Consideration of Confidential Business Information   
Public Law c. 477  does not properly consider that many entities will be requesting information that their 
suppliers will consider to be a “t rade secret” or confidential business information ( CBI).  For example, 
the very presence of a specific byproduct and impurity within a formulation can be considered CBI if it 
might divulge proprietary processes or formulation related information.   So that suppliers aren’t 
required to reveal commercial trade se cret information to their downstream customers, LD 1214 
clarifies information elements for CBI claims. Disclosures to the Departement of Environmental 
Protection  need s to be balanced with CBI protection so that innovation within the  marketplace can 
continu e, and LD 1214 seeks to stike this balance.  
 
Lastly, we would like to note our support of LD 1273  (Stewart) . By exempting products governed under 
federal  law, the state would avoid unintentionally inserting reporting measures that may interfere with 
long -standing federal regulation.  LD 1273  serve s to clarify product scope in the law and avoid 
disruptions in the marketplace, therefore, we urge committee sup port of this bill  as well.  
 
The safety of human health and the environmental is a top priority for HCPA and our member 
companies. HCPA supports efforts to address the release of PFAS into the environment; however, we 
believe  Public Law c. 477  would benefit  from refinements  to mitigate possible unforeseen consequences 
within the supply chain. For the reasons outlined above, HCPA respectfully requests your support of  LD 
1214 (SP 495), and take into consideration the points set forth in this letter.  
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
Michelle  L. Kopa  
Director, State Government Relations & Public Policy - Eastern Region  

