 
  
Via Electronic Mail Only  
April 25, 2023  
 
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Maine State Legislature 
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: Support - LD 1214/ SP 495 An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS Contamination  
 
Dear  Senator  Brenner , Representative  Gramlich  and Members of the Joint Committee on Environment and 
Natural Resources:  
 
BASF Corporation  respectfully requests your support for LD 1214/SP 495, a measure that would clarify Public 
Law 2021 chapter 477.  As you know, the curren t version of the law requires reporting of products with 
“intentionally added PFAS” by or on January 1, 2023.  Maine DEP would then evaluate whether the reported 
product involved an unavoidable use or if it should be subject to a statewide ban.     
 
BASF C orporation is the North American affiliate of BASF SE.  At BASF, we create chemistry for a sustainable 
future.  We combine economic success with environmental protection and social responsibility.   
 
BASF Corporation recognizes Maine’s interest in managing  PFAS contamination to protect the health of the 
state’s citizens and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers this goal by making necessary changes to 
definitions in current law, specifically for the definitions of “PFAS” and “Intentionally added PFAS”.  These 
amendments more closely track the prevailing regulatory landscape throughout the country and provide added 
clarity to those companies reporting under the law.  Hopefully, it then will permit continued use of certain PFAS 
chemistries with critically i mportant uses and benefits.  
 
LD 1214/ SP 495 would also enable greater compliance with the law by providing companies a one -year 
extension of the deadline for reporting of products containing intentionally added PFAS.  Although the reporting 
requirement was scheduled to go into effect on January 1, 2023, the DEP granted thousands of manufacturers an 
extension in recognition of the complications related to reporting including delays in rulemaking, difficulty in 
obtaining and protecting confiden tial business information, disruptions in the global supply chain, and lack of 
laboratory testing capacity. A one -year extension of the reporting requirement date would allow manufacturers 
and the DEP to work through these issues.  
 
Lastly, the proposed bil l removes language from the current law which purports to ban any products with PFAS by 
January 1, 2030, unless DEP identifies an unavoidable use. This provision is unnecessarily duplicative given that 
the law determines DEP may analyze reported PFAS produ cts and ban future sales.  If DEP determines that such 
product involves an unavoidable use, that product would be exempt from the law.   
 
BASF Corporation  encourages the support of LD 1214/ SP 495 as a more sensible solution to protect health and 
the envir onment while providing regulatory clarification and certainty to impacted companies.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
Kind regards,  
 
/s/ Michael Heltzer  
 
Michael Heltzer  
Head of State Government Affairs        

