Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1214  
 
“An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl 
and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination ” 
 
April 26, 2023 
 
Patrick Strauch, Executive Director  
 
Good afternoon  Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich  and members of 
the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. I am Patrick 
Strauch from Exeter, Maine, and the Executive Director of the Maine 
Forest Products Council (MFPC).  I am submitting testimony today on 
behalf of the Maine Forest Products Council in support of LD 1214, “ An 
Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances Contamination .” 
 
As drafted, LD 1214 would make improvements to Maine ’s first-in-the-
nation  2021 PFAS in products law  to ensure that those who  do business in 
Maine can comply. W ith no model to look t o, it isn ’t surprising that 
Maine ’s law has had some unintended consequences that need to be 
addressed.  This new law is a major undertaking with impacts on every 
single business that sells products or goods in Maine.  Compliance requires 
subst antial time and resources and  considering that the formal rulemaking 
process is just beginning at Maine DEP, it is not practicable to expect 
companies to be able to comply with a law in the absence  of fin alized  rules 
and guid elines on how to do so.  
 
LD 1214 is necessary because it would narrow the scope of PFAS to match 
up with testing capabilities,  protect confidential business information, push 
the effective date out one year to allow time for the rulemaking proces s and 
more.  
 
If Maine is going to lead on this issue, it is critical  that we get the details 
right, or it’ s going to be Maine ’s businesses and manufacturers who will 
bear the brunt of this new law. For that reason, we urge your su pport of LD 
1214. Thank you for your consideration.  
 
