A Non Governmental Organization in Special Consultative Status with the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations333 West Wacker Drive, Suite 810
Chicago, Illinois, 60606
Phone/Fax: (312) 929-1970
www.truckandenginemanufacturers.org 
Testimony of the Truck and Engine Manufacturers Association
By
Patricia Hanz
LD 1214/ SP 495, An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS Contamination
Public Hearing of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources,  
Maine State Legislature
April 26, 2023
Chair Brenner and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources:
I write you today on behalf of the Truck & Engine Manufacturers Association (EMA) respectfully 
requesting your support of LD 1214/SP 495.  EMA represents the world’s leading manufacturers 
of commercial vehicles and on- and off- road engines used in several applications, including 
trucks, buses, construction and farm equipment, locomotives, marine vessels, lawn and garden 
equipment and stationary generators.  EMA believes that LD 1214/SP 495 will clarify Public Law 
2021 chapter 477 which requires reporting of products with intentionally added PFAS as of 
January 1st, 2023 and would ban products with intentionally added PFAS as of January 1st 2030, 
unless DEP determines that the use of PFAS in the product is an unavoidable use. 
EMA recognizes Maine’s interest in managing PFAS contamination to protect the health of the 
state’s citizens and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers this goal by making the necessary 
changes to definitions in current law that would address concerns with certain PFAS chemistries 
while allowing critically important uses and benefits of these chemistries. 
LD 1214/ SP 495 would also enable greater compliance with the reporting component of the law 
by providing companies a one year extension of the reporting deadline for products containing 
intentionally added PFAS. Although the reporting requirement was scheduled to go into effect on 
January 1, 2023, the DEP has granted thousands of manufacturers an extension in recognition of 
the complications related to reporting including delays in rulemaking, difficulty in obtaining and 
protecting confidential business information protected by intellectual property laws, disruptions in 
the global supply chain, and lack of laboratory testing capacity. A one-year extension of the 
reporting requirement date would allow manufacturers and the DEP to work through these issues.
Lastly, the proposed bill removes the ban on any products with PFAS by January 1, 2030 unless 
DEP identifies it as an unavoidable use. This provision is unnecessary and duplicative given that 
the law states DEP can by rule identify products or categories of products that cannot be sold or 
distributed. 
As you know, nearly every sector of the economy, including aerospace, autos, alternative energy, 
healthcare, building and construction, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and agriculture, relies on 
PFAS chemistries for the reliable and safe function of a variety of products. 
EMA encourages the support of LD 1214/ SP 495 as a sensible solution to protect health and the 
environment while providing regulatory clarification and certainty to impacted companies. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide our comments.  I would be happy to answer any questions 
following the hearing at: phanz@emamail.org  (312) 929-1979.
