Testimony   
Patrick Vaillancourt  
Owner, Northern Turf Management  
April  19th, 202 3 
 
In Support of  LD 1214 
“An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances Contamination ” 
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and members of the joint standing 
Committee on  Environment and Natural Resources , my name is Patrick Vaillancourt and 
I am the owner/operator of Northern Turf Management, a specialty turf and plant 
health care comp any in Cyr Plantation, ME  and a resident of the same.   I am in favor of  
LD 1214 “An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances Contamination .” 
 
I have been in the turf and ornamental health care industry since 2012, with a BS 
degree in Environmental Horticulture from the University of Maine and an AS degree in 
Turfgrass Management from the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Stockbridge 
School of  Agriculture.   
 
While Maine and the US as a whole certainly needs to perform further research 
on PFAS /PFOA,  a better understanding of their true make -up, and more importa ntly 
their true acute and chronic effects , current laws  in plac e seem to be aggressive based 
on the facts available.   LD 1503 is the measure in question, and while well intentioned , 
has had some ramif ications that seemin gly make the cure worse than what is tryin g to 
be prevented.    
 
As PFAS/PFOA become more familiar to us, we know that they exist just about 
everywhere, from pesticides and their containers, seatbelts, cell phones, firefighting 
turnout gear, medicines, and across many other things we conta ct daily.   Is there the 
potential that SOME of these PFAS/PFOA contained within COULD be harmful?  
Absolutely .  The flip side is that there are most likely many more  that are acceptable 
health wise.   My point is if we continue down this same path of 
prohibiting/banning/restricting PFAS/PFOA to the degree that we are , commerce and 
daily life as we know it will come to a screeching halt.  
 
This bill provides a more reasonable appr oach to PFAS/ PFOA , by ratcheting back 
the current definit ion to US EPA ’s definition , which is less restrictive .  It also allows for 
more time so that research can continue, bring ing more accurate information  to ligh t 
rather than the current “shoot from the hip, al l PFAS/PFOA are bad” approach.   It also 
provides clarity for manufacture rs of products  who may need to report PFAS/PFOA, so 
that they may do so without revealing trade secrets and formulation info rmation.  
 
 
For these reasons, I encourage the committee to vote “ought  to pass”                   
on LD 1 214. 
 
Thank you for your time.  I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
Patrick Vaillancourt  
Northern Turf Management  
820 Caribou Rd.  
Cyr Plantation, ME 04785  
northernturf@live.com  
207-551-1449  
