 
Manufacturers Association of Maine  
 
26 April 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and 
honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Environment and Natural Resources, we offer this 
testimony in support of LD 1214, An Act to Clarify 
Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substanc es Contamination.  
The Manufacturers Association of Maine (MAME) is a 
non-partisan 501(c)6 non -profit grounded in service to 
its membership, providing a network of resources 
designed to support the strategic business growth 
needs of Maine manufacturing ent repreneurs.  
Maine’s manufacturing businesses are diverse, 
employing almost 60,000 individuals in military and 
defense, aerospace, metal fabrication, paper, boat 
building, semi -conductor, wood products, aquaculture 
and biotech, medical device, composites, and 
bioplastics, as well as the food and beverage 
industries.  These businesses represent almost 10% of 
Maine’s annual GDP and 14.5% of all the wages paid 
in the state on a weekly basis.  MAME’s mission is to 
help manufacturing grow and succeed and support s 
Maine’s development of future manufacturing assets 
through a variety of programs.  
As you are acutely aware, the PFAS issue is of great 
concern to many across our state.  Our members 
understand those concerns and want to do their part 
to address them.  Ho wever, it is nearly impossible for 
our members to comply with the law as it currently 
stands.  
  2023 Executive BOARD  
 
Chair of the Board  
Judith Borelli  
Texas Instruments  
 
Vice Chair of the Board, &  
Legislative Chair   
Dave Fortin  
Kennebec Technologies  
 
Treasurer & Investment Chair  
Samantha Pedersen  
Albin, Randall & Bennett  
 
Secretary & Business Svcs. Chair  
Neal Prescott  
Prescott Associates  
 
Past -Chair & Energy Program Chair  
Alan LaPoint  
The Strainrite Companies  
 
Executive Director  
Mike Roughton  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAME_LD 1214 testimony 042623  
 
When Maine’s PFAS law was passed 2021 it required DEP to adopt rules which 
would set forth which businesses would be impacted and what those businesses 
needed to do to comply with the law. MAME members, along with many other 
businesses across that state, anticipated that guidance would be forthcoming.  Yet, 
as you also know, the DEP has had challenges with the rulemaking process and our 
members are still without the  guidance they need.  In the absence of any clear 
direction, many of our members sought an extension from the reporting 
requirements so as not to run afoul of the law, but those extensions will soon end.   
The majority of our membership is made up of small  businesses.  As written, the 
current law will disproportionately affect small businesses who have neither the 
knowledge nor the staff to follow DEP regulatory proceedings and/or adhere to the 
testing procedures that will be required under the law.  Additio nally, the cost of 
testing will likely be prohibitive for most of those small members.  
Given these challenges, we believe that LD 1214 as currently proposed provides a 
targeted approach that maintains the original intention of law by limiting PFAS 
human ex posure, but at the same time, makes reasonable changes that will be less 
onerous to Maine businesses and the state’s economy.  By changing the definition 
of PFAS, the bill aims to narrow the scope and make it easier to comply.  As has 
been stated by others , Maine simply does not have the lab capacity or technology 
to be able to adhere to the testing required under current statute.  Limiting the 
definition makes it more likely that testing can take place and lessens the cost of 
that testing.  The proposal al so aims to protect confidential business information, 
which is essential for a business trying to stay relative in a highly competitive 
business environment.  Additionally, the bill pushes out the effective date allowing 
DEP and other regulatory bodies to adopt rules.  Clearly promulgated rules are 
essential so that our members can understand who is impacted, how they are 
impacted and what they must do to comply with the law.     
Finally, the proposal removes the 2030 ban on products with intentionally adde d 
PFAS.  We believe DEP is better positioned through rulemaking to determine what 
products can and cannot be sold in Maine.  As a regulating agency, DEP will have all 
the information and expertise needed to make such decisions.  
For these reasons, we ask yo u to look favorably upon the proposal and vote for its 
passage.   
