April 26, 2023 
Joint Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources 
RE: Support of LD 1214 
Thank you, Chair and members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee: 
I'm Shawn Swearingen a Director of Chemical Products and Technology at the American Chemistry 
Council. I am here today not only representing ACC in support of LD 1214, but two specialty groups we 
manage, the Alliance for Telomer Chemistry Stewardship and the Performance Fluoropolymer 
Partnership, groups whose members include manufacturers processors, and users of per-and 
polyﬂuoroalkyl substances. 
Our members have serious concerns with Public Law 477 and the rulemaking by the Maine DEP. And as 
evidenced by the more than 2,000 companies that requested and received reporting extensions under 
the current law, and the hundreds of companies that participated in DEP's two stakeholder meetings, our 
members are not alone in their concerns. We believe LD 1214 will ﬁx many of the shortcomings of the 
current law that have been identiﬁed by our members and other industry stakeholders. 
By correcting the overly broad deﬁnition of PFAS, adding language to assure the protection of 
conﬁdential business information, extending the timeline for reporting, and removing the 2030 ban date, 
LD 1214 will protect the citizens of Maine in a manner that is more effective and more workable, and 
that will provide greater certainty, than under the current law. 
The deﬁnition of PFAs in LD 1214 focuses on the PFAS chemistries of concern for water and soil 
contamination, the primary concern articulated in the preamble of PL 477. At the same time, the 
deﬁnition does not impact those products already regulated by federal regulatory agencies. 
We have commented repeatedly that the DEP mu_s_t _ articulate far more clearly than it has done to date 
how CBI will be managed in the notiﬁcation process and protected thereafter by both the DEP grgthe 
interstate Chemicals Clearinghouse (|C2 We are encouraged that LD 1214 provides explicit protection for 
conﬁdential business information security, and we plan to offer suggestions to further clarify these 
protections. 
PL 477 established timelines that have been impossible for DEP to meet, resulting in deadlines taking 
effect before rulemaking even got underway. This put DEP in a position of needing to grant thousands of 
extensions, but at the same time, not every business that requested an extension received one. The 
language in LD 1214 gives DEP leeway in reporting timelines to appropriately respond to the information 
they request from affected stakeholders without being conﬁned by the unsustainable timelines in the 
initial regulations. Most importantly, LD 1214 takes the important step of eliminating the 2030 ban 
provisions of PL 477 and the numerous, unwieldy regulatory processes it envisions. 
LD 1214 addresses important concerns with the initial legislation, while still allowing DEP to undertake 
rulemaking and keeping to the intent of regulating PFAS of potential concern. We will continue to 
comment and have discussions with DEP in hopes that the legislature will pass LD 1214 to assist in the 
DEP's efforts. LD1214 will not only preserve critical uses of this technology that are important for 
Maine's broader sustainability objectives and economy, but this legislation will preserve access to 
products like personal electronics, medical devices, life-saving medications, and many others which 
Maine families and businesses rely on every day.
We appreciate the opportunity to comment today to the Committee and look forward to continued 
dialogue with the legislature and the DEP aiong with so many other interested stakeholders here today.
