 
 
  97 Main Street, Belfast, ME  04915                    207.338.6575                     mainefarmlandtrust.org 
 
 
 
Testimony of Shelley Megquier, Policy & Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust, to the 
131st Legislature’s Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
May 3, 2023 
 
Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. My name is Shelley Megquier and I am the 
Policy & Research Director at Maine Farmland Trust (MFT).  I am providing testimony on behalf of 
MFT in opposition to LD 1214 – An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination.   
 
MFT is a member-powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support farmers, 
and advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has helped to permanently 
protect more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. Our Farm 
Network includes over 500 farms and, in 2022, 2,250+ individuals demonstrated their commitment 
to the future of Maine agriculture through an MFT membership. In 2022, MFT supported 48 farm 
businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and grants – delivering over 680 hours of technical 
assistance and $309,000 in business and seed grants to help businesses grow their profitability. Our 
main program areas are Farmland Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm Business 
Planning, PFAS Support, Climate Resilience, and Policy and Research. 
 
For the past several years, MFT has been deeply engaged in the strong and collaborative response 
to the challenge of PFAS (per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances) contamination on Maine farms and 
farmland. The presence of PFAS in soil, water, crops and livestock is an emerging national issue, and 
PFAS contamination in Maine is alarming, especially for farmers whose livelihoods are connected to 
the land. The application of PFAS-contaminated sludge or residuals decades ago by farmers who 
were unaware of the presence and health risks of these chemicals can still impact PFAS levels in the 
soil and water today – with such high levels of contamination in some cases that agricultural 
production is simply no longer possible, at least in the near future until research is advanced on 
remediation methods. MFT staff have witnessed firsthand the significant impacts farm businesses 
and families have experienced from the contamination. These impacts include losing the financial 
value of products that can no longer be sold; making the investments to change farm management 
practices and adopt new infrastructure; and even having to purchase or lease additional land to use 
for their farming operations. These farmers have also had their wells contaminated, and live with 
ongoing concerns about the health effects of the PFAS contamination for themselves and their 
families. Finally, these farmers worry about the value of their land – their largest investment – and 
what their options might be if they are no longer able to farm there. 
 
We advocate in partnership with impacted farmers and other organizations for state and federal 
policies that stop the ongoing contamination of agricultural land, ensure that impacted farmers 
receive the support they need, and advance PFAS research, including on critical topics such as soil 
remediation. To comprehensively support Maine’s farmers and protect our agricultural land, we 
must slow the rate at which PFAS are entering the environment – eventually stopping it altogether. 
 2 We appreciated the PFAS source reduction measures and goals included under LD 1503 in the 130th 
Legislature and also appreciate efforts this session to ensure that the Maine law is realistic, focused, 
and fair.  Ultimately, while we work together to mitigate the existing problem of PFAS 
contamination, we need to identify and implement solutions to turn off the PFAS tap all the way 
upstream before the chemicals enter our state.  
 
LD 1214 seeks to change the definition of intentionally added PFAS in ways that we believe would 
continue to expose Maine farmland and waters to contamination.  Not only would this revision 
override the consensus on a comprehensive definition for PFAS that was reached in the 130th 
legislature with overwhelming bipartisan support, but the revised definition would remove Maine’s 
ability to track and regulate many dangerous fluorinated chemicals. Secondly, LD 1214 proposes to 
repeal language that would allow Maine’s Department of Environmental Protection to ban 
particular products containing PFAS by 2030.  MFT routinely hears from farmers who are deeply 
concerned about PFAS contamination and eager to see limits on the ways that PFAS can enter our 
environment. To remove Maine’s ability to ban particular products found to have PFAS 
contamination is counterproductive to Maine’s ongoing efforts to invest resources in and laudably 
work to support farmers impacted by PFAS contamination.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony to urge you to vote ought not to pass for LD 
1214. I’m happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
 
