April 2023 
To: The Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
RE: Reporting of Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances - LD 217, 1214, 1273, and 1537 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished Committee Members, 
My name is Stacey Keefer; l am a resident of Union. I am speaking to you today in my capacity 
as the Director for the Maine Marine Trades Association (MMTA). MMTA represents over 120 
Maine businesses and an industry comprised of boatyards, boat builders, marinas, boat dealers, 
and marine retailers located throughout the state. Our industry provides an annual economic 
impact of $2.9 billion in Maine according to data from the National Marine Manufacturer's 
Association. The boating industry serves commercial vessels including fishing and sea farming, 
recreational boaters, tour boats, plus other essential service providers such as the US Coast 
Guard, police, harbor masters, and Maine state agency vessel fleets. 
On behalf of the members of MMTA, thank you for the opportunity to speak about these 
multiple bills that aim to change the new Chapter 90 regulations. We have been doing our best 
to respectfully participate in the rulemaking process and never participated in the original 
public hearing for the bill that created this law (LD 1503 in the 130"‘ Legislature) because the 
language appeared to apply to large corporations outside of Maine who manufacture chemicals 
and/or intentionally add PFAS to products. There were only 35 submissions of public testimony 
at that time, and we believe many small businesses would have testified if they understood the 
enormous impact of the legislation. We appreciate that some of our concerns have been 
alleviated in the rulemaking process, however we continue to have some significant concerns 
about probable impacts and the time that may be needed in order to reach compliance. 
Maine boat builders make very few of the items that are included in the boats that are sold 
under their brand names, but the new reporting law will require them to report on all of the 
items included in their finished product. Their manufacturing is predominantly an assembly 
process of smaller components, electronics, accessories, fabrics, fasteners, and engines. A 
modest 20-foot boat can have a thousand separate parts, or more (see attached information on 
stock keeping units). Overwhelming reporting requirements that may require destructive 
testing by a laboratory, will simply send boat sales out of state unless all states have equivalent 
requirements. 
Rather than address specifics of each bill, l will list some key statute and rule changes that we 
believe are needed in order to help the State of Maine start to gather desired information, but 
hopefully avoid overburdening our boat builders, dealers, and marine manufacturers. We very 
much appreciate the proposal to exempt the smallest companies from the reporting 
requirement, however our marine manufacturers who have 11-200 employees are also going to 
struggle to meet compliance unless other changes are made.
Start at the Source: In order for an assembler of complex products to be able to reference 
reports from original manufacturers of subcomponents, reporting needs to begin at the start of 
the supply chain. Destructive testing is costly, wasteful, and time consuming for those at the 
end of the supply chain. An engine dealer should not have to destroy an engine in order to sell 
an engine. 
Time: More time is critical for manufacturers of complex products that contain thousands of 
components. Maine is boldly trying to enforce national and international reporting cooperation, 
yet there is no incentive for most foreign suppliers to comply because Maine is such a small 
market percentage in a massive global economy. Or if they do voluntarily report, there is no 
capacity for the State of Maine to conduct testing to verify reporting accuracy. 
Prioritization: Reporting for over 12,000 separate chemicals is going to need a complex 
database. lt would be helpful to look at the risk of exposure to different PFAS chemicals or 
groups of chemicals. California started the process to phase out their PFAS in products by 
focusing on cosmetics and textiles. We support using a similar, risk-based approach to initiate 
the program. 
Considerations for Custom Manufacturing: Manufacturers of marine products typically sell 
custom, or semi-custom final products so reporting is not a one-time challenge. Each new 
owner orders a different accessory package with different electronics, engine options, fabrics, 
and interior layouts. Sail and canvas shops rarely make the exact same product because every 
boat is different. lt would be helpful to allow reporting for an average-size product, or a range 
for PFAS content between one of their smallest and largest products. 
Considerations for Using Recycled Content: 
Please allow for an exemption if using recycled content if no PFAS is intentionally added to that 
repurposed content. Otherwise, the use of recycled content becomes undesirable. 
In summary, we would like to request language or rule change considerations that will help 
alleviate these reporting burdens for our small Maine boat building businesses and marine 
dealers so they can continue to competitively sell their complex and very customized products 
in Maine. We will help our members prepare for future reporting once there are base level 
reports for most marine components. If there is any sort of resolve created on this topic, we are 
happy to work with the Department and our national colleagues to help prioritize reporting for 
any chemicals that could be targeted for the first phase of reporting. 
Respectfully, 
Shay /Qua 
Stacey Keefer 
Maine Marine Trades Association, Executive Director
