 
April 13, 2023  
 
 
The Honorable Stacy Brenner  
Chair, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Cross, Building Room 216  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: Support - LD 1214/ SP 495 An Act to Clarify the Laws Re lated to PFAS Contamination  
 
Dear Chair Brenner and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources,   
 
INDA, the Association for the Nonwoven Fabrics Industry respectfully requests your support of LD 1214/SP 
495 which  would provide clarifica tion to Public Law 2021 chapter 477 which requires reporting of products 
with intentionally added PFAS and would ban products with intentionally added PFAS as of January 1st 2023, 
unless DEP determines that the use of PFAS in the product is an unavoidable use.  
 
Founded in 1968, INDA member companies represent the entire nonwovens value chain including raw 
materials and roll goods producers, machinery manufacturers, converters, and b rand owners. INDA works 
each day to fulfill our mission of “fostering member and industry success through its activities.” INDA 
provides thought -leadership in Innovation & Technology through conference content, recognition awards, 
and industry reports; pro tecting markets that are important to our members through focused Product 
Stewardship; advocating for industry sectors impacted by regulatory or consumer -driven issues; and 
organizing face -to-face interaction through industry expositions and events.  
INDA m embers include the manufacturers of thousands of durable and disposable products such as personal 
care items, hygiene products, PPE, medical equipment , construction materials, automotive fixtures, and 
many other end uses.  
INDA  recognizes Maine’s interest in managing PFAS contamination to protect the health of the state’s 
citizens and the environment. LD 1214/SP 495 furthers this goal by making the necessary changes to 
definitions in current law that would a ddress concerns with certain PFAS chemistries while allowing critically 
important uses and benefits of these chemistries.  
 
LD 1214/ SP 495 would also enable greater compliance with the law by providing companies a one-year  
extension of the deadline for re porting of products containing intentionally added PFAS. Although the 
reporting requirement was scheduled to go into effect on January 1, 2023, the DEP granted thousands of 
manufacturers an extension in recognition of the complications related to reporting  including delays in 
rulemaking, difficulty in obtaining and protecting confidential business information protected by intellectual 
property laws, disruptions in the global supply chain, and lack of laboratory testing capacity. A one -year 
extension of the reporting requirement date would allow manufacturers and the DEP to work through these 
issues.  
 
Lastly, the proposed bill removes the ban on any products with PFAS by January 1, 2030 unless DEP 
 
identifies it as an unavoidable use. This provision is unneces sary and duplicative given that the law states 
DEP can by rule identify products or categories of products that cannot be sold or distributed.  
 
As you know, nearly every sector of the economy, including aerospace, autos, alternative energy, 
healthcare, bu ilding and construction, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and agriculture, relies on PFAS 
chemistries for the reliable and safe function of a variety of products.  
 
INDA  encourages the support of LD 1214/ SP 495 as a sensible solution to protec t health and the 
environment while providing regulatory clarification and certainty to impacted companies.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Wes Fisher  
Director of Government Affairs  
INDA, Association of the Nonwoven Fabrics Industry  
 
 
