STATE OE MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES‘ 
a.__-=2“ .-$.51‘ HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE ‘KT All 1 11 
AUGUSTA. MAINE O43);-OOOZ 
.\"T.»\TE REPRESE\'TATI\'E é"‘:‘:““1 
I, I g, 61 l_ v -sH 
BILLX BOB FALiLI\INGHAM Fax: (.07, .S,_,,,., 
Hm" SE REPLABLICAN LEADER E~!\’l;1il: \\'ilIizim.F;iull;iiigl\;11im] lI3‘:'l>lLllLlI ‘L’.Il1LllIlC.gl 
April 24, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 547 
”An Act to Amend the Hunting Laws as They Pertain to the Training of Dogs" 
Good morning, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. I am Representative Billy Bob Faulkingham and I am here to 
present my bill LD 547, “An Act to Amend the Hunting Laws as They Pertain to the Training of Dogs." 
This bill as drafted is incredibly simple. This bill removes half a sentence in Section 1. 12 MRSA. This bill 
removes the prohibition on training hunting dogs on bear in those portions of Washington County and 
Hancock County that are situated south of Route 9. 
This bill came about when a constituent who has hunting dogs told me about the issue of not being able 
to train his dogs on bear below Route 9. He asked if I could do something about it, so here we are. 
This issue seems so simple, that it became a head scratcher why this law even exists? This is the only 
area in the whole state that has such a prohibition on bear dog training. During the same time period 
the prohibition is in place other hound hunting like coyote hunting is permitted. 
So, eventually I found out that there was a conflict Down East with the timing of the bear training 
season and the harvest season of one of Maine's biggest industries, the wild blueberry industry. 
Well, rather than put this issue on the committee to sort out, I thought it would be more productive to 
have to two groups engage each other and work it out. 
To that end, I helped facilitate a meeting in Jonesboro last week between a group of stakeholders from 
the dog hunting community, and a group of members from the Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine. 
The result may surprise some, but not me. 
The growers didn't hate dog hunters, and weren't completely opposed to them hunting their land. Asa 
matter of fact, the growers have a good perception of hunters, and dog hunters, and for the most part 
t allow dog hunting on their land. Their concerns were mostly around conflicts with their harvest season. 
If this law passes, they won't allow bear training on their lands during harvest season. This is a position I 
believe to be very reasonable, and one the hunters are very willing to accept.
The hunters didn't hate the growers, and as a matter of fact, some of them were involved in blueberry 
harvest themselves. They didn't want to cause damage to the crops, or disrespect the landowners. The 
hunters feel confident there is a lot of land in Washington County they can hunt that isn't blueberry 
land. They also feel like they can do a good job of keeping their dogs off the blueberry land, especially in 
light of the stricter laws passed a few years ago on hound hunting and private property. 
So we started discussing how the groups could compromise. What we discussed was an amendment 
adding a line onto the current law that says, ”except in those portions of Washington county and 
Hancock County that are situated south of Route 9, permission required on land used for wild blueberry 
production." 
We also agreed to give this law a 2 year sunset, with a report back from the Department. 
These amendments to the bill will give blueberry producers insurance that their harvest won't be 
disrupted, and that if it doesn't go well, the law will sunset in two years. For the hunters, it gives them 
two years to prove themselves. I believe that this is a good bill, and this amendment will ensure that it's 
done properly and reduces the risk of bad outcomes. 
l believe that if the committee passes this bill as amended, that it will be a complete success, and that in 
two years the department will report back that this bill should be permanent law. 
l urge the committee to pass this bill, with the amendment I have proposed and give these hound 
hunters the same opportunity that hound hunters from Kittery to Baileyville, and Rockland to Fort Kent 
already enjoy. 
Thank you for your time. I will answer any questions you may have. 
Respectfully, 
Representative Billy Bob Faulkingham
