TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 547 
“An Act to Amend the Hunting Laws as They Pertain to the Training of Dogs" 
Presented by Representative FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor. 
Cosponsored by Senator MOORE of Washington and Representatives: DAVIS of East Machias, 
LANDRY of Farmington, MASON of Lisbon, SHAGOURY of Hallowell, STROUT of Harrington, 
Senator: CURRY of Waldo. 
DATE OF HEARING: March 24, 2023 
Good morning Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife Committee. I am Dan Scott Colonel of the Maine Warden Service, at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in 
opposition of L.D. 547. 
This bill would eliminate the portions of Washington and Hancock Counties that are situated 
south of Route 9, that is currently closed to the training of bear dogs during the statewide bear 
training season from July 1st to the 4"‘ day preceding the open season on hunting bears. 
This law had traditionally been enacted with an agreement in mind, between the landowners, 
blueberry growers and the dog hunting community to alleviate or minimize conflicts during the 
peak of blueberry harvesting time in the listed areas. Blueberry growers, like other food crop 
producers must adhere to very strict guidelines and laws, regarding food safety practices and 
standards at the federal and state level. 
The landowners and growers have concernsof non-employees, dogs, bears, and vehicles within 
the area and possibly doing damage to crops, roadways, etc., as well as possible conflict with 
federal and state regulations. 
Many of the landowners and blueberry growers allow bear baiting, trapping, and hunting with 
dogs during the open season on bears, as well as other activities like hunting, fishing, ATV, and 
snowmobile trails on their land base. There was no biological reason for the closure, but more of 
a social one in showing support to the private landowners that continue to provide opportunity 
for outdoor recreational activities. 
We have had correspondence with the Maine Blueberry Commission and some of the large 
landowners in the affected area and support them in the opposition of this bill. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
