 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
April 24th, 2023   
 
Senator LaFountain  
Representative Landry  
Members of the Committee On Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  
 
Testifying Ought To Pass  - Amended , LD 547 , An Act to Amend the Hunting Laws as They Pertain to the 
Training of Dogs  
 
My name is Eric Venturini  and I am the Executive Director of the  Wild  Blueberry Commission of Maine. 
The Wild Blueberry Commission works on behalf of 4851 farmers and businesses  who grow wild 
blueberries on approximately 4 2,0002 acres across the state  and on Passamaquoddy lands. Maine’s 
growers often produce crops exceeding 100 million pounds that supply markets in Maine to Ca lifornia, 
and across the globe. As such, they are a vital part of Maine’ s—especially Downeast Maine’ s—economy, 
accounting for an estimated $250 million in ec onomic activity in the state each year.3 
Under current law, hunters with bear dogs may not train their dogs in the parts of Washington and 
Hancock Counties that are south of Route 9. This law was put into place, as we understand it, due to 
concerns and exp eriences that wild blueberry producers had with dog training and its impacts on wild 
blueberry fields and harvest crews during the harvest season. Approximately 90% of Maine’s 42,000 
acres of wild blueberry production are in Washington and Hancock Counties . Any hunting rules and 
regulations that impact these counties  have the potential to interact with Maine’s wild blueberry fields.  
When we saw this bill printed, we met with Representative Faulkingham to express our concerns. He 
suggested that we set up a m eeting between wild blueberry producers and the hunters interested in 
removing the south of route nine exemption. These two groups met last Friday, along with Rep . 
Faulkingham, and I. The discussion went well and the group was able to come to a compromise,  which 
                                       
1 USDA - National Agricul tural Statistics Service. 2017. US Census of Agriculture.  
2 USDA - National Agricul tural Statistics Service. 2022. Maine Wild Blueberry Production up Significantly from 2020. Estimate 
provided is based upon  2021 harvested acreage (appx. half of total acreage in any given year  due to biennial harvests ). 
3 Wild Blueberry Association of North America – US. 2009. The Econo mic and Fiscal Impact on the State of Maine of the Wild 
Blueberry Industry. Planning Decisions, Inc. Unpublished study.  
 
 
 
5784 York Complex Suite 52 ⋅ Orono, ME 04469 -5784 ⋅ 207-581-1475 ⋅ wbcm@maine.edu  
wildblueberrycommissionofmaine. org 
the sponsor is presenting to this Committee today as an amendment.  
Thanks to Rep . Faulkingham and the hunters behind this bill, the amendment includes provisions that 
allow us to support it. Thank you for your time. I would b e happy to answer any questions . 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
Eric Venturini  
Executive Director  
Wild Blueberry Commission of  Maine  
Eric.Venturini@maine.edu  
(207) 478 -7612  
 
 
