 
  
 
Testimony In Opposition To  
LD 936, An Act t o Require Disclosure of Pay Ranges and Record Keeping of Pay History  
 
March 21, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder , and Honorable Members of the Labor and Housing  Committee,   
 
My name is Alexander Price  and I am submitting  this testimony  on behalf of the  Maine Jobs Council . The 
Maine Jobs Council is a statewide, nonpartisan, member- driven advocacy organization that advances 
public policies to support the creation and preservation of foundational jobs in Maine. We are submitting  
this testimony in opposition to  LD 936, An Act  to Require Disclosure of Pay Ranges and Record Keeping 
of Pay History . 
 
We oppose LD 936 because it would increase the regulations and burdens on employers at a time when 
they are already struggling to compete . Maine’s regulatory and business environments rank among the 
lowest in the nation. We are 4 4th in the nation in overall economic ranking  and 42nd in the nation in 
venture capital investment.  Maine is  currently experiencing an aging population;  lack of quality 
foundational jobs ; top heavy service and public sectors ; lack of investment;  failure to attract 2 1st 
century, cutting edge businesses ; high taxes and energy costs ; high health care costs ; and aging and/or 
inadequate infrastructure. What does this proposal do to address any of those issues? If anything, it only 
makes improving them harder.  
 
The Maine Jobs Council supports making workers a top priority. The best way to do that is with a robust 
economy full of quality foundational  jobs that provide choices, career growth, and increasing wages.  By 
requiring the employer to list  or disclose  the pay range in an employment opening, this bill could affect 
the number and quality of applicants and could set unrealistic expectations. This bill c ould also cause 
unnecessary conflict within the business, as current employees may be offended if the business is 
attempting to hire a new employee at a comparable or even greater salary . Further, listing or disclosing 
the salary range may give competing businesses a heads -up. Most states do not require employers to 
list or disclose the pay ranges in an empl oyment opening . As such, this bill would continue to make Maine 
an outlier at a time when Maine  already ranks among the lowest in the nation in numerous economic, 
regulatory, and demographic rankings.  
 
Supporting working people is critical, but if our companies cannot compete, if money isn’t invested here, 
if jobs stagnate or leave, then we will have more and more people who are no longer working people.  
The simple truth is that Maine’s  economic  and regulatory rankings are in the bottom 10 of the nation. 
Maine’s public policy needs to focus on the big picture, create a comprehensive plan  that meets the 
needs of the 2 1st century economy , and take steps to improve those  economic and regulator y rankings.  
 
Individual pieces of legislation such as LD 936 are not the solution to solving our state’s economic 
problems. Our overall business environment is 46th , we have the  3rd highest tax burden, the 9th highest 
healthcare cost, the 1 1th highest cost of living , and the  13th highest energy cost. Our overall economic 
ranking is among the  last in New England and if LD 936 passes, it will be one more thing that makes it 
harder for our state’s economy to succeed.  
 
We encourage this committee to start taking a more com prehensive look at how workforce challenges, 
taxes, regulations, infrastructure, and other issues act as a barrier to job creation in our state. Maine 
needs to develop and follow a long -term  strategic plan to create a tax base that works for all Mainers.  
 
The MJC thanks the committee for it s time and consideration of this  issue , and we would welcome any 
opportunity to discuss it with you.  
 
Thank you,  
 
Alexander Price, Pierce Atwood  
On behalf of the Maine Jobs Council  
