The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA 
members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, 
amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers 
from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner,
Maine Invites You (since 1933).
Alison  Sucy,  Chief Operating Officer and Director  of Government  Affairs,  
on Behalf  of the Maine  Tourism  Association
In Opposition  to
LD 936, An Act to Require Disclosure of Pay Ranges and Record Keeping of Pay History
Senator  Tipping, Representative  Roeder, and Members  of the Joint  Standing  Committee  on 
Labor  and Housing:
My name  is Alison  Sucy  and I am the Chief  Operating  Officer  and Director  of Government  
Affairs  for the Maine  Tourism  Association.  The Maine  Tourism  Association,  a non-profit,  is 
the state’s  largest  tourism  organization  supporting  members  in every  type of tourism  business  
such  as lodging,  restaurants,  camps,  campgrounds,  retail,  guides,  tour operators,  amusements,  
and historical  and cultural  attractions.  We’ve  been  promoting  Maine  and our members  for over 
100 years.  I present  this testimony  in opposition  to LD 936.
Although  we support  the intent  to ensure  wage  fairness  and transparency,  we have  a couple  of 
concerns  with the bill. First  is with the pay range  requirement  for job postings.  Employers  
should  be able to choose  whether  or not to include  salary  information  in job postings.  What  
happens  if an employer  decides  to offer  an applicant  a salary  outside  of that range?  It is unclear  
what  the specific  benefit  is as pay ranges  are simply  ranges.  They  can vary each  time a job is 
advertised  as the market  for that type of job will change  over time or employers  are likely  to 
change  job duties  slightly  when  one employee  leaves  so the next applicant  may have  the same  
or similar  title but different  pay opportunities  due to tweaks  in the job duties.
Second,  we believe  the amount  of record  keeping  required  is burdensome  to our small  business  
owners;  and it is unnecessary  and redundant  to existing  law. Maine  already  has a law that 
makes  it illegal  for employers  to prohibit  employees  from  discussing  pay and, just a few years  
ago, made  it illegal  for employers  to ask applicants  about  their  pay history.  
Many  of our small  business  owners  do not have  human  resources  or finance  positions.  The 
owners  perform  these  functions  themselves.  Adding  the title and payment  history  for three  
years  beyond  the employee’s  employment  seems  unnecessary  and, again,  particularly  
burdensome  for these  employers.  
I respectfully  ask that you vote Ought  Not To Pass.  Thank  you for your  time and consideration  
of our testimony.
