1 
  
TOWN OF THOMASTON  
TOWN MANAGER  
13 VALLEY STREET  
THOMASTON, MAINE 04861  
TEL: (207) 354- 6107  
 
March 20, 2023  
 
Maine State Legislature  
Labor and Housing Committee  
 
LD 936-An Act to Require Disclosure  of Pay Ranges and Record Keeping of Pay History  
 
Dear Labor and Housing Committee:  
 
I write on behalf of the Town of Thomaston in opposition of LD 936. This proposed bill directly  circumvents  
the new laws pass ed in MRS Title 26 (628- A) that bans s alary history : 
§628- A. Compensation history inquiry prohibited  
1.  Legislative findings and intent.   The Legislature finds that despite requirements regarding equal pay 
having been a part of the laws of Maine since 1965, wage inequality is an ongoing issue in the State. Wage 
inequality causes substantial harm to the citizens and to the economy of the State. The Legislature finds that 
when employers base compensation decisions on compensation history of a prospective empl oyee, it directly 
perpetuates this wage inequality. An employer's knowledge of a prospective employee's compensation history 
is directly related to the practice of basing compensation decisions on compensation history. It is the intent of the Legislature to promote the payment of equal compensation for comparable work on jobs that have 
comparable requirements relating to skill, effort and responsibility and to prevent unlawful employment 
discrimination with respect to compensation.   
[PL 2019, c. 35, §4 (NE W).] 
2.  Prohibition.   An employer may not use or inquire about the compensation history of a prospective 
employee from the prospective employee or a current or former employer of the prospective employee unless an offer of employment that includes all ter ms of compensation has been negotiated and made to the 
prospective employee, after which the employer may inquire about or confirm the prospective employee's compensation history.   
[PL 2019, c. 35, §4 (NEW).]  
3.  Exception.   This section does not apply to  an employer who inquires about compensation history 
pursuant to any federal or state law that specifically requires the disclosure or verification of compensation history for employment purposes.   
[PL 2019, c. 35, §4 (NEW).]  
4.  Penalty.   This section may be enforced pursuant to  section 626- A. The civil action provided pursuant 
to section 626- A may b e brought to enforce this section by or on behalf of a person affected by a violation 
of subsection 2  or by the Department of Labor on behalf of a person affected by a violation  of subsection 2 , and 
the plaintiff or plaintiffs may also seek judgment for compensatory damages.   
 
MRS Title 26 (628- A) clearly  states the legislative finding and intent of this law. Pay history s hould not be 
disclosed upon request, as it  lessens the job candidate ’s ability to negotiate wages . All employees are to be 
paid an equitable and equal wage based on their education, work experience, and responsibilities of the 
position. The new law as outlined above has made gr eat progress in reducing salary dispar ities amo ng 
employees based on gen der and race.  
 

2 
 LD 936 is a step backwards and is a complete departure from the progress made in MRS Tit le 26 (628- A). 
Thank you for your consideration in opposing LD 936.  
 
 
 
 
Best,  
 
 
Kara George  
Town Manager  

