 
 
 
David LaFountain  
Senator, District 16  THE MAINE SENATE  
131st Legislature  3 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333
 
Testimony of Senator Dave LaFountain  
LD 936, An Act to Require Disclosure of Pay Ranges in Job Postings  
before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
March 21, 2023  
Senator Tipping and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Dave LaFountain. I have the honor of representing the good people of 
Senate District 16, including the towns of Albion, Fairfield, Oakland, Waterville, and my hometown 
of Winslow. Today, I am here to speak in support of LD 936, “An Act to Require Disclosure of 
Pay Ranges in Job Postings.”  
This bill would enable potential employees to get a fair shake in an evolving job market. Sometimes, 
well qualified candidates apply for jobs where the title sounds worthy of their skills, but the pay 
range doesn’t match up. In addition to assisting candidates in their job search, this proposed 
transparency is one step forward in the fight to close the gender pay gap. In 20221, women earned 
82% of what their male counterparts earned for the same work. Same experience, same 
qualifications, same if not better output, for nearly ⅘ of the pay.  
Posting your range of pay on a job application shouldn’t be viewed as burdensome, as some might 
say. It simply allows all candidates to play on an even playing field. It also allows employers to 
recruit, interview, hire, and retain quality employees who perform exceptionally. Currently, there are 
laws on the books that prohibit the transparency that we are seeking with LD 936.  
If we are to continue progress on developing a robust workforce here in Maine, we can’t hide behind 
laws that decrease transparency when it comes to something as concrete as employment. I urge this 
committee to vote Ought to Pass, and allow candidates seeking jobs to know exactly what they’re 
applying for.  
Thank you Representative Roeder for submitting this bill, and I’m happy to answer any questions 
from the committee.  
 
 
Chair, Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee * Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee  
State House (207) 287-1515 *  Fax (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711  
David.LaFountain@legislature.maine.gov * legislature.maine.gov/senate  
 
                                                      
1 https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2023/03/01/gender-pay-gap-facts/ 

