Tobin Williamson
Lewiston
LD 936
Hello,
I would like to submit my wholehearted support for LD 936: An Act to Require 
Disclosure of Pay Ranges and Record Keeping of Pay History, sponsored by Rep. 
Roeder.
In the past, I have lost jobs both expectedly and unexpectedly. So, too, has my 
partner; she is actually looking for her next job now after her current one concludes 
this summer. I can pretty much guarantee that anyone who ever has a job will be in a 
situation at some point where they are looking for another one, whether by choice or 
not. 
Unfortunately, a recent study^ found that while 98% (!) of jobseekers say it is 
important to know a job's salary before they apply, just 12% (!) of jobs posted in our 
country list the salary. What this means is that someone could spend literally hours of 
effort on a job application (inputting their resume, writing a cover letter, researching 
the employer, etc.) with no idea of what they would be offered in terms of salary. This
is a tremendous waste of time and energy for both potential employees (who might 
never apply for the job if it is too far out of their salary range) AND for the potential 
employer (who might offer an interview to, say, ten people but then have five of them
withdraw when they learn about the salary).
Fortunately, there is momentum behind the effort to change this. Colorado, 
Connecticut, California, Nevada, Rhode Island, and Maryland are some of the states 
that have enacted salary transparency policies. It would be great for Maine to join 
them.
I join groups like the Maine Association of Nonprofits, the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy, the Maine People's Alliance, and others in supporting this 
legislation. Jobseekers deserve transparency and realistic expectations when they are 
searching for their next position.
^ Citation: 
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20220727005446/en/Only-12-of-U.S.-Job
s-Posted-Online-Disclose-Salary-But-98-of-Job-Seekers-Say-It%E2%80%99s-Import
ant-to-Know-the-Salary-Before-Applying-According-to-New-Talent.com-Survey
