1 
 Written Testimony on 
L.D. 1295, “An Act Regarding Penalties for Maintain ing Drug-involved Premises” 
Presented by 
Deputy Chief Christopher M. Martin 
Brewer Police Department 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and  distinguished members of 
the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety : 
 
I am submitting testimony in support of the passage  of LD 1295,” An Act 
Regarding Penalties for Maintaining Drug-involved P remises”.   
This proposed bill addresses an emerging drug traff icking trend.  We are seeing 
traffickers affiliated with organized crime from ot her sources cities and states 
setting up trafficking operations in residences of local consumers.  They often sell 
drugs out of the premises for a few weeks and then move operations to another 
residence.  Clearly in these instances the resident s of the home are intimately 
aware of the trafficking activity either are active ly involved or getting paid in 
drugs.  The cycling of properties for trafficking o perations make it difficult for law 
enforcement to react.  It is often excessive calls for service, overdoses in the 
area, or concerned neighbors that alert us to this.   Once such a property 
becomes a trafficking location it will cycle back t hrough and repeat over and 
over again.  In the instances where there are exces sive complaints landlords 
become aware.  If the property owner or resident is  complicit in allowing such 
activity then there should be an accounting for it.  
We must recognize that illicit drug consumption is a money-making venture, one 
that organized crime is the profiteer.  The Mexican  Cartels control every major 
distribution hub in the United States with no other  criminal organization posed to 
challenge their dominance.  All of the fentanyl, me thamphetamine, and 
cocaine that we have here in our state came from th e distribution of the 
Mexican Cartels, which has an identified presence i n New England states.  From 
there it goes to other levels of organized crime, g angs, and is further distributed 
at the street level.   
2 
 We are seeing wholesale quantity seizures of fentan yl and methamphetamine 
by patrol officers in my area.  Pounds and kilogram s are readily available, this is 
a significant change from years past. 
Our demand is at an all time high, as illustrated b y record numbers of overdoses 
and overdose deaths.   
Supply sources, gangs, are now coming to my area to  distribute drugs to meet 
the demand.  A stark contrast from years past when our consumers travelled to 
Massachusetts to procure drugs for use and sale.  T hese gang members come 
from New York, Connecticut, and Massachusetts.  Gun  involvements and 
violence are becoming more common place.  The under lying reason is because 
its about money, making money.  Criminal organizati ons profit while our citizenry 
is at risk. 
I respectfully ask for your support on this bill to  give law enforcement a much-
needed tool to combat organized crime here in Maine . 
