J " ’:' 
\\ ' 
u' 
Q‘
5 
. g 
x 
J£
" \ H 5,‘ 
3 x V Penobscot County Sher1ff’s Office1 
9* ii 
85 Hammond St. Bangor, ME 04401 
f 
; 207-947-4585 
- » <»~_<.lf »n.\-. _- 
"5 "3".-"": ’lv-E~?. .' 1 
Troy J. Morton John Knappe i‘ 
Sheriff Chief Deputy 
April 7, 2023 
LD 1295 "An Act Regarding Penalties for Maintaining Drug-involved Premises" 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, 
My name is John Knappe; I am the Chief Deputy for the Penobscot County Sheriff’s 
Office. Before my appointment to this position, I was assigned to the Maine Drug 
Enforcement Agency North Central Task Force as a Special Agent. Sheriff Troy Morton 
and I support LD 1295, “An Act Regarding Penalties for Maintaining Drug-involved 
Premises. ” 
While there have been tremendous strides to address the severe drug epidemic witnessed 
across our state, we need to continue a multifaceted approach through enforcement, 
treatment, and prevention. A growing concern throughout many connnunities involves 
using properties as “drug-involved premises. ” 
This proposed statute aims to prevent the operation of houses or buildings where drugs 
such as fentanyl, heroin, crack cocaine, cocaine, methamphetamine, and other hard drugs 
are trafﬁcked, manufactured, or used. 
One residence in the Bangor region produced multiple overdose complaints, including 
two involving the individual ’s death. Additionally, two incidents involved the use of 
firearms. The ﬁrst incident involved two subjects shooting and inﬂicting injury on each 
other. The second incident involved the homicide of a young man. This residence was 
well known for supporting out-of-state drug trafﬁckers and organized crime circuits from 
New York and supported multiple drug trafﬁckers operating out of the residence for 
many years. This property was not closed down until law enforcement agencies 
conducted a search warrant and arrested multiple people, including the property owner. 
Another residence in northern Penobscot County supported drug traffickers from out of 
state and was responsible for multiple arrests, overdose calls, medical calls, and general 
nuisance —type calls. Neighbors dealt with constant traffic, disorderly situations, and 
constant fear within their properties. This property was not closed down until law 
enforcement agencies conducted a search warrant and arrested multiple people, including 
the property owner.
’: 
85 Hammond St. Bangor, ME 04401 IS 
~ 207-947-4585 
£1 Q,‘ \ Penobscot County Sher1ff’s Ofﬁce 
/ I v. 
QM‘ 
Troy J. Morton John Knappe \I 
Sheriff Chief Deputy 
One drug-involved residence in the City of Brewer was next to a school and was known 
for its association with out-of-state drug traffickers. This residence produced sixty-seven 
public safety responses (police or medical-type calls) between May 20, 2021, and 
October 05, 2022. This property was not closed down until law enforcement agencies 
conducted a search Warrant and arrested multiple people, including the property owner. 
Protecting communities and maintaining safe neighborhoods is an integral part of our 
approach to addressing the dangerous drug epidemic. Developing a state statute that 
aligns with our current federal law makes sense. I respectfully ask that you vote “ought to 
pass.” 
I appreciate your time, and I am happy to answer any questions you might have today or 
during the future workshop, 
Chief Deputy John Knappe
