 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1295  (Opposed)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1295, An Act Regarding Penalties for Maintaining Drug -involved Premises  
 
DA: April 10, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1295.    
 
 The conduct described in the bill falls within and could l ikely be prosecuted under existing 
statutes .   It is not apparent to CLAC what different or other conduct might be criminalized  under 
the proposal.  Depending on th e circumstances, a combin ation of t he current drug crimes and 
statutes addressing  accomplice liability , 17-A M.R.S. § 57; conspiracy , 17-A M.R.S. § 151;  or 
attempt , 17-A M.R.S. § 152,  can be used to hold offenders accounta ble.  Such an approach also 
makes the affirmative def enses outlined in 17-A M.R.S. § 154 available to defendan ts charged with 
attempt and consp iracy , and ties the classification of the crime to the underlying c onduct  (attempt 
and conspiracy  are generally one class less serious than the object of the attempt or conspiracy , 
unless the object is a Class E crime) .      
 
 Should the Committee choose to go forward with t his proposal, CLAC is available to assi st 
with technical drafting issues concerning  placement of the culpable mental state and use of 
potentially o verbr oad language.    
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
