PO BOX 7860 
Portland, ME 0411.2 
(207) 7745444 
wwwaclurnaine oag 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine »“
A 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
LD 1295 - Ought Not to Pass 
An Act Regarding Penalties for Maintaining Drug-involved Premises 
Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, 
greetings. My name is Michael Kebede, and I am policy counsel for the American 
Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing 
and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On_ 
behalf of our members, we urge the committee to reject LD 1295. 
Our criminal legal response to the decades-long substance use crisis has 
failed. We have tried to arrest and incarcerate our way out of our despair-driven 
drug overdose crisis. The results have been disastrous. Last year, over 700 people 
died in Maine as a result of drug overdoses. Our jails have become default 
depositories in lieu of sufficient mental health or substance-use-treatment.1 A high 
proportion of the people incarcerated in Maine’s jails currently receive psychotropic 
medications. This cannot continue. 
Passing thislbill would worsen this crisis. The criminal legal system cannot' 
solve our serious problem of substance use disorders. The way to solve that problem 
is to strengthen our healthcare, housing, and educational systems. We often stand 
before this committee and object to the creation of new crimes because creating 
felonies does not stop abhorrent behavior or address its underlying root causes. This 
bill is no different. 
' 
See Justice Reinvestment in Maine, Justice Center: Council of State Govemments, at 3, Dec. 2019, available at 
https:/kzsgjusticecenter.0rg/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/JR-in-Maine-Oven/iew.pdf
Creating a Class D crime will not keep people with substance use disorders 
safe. Moreover, the conduct this statute attempts to address can be prosecuted 
under existing law. Should a person knowingly allow their residence or other 
premises to manufacture, store, or distribute scheduled drugs, they could be 
prosecuted as an accomplice to unlawful trafficking. See 17-A MRS § 57 (accomplice 
liability), § 1103 (unlawful trafficking). This bill would duplicate existing law. 
We urge you to vote ought not to pass,
