Dv_ ~ P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2o7_43O_3334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
ln SUPPORT of LD 1865: "An Act Establishing the ME Sentencing Guidelines Commission ” 
Monday, May 8, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 1 am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)‘ to offer our perspective on LD 1865, “An Act Establishing the Maine 
Sentencing Guidelines Commission. ” 
We appreciate Speaker Talbot Ross’ continued commitment to having purposeful 
conversations about how our criminal justice system could be more just, structured to avoid 
bias, and a more reliable tool for enhancing public safety. If the legislature determines that it 
is appropriate for Maine to have sentencing guidelines, we support the approach that LD 
1865 suggests in convening a group of interested parties who hold a broad range of 
perspectives and expertise. In our experience, the best public policy proposals are put 
forward when there has been ample opportunity to hear, consider and hopefully address a 
variety of viewpoints to reach the right balance of interests and objectives in the end. 
MCEDV also supports that the proposal recognizes the interests that crime victims 
have in sentencing policy and suggests appointment of a crime victim to the Commission. 
We would note that, in our experience, it is a burdensome request to expect one crime 
victim to represent the broad range of victim perspectives. Pick any place on the spectrum 
of opinion regarding appropriate criminal justice policy and you will find crime victims there. 
lt’s also difficult to expect the average crime victim to feel comfortable engaging with what 
is likely to be a room full of lawyers and those with highly technical expertise. To that end, 
we would ask the committee to consider additionally naming a domestic violence victim 
services representative to the commission. 
Lastly, the bill proposes a definition of Restorative Justice that we would ask you to 
reconsider. Our statutes should not suggest that “reconciliation ” between the person who 
caused harm and their victim is a public policy goal. We note that, in Title 34, Section 1001, 
Restorative Justice is defined as, “a practice in which offenders take responsibility for 
causing harm and engage in a facilitated process with victims, family members, community 
1 
MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to approximately 14,000 victims of 
domestic violence in Maine last year. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of2 
members, advocates, and others impacted by the harm that focuses on repairing the harm, 
addressing needs and preventing future harm.” Title 15, Section 3204 also incorporates this 
language to define “restorative justice program. ” This definition, already existing in Maine 
law. MCEDV would encourage policy makers to use consistent definitions throughout our 
statutes, unless there is a compelling public policy reason for deviation. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective. 
Contact information: 
Andrea Mancuso, 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Phr (107) 430-8334 
Email: andrea@mcedv.org
