_ STATE OF MAINE 
___, 
, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
SPEAKER'S OFFICE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
1." (207) 287'-1300 
RACHEL TALBOT ROSS 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
Monday, May 8th, 2023 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting 
LD 1865, An Act Establishing the Maine 
Sentencing Guidelines Commission 
Before the Joint Select Committee on the Judicialfy 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, I am Rachel Talbot Ross. I represent House 
District 118 which is the Portland peninsula. I also have the distinct honor of 
serving as the Maine Speaker of the House. I am here today to present LD 1865, 
An Act Establishing the Maine Sentencing Guidelines Commission. 
This bill establishes the Maine Sentencing Guidelines Commission to 
develop, adopt and modify sentencing guidelines for murder and Class A, B andC 
crimes. The commission would be housed in the Judicial Department. The 
purposes of the commission is to maintain uniformity, proportionality, rationality, 
and predictability in sentencing similarly situated persons for similar crimes. By 
making sentences more predictable and rational we better insure that persons who 
have committed similar offenses and have similar criminal histories are not treated 
differently because of actual or implicit biases. This will further enhance Mainers’ 
conﬁdence that justice is truly blind and that all persons who come before Maine 
courts after a criminal conviction are treated equally and fairly. That Mainers’ 
receive sentences based on what they have done rather than personal characteristics 
that they possess such as race, gender, ethnicity, national origin, sexual orientation, 
socio-economic status, or educational level to name but a few. 
The commission will be comprised of people with diverse professional 
backgrounds and lived experiences. The commission will have l9 members 
including the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court or the Chief Justice's 
designee and other members of the judiciary, the Commissioner of Corrections or 
the commissioner's designee, the Commissioner of Public Safety or the 
commissioner's designee, prosecuting and defense attorneys, a probation and 
parole ofﬁcer, 3 members of the public, one of whom is a victim of a Class A, B or 
District 118: Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Bayside, East Bayside, Oakdale and 
the University of Southern Maine Campus
C crime, experts in mental health issues and substance use disorder, formerly 
incarcerated persons, and representatives of statewide organizations focusing on 
legal aid, restorative justice and civil rights. Signiﬁcantly, when an appointing 
authority selects an individual for membership on the commission, the appointing 
authority shall make reasonable efforts to appoint members that reﬂect the 
diversity of the State’s racial and gender demographics and seek out qualiﬁed 
members of protected classes as deﬁned in the Maine Human Rights Act. 
All sentencing guidelines developed by the commission will be advisory. 
Importantly, guidelines that are developed do not create a right for the defendant. 
The sentencing guidelines are procedural and reflect state public policy to maintain 
uniformity, proportionality, rationality, and predictability in sentencing similarly 
situated persons for similar crimes. When developing or subsequently modifying 
sentencing guidelines, the commission ’s primary considerations are public safety 
and equal application of sentences under the law. All sentencing guidelines 
adopted by the commission must establish: 
1) The circumstances under which imprisonment of an offender is proper; 
and 
2) Appropriate sanctions for offenders for whom imprisonment is not 
proper, making speciﬁc reference to noninstitutional sanctions, including 
payment of ﬁnes, restitution, community service, work release programs, 
community based residential and nonresidential programs, incarceration ina 
local correctional facility, and probation. 
The commission will be staffed by a research director and serve asa 
clearinghouse and information center for the collection, preparation, analysis, and 
dissemination of information on state and local sentencing practices, and conduct 
ongoing research regarding sentencing guidelines, use of imprisomnent, and 
alternatives to imprisonment, plea bargaining and other matters relating to the 
improvement of the criminal justice system. After its initial implementation of 
sentencing guidelines, the commission shall study, at least every two years, the 
impact of the sentencing guidelines and review the powers and duties of the 
Commissioner of Corrections. The commission will be authorized to accept funds 
and grants from the federal govermnent and other funding sources but is prohibited 
from receiving loans or taking on debt except as otherwise provided by law. 
The commission will be authorized to meet as necessary but must meet at 
least two times per year for the purpose of modifying and improving the sentencing
guidelines. If the commission seeks to develop sentencing guidelines regarding 
severity levels and offender characteristics or that results in the reduction of any 
sentence or in the early release of any inmate, those proposed guidelines must be 
submitted to the Legislature by January 15th of the year in which the commission 
wishes to make the change. Additionally, the commission must submit an annual 
Written report by January 15th to the joint standing committee of the Legislature 
having jurisdiction over judicial matters that identiﬁes and explains all 
modiﬁcations made during the preceding year and all proposed modiﬁcations that 
are being submitted to the Legislature that year. Lastly, the commission must 
submit sentencing guidelines developed pursuant to this section to the joint 
standing committee having jurisdiction over judicial matters by November 6, 2024. 
By enacting LD 1865, Maine will be following steps taken by 20 other states 
and the District of Columbia. Those states and the District of Columbia have 
established some form of commissions or other entities to study sentencing 
practices and propose sentencing guidelines. According to the Robina Institute of 
Criminal Law and Criminal Justice at the University of Mimiesota, jurisdictions 
across the United States have taken varied approaches to develop systems that 
insure appropriate sentences in criminal cases. Some jurisdictions have sentencing 
commissions to help guide policy decisions. Some of those jurisdictions have 
created sentencing guidelines, which are standards put in place to establish rational 
and consistent sentencing practices with the goal of more uniformity and 
proportionality in sentencing ‘ . Those are the stated goals of the proposed 
legislation before you today. 
As the Urban Institute reported in January of this year2 , disparities in 
sentencing in the criminal legal system, particularly racial disparities, havea 
profound and far-reaching impact on individuals, families, and communities. LD 
1865 will study and address all disparities and inconsistencies in sentencing in 
Maine and create a set of guidelines that advances equal treatment under the law 
for all. By creating guidelines that promote rational and consistent sentencing 
practices thus producing more uniformity and proportionality, we can reduce those 
far-reaching negative impacts on all individuals, families, and communities while 
at the same time protecting public safety. Consistent examination and thoughtful 
‘ “Sentencing Guidelines Resource Center: In-Depth Jurisdiction Profiles ” , University of Minnesota Robina Institute 
of Criminal Law and Criminal Justice. https://robinainstitute.un1n.edu/publications/sentencing-guidelines-resource- 
center-depth-jurisdiction-pro ﬁles 
2 “Looking Beyond the Sentence ” , Urban Institute. Mari McGilton & Sabrina Rizk, January 12, 2023. 
https://www.urban.org/research/publication/looking-beyond-sentence
approaches like those contained in this bill are needed to combat sentencing 
disparities for all people. 
I thank you very much for your time and attention this afternoon and ask you 
to please act favorably on this proposed legislation. I am happy to answer any 
questions that you might have.
