Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and distinguished 
members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Bob 
Foley and I was honored to have served on this committee back in the 129*“ 
Legislature. It's nice to see many familiar faces and new ones as well. I want to 
thank Representative Gramlich for sponsoring this bill on an issue near and dear 
to her community and mine as well. 
l'm here today to speak in support of LD 478, An Act to Improve Coastal Sand 
Dune Restoration Projects. 
For the past 30 years l have been concerned about the state of l\/laine's sandy 
beach systems. With erosion rates increasing along our coastline due to 
manmade structures like seawalls and jetties, as well as rising sea levels, l started 
raising the red flag about these concerns that led to me forming an organization 
called Save Our Shores-Maine. The organization is made up of many coastal 
property owners and businesses from the communities of York to Pine Point is 
Scarborough. A spin off group was formed in Saco dealing with the Camp Ellis 
erosion problems. 
In 2004 l was asked by then Chair of this committee, the Honorable John Martin, 
to serve on a task force to look into protecting l\/laine ’s beaches into the future. 
We issued our report in 2006 with many recommendations and actions plans to 
stem the erosion rates along our most vulnerable beach systems. Unfortunately, 
none of those action plans were undertaken. 
ln 2016 l was again asked to serve on the same task force to revisit our 
recommendations. A summary was issued in January of 2017 with similar 
recommendations as was first put forward. And still nothing has happened to 
slow the destruction of our sandy coastline. Both of these reports are available 
through the DEP's website. With sea level rising, more severe winter storms, our 
time is almost up. 
The bill before you seeks to allow the utilization of newer technologies that have 
been implemented in many other states with coastal erosion issues. l saw these 
new technologies at the Maine Beaches conference hosted by the Wells Reserve 
and l\/laine Sea Grant Program last June and was fascinated by their potential for 
rebuilding and restoring our dune systems.
The biodegradable technology will allow for the placement of sand onto a dune 
system and help stabilize it while native vegetation can be planted and allowed to 
establish itself to eventually provide natural protection. Over time the matting 
material degrades as the vegetation takes hold. Unfortunately, this methodology 
is prohibited under our current sand dune rules as this methodology is considered 
a permanent structure. 
One of the recommendations put forward in both reports for protecting Maine 
beaches is beach and dune nourishment. But you cannot simply place sand on the 
dune, plant dune grass, and other vegetation, without protecting it from further 
erosion until the plants can take root. This new technology will help do that. 
The first several pictures in my hand out shows what is currently being allowed to 
be placed along the toe of the seawalls protecting the homes behind. For some 
reason these are not considered permanent structures and are allowed to remain, 
as well as maintained, as you can see in one of the pictures with more rocks on 
the beach being readied to reinforce the current rock formations. 
The unfortunate consequence of allowing these rocks to permanently remain is 
the energy and force that they create during ocean storms that dig away likea 
bulldozer at the adjacent sand dunes which is shown in several of the following 
photos I've also included. Since these rocks have been in place for the past 15 
years, we have lost 100 feet of the adjacent dune, which is owned by the Town of 
Wells and managed by the Wells Reserve. In one of the pictures, you can see the 
end of the Reserve's boardwalk that has also been lessened by the erosion. There 
are several homes behind the dunes, that don't have hardened seawalls, that 
have lost their valuable protection from a healthy dune system. 
If we can allow these hard rock structures to sit along the seawalls, then why can't 
we utilize a less evasive technology to save our dunes that were once home to 
many piping plovers and least terns. The dune pictures you are seeing are in my 
home town of Wells, and home town of Representative Hobbs, it protects the 
water and sewer lines that run from the Wells Reserve, through Drakes lsland and 
over to Wells Beach. Protecting it from erosion is a priority of the town's 
resiliency and sustainability strategies for our coastline. This new technology can 
play a major roll in assisting in creating a more resilient coastline for many l\/laine 
towns.
If we can utilize this new technology, I would suggest that those rock structures 
you've seen could and should be replaced by a dune system, which would be far 
more beneficial to the beach environment. 
I've included several photos of this new technology being used in other parts of 
the country. As you can see there is potential to rebuild our dunes if we are 
allowed to try. 
One may ask why is protecting Maine's beaches so important? As was identified 
in the 2017 updated report l\/|aine ’s beaches brings in over $1.6 billion in tourist 
related dollars and creates over 24,000 jobs. That was in 2017, I suspect today it's 
even greater. 
As in the past I am ready and willing to work with the Department, this committee 
and other organizations to implement a strategy to preserve and protect our 
dune systems that are in peril. Wells, Camp Ellis and other vulnerable areas can 
no longer wait 
I'm happy to answer any questions but there are folks here who can better speak 
to the technology and its application better than l can. 
Thank you
