March 8, 2023 I am David Plavin, a coastal Maine resident of Saco and Vice President of SOS Saco Bay. I am here to emphatically support LD 478.Our coastal plain is under a vicious attack from rising sea levels, warmer oceans and stronger, more frequent storms. This bill advocates for an environmentally friendly solution, living shorelines, a proven commodity that we need to be able to utilize without having to undergo lengthy approval process. The urgency of arming for the battle to save our coastline is not one that can wait or be tied up in process.In the climate action plan, “Maine Won’t Wait,” this approach is advocated. “Nature-based solutions and green infrastructure should be prioritized where appropriate. Nature-based solutions provide effective and lower-cost protection for climate-change-related challenges while restoring coastal and marine habitats. For example … “living shorelines” are projects constructed with plants, oyster shells, and other natural materials to protect against coastal erosion.”In the soon-to-be released State DEP Document, “Improving Climate Resilient Infrastructure Services: Research Investigation 2022-2023,” its recommendations included:1) Resilient infrastructure approved and implemented in a standardized way across the state. 2) Create a streamlined permitting structure for nature-based solutions. And it concluded, ”Better alternatives to build resilient infrastructure that can provide cost-effective solutions with additional co-beneﬁts for environmental and public health are available. Increasing communication, coordination, and establishing a ﬁnancial and regulatory construct that promotes these designs can create the enabling conditions for sustainable, resilient infrastructure investments as we transition to the future climate.” While much environmental policy is built on reduction and habit change, the coastal problem requires immediate and reactive response. The passage of his bill puts the state on a path to utilize living shorelines to its fullest potential and to avoid real catastrophe.Thank youDavid Plavin2 Surf St.Saco, Mainedavid.plavin@gmail.com
