MAINEQ 
AUDUBON Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
% Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
March 8, 2023 
RE: LD 478, An Act to Improve Coastal Sand Dune Restoration Projects 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony neither for nor against LD 478, An 
Act to Improve Coastal Sand Dune Restoration Projects, on behalf of Maine Audubon and our 
30,000 members and supporters. 
Maine Audubon comes to this legislation and the issue that it seeks to address with great 
interest and attention. Maine’s coastal sand dunes are under threat. The Gulf of Maine is 
warming faster than 99 percent of the world’s oceans. Among the effects of warming oceans is 
rising sea levels. Sea levels along Maine’s coast have risen approximately 0.1 inches a year in the 
last few decades. As Maine’s sea level rises, coastal communities and ecosystems are seeing 
increased frequency of nuisance ﬂooding, inundation of coastal lowlands with saltwater, erosion, 
and loss of dry beaches, saltmarshes, sand dunes, and other habitats. 
Sand dunes, along with dry beaches and salt marshes, provide invaluable ecosystem 
services and economic beneﬁts. Coastal sand dunes protect buildings and infrastructure from 
waves and ﬂooding. Closest to Maine Audubon’s mission, sand dunes contain critical wildlife 
habitat. Endangered Least Terns and Piping Plovers rely on sandy beaches and sand dunes on 
Maine’s coast to nest and rear their young. Sand dune erosion is devastating to these vulnerable 
birds. 
Against that backdrop, Maine Audubon is supportive of this legislation ’s intent: Maine 
must pursue strategies to protect against dune erosion. Planting native dune vegetation isa 
leading strategy for fortifying sand dunes. This bill would allow the Department of 
Environmental Protection (DEP), under the Natural Resources Protection Act (N RPA), to 
authorize the use of “blankets ” and other structures made from certain biodegradable materials to 
stabilize dunes vegetation through permit by rule. NRPA is an environmental permitting law 
designed to protect certain natural resources from development-related activities. A “permit by 
20 GilslandFa1'rn Road, Falrnouth, Maine 04105 (207) ”781—233o m2ineaudubon.org
rule” is a streamlined mechanism for granting permits, so long as the proposed activity meets 
certain established standards. 
With our strong commitment to protecting sand dunes from erosion in mind, Maine 
Audubon staff reached out to our partners in shorebird conservation and named the following 
concerns: 
0 That endangered Piping Plovers could become entangled in the stabilization blankets and 
other named materials; the materials could displace important nesting habitat; and that the 
materials could create a barrier to predator evasion, all of which could lead to bird 
mortality. 
O The amount of time it would take for the materials to biodegrade or decompose, which 
could exacerbate the aforementioned concerns. 
0 Potential negative impacts from the decomposition of allowed, man-made materials. The 
bill speciﬁcally names “polylactic acid polymers ” and “other similar materials ”. 
0 That the stabilization efforts would unduly prevent sand dunes from shifting and moving, 
which is elemental to dunes’ ability to serve their ecological functions. 
Maine Audubon sees a great deal of merit in the use of these stabilization techniques to 
fortify sand dunes. However, for our organization to reﬁne our position on this bill, we’d like to 
ﬁrst understand Whether NRPA and the DEP’s Chapter 355 “Coastal Sand Dune Rules” allow for 
the use of these “blankets ” and other materials. It is our understanding, based on conversations 
with bill stakeholders, that there is a concem or perception that the stabilization techniques are 
currently not allowed under a standard NRPA permit. If that is indeed the case, then we do not 
believe that a NRPA permit by rule - a streamlined permitting mechanism that is used for known 
land uses using exacting, established standards - is the appropriate mechanism to change and in 
turn allow for that use. Changes to NRPA and/or the “Coastal Sand Dune Rules” may be a better 
avenue to address this issue, because of our conﬁdence in the 1aw’s and rules’ ability to address 
the potential unintended consequences in the use of these important materials. 
Maine Audubon is ready to continue the conversation with bill stakeholders on how to 
address our mutually held commitment to making Maine’s coastline more resilient. Thank you 
for your consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Eliza Donoghue, Esq. 
Director of Advocacy 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falnrotrth, Maine 04mg ~ 
(397) 78142330 rnaineauduhonorg
