Good morning Senator Brenner and Representative Gramlich and distinguished members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Lisa Vickers and I am here today in 
support of LD 478, An Act to Improve Coastal Sand Dune Restoration Projects. I believe this bill 
strikes a balance that allows for an effective means to stabilize coastal dune shorelines while 
minimizing impacts to the dune system. 
Currently, I am a senior project manager with Atlantic Environmental. We are a Maine based 
consulting firm with over 40 years of collective experience. We provide a range of services that 
includes project design, permitting, and compliance. Prior to my time with Atlantic, i served for 
nearly eight years at the Maine Department of Environmental Protection as a project manager 
within the Bureau of Land Resources and I reviewed applications under the Natural Resources 
Protection Act, including the Coastal Sand Dune Rules. 
While my firm works throughout the State of Maine, a large focus area is along the coast. We 
are seeing an alarming increase in erosion along our shorelines given the intensity and 
frequency of larger storm events. While there are different approaches for stabilization 
depending on the location and exposure of the site, property owners that are located withina 
mapped coastal sand dune system and that do not have existing seawalls or the like have 
virtually no means to protect against erosion along their shoreline. We recently had a situation 
in Phippsburg in which two adjacent landowners had septic systems in front of their residences 
and they had lost approximately twenty feet of the shorefront. Not only were their houses in 
jeopardy but also their septic systems and the consequences of a septic system washing into 
our waterbodies is not an outcome anyone wants to see happen. They were allowed to placea 
temporary structure in front of their property but this only acted as a band-aid and did not 
provide for a longer term solution. 
Historically, the most common means of stabilization is to place riprap along the bank. While 
this is still effective in specific applications, a coastal sand dune requires a different approach 
given the dynamic nature of these systems. Stabilization techniques have evolved over time; 
however, the DEP rules have not evolved with the latest technologies. 
The rules define a seawall as, “vertical wall, or other sloped barrier that separates land from 
water areas, commonly constructed out of rocks, wood, concrete or other similar materials, 
generally built for the purpose of protecting structures or property from shoreline erosion 
caused by wave or current action. A seawall is presumed to be a permanent structure. ” Given 
this definition, soft engineering techniques have been considered a seawall which are 
prohibited in a coastal sand dune. 
The options currently allowed under the existing rules provide for cobble-trapping fences in 
front of existing seawalls or the ability to repair or replace an existing wall in the same location 
and with the same dimensions. While this is good news for those with existing structures, there 
needs to be alternative options for those without. This bill will allow for the use of natural or 
biodegradable methods to establish a starting point for stabilizing and re-establishing a
vegetated dune. The key to restoring those areas is the ability to hold sand at the base ofa 
slope. Once this is achieved, materials can be stacked to the appropriate height and slope. The 
shoreline can be backfilled with sand and planted with native dune grass or other native 
vegetation depending on the site. This approach has been successful in other states, 
particularly Massachusetts and l hope to see this bill move forward in order for landowners to 
take a more proactive approach to protecting and restoring coastal sand dune systems. 
Thank you for your time. I am happy to answer any questions.
