Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and distinguished members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Seth Wilkinson. I am a Certified 
Ecological Restoration Practitioner specializing in restoring coastal areas. I founded Wilkinson 
Ecological Design in 1999. We work exclusively on ecological restoration projects. l have 
worked extensively with coconut fiber rolls," also known as coir fiber rolls, and my company has 
installed many miles of coir fiber rolls in the last couple of decades. The Company is 
incorporated in Massachusetts, where the majority of our work has been implemented, though 
we have occasionally ventured into Maine and l am aspiring to move to this great state. We 
presently hold three US Patents regarding coir fiber roll construction methodologies and I am 
the inventor of these methodologies. While our patents cover certain specificconstruction 
methodologies, the general use of fiber rolls to stabilize coastal landforms is in the public 
domain and not exclusively governed by the referenced patents. 
I have served on a Technical Advisory Committee for Massachusetts Coastal Zone Management 
to "develop a guidance document for coir fiber rolls in coastal environments, which is attached 
to my hand out. l have also served on an advisory group to the Massachusetts Department of 
Environmental Protection which is working to develop regulations to better protect the coastal 
flood plain in Massachusetts. l hope my knowledge as an ecological restoration practitioner 
who specializes in the use of fiber rolls as well as my experience in developing coastal 
regulations and guidance documents can be of assistance to this committee. 
l'm here today to speak in support of LD 478, An Act to improve Coastal Sand Dune Restoration 
Projects. Coir fiber rolls are a critical bioengineerlng material which can be used asa 
reinforced, biodegradable rooting medium to help preserve and enhance sand dune vegetation. 
The role that fiber rolls play in anchoring the roots of American beach grass and associated 
dune vegetation has become increasingly important to help coastal landforms resist erosion in 
the face of the increased intensity and frequency of coastal storms. 
Throughout much of the 20“ century and culminating in the 1970's and 1980's the simple act of 
planting American beach grass into sand dunes was a generally accepted method of managing 
coastal erosion and was considered to be effective in many sandy locations. The cyclic nature 
of coastal storms were such that sufficient time would pass between storms so that beach grass 
plantings could establish an extensive root system in the calm period between storm events. 
ln the 1990's, the intensity and frequency of coastal storms began to noticeably increase and 
the effectiveness of beach grass planting alone began to decrease proportionally. This planting 
method which had worked for for decades was rapidly become less effective at protecting 
coastal landforms. The coastal wetlands regulatory structure in Massachusetts happened to 
support the use of coir fiber rolls in the 1990's, when they first started being used in 
Massachusetts- , and has evolved to generally be a favored method of naturally protecting 
coastal banks and dunes by the regulatory agencies in Massachusetts, as noted in the attached 
Massachusetts Coastal Zone Management Storm Smart Coasts guidelines, which are attached.
I believe that the reason coir fiber rolls have become a preferred method for stabilizing coastal 
landforms is that unlike conventional sea walls, bulkheads and revetments —which reflect wave 
energy, coir fiber rolls absorb and dissipate wave energy, while still protecting the coastal 
landform. When a soft structure absorbs wave energy, then that energy is not reflected to 
adjacent coastal resources, such as beaches, dunes and salt marshes. Reflected wave energy 
tends to be particularly problematic because it occurs primarily during storms, so erosion is 
intensified in areas adjacent to hard armored shorelines which are subjected not only to the 
normal wave energy, but also the additional reflected wave energy from the adjacent hard 
structures during these storm events. - 
Coir ﬁber rolls also preserve the aesthetics of sand dunes and adjacent areas. Because they are 
made of biodegradable materials, are intensely planted and typically covered with sand, these 
fiber roll arrays preserve the aesthetic beauty of a natural sand dune. 
Fiber roll arrays can support wildlife habitat. When coastal storms erode and diminish coastal 
sand dunes, the associated habitat is diminished as well. Wilkinson Ecological Design has 
installed many fiber rolls immediately adjacent to and nearby active nest sites for federally- 
endangered shorebirds with the approval and support of the agencies charged with rare species 
protection. Because these designs mimic nature and exist to protect the coastal landform (as 
well as the property landward), they are extremely friendly to wildlife and help preserve critical 
wildlife habitat. 
I would note that there have been at least three high-energy coastal storms with predominant 
winds from the southeast just this winter alone. Winter storms from the southeast are atypical 
from a historical perspective. When you combine these with the more typical Nor'easter 
storms, it demonstrates the increased forces of erosion which the Maine coast is experiencing. 
The sand dunes at Popham Beach in Phippsburg, Willard Beach in South Portland and Wells 
Beach are just a few examples of great public resources which have suffered substantial erosion 
this winter. I have no doubt that had fiber rolls been allowed as a method to protect these 
sand dunes, the damage could have been avoided or substantially limited. 
I have seen many times before in numerous states where welI~meaning regulations 
inadvertently limit innovative nature-based solutions for managing erosion or other beneficial 
activities and I believe that may have been what occurred with the blanket prohibition of 
permanent structures (lasting more than 6-months) in sand dunes. I am very happy that 
conventional structures such as sea walls, bulkheads and rock revetments are prohibited in 
sand dunes. Coir fiber rolls used to support native dune vegetation couldn't be more different 
from traditional hard armoring and I can't imagine the intention was to explicitly prohibit a tool 
such as a ﬁber rolls, which can effectively protect a sand dune. I commend Representative 
Gramlich for sponsoring this bill and urge this subcommittee to support its advancement. 
Thank you.- 
Respectfully submitted by Seth Wilkinson, Certified Ecological Restoration Practitioner #147.
