p HoUsE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
1;,- 
p1
. 
,‘ 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
,0-if AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
Q0“ (207) 287-1400 
Hony Stove, TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
71 Dover Rd. 
Boothbay, ME 04537 
Phone: (207) 633-5979 
HolIv.Stover@legislature.maine.gov 
April 1s, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Holly B. Stover in support of 
LD 1334, An Act to Establish a Managed Care Program for MaineCare 
Services. 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee. I am Representative Holly Stover, and I represent 
House District 48, including the towns of Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, Southport, 
South Bristol and Westport Island. I am here today to testify in support of LD 1334, An Act to 
Establish a Managed Care Program for MaineCare Services, of which I am a proud cosponsor. 
LD 1334 proposes an incremental approach to expand managed care in MaineCare and provide 
much-needed social services to help keep people well. 
Managed care is deﬁned as a group of activities or techniques intended to control costs, 
utilization, and maintain quality of care through health insurance plans. When done right, 
managed care improves healthcare outcomes, promotes patient satisfaction, and establishes 
improved access to care and social services. At the same time, adopting managed care helps 
ensure budget predictability through shared risk and accountability. 
According to a report published in the National Library of Medicine, today, 38 states have 
adopted a form of managed care. Among state wide Medicaid programs, 77% of Medicaid 
patients were enrolled in some form of managed care, and results have shown better quality 
outcomes in preventive services, maternity care, and patient experiences when compared to 
Medicaid programs without managed care plans. The effect of managed care penetration on 
overall hospital costs turned out to be cost-effective, as per previous studies. For instance, in 
Califomia, with 40% of managed care penetration in market share, there was an evident 25% 
slower growth rate in hospital costs.‘ 
Our proposal today phases in managed care, starting with the Temporary Aid to Needy Families 
and (TANF) Children ’s Health Insurance Plan (CHIP) populations. Most of this population 
would greatly beneﬁt from better care coordination. My guess is that most of you have thought 
1 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK556053/ 
District 48: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, South Bristol, Southport and Westport Island
carefully about how social spending at the right time can improve the long-tenn health ofa 
population. So what does a young single mother need? Certainly, health care. But they also need 
access to childcare and reliable transportation to work or school, not to mention the grocery 
store. They need access to education to develop meaningful skills, and they need help with 
housing while they develop those workforce skills. 
This legislation will provide ﬂexibility to the Department to expand access to some of these 
social services so that each individual will have the opportunity for a hand-up to help them 
establish economic independence and healthier outcomes. 
Clearly, this is not a panacea for every social problem. But the problem here isn’t that we aren’t 
spending enough money; it is that often we are not usually spending it on the right things. I 
believe this legislation will help young families and children live healthier and more productive 
lives. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions. 
District 48: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, South Bristol, Southport and Westport Island
