1 
  
 
TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION  
 
In Opposition to 
 
LD 1334 -  An Act to Establish a Managed Care Program for MaineCare Services  
 
April 18, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health and Human Services Committee, 
my name is Jeffrey Austin and I am presenting testimony against  LD 1334 on behalf of the Maine 
Hospital Association.  
 
Below is the testimony we presented in 2013  and again in 2021.  We don’t believe anything has 
changed sufficient to alter our testimony.  
 We understand quite well the motivation for this legislation.  The Medicaid program presents innumerable challenges, not the least of which is sufficient state -level funding. 
 Our members support ma naging the care of Medicaid recipients.  From smoking rates to emergency 
room usage, Medicaid recipients engage in costly  health behaviors and health care consumption in 
rates that exceed the commercially insured, and often, even the uninsured.  
 The question before you is whether a third- party, such as a Managed Care Organization, could manage 
Maine’s Medicaid recipients under Maine’s Medicaid rules better than can DHHS and local providers.  
 The answer is unknown.  Lots of individuals and groups have answers to the question, but, our members have come to the conclusion that we really don’t know. 
 
Our member’s position is supported by research by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF).  In a September, 2012 report entitled “ Medicaid managed care:  Costs, access and quality of care ” 
RWJF explored whether states have saved money, and whether Medica id recipients in managed care 
have suffered either reduced access or quality.  
 “We should note at the outset, however, that while the questions are straightforward, 
the academic literature that seeks to provide answers is rather thin.”  
 
Here are the three questions and the three summary answers from the RWJF report:  

2 
 1. Have states saved money by implementing Medicaid managed care ? 
“Peer -reviewed literature finds little savings from Medicaid managed care on the national level, but 
some states have been more successful than others .” 
  
There are many limitations to this conclusion.  First, there are few studies really out there.  Also, 
much of the data in the research is from the 90s -  a different era of health care.  
 RWJF notes that a Lewin meta- study of other st udies (mostly industry- funded, but not to be ignored) 
finds savings related to reduced hospital inpatient utilization.  An important note is that most of that savings occurs with a single Medicaid population (the SSI population).  Maine data may be consist ent 
with this finding:  “ Among the top 5% of high- cost enrollees, the primary eligibility category was SSI 
recipients ages 18 to 44 with developmental disabilities .” (See Medicaid Redesign Task Force (2012) 
report).  
 
2. Do Medicaid managed care beneficiaries have better access to care?  
“Medicaid managed care can and sometimes does provide beneficiaries with improved access, but 
the scope and extent of such improvements generally are state specific and variable .” 
 
3. Do Medicaid managed care beneficiaries receive higher- quality care?  
“There is scant literature that carefully examines the effectiveness of disease and care management 
programs administered by Medicaid health plans (including state -administered PCCM programs) .” 
 
Here are some suggestions for you as you consider this issue.  
The bill should expressly prohibit rate cuts .  The promise of managed care is that a third- party can 
manage the medical needs of Medicaid recipients better than the state.  Accepting that as true, MCOs shoul d not have any ability to cut provider rates.  Cutting provider rates saves money, but, as you are 
well aware in this year’s budget, states  know how to cut provider rates too. 
Furthermore, RWJF found:  
“The successful states appear to be those with relativ ely high provider reimbursement 
rates in their fee -for-service program.  The cost savings are due primarily to 
reductions in provider reimbursement rates rather than managed care techniques, 
through reductions in emergency room utilization and inpatient hospital care 
contribute.”  
 
Obviously, if MCOs can reduce ER use or hospitalizations, they should share in the savings.  But,  
cutting provider rates is not “managing care” and should be expressly prohibited in Maine. 
 
The MCOs should focus on high- cost populations .  This is essentially the recommendation of 
Maine’s Medicaid Redesign Task Force (2012).  
 
We’ve all heard that 20% o f Medicaid population drives 80% of the cost.  But we should not lose 
sight of the converse:  80% of the Medicaid population consumes only 20% of the budget.  According 
to DHHS materials you’ve all seen, the average annual cost of the bottom 80% is $937.  This is less 
3 
 than $80 per month.  It makes no sense to us to put the 200,000 Mainers in Medicaid who are quite 
low cost into a new MCO world.  Nor does it makes sense to spend resources managing their care – 
what do we hope to save?   
 
On the other hand, M aine should seriously consider what an MCO might have to offer with respect 
to high costs populations.  As mentioned above, the SSI population is the most expensive.  
Furthermore, “ The largest spend by provider type for this top 5% was for waiver services....Maine’s 
spending on developmental disability waiver services is above the 90th percentile of nationwide 
spending”  (Medicaid Redesign Task Force (2012)).  
 
To be clear, it is not fair to give an MCO a high- cost population in a pure “capitated” system.  T hat 
is, you can’t give the MCO the most expensive 5% but only 5% of the Medicaid budget.  An MCO 
should be given resources consistent with the spending on the population they manage.  
 
Finally, hospitals have generally supported home -grown managed care opportunities.  That is, 
investing in local resources rather than in the resources of out -of-state, private, for -profit MCOs.  The 
recently awarded SIM grant needs to be better understood. 
 
Local efforts, such as those by hospitals and health systems have demonstrated success with locally -
managed care.  We should not duplicate efforts and waste precious resources on care management and care coordination if those services are available locally; in fact, to the extent the state has funding for those services it s hould be offered to local providers now.  
  
Thank you.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
THEMHA. ORG | (207) 622 -4794 | 33 FULLER ROAD | AUGUSTA, ME 04330  
