 
1 
 
 
Testimony of John Stephen , Founder and Managing Director of The Stephen Group , a business and 
government consulting agency.  Former Commissioner, New Hampshire Department of Health and 
Human Services.  
To Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 131st Maine Legislature, First Regular 
Session  
In Favor of LD 1334 –An Act to Establish a Managed Care Program for Maineca re Services  
Delivered virtually  on April 18, 2023  
Honorable Senate Chair Joe Baldacci and Honorable House Chair Michelle Meyer and all other 
Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services Committee,  
My name is John Stephen,  Founder and Managing Director of The Stephen Group , a business and 
government consulting agency. I served as the Commissioner, New Hampshire Department of Health 
and Human Services  from 2003 - 2007 .  My firm has provided consulting services since 2013 for many 
state  agencies, including Maine , and we also provide strategic health care consulting for a Medicaid 
Managed Care company , AmeriHealth Caritas, who we represent today.    
I offer  my support for LD 1334, An Act to Establish a Managed Care Program for Ma inecare Services. 
Managed care has been proven to improve access to care, control costs, and promote better health 
outcomes for Medicaid beneficiaries in 41 states including my home state of New Hampshire.  
In 2011 New Hampshire  passed legislation requiring mandatory enrollment in risk -based managed care 
for all Medicaid beneficiaries in the state . After a competitive RFP process, vendors were chosen and 
underwent re adiness review to ensure network adequacy and readiness to opera te. The m anaged care 
program started enrolling all Medicaid beneficiaries in December of 2013  and over time the  expansion 
population was incorporated into the current full risk managed care program  in 2017.  
From my experience as Commissioner of Health and  Human Services overseeing a Medicaid service 
delivery system in a state, and as a consulting organization assisting a number of states with Medicaid 
innovation and efficiency, it is my opinion that the Medicaid Managed Care  delivery model is one that  
better coordinat es care and ensur es appropriate service utilization, which naturally produces a greater 
value for both the individual and taxpayers by more appropriately coordinating care for Medicaid 
members , more so than a state fee for service program .  That is why most states have moved to a 
managed care system.  U nder the traditional fee -for-service Medicaid model, or “traditional Medicaid,” 
the state pays providers more based on the number of services they provide. Clearly the incentive here 
is to provid e more services to yield more payment, but this doesn’t necessarily mean proper spending  or 
effective service .  It does not always mean better outcomes  either . 
Under a full risk capitated Medicaid managed care program, managed care organizations (MCOs), or  
“health plans,” are pre -paid a monthly per -member per -month rate, or “capitation payment,” to deliver 
 
2 
 
all services covered under the contract. Rates are inclusive of predicted medical and administrative 
costs, taxes, and fees. The state’s actuary determin es an acceptable rate range based on prior cost 
experience and medical cost trends, and the state negotiates final rates with each plan within the rate 
range. Rates are risk -adjusted to reflect the severity of enrollees’ condition. Health plans keep any 
savings that are achieved through better care management and healthier outcomes and  share these 
savings with the state through the rate -setting process that lowers the cost platform in the program. 
Conversely, health plans assume the risk of higher -than -expe cted  costs, whereas the state assumes this 
risk now. This creates predictable program expenditures on behalf of the state, which other states have 
reported is one of the most favorable aspects of this model  which  realigns the incentives from delivering 
more services to delivering better care.  Moving to a managed care program for Mainecare services will 
improve access to care, promote better health outcomes, and provide budget stability for taxpayers in 
Maine .  
Currently, there are three managed care organiz ations in N ew Hampshire  that are covering over 
250, 000 members for health care coverage. These include high cost populations such as high needs 
children in foster care and elders at risk of nursing home placements. N ew Hampshire  is currently 
preparing for its next Request for Proposal in September  2023 . The managed care experience in N ew 
Hampshire  has worked and is focu sing now on improvement of the delivery of health  and well -being of 
Medicaid beneficiaries via a strong data driven process.   In the most recent  External Quality Review 
Technical Report (April 2023)1 all three MCOs demonstrated strengths, with very strong compliance with 
the federal and State requireme nts, by achieving overall scores of 98.8 percent or higher. The New 
Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services has effectively transformed its Medicaid agency 
from one that was a payor of thousands of claims to managing the performance of three M edicaid Care 
Management contracts and ensuring cost and quality outcomes are met .   The State of Maine should 
consider the New Hampshire experience as one to look at in considering this Bill.  
Thank you for the opportunity to offer this testimony in favor of LD 1334  and I would be happy to 
answer any questions.  
 
1 External Quality Review Technical Report  
https://medicaidquality.nh.gov/sites/default/files/2022%20NH%20EQR%20Technical%20Report.pdf.pdf  
