 
 
Testimony in support of  
LD 1334, An Act To Establish a Managed Care Program for MaineCare Services  
 
May 7 , 202 3 
 
Community Health Options is Maine’s only nonprofit CO -OP health insurance company.  We are based 
in Lewiston and provide health insurance in the individual, small group and large group markets, as well 
as providing health plan administration through our Pi oneer ASO.  Health Options exists for the benefit 
of our members and our mission , which is to provide affordable, high quality benefits that promote 
health and wellbeing.  
 
We support LD 1334 , An Act to Establish a Managed Care Program for MaineCare  Services , and this 
support is grounded in a deep understanding of the value and benefits that a proper  managed care 
model can deliver to both the state and to MaineCare members.    The state is invo lved with important 
efforts to achieve the Triple Aim through its MaineCare program.   LD 1334  will broaden the expertise 
and wherewithal of the state to improve health outcomes while controlling the total costs of the 
MaineCare program.    
  
In much the sa me way that Medicare Advantage has successfully brought additional services and 
supplemental benefits to Medicare enrollees, Medicaid managed care taps into the expertise  that already 
exists among health  plans  like ours  to serve as an extension of the goal s and aims of MaineCare .  
Utilizing the expertise that health plans have in the areas of care management and coordination and 
working with members to help them access the right care at the right time , serves to improve health 
outcomes.  A quality managed c are approach would also serve to  ensure that social determinants of 
health are addressed as part of MaineCare benefits .  This is critical in promoting health and wellbeing 
among MaineCare beneficiaries , and it is the work that we do in the commercial and e xchange markets 
today.  
 
We have always been proponents of a healthy and robust MaineCare program because of  our belief that 
adequacy of coverage for everyone in the state is vital to the health of our society, our economy as well 
as the efficient function ing of health insurance markets .   As a mission -driven nonprofit, Health Options 
is focused on improving the health and wellness of the populations that we serve, as well as being a 
positive contribution to the health and wellbei ng of Maine.   
 
Please join us in our support of LD 1334, and we ask you to vote in favor of this important 
proposal that will benefit all of Maine.  
 
 
