295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Opposition to  LD 1334  
"An Act to Establish a Managed Care Program  
for MaineCare Services " 
Sponsored by Representative Millett   
April 18, 2023  
 
Good afternoon  Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer , and esteemed  members of 
the Health and Human Services  Committees.  My name is  Malory Shaughnessy and I 
am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. 
The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s 
community based mental health and substance use treatment providers , providing 
services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children .  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am h ere to testify in opposition to LD 1334, “An Act to 
Establish a Managed Care Program for MaineCare Services,” and to share information regarding behavioral health in managed care under MaineCare.  
 
Maine is in the minority of states by not having already i mplemented Managed Care 
through these types of MCOs. One reason is due to our size, and the impacts of economies of scale. However, the Alliance stands in strong opposition to heading down this road without a thorough  and inclusive discussion and review of the 
impacts on behavioral health.   There are mixed results in these other states , especially as  pertains to Behavioral 
Health treatment and recovery. Some states have created a truly comprehensive and 
supportive system of care for mental health and substance use  services. Others have 
starved these services to near death  … which has led to the deaths  of some of their 
client/members.  
 Maine is also in the process of major rate reform an d the establishment of a new 
model of care with the C ertified Community Behavioral Health Clinic (CCBHC). To 
shift focus now would be misguided and would stall this reform.  
 I have submitted a recent publication from the National Council on Mental Wellbeing, THE TRANSITION OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES INTO  
COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAID MANAGED CARE: A Review of Selected States .
1 
 
In this review of other states, you will read a lot a bout “carve -in” and “carve -out” as  
it pertains to behavioral health services. Most states chose to “carve -out” behavioral  
health services in the roll out of managed care, but in recent years there has been a   
movement to “carving” it back in. This publicat ion is a thorough review of what has 
been  the history and the success or failures of moving behavioral health into 
managed care.  
 
                                                           
1 https://www.thenationalcouncil.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/04/Transition_of_BH_Services_into_Comprehensive_Medicaid_Managed_Care_Final_June_2020.pdf   
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 The National Council offers 12 key steps to ensure effective planning and smoother  implementation of 
behavioral health benef its being carved -in to comprehensive Medicaid managed care organizations.  
 
I would urge that these be incorporated into any review of these services while being  included in a new 
Managed Care Organization contract.  Per their research, states should:  
 1. Use existing data resources to document their understanding of the BH service system, including an  
analysis of population demographics, chronic health conditions, cost drivers and total cost of care of  
persons with SMI/SED or SUD, service utilization and t rends and care gaps.  
2. Assess current provider and service capacity and determine whether a sufficient network is available to  
attend to population health needs.  
3. Describe and quantify outcomes to be achieved with carve -in, including health, quality of care,  financial 
and member experience outcomes and have a formal pre -/post -evaluation plan for the  implementation.  
4. Collaborate with the state’s BH authority and provider networks’ clinical leadership to develop a  
clinically informed theory about how to accomplish change and confirm which evidence -based services  
will support desired changes.  
5. Conduct internal Medicaid agency reviews of readiness across all program phases (e.g., planning,  
design, pre -implementation, go -live, monitoring), particularly rel ated to requests for proposals (RFP)  
development, outcomes measures identification, MCO contracting, rule promulgation and handbook  
development.  
6. Conduct external behavioral health provider readiness reviews with respect to contract negotiation,  
coding, claim submission and payment reconciliation abilities and be prepared to offer technical  
assistance and t raining to behavioral health providers without prior experience in managed care  
contracting and billing.  
7. Stage implementation based on readiness and  resource constraints and establish a clear 
communications strategy to keep members, providers and other stakeholders informed about  
timeframes, progress and delays.  
8. Conduct and evaluate small -scale pilots (e.g., regional rollouts) to identify implement ation details that  
may be in need of refinement or overhaul before full implementation of reforms.  
9. Ensure MCO readiness by confirming appropriate governance and staffing, provider network and  
services adequacy, claims processing capacity, reporting capa bilities and development of internal policies  
and procedures.  
10. Institute formal end -to-end systems testing and require MCOs to report on outcomes and document  
which services were not paid during testing.  
11. Ensure provider readiness by assessing staffing and workforce capacity, claims submission capacity, 
EHRs and use of HIT/HIE.  
12. Develop an oversight, monitoring and evaluation framework for program integrity and general quality improvement purposes.  
 There are also other studies pertaining to the impact on individuals with chronic and complex conditions, especially Medicaid enrollees with SMI, who experience high rates of comorbid physical health conditions and complex healthcare needs, and how it can be challenging for managed care organizatio ns to support these needs. To the extent that managed care organizations can help this 
population navigate their coverage and use more of the available benefits, barriers to care and unmet needs can be reduced or eliminated and outcomes subsequently improv ed.
2 
 
Thank you . I’d be pleased to answer any questions you have for me and to bring you additional 
information to the work session.  
                                                           
2 https://www.ajmc.com/view/medicaid -managed -care -issues- for-enrollees- with -serious -mental -illness  
