 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the Office of MaineCare  Services  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
 
Neither For Nor Against  LD 1334, An Act to Establish a Managed Care Program  
for MaineCare Services  
 
Hearing Date: April 18, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services, my name is  Olivia Alford, Director, Delivery System Re form at the Office 
of MaineCare Services . I am here today to provide information on LD 1 334, An Act to Establish a 
Managed Care Program for MaineCare Services . This bill establishes a managed care program 
for all covered MaineCare services , beginning with the Children’s He alth Insurance Program and 
members categorically eligible for TANF  by July 1, 2025,  and the remaining MaineCare 
population by July 1, 2027.  It requires the Department to apply for any state plan amendments or 
waivers required by January 1, 2024, and to exp lore options to create a managed care program that 
integrates Medicaid and Medicare benefits.  
 
The Department is not opposed to managed care generally, but we advise that the committee 
carefully consider the ramifications of establishing a managed care program for Maine’s Medicaid 
population.  It is not clear to us what objectives the sponsors’ wish to achieve for the MaineCare 
program with the suggested transition . Managed care is not a panacea. It has shown very mixed 
results nationally in terms of cost savings, improved access  to health care , and improved quality 
of care. It is true that m anaged care  can offer states more predictab le costs and offer some 
additional flexibilit ies, but once a state has implemented  managed care , it can be  very difficul t to 
change the state’s approach  to delivery of services, alter rates, etc . What Maine would  gain in 
predictability  we could  lose in responsiveness and control .  
 
The magnitude of a transition  like this  cannot be understated. The move  would dramatically 
overhaul MaineCare member experience, provider experience, provider reimbursement, and 
DHHS and provider operations. It would be costly to implement and administer , as it requires 
heavy vendor support to design the program, conduct required actuarial analyses and rate 
calculations, engage stakeholders, procure and contract with managed care organizations , and seek 
CMS approval . There would be  very significant changes  to our claims processing systems , and w e 
would need to re -assess and restructure our staffing at both the individual  and team level s. All of 
that is the up -front time, effort, and cost: there would also be ongoing administrative overhead for 
the state to manage the managed care organizations, in addition to the substantial fees paid to the 
managed care organizations.  
 
Given the work involved , the proposed timing for implementation outlined in this bill is 
unachievable. State plan amendment and waiver submissions would take at least 12 months of 
engagement prior to even drafting, not including the time to bring on the external  support we would 
need to do this work . Based on other states’ experiences,  CMS and state negotiations  often take  
well over a year for changes of this  magnitude and the significant level of CMS oversight over 
Medicaid managed care. Once we would procure the managed care vendors , it could be another 9 -
12 months for contract negotiation . Throughout this process, it would be critical to engage  
meaningfully with MaineCare members directly so that they understand the changes to come. We 
would also need to engage meaningfully with small, often community -based providers, to ensure 
they have the tools needed to successfully engage  and negotiate terms with the large for-profit and 
non-profit national health plans that  hold significant market control over Medicaid managed care 
networks nationwide.  
 
The work would be  long and all-encompassing. During that time , other major Department 
priorities such as rate reform , long -term care reform, continued focus on value -based payments , 
expanding eligibility and benefits, and general operational improvements  would have to be set 
aside . The Department, with legislative support, has numerous large -scale reforms and investments 
in progress related to children’s and adult behavioral health services and home and community -
based waiver services – these would all be impacted by a transition to  comprehensive managed 
care.  
 
The Department has made great strides in transitioning to sound reimbursement  methodologies , 
value -based payments, and strengthening the provider delivery system to address health care 
access issues , improve  health equity , and improve quality  of care . Our current rate reform efforts 
and focus on delivery system reform, including a transition to shared risk and accountability in our 
Accountable Communities program, can achieve many of the goals of managed care, and 
potential ly at less cost and certainly  with less disruption to the State , providers , and members.   
 
I will end my testimony by noting that MaineCare is planning to explore whether managed care or 
other options are a logical next step for “dual” eligible MaineCare members already enrolled in 
Medicare  Advantage  health plan s. It is possible  to provide a more efficient and integrated 
experience  for that population through managed care , and the Department is procuring expert 
consultation to design a strategy to improve c are for these Mainers.  
 
I am happy to answer any questions you have . I will plan to attend the work session  to discuss the 
reality of what this LD would mean for DHHS as a whole and  engage in meaningful conversations 
about existing and near -term opportunities to achieve  shared objectives . 
 
 
