Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, I'm Doctor Robert Hockmuth, I am a primary care 
physician with experience practicing family medicine in Maine and New Hampshire. 
I completed residency in Bangor in 1985 as Chief Resident. l then practiced in Milo, Maine 
under the auspices of the national Health Service Corps to pay back a full scholarship for my 
medical school education. This program was designed to serve people who did not have access 
to healthcare. I completed that service in 1989. I then worked in both Maine and New 
Hampshire. I currently serve as the Chief Medical Officer for AmeriHealth Caritas New 
Hampshire, one of the Medicaid managed care originations (MCOs) in New Hampshire's 
Medicaid managed care program. I'm here to speak in support of LD 1334. 
AmeriHealth Caritas is a mission-driven company with nearly 40 years of experience serving 
low-income and chronically ill populations. Operating in neighboring New Hampshire, 11 other 
states and the District of Columbia, AmeriHealth Caritas serves over 5 million Medicaid, 
Medicare, and Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) members through its integrated 
managed care products, pharmaceutical benefit management and specialty pharmacy services, 
and behavioral health services. 
From my 23 years of experience working in managed care and 25 years before that of working 
as a health care provider in Maine and New Hampshire, I can tell you that a managed care 
system as proposed in LD 1334 would promote beneficiary health by creating positive 
incentives and a focus on social determinants of health, while also bringing budget 
predictability and national expertise to the program. 
Managed Medicaid is about helping improve the health and well-being ofthe patients that it 
serves. It looks at the entire population in terms of their current health status, anticipated 
health needs based on family history, lifestyle choices, social barriers to access health, and 
other important influences such as cultural difference and perceptions. It then looks at each 
segment of the population to work with the patient to be as healthy as possible within the 
parameters of their underlying risk category. For example, a high-risk person may have multiple 
chronic disease conditions. The goal with these members is to keep them as healthy as possible 
by providing care management and benefits to address their individual needs - including 
prescriptions, transportation, access to healthy food, and to the medical care they need. 
A person at moderate risk may be overweight, have a strong family history of diabetes, heart 
disease and be a smoker who has no regular predictable transportation. For these beneficiaries, 
case managers would work with them on a personal level to create a plan that is realistic and 
acceptable to them to address these issues, and then regularly revisit it to promote success. For 
relatively healthy people who have no obvious illness, take no medications and are living active, 
healthy lifestyles, the goal is to keep them healthy. We do this by encouraging them to get their 
preventive services including vaccines, check-ups, and recommended screening exams, as well 
as to focus on healthy diet and exercise.
MCOs don't usurp the roll of their physician, or other medical providers, or come between 
doctors and patients; but rather provide services to augment what patients get, and work with 
the providers to help patients navigate through the system. 
When I was practicing in Milo, Maine, I saw many patients who could not afford their 
medications; nor could they afford to both buy food and see a doctor in the same week. They 
could not make it to Bangor even when they needed to see a specialist, much less for 
preventive visits to get a test or a vaccine, because they had no way to get there or could not 
afford to leave work to go. Again, l come to you as a doctor who has seen and lived both sides 
of this discussion and I encourage you to support this bill. The people of Maine need these 
services and deserve a program that provides access to them. 
States across the country have increasingly seen the advantages of Medicaid managed care and 
chosen to adopt it for the administration of their Medicaid programs. 41 states currently use 
managed care to administer at least a portion of their Medicaid program, and in 38 states it is 
the primary delivery system for Medicaid. 
Many states choose it because managed care creates positive incentives that promote health 
by utilizing managed care organizations with high levels of expertise under the direction of 
state Medicaid department regulators. The capitated structure of managed care makes MCOs 
responsible for member health. The state pays an amount commensurate to its expectations of 
the cost of each member to the MCO each month, and the MCOs are responsible for any 
additional expenditures. Thus, the only way for managed care organizations to succeed 
financially is through the promotion of member health — by encouraging members to access 
primary care, screenings, neonatal visits, and follow up care in order to reduce the need for 
expensive emergency care, hospital stays, and major surgeries. 
MCOs do so through personal outreach and directed services, especially for members who have 
identifiable medical needs. Care managers help at-risk members to utilize the care they need, 
encouraging medically indicated medication usage and follow up visits. Care managers can be 
especially impactful after a medical diagnosis that requires ongoing treatment - like diabetes, 
asthma or a complex surgery. MCOs also often have a special focus on ensuring a healthy 
pregnancy and positive birth outcomes. 
In addition to providing access to direct medical services, MCOs provide a set of value-added 
services to their members to further promote health. These are often services that address 
medical needs outside ofthe benefit package for which the state compensates them. These 
services are all provided out of funding from MCOs, with the goal of promoting member health. 
For example, for pregnant mothers, we offer a program that provides gift cards for each 
neonatal visit attended, promoting health for mother and baby while also cutting down on 
negative birth outcomes and neo-natal intensive care unit usage. 
Through such services, MCO's can also help address the social determinants of health that 
influence health but are not directly medical. This may include additional assistance at home for
members with certain medical needs, rides to the grocery store as well as to the doctor, and 
delivery of meals to member's homes - particularly for those with conditions that require 
specific diets like diabetes. 
A competitive procurement as envisioned by L.R. 1205, would allow the Office of MaineCare 
Services (OMS) to review MCOs' planned value-added offerings and take them into account 
when selecting what plans to offer contracts to. Other factors, like health outcomes or fraud 
prevention performance in other states, plans for hiring Maine citizens and creation of offices 
within the state, and responses to questions about how the plan would react to specific 
situations, would also be evaluated and scored to determine which managed care organizations 
would be the best fit for Maine. 
OMS would of course retain responsibility for designing and overseeing the program both 
before and subsequent to the procurement as well. While the MCOs administer the program in 
a managed care state, the Medicaid department is always in control of shaping requirements 
and verifying compliance. lt is always a top priority for MCOs to maintain a good working 
partnership with the states they operate in, and to both share input with and follow the 
direction of their state regulators. 
LD 1334 is the right start to move Maine to move toward a better system of administering 
Medicaid. It would create access to additional care management and social determinant of 
health focused services that I believe would improve the health of Mainers on Medicaid, while 
also offering the state stability for their Medicaid budget. The timeline in the bill in consistent 
with what we have seen work well in other states, and the bill provides a good deal of flexibility 
to implement the program to OMS. l urge you to vote yes on this bill. 
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to offer this testimony. l’d be happy to answer any 
questions you may have.
