“ 601 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW T 202.778.3200 
I P South Building, Suite 500 F 202.331.7487 
- Washington, D.C. 20004 ahiporg 
Guiding Greater Health 
April 18, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair& 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Of the Joint Committee on Health and Human Services 
c/o Legislative Information Ofﬁce 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: AHIP Comments on LD 1334, An Act to Establish a Managed Care Program for 
MaineCare Services — SUPPORT 
To Chairs Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Committee on Health and 
Human Services, 
America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP) appreciates the opportunity to comment in support of LD 1334, 
legislation that would establish a managed care program for all covered MaineCare services. We share 
Maine’s strong commitment to ensure health care access to the most vulnerable populations that is 
effective and affordable. 
Forty-one states (plus DC and Puerto Rico) rely on Medicaid managed care health plans to provide high- 
quality, coordinated care for their growing Medicaid populations. One in four Americans are covered by 
Medicaid, including millions of children, older adults, people with disabilities, and millions of veterans. 
Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs) serve more than 70 million enrollees — more than 80% of 
people with Medicaidlutilization of generic prescription drugs, and other effective solutions like programs 
focused on routine and preventive care. 
Not only do Medicaid managed care plans (MCOs) provide high quality care, but they are also 
responsible stewards of taxpayer dollars. They perform a signiﬁcant range of network management, care 
management, and operational functions for states, demonstrating how efficiently and effectively they 
serve Medicaid enrollees and hardworking taxpayers. Medicaid health plans achieve cost savings for 
states while outperforming the fee-for-service program on key quality measures. Moreover, beneﬁciaries 
enrolled in Medicaid health plans are more likely to receive preventive services, as well as have fewer 
hospital admissions, and better access to primary care than the fee-for-service program. 
AHIP-Menges Group Managed Care Studv Series 
Throughout 2020, AHIP contracted with the Menges Group to conduct a series of studies on the 
performance of Medicaid managed care plans to examine key performance metrics, including quality 
performance and value; use of innovative programs; and technology. The studies evaluated the highest 
quality and most cost-effective strategies to deliver care to high-risk, high need populations. 
‘ AHIP, Integrating Medicaid Prescription Drug Coverage: Better Health Outcomes and Budget Savings. 
https://ahiporg;production.s3amazonaws.com/documents/202304-AHlP_MedicaidRxCvg.pdf
April 18,2023 
Page 2 of5 
The Value of Medicaid Managed Care: Making Prescription Drugs More Affordable for States and 
Taxpayers finds that Medicaid managed care plans saved over 25% more per prescription than traditional 
Medicaid fee-for-service and help keep Medicaid affordable and effective for enrollees and taxpayers. 
Key takeaways from the study include: 
0 Medicaid managed care plans’ net costs per prescription (which factor in rebates) were roughly 
27% below the net costs in traditional Medicaid F FS program. The lower costs yielded $6.5 billion 
in net savings for states and taxpayers during ﬁscal year 2018. 
0 Medicaid managed care plans consistently control prescription drug costs more effectively than 
traditional Medicaid. Over the 5-year period from 2013 to 2018, net costs per prescription increased 
13% faster in FFS settings than in Medicaid managed care plans. 
0 States continue to recognize the value and advantages of Medicaid managed care plans in delivering 
affordable health care and program savings. Medicaid enrollment in managed care plans more than 
doubled from 25.6 million people in 2010 (51% of Medicaid enrollees) to 56.5 million people (77% 
of enrollees) in 2018, and this trend is expected to continue. 
0 With states signiﬁcantly expanding the role of Medicaid managed care in Medicaid, the number 
and percentage of Medicaid prescriptions covered nationwide by Medicaid managed care grew 
dramatically. More than 70% of all Medicaid prescriptions nationwide were delivered through 
Medicaid managed care plans in 2018, compared to only 28% in 2011. 
0 States that used Medicaid managed care to deliver integrated drug beneﬁts instead of prescription 
drug carve-outs realized big savings--with upwards of 25% lower net drug costs. A comparison 
of states with integrated drug coverage versus carve outs showed higher generic dispensing rates 
and much lower growth rates in net costs per prescription. 
The Value of Medicaid Managed Care: Improving the Ouality of Care in Medicaid finds that as part of 
their commitment to serving Medicaid enrollees and ensuring their access to high-quality care, Medicaid 
managed care plans have continued to consistently improve their performance across a range of quality 
measures over a 5-year period. The major takeaways from the study include: 
0 Medicaid managed care plans improved their performance on 26 out of 30 (87%) key HEDlS® 
and CAHPS® quality measures between 2014 and 2018. The improvements covered a broad 
range of measures —from providing comprehensive diabetes care to controlling high blood 
pressure. 
0 77% of Medicaid managed care enrollees in 2018 were members of NCQA-accredited health 
plans, up from 71% in 2015. Accreditation by the NCQA signiﬁes a high level of quality. 
v Twenty-four states recognize the value of ongoing quality improvement in their managed care 
programs by incentivizing Medicaid managed care plans to meet or exceed quality targets. The 
number indicates the value states place on Medicaid managed care plans and the quality they 
provide. 
The Value of Medicaid Managed Care: Innovating in Medicaid ﬁnds that innovative solutions from 
Medicaid managed care plans expand access to doctors and improve quality of care. The major takeaways 
from the study includez. The major takeaways from the study include: 
0 Medicaid managed care plans are creating and covering telehealth programs that expand access to 
care and increase the ability of doctors to coordinate care for patients. These solutions address 
rural access to care, behavioral health services, and chronic pain management. 
0 Medicaid managed care plans are demonstrating breakthrough programs to reduce social and 
financial barriers to health, such as deploying mobile produce markets with fresh vegetables to 
neighborhoods with limited supermarket access, or teaching enrollees with chronic health 
conditions how to cook healthy meals.
April 18, 2023 
Page 3 of5 
¢ Medicaid managed care plans are improving the ways enrollees can access provider networks, 
including creating tools that allow enrollees to locate doctors more easily in their networks, view 
practice information, and rate their doctors. 
Care that Is Fair and Just: Improving Health Equity Through Medicaid Managed Care shows managed 
care plans’ commitment to ending discrimination and systemic racism. For years, managed care plans 
have been hard at work mitigating socioeconomic conditions, reducing health disparities, and advancing 
health equity for more than 50 million Americans. Medicaid F F S models are designed to simply pay for 
medical products and services without a focus on or expertise for improving health outcomes or quality. 
Medicaid managed care models, on the other hand, can include health outcome and quality improvement 
goals with ﬁnancial incentives and hold managed care plans accountable for meeting those goals. Major 
takeaways from the study include: 
0 Medicaid managed care plans improved their performance on 87% of key quality measures 
related to patient satisfaction, provision of services, and health outcomes between 2014-2018. 
0 In 2020, AHIP launched a Health Equity Measures for Value-Based Care Workgroup to identify 
measures that would advance health equity and work with policymakers and measure developers 
to encourage their use to accelerate work that advance health equity. 
The Value of Medicaid Managed Care: States Transition to Managed Care makes clear that Medicaid 
managed care plans deliver real savings for states and are effective and accountable stewards of taxpayer 
dollars. The study shows more states are relying on Medicaid managed care to take on care management 
and administrative services, saving money and ensuring quality. Since FFY 2017, capitation expenditures 
have exceeded fee-for-service expenditures. Medicaid is now predominantly a managed care program. 
But it’s important to note that states do not relinquish control of their Medicaid programs when they opt 
for managed care. Instead, states shift from active beneﬁts administrators to active contract and oversight 
management, holding plans highly accountable for the delivery of care to their citizens. The major 
takeaways from the ﬁnal study include: 
0 Medicaid managed care plan enrollment more than doubled (increased by 121%) between ﬁscal 
years 2010 and 2018—from approximately 26 million to over 56 million. As of 2018, more than 
75% of all Medicaid enrollees were enrolled in a Medicaid managed care plan, up from about 
50% in 2010. 
0 Medicaid is now predominantly a managed care program. Capitated payments to Medicaid 
managed care plans exceed fee-for-service expenditures and have done so since ﬁscal year 2017. 
0 States are increasingly relying on Medicaid managed care to provide care management and 
administrative services. States continue to shiﬂ from being active beneﬁts administrators to 
providing contract management and highly accountable oversight for Medicaid managed care 
plans. 
Medicaid Pharmacy Beneﬁts 
Prescription Drug Carve-in Programs Save States Billions 
Integrating prescription drug beneﬁts into Medicaid managed care saves taxpayers billions of dollars 
more than when those services are not integrated. An in-depth 2018 study compared results of Medicaid 
health plan carve-in arrangements with FFS carve-out arrangements and determined that can/e-in 
arrangements reduce Medicaid costs for both the state and the federal govemmentz . 
2 
Medicaid Prescription Drug Utilization and Expenditure Dynamics, Exhibits 2 & 3. The Menges Group. 
November 2018. Available at https://www.community_plans.net/wp-content/uploads/20l 8/1 1/Medicaid-Prescriptiom 
Drug-Utilization-and-Expenditure-Dvnamics.pdf.
April 18,2023 
Page 4 of5 
One major reason why Medicaid health plans save states money is that they prioritize generic 
prescriptions over brand name drugs. According to the Menges Group study mentioned above, states that 
switched from carve-out arrangements to carve-in saw only a 1% increase in net costs per prescription 
over a three-year period, whereas seven states that utilized a carve-out program during the same period 
experienced a 20% increase. 
Data show that MCOs achieve lower net costs per prescription for both generic and brand-name drugs.A 
recent study of West Virginia, where they moved from a carve-in to a carve-out prescription drug beneﬁt, 
grossly overstated the amount the state will save. Instead, data reported directly by the state show that 
West Virginia increased spending by $18 million in additional payments to phannacies. During the ﬁrst 
15 months of West Virginia ’s carve-out, the average cost per prescription increased by 12.6%, compared 
to the U.S. average increase of 4. 1% over the same period‘. 
Integrated Beneﬁts Improve Carep 
In addition to demonstrating that carving-in the Medicaid drug beneﬁt saves states money, integrating 
drug coverage has clinical beneﬁts as well. Today, MCOs diligently coordinate a patient’s medical and 
pharmacy beneﬁts, gaining valuable insight into all the elements that affect a person’s overall health. This 
is particularly important when it comes to prescription drug adherence and drug interactions. There are 
numerous studies over the last decade that show that integrating services across the care continuum 
improves health outcomes for patients. Prescription drugs are an integral part of care management. MCOs 
have been leaders in integrating care and reporting higher quality outcomes due to these efforts. 
States have now long recognized how MCOs provide great value to states and their vulnerable 
populations by delivering affordable health care and program savings. We commend the effort by the 
legislature to transition MaineCare into a managed care program that is more efﬁcient and provides 
higher levels of care. Thus, we urge the Committee to pass LD 1334. 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. AHIP and its members stand ready for further 
discussions on this important topic. 
Sincerely, 
Sarah Lynn Geiger, MPA 
Regional Director, State Affairs 
America’s Health Insurance Plans 
slgeiger@ahip.org / (609) 605-0748 
AHIP is the national association whose members provide health care coverage, services, and solutions to 
hundreds of millions of Americans every day. We are committed to market-based solutions and public 
3 
Assessment of Report on Impacts of West Virginia Medicaid Prescription Drug Carve-Out. The Menges Group. 
April 2019. Available at https://www.ahip.org/wp-content/uploads/Assessment-of-Study-of-WV-Rx-Carve-Out 
Impacts-0419.pdf
April 18,2023 
Page 5 of5 
private partnerships that make health care better and coverage more affordable and accessible for 
everyone. Visit www.ahip.org to leam how working together, we are Guiding Greater Health.
