A 
Stmrz or M/RENE 
DEPARTMENT or Ai)Mi3\ElSTRATi\/ ‘E. & Fiw».r~rcrAi. Suavrcrs 
Brrmm: M. Crtoss BTJILDENCE, 3*“ Ftoora 
78 STATE Housta ST/\'FiON 
Auousm, MAENE 64333-G078 .....,. ».= , 
Serzvmo Tr-rr-5 Pusuc AND Deuvsarwc ESSENTIAL SERVICES To STATE GOVERNMENT 
JANET T. MILLS KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
testifying in support 
LD 501, Resolve, Authorizing the Department of Administrative and Financial Services to 
Convey the Interests of the State in Certain Real Property Located in Machiasport 
Presented by Rep. Stover 
To the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
State and Local Government, I am Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations 
for the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. l am providing testimony in 
Support of LD 501, which is a Department Bill. 
For the State to dispose of surplus real property, legislative authorization is required-upon 
passage, this Resolve will provide the DAFS Commissioner authorization to sell a parcel in 
Machiasport that is currently part of the larger Downeast Correctional Facility property, on 
behalf of the Department of Corrections. For those departments and agencies, like DOC, 
without their own statutory authority to dispose of real property, DAFS/BGS conducts the 
process on their behalf under our broad statutory authority. 
The Department of Corrections has identified this land as no longer needed, and able to be 
separated from the larger parcel and returned to the Machiasport property tax rolls. The parcel 
totals about 9.5 acres, is located roughly across from Jasper Beach, and includes some 
dilapidated housing units from when the property was owned and operated by the Air Force. The 
State would sell the property “as is” which is customary, with the expectation that the sales price 
would reflect any need for remediation of the property. 
The future of this property is not predetermined, however after meeting with Machiasport 
officials, the Town has indicated that it may be interested in acquiring the property. Toward that 
end, DAFS is bringing forth the attached proposed amendment that would provide the town with 
a “right of first refusal” to purchase the land at the broker opinion of value. This is modeled ona 
similar provision for East Millinocket, added to a similar bill during the 129"‘ Legislature. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. I am happy to answer any questions. 
PHONE: (207) 624-7800 www.Maine.g0v FAX: (207) 624-7804
DAFS Proposed Amendment to LD 501 
Right of ﬁrst refusal. Resolved: That the Town of Machiasport has the right of ﬁrst refusal to 
purchase the state property at the broker opinion of value determined pursuant to section 4. The 
commissioner shall provide written notice to the clerk of the Town of Machiasport of the intent to 
sell the state property and the terms of sale. The Town of Machiasport has 90 days to notify the 
commissioner in writing whether the Town of Machiasport will purchase the state property at the 
broker opinion of value. The Town of Machiasport has 60 daysfrom the date of invoking its right 
of ﬁrst refusal to complete the purchase of the state property. 
PHONE: (207) 624-7800 www.Main¢:.g0v FAX: (207) 624-7804
