District 48: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, South Bristol , Southport and Westport Island  
  
 
Holly Stover  
71 Dover Rd.  
Boothbay, ME 04537  
 Phone:  (207) 633 -5979  
Holly.Stover@legislature.maine.gov  
 
 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 
Testimony of Holly B. Stover  
LD 501 Resolve, Authorizing the Department of Administrative an d Financial Services to 
Convey the Interests of the State in Certain Real Property Located in Machiasport  
 Before the Joint Standing Committee on  State and Local Government  
March 2 1, 2023  
   
Senator  Nangl e and the Distinguished Members  of the Joint Standing Committee on State 
and Local Government , my name is Holly Stover . I proudly serve the people of  House 
District 48, including the towns of Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Southport, Edgecomb, 
Westport Island and South Bristol in the House of Representatives. Thank you for the 
opportunity to appear before you today to present LD 501 Resolve, Authorizing the 
Department of Administrative an d Financial Services to Convey the Interests of the State 
in Certain Real Property Located in Machiasport  
 
I am offering th is testimony in  support of  LD 501. This bill is a straight forward, procedur al bill .  This Resolve 
would give the State of Maine the required authoriz ation to dispose of real propert y. In this instance, the 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services (DAFS) , Bureau of Gen eral Services (BGS) does not have 
their own statutory  authority  to dispose of real property so th e only course of action they have is through this 
Committee.  
 
The future of this property is not predetermined. LD 501 proposes to sell a parcel of land that is currently part of 
the larger Downeast Correctional Facility property. The Department of Corrections has determined that  the land 
is no longer needed by them  and should  be separated an d returned to the  property tax rolls  in Machiasport . The 
property  totals about 9.5 acres, and is located roughly across the road from Jasper Beach . It includes some aged, 
run down housing units that w ere once occupied b y the Bucks Harbor Air Force Station.  
 
The State would s ell the property “as is ”, which is typical of how the State of Main e sells all surplus real 
property. The sales price will take  into consideration any need for remediation of the property.  
 
The Department of Administrative and Financial Services  has met  with Machiasport town officials and local 
legislative delegation . DAFS agreed to bring forth the following amendment to allow the town “right of first 
refusal” to purchase the land at the broker opinion of value. This was previously  done in East Millinock et with a 
piece of land that the town had ex pressed an interest  in acqu iring.  
 

District 48: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, South Bristol , Southport and Westport Island  
  
The amendment reads :  
 
Right of firs t refusal. Resolved:  That the Town of Machiasport has the right of first refusal to purchase the 
state property at the broker opinion of value determined pursuant to section 4. The commissioner shall provide 
written notice to the clerk of the Town of Machi asport of the intent to sell the state property and the terms of 
sale. The Town of Machiasport has 90 days to notify the commissioner in writing whether the Town of 
Machiasport will purchase the state property at the broker opinion of value. The Town of Ea st Millinocket has 
60 days from the date of invoking its right of first refusal to complete the purchase of the state property.  
 
There is no known interested buyer  and the  State of Maine doesn’t concern itself with the future use of the 
property.    
 
The task f or the Joint Standing Committee on  State and Local Government  Committee  is to decide if you  wish 
to give authorization sell this land.  
 
Thank you for your time and attention and I am available to a nswer any questions that you may have.  
 
  
 
 
