 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1790 (NFNA ) 
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1790, An Act Removing the Statute of Limitations on Criminal and Civil Actions 
Involving Sexual Abuse of Minors  
 
DA: May 10, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony regarding LD 1790 .    
 
 CLAC takes no position with respect to  Section 1 of the bill, which pertains to civil statutes 
of limitations.    
 
 CLAC is not commenting on the policy of extending the statute of limitations for the 
designated crimes.   However, CLAC does not support Section 2 it in its current form, given drafting 
concerns members have noted.  
 
 We note first that e xisting paragraph 8(1)(B) and proposed paragraph 8(1)(C) overlap; some 
crimes fall into both provisions.    Drafting issues include the following:  Paragraph C is drafted 
with reference to an age limit (18) that is often not an element of the crime —In many instances  in 
Chapters 11 and 12 , the crimes against children are defined with reference to the victim not having 
attained the age of 16, 14 or 12.   In addition, it would be simpler to designate a specific date rather 
than to reference the effective date  generally (crimes “committed on or after the effective date of 
this paragraph”), as readers of the statute will not know the effective date of the law without further 
research.    
 
 In order to make the provision more consistent with existing paragraph B, it might be 
constructed as fo llows: “If the victim had not attained the age of 18 [or other age designated by the 
Legislature] at the time of the crime, a prosecution for a crime defin ed within  chapter 11 or chapter 
12.  This paragraph applies to conduct committed on or after [date] .”    (This language is  consistent 
with the bill; it does not change the policy promoted by the LD of e liminating the limitations period 
for more crimes .) 
 
 The crime of incest, 17 -A M.R.S. § 556, is not within Chapter 11 or 12.  We offer this 
observation solely to notify the Legislature that incest involving a victim under 16 would remain 
within existing paragraph B; and incest involving a victim aged 16 or 17 would remain  subject , as it 
currently is , to the general limitations periods applicable to Class D (three years) and C crimes (six 
years) in 17 -A M.R.S. § 8(2).   
   
 
  
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current  members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, b y statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
