160 Capitol Street, P.O. Box 438, Augusta, Maine 04332-0438 
(207) 623-2661 • FAX (207) 621-0118 
mtla@mtla.org 
President 
Jason M. Jabar 
 
President-Elect 
Lisa A. Lunn 
 
Treasurer 
Walter McKee 
 
Secretary 
Christiana E. Mann 
 
Past President 
Susan Faunce*++  
 
Board of Governors 
Taylor Asen 
Michael Bigos*++ 
Lauri Boxer-Macomber++ 
Alexis Garmey Chardon 
Thomas L. Douglas 
Christian Foster 
Benjamin R. Gideon 
Christopher Harmon 
Scott Hess 
Daniel G. Kagan*++ 
Timothy M. Kenlan 
Stephen W. Koerting 
Christopher R. Largay++ 
Christian Lewis++  
Scott J. Lynch 
Sanchita Mukherjee 
Jodi L. Nofsinger++ 
James E. O’Connell III 
Sebastian Okun 
Verne E. Paradie 
Richard R. Regan 
Ellsworth T. Rundlett, III ++ 
Randall E. Smith++ 
Daniel J. Stevens++ 
Heather Seasonwein 
Michael J. Welch++ 
Laura White 
 
 
*AAJ Governor 
**AAJ State Delegate 
++Past President 
 
Executive Director 
Steven Prince 
 TESTIMONY of the MAINE TRIAL LAWYERS ASSOCIATION  
IN SUPPORT OF  
LD 1790, An Act To An Act Removing the Statute of Limitations on Criminal and 
Civil  
Actions Involving Sexual Abuse of Minors  
May 10, 2023  
Judiciary Committee  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Judicia ry 
Committee, the Maine Trial Lawyers Association extends its support of  LD 1790, An Act 
Removing the Statute of Limitations on Criminal and Civil Actions Involving Sexual 
Abuse of Minors.   
No one is safe if perpetrators of sexual abuse are unaccountable.  All vict ims of sexual 
abuse should be able to hold their abusers accountable, especially whe n an unfair power 
differential, coverups, malfeasance, and/or sexual exploitation contribut ed to their injury.  
LD 1790 would allow civil claims by survivors of sexual exploitation of a minor to c ome 
forward without regard to when such abuse occurred, and it would allow the prosecution of  
crimes for sexual exploitation and sexual abuse without time -limitations.  This would 
expand the removal of the statute of limitations for civil claims arisi ng from child sexual 
abuse that was passed in 2021 law.  That would be an incredibly helpful change for  victims 
to come forward.  
The nature of child sexual abuse injuries frequently results in victims not c oming forward 
for years or decades because of the psychological injury and victims’ survival instincts.   
This legislation is timely because child sexual abuse was not widely r eported and known to 
be as prevalent when the current law and statute of limitations was enac ted as it is today. 
The past two decades have brought to light both major abuses and abusers. The legi slature 
didn't have the information that we have now to be able to write a trauma -informed law.  
The average age of adults reporting sexual abuse as a child is 52 years old. Vic tims should 
not be prohibited from seeking justice when child sex abuse was going unchec ked for years 
because society favored silencing victims and didn't understand the psychology b ehind the 
trauma of children repressing sexual abuse or fear of coming forward. There i s a major 
power imbalance when a child is abused, and they are pressured to keep quiet  by their 
abusers.  
The committee should be aware of and take steps to clarify as much as poss ible that the 
civil claims statute of limitations removal would apply to all those who  contribute to the 
sexual abuse occurring, including enabling employers of the CSA and exploitation, and not  
just the perpetrator.  However, the criminal statute of limitations p roposal likely applies 
only to the perpetrator.  
We urge the committee to support LD 1790.  Thank you.  
 
 
 
 
