  
2021-202 2 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F.  McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
202 1-2022 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Bo yd 
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph  Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sher man  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXE CUTIVE DI RECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau   
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523 -9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
May 4, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matt Moonen  
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State Ho use Station, Room 438  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1790 – An Act Rem oving the Statute of Limitations on Criminal and  
 Civil Actions Involving Sexual Abuse of Minors  
        
Dear Senator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 1790’s pro visions removing the statute of limitations as it 
relates to  every single criminal offense un der Chapter 11 or Chapter 12.  MACDL 
takes no position  on the removal of the civil  statute of limitations.  
 
Statutes of limitations in criminal cases are important for the simple reason that after a 
certain period of time it is no longer fair or just to a criminal defendant to face charges 
that happened so long ago that the person cannot defend themselves.  While I am 
confident that the proponents of this bill will talk about the alle ged victims and their 
being able to obtain justice, that  can happen in a  civil cont ext where  money d amages 
are at issue, but when a person is facing a criminal charge and potentially d ecades of 
incarceration , it is a different matter. Events that could have occurred 10, 20, or even 
50 years ago  could still be c riminally prosecuted if this  bill passes, and a defendant 
who may  not have even been in the same state at the time of the allegations would 
have a difficult time defending himself or herself because it simply happened so long 
ago.  With the passage of time  like this, w itnesses may  and often are long since gone  
or have completely forgotten what did or did not happen , and the de fendant is left 
with only his or  her adamant denial s that nothing ever happened in defense of a c ase, 
a truly unfa ir position when if  the case h ad been brought within the existing statute of 
limitations a defendant would have the benefit of far more evidence.  
 
This bill as it relates to criminal c ases exposes countless numbers of people who 
allegedly committed crimes many years ago to p otential criminal prosecution simply 
because  the alleged victim makes an allegation .  That is a terrible position for 
someone accused of a crime to be in, especially when the tools to defend oneself from 
these allegations  are gone from the passage of time and the result of an alleged victim 
bringing the allegations forward many years, if not decades, after the event allegedly 
happened.  Indeed, a person could simply wait until witnesses have passed away to 
bring an allegation  forward, thereby depriving a de fendant of a defense, and that  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be completely  unfair and a gross miscarriage  of justice .  But it is a miscarriage 
of justice that can in fact h appen  and which the c urrent statute  of limitations prevents 
from happening except in the most serio us cases.  
 
Thank y ou for the opportunity to address this issu e. 
 
 
  Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legi slative Committee  
 
                        
 
 
  
  
 
  
             
  
             
                          
                          
 

