JAMES I. COHEN One Portland Square 
PARTNER Portland, Maine 04101-4054 
jcohen@verriI|-|aw.com Main 207-774-4000 
207-253-4708 
April 6, 2023 
Sen. Donna Bailey, Chair 
Rep. Anne Perry, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, M1-3 04333 
Re: LD 1146, An Act to Authorize Certain Health Care Professionals to Prescribe Methadone 
Dear Sen. Bailey, Rep. Perry, and Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Committee: 
On behalf of the Coalition to Ensure F air Access to Opioid Addiction Treatment, we are pleased for the 
opportunity to provide testimony with regard to LD 1 146. We very much appreciate the intent behind LD 
1146, namely, to help make methadone treatment more available to patients in Maine. However, LD 1146 
would conﬂict with federal law which provides strict guidelines mandating that methadone treatment 
occur through opioid treatment programs (OTPs). 
About us. Our Coalition is comprised of all twelve opioid treatment provider clinics licensed by the 
State of Maine to offer medication-assisted treatment services utilizing methadone. Our Coalition serves 
thousands of Mainers with opioid use disorder from clinics located throughout Maine, approximately 
70% of whom are MaineCare eligible. 
How OTPs operate. By way of background, medication-assisted treatment (MAT) includes several 
different modalities of which MAT utilizing methadone is one. Methadone treatment is unique in that it 
must be provided through an OTP clinic under medical supervision and with integrated medication, 
counseling, drug screenings, and physician oversight. Methadone treatment has been in widespread use in 
this country for nearly six decades and is one of the most studied modalities of healthcare. Study after 
study demonstrates that methadone treatment works and is the gold standard of care for opioid use 
disorder. 
For context, OTPs are outpatient programs that provide comprehensive treatment services for opioid use 
disorder. Part of the beneﬁt of OTPs is the ﬂexibility that they provide. OTPs can be hospital-based, 
standalone, or part of a larger program. The beneﬁts of the OTP setting are evidenced by the fact that 
available data indicates that OTPs are unlikely to be the source of methadone in methadone-related 
deaths.‘ OTP clinics provide a safe and effective setting for methadone treatment to be administered.L 
1 
U.S. Dep’t of Justice Nat’l Drug Intelligence Ctr., Nov. 2007; U.S. Dep’t of Health and Human Servs., Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Servs. Admin, July, 2007.
Coalition — Letter in Opposition to LD 1146’ 
April 6, 2023 
Page2 
LD 1146 is contrary to federal law. Under current state and federal law, some forms of MAT may be 
prescribed directly by a physician. Buprenorphine treatment, for example, can be prescribed bya 
physician. However, with respect to MAT utilizing methadone, federal regulations expressly require that 
such treatment be provided through opioid treatment providers who offer a suite of treatment services 
under one roof. 42 C.F.R. § 8. J 1. Maine law similarly requires that methadone treatment occur through 
an OTP. Under LD 1146, a health care professional licensed under the Board of Osteopathic Licensure or 
the Board of Licensure in Medicine with authority to prescribe controlled substances would be permitted 
to prescribe methadone to a person with substance use disorder. As noted above, this would directly 
violate federal law. See 42 C.F.R. § 8.11. 
OTPs are the appropriate place for dispensing MAT with methadone. Not only does federal law 
require MAT with methadone be dispensed through an OTP, this policy makes sound medical sense, and 
appropriately contrasts with federal law governing MAT with buprenorphine. MAT with buprenorphine 
(including Suboxone) may be prescribed by physicians and dispensed through a pharmacy. MAT with 
methadone must be dispensed through an OTP. The differing policies reflect several key pharmacological 
differences between methadone and buprenorphine: 
v OTPs offer a full suite of important services under one roof, including physician examination, 
regular counseling, random drug screenings, case management, and health education. By contrast, 
MAT with buprenorphine does not automatically come with counseling, case management, or 
drug screening. 
0 MAT offered through an OTP involves so-called “daily dosing” which allows OTP medical staff 
to regularly observe patients and their health and well-being. Daily dosing patients may eam 
“take-home ” medication doses for up to a week, which is a privilege accorded to patients who are 
doing well in treatment. This approach creates a positive incentive for patients to avoid illicit 
drugs and participate in counseling, both of which increase the likelihood of successful treatment 
and recovery. 
0 Methadone is Schedule II drug that is a full opioid agonist that is also long-lasting, whereas 
buprenorphine is a Schedule HI drug that is a partial opioid agonist and shorter-lasting. This 
difference means that patients prescribed methadone tend to receive doses at higher levels where 
careful monitoring of the patient is required at induction to minimize the risk of adverse health 
effects. A clinic setting is helpful in this regard. 
0 Very few overdose deaths involving methadone relate to substance use disorder treatment through 
OTPs. By contrast, overdose deaths involving methadone are more common when prescribed by 
a physician for pain management purposes? 
0 Dispensing methadone through an OTP reduces the risk of illegal diversion of the drug. 
State regulations should conform to federal regulations. Part of the intent of this bill, most likely, is to 
expand access to MAT with methadone. As noted, we strongly support policies that expand access to this 
important treatment; however, we believe such expanded access must remain in the context of OTPs. That 
said, there are other opportunities to expand access to MAT with methadone by modifying certain 
regulatory requirements that impede access. In this regard, the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, through its Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAM1-ISA), 
commenced an important rulemaking process that would, among other things, scale back federal
\ 
2 Methadone Mortality — A Reassessment: Report of the Meeting. Sponsored by the Center for Substance Abuse 
Treatment, SAMHSA (July 20, 2007), p.14; BMJ 20l0;34l:c485ldoi:10.1136/bmj.c485l; US GAO, Methadone- 
Associated Overdose Deaths: Factors Contributing to Increased Deaths and Efforts to Prevent Them (March 2009), 
p.23
Coalition — Letter in Opposition to LD 1146 
April 6, 2023 
Page3 
regulations governing OTP clinics. Among the regulations recommended for scaling back or elimination 
are the following: 
0 Relaxing regulations regarding take-home medication for patients; 
Q Providing greater ﬂexibility in the level of medication that a patient should receive when they 
are first entering treatment (the “induction period”); 
0 Promoting mobile medication units to expand an OTP’s geographic reach; and 
0 Reviewing OTP accreditation standards. 
Likewise, the Maine Department of Health and Human Services and the Govern0r ’s Director of Opioid 
Response have been working to modify Maine regulations to enhance access to MAT with methadone in 
a manner consistent with Maine law. We believe such reforms are appropriate and would allow more 
Mainers to have access to life-saving methadone treatment. V 
Conclusion. ,We appreciate the opportunity to provide comments with regard to LD 1146, and if you 
have questions or need any other information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Sincerely, 
146/" James I. Cohen 
Counsel to OTP Coalition 
cc: Gordon Smith, Director of Opioid Response, State of Maine 
Katherine Coutu, State Opioid Treatment Authority, State of Maine
