Maine Medical ~ 
.I
' 
-._ -"*1 ;; mi‘ 
ir e ‘xi? =- ,§= ii 2» 
-1 43</ ~?\ s. ,1-1%" , .. ,., .,. ., 
..~$‘ §-- - --st ‘fa We s- A e 1:9 ,/it .1 H ‘.= .1‘ 7; 1:» 
‘e ~> a .e' _ ;.; »,.»: <-. E1 .-,; 
-‘ 
.=,= ‘ta :f1_;;\§l:_:4 e.,.A.s=' *2 t' 
» ' 
:1 =: 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President l Paul R. Cain, MD, President —Elect l R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO l Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
O SUPPORT Maine Physicians 0 ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine I PROMOTE the health of all Maine people 
TO: Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Sen/ices 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director of Communications and Government Affairs 
DATE: Thursday, April 13, 2023 
RE: SUPPORT with amendments, LD 1323; An Act to Amend the Opioid Education 
Requirements 
The Maine Medical Association is the largest statewide professional association of physicians 
representing over 4,300 current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and 
practice settings. 
The MMA appreciates the opportunity the submit the following comments in support of LD 1323 and 
directly thank Representative Nutting for introducing the bill on its behalf. Numerous physician members 
have requested we present this legislation asking the Legislature to reconsider current opioid CME 
requirements. 
The bill as introduced was drafted before cloture. Since then, the landscape of requirements to treat 
opioid use disorder and education requirements have drastically changed at the federal level. Therefore, 
we respectfully ask the committee and the legislature to not only amend LD 1323 by striking all sections 
of the bill but go further and repeal all the listed sections for the reasons outlined below. 
CURRENT LAW AND REQUIREMENTS 
The MMA was at the forefront of compromise legislation passed in 2016 concerning opioid prescriptions 
which has resulted in a 40% reduction in prescriptions, and the MMA has since worked closely with state 
leaders and clinical partners to develop educational resources, identify best practices, and provide helpful 
decision-making tools for prescribers. 
Since December 31, 2017, as directed by P.L. 2015, ch. 488, the following licensees need to complete 3 
hours of AMA category 1 CME on opioid prescribing every 2 years. 
Nurse Practitioners licensed under Title 32, Chapter 31 
Physicians under Title 32 Chapter 36 & Chapter 48 
Podiatrists licensed under Title 32 Chapter 51 
Dentists licensed under Title 32, Chapter 143 
All Maine physicians who have maintained licensure since 2017 have now completed licensing renewal 
three times, totaling nine hours of education. Physicians born in odd-numbered years will have satisfied 
the three-hour CME requirement 4 times before 2024. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
WHAT’S CHANGED? 
ln late 2022, Congress eiiminated the "DATA-Waiver Program“ or “X-waiver ” through Consolidated 
Appropriations Act of 2023. 
"X waiver" refers to now repealed legislation that authorized the outpatient use of buprenorphine for the 
treatment of opioid use disorder. Physicians had to complete 8 hours of training and advanced practice 
practitioners were required to complete 24 hours to receive an X-waiver. 
Prescribing buprenorphine no longer requires special certification beyond obtaining a standard DEA 
registration number for prescribing Schedule lll drugs. 
The new law instead will require all prescribers of controlled substances, not just those treating 
QUD or using buprenorphine, to take part in a one-time 8-hour training program before they can obtain 
or renew their DEA registrations, starting June 2023. 
All DEA-registered practitioners, with the exception of practitioners that are solely veterinarians are 
responsible for satisfying this new training requirement (DEA Training Requirement letter). 
DATA FOR CONSIDERATION ON SORCES OF OPIOID MlSUSE 
Of those who developed opioid use disorder in the 2000s, 75 percent reported that their first opioid was 
a prescription drug (National institute on Drug Abuse, 2012). 
Nearly two-thirds of all pain reliver misuse now starts with people using medication that was not 
prescribed for them but instead obtained from a friend, family member, or purchased from a stranger 
(National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2019). 
EXlSTlNG AND ONGOING RESOURCES AND EDUCATION 
The Board of Licensure in Medicine lists free board sponsored opioid CME resources on its website, 
including modules developed by MMA’s Center for Quality Improvement, which develops countless 
evidence-based and patient-centered training and education modules on medical care, including pain 
management principles to engage practices in pain management, substance use disorder treatment, and 
quality improvement. 
Example: CQI New Learning Lab Moo'uie.'TPMP Features to Enhance Patient Safetif‘ 
The Maine SUD Learning Community is another excellent and well-used resource: 
0 Live and archived educational webinars on compassionate tapering, transitioning methadone to 
buprenorphine, etc., 
Open ‘office hours’ 
Guidance documents 
Technical assistance 
Additional resources 
ADDlTlONAL INFORMATION AND BACKGROUND 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
Maine State Continuing Medical Education (CME) Requirements 
Continuing medical education (CME) experiences are designed to encourage you to keep up with the 
latest developments in your field and to improve your skills over time. 
Maine requires 40 hours of Category 1 CME credits per licensure cycle. The licensure cycle is biennial. 
Category 1 credits are credits certified and approved by a third party to verify a licensee has participated 
in CME activities, as required by various licensing, credentialing and professional organizations. 
Category 2 credits are credits that you can document on your own. 
U.S. State CME Requirements 
About the Maine SUD Learning Community 
Co-Occurring Collaborative Serving Maine in partnership with and funding from the Maine Department of 
Health and Human Sen/ices supports Prescribing Clinicians and their Teams to provide more evidence- 
based treatment to individuals and their families affected by Substance Use Disorders and Opioid Use 
Disorder (SUD/OUD) to promote recovery and reduce drug overdose deaths. 
The Maine Medical Association thanks the committee for accepting our comments and urges the 
committee to vote Ought to Pass as Amended. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
