STATE OF MAINE
  
GOVERNOR ’S OFFICE OF POLICY INNOVATION AND THE FUTURE  
181  STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  
04333 -0181 
GORDON SMITH  
DIRECTOR , OPIOID RESPONSE  
PHONE 207

624

7458    WWW .MAINE .GOV /FUTURE   
 
 
April 19, 2023 
 Sen. Donna Bailey, Chair  
Rep. Anne Perry, Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
Re:  L.D. 1323, An Act to Amend the Opioid Education Requirements  
 
Dear Senator Bailey, Rep. Perry and Members of the Committee.  
   
I am Gordon Smith, J.D., Director of Opioid Response in the Governor’s Office of Policy 
Innovation and the Future.  I was unable to attend the public hearing on L.D. 1323 but appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on the bill through this communication.  I also will be available for the work session on the bill this afternoon.  As printed, the  bill would reduce the three 
hours of mandatory continuing education on opioid prescribing to one hour. I am prepared today, on behalf of Governor Mills, to support this change as the land- mark legislation limiting the amount 
of opioid medication that can be prescribed has been in existence for seven years and all current prescribers have had to take the educational courses three or four times (unless they were licensed for the first time during this period) and a one -hour refresher course seems appropriate  now at each 
two-year licensing cycle.  
 However, during the public hearing, proponents of the legislation presented testimony advocating for the outright repeal of the educational requirement based upon the recent announcement by the 
Drug Enforcement Agenc y (DEA) that it will be requiring eight hours of education prior to issuance 
of any new DEA certificate or renewal of an existing certificate. I do not believe that the new DEA 
requirement is an adequate substitute for our state law, for the following reas ons: 
 
1. The current state law, and now relevant licensing board rules, imposes the educational requirement every two years.  The DEA requirement is a ONE TIME eight -hour 
requirement.  One and done.   
 
2. The purposes of the two requirements are not identical.  The state law is on the prescribing of opioid medication for the treatment of pain.   The DEA requirement is on the treatment of patients with opioid or other substance use disorders. 
 
 
3. There are some notable exceptions to the DEA requirement.  For instance , any prescriber 
who took the education required to achieve an X -waiver is exempt.  This represents over 
1400 prescribers in Maine.  Recent medical school graduates are also exempt if their 
curriculum included similar topics.  
 
4. As Maine physicians are requi red to complete 40 hours of continuing medical education, 
one hour of education on responsible prescribing of opioid medication does not seem onerous.  Many excellent courses are offered on- line and without cost to the licensee.  
 As the recommendation to r emove all the three hours of the mandatory opioid education was 
offered by the Maine Medical Association, an organization I am very familiar with, I reached out to them last evening and am authorized today to indicate their support for retaining one hour of the current requirement.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this information and I look forward to joining you for the 
work session.  Sincerely,  
 
Gordon Smith, J.D. 
Director of Opioid Response  
Email: Gordon.Smith@maine.gov Cell: 207- 592-0859 

