 
 STATE OF MAINE  
BOARD  OF  NURSING  
158  STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  04333- 0158   
JANET T. MILLS  
GOVERNOR  
 
      
 
 KIM ESQUIBEL, PHD, M.S.N., R.N.  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR   
 
  
 
 
PHONE: (207)287 -1133  
  
 
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER  
  
 
 
FAX: (207) 287-1149     
 OFFICES  LOCATED  AT:  161  CAPITOL  ST.,  AUGUSTA,  ME 
www.maine.gov/ boardofnursing      
 April 11, 2023 
 Senator Donna Bailey, Chair  
Representative Anne Perry, Chair  
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333  RE: LD 1323 – “An Act to Amend the Opioid Education Requirements”  
 Dear Senator Bailey , Representative Perry,  and Members of the Committee : 
 The State Board of Nursing (“Board”) licenses and regulates licensed practical nurses, registered professional nurses and advance d practice registered nurses in Maine. The Board is composed of 
9 members – 5 actively practicing registered nurses, 1 actively practicing advanced practice registered nurse, 1 actively practicing licensed practical nurse and 2 public members. The Board’s mission is to protect the public by licensing and regulating nurses , and approving 
prelicensure nursing education programs.   
 In general, the Board does not require continuing education (“CE”) in any specific subject area. The Board relies upon the professionalism of its licensees to identify and complete CE relevant to their specific scope of practice, area of certification and patient population they serve.  
 Currently, the only mandated CE requirement is that enacted by the Maine Legislature in 2015 requiring 3 hours of opioid related CE for licensees who prescribe opioids. Based upon the value 
of that CE, the Board expanded that requirement by rule to apply to all its licensees with prescriptive authority. The Board’s intent was to ensure that all licensees with prescriptive authority are aware of the opioid crisis and gain an understanding about the prevention and treatment of  opioid abuse. 
 In the 2019 first regular session of the Maine legislature, An Act to  Amend the Continuing 
Education Requirements for Prescribers of Opioid Medication was introduced to reduce the amount of opioid prescribing education required of prescribe rs from 3 hours per license cycle of 
2 years to one hour per license cycle of 2 years after the licensee had completed an initial 3 -hour 
requirement. It also required the licensing boards to adopt rules consistent with the reduction in the amount of requir ed prescribing education. The result of this bill required the Board to provide 
the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services (“HCIFS”) with a response to its request that the BON “review the existing continuing education requirements related to  
 
    opioid prescribing and consider whether the change proposed in the bill, or other changes, were appropriate.” The BON submitted its report to the Committee on January 10, 2020.  LD 1323 would reduce the number of hours of C E regarding the prescr iption of opioid 
medication a health care provider who prescribes opioid medication must complete every two years from 3 hours to 1 hour and directs the BON  to adopt rules implementing the requirement.  
  The BON offers the following comments for consideration:  
 
1. The opioid epidemic is still a public health concern. 
 
2. Since the enactment of Chapter 488, the Board has made great progress in educating prescribers of opioid medication in the risks of over -prescribing. APRNs with 
prescriptive authority c ompleted the 3 -hours of training by the December 31, 2017, 
deadline and have been required to complete 3 -hours per license cycle of two years. The 
Maine Nurse Practitioner’s Association (MNPA) has contributed to this effort by offering numerous opioid programs at its annual spring and fall conferences. The MNPA and the Board have provided numerous resources on their websites for articles and webinars 
related to the opioid crisis. 
 
3. The Board adopted a joint rule, Chapter 21: Regulations Relating to Use of Controlled 
Substances for Treatment of Pain, with the Board of Osteopathic Licensure, the Board of 
Licensure in Medicine, and the Board of Podiatric Medicine. The rule established standards for proper pain management, including but not limited to, treatment plan, documentation and other “universal precautions” as well as continuing education for prescribing opioids. Chapter 8: Regulations Relating to Advanced Practice Nursing was also amended to include the 3- hours of CE for prescribing opioids. 
 
4. The BON requ ires 50 hours of CE every 2 years for renewal of advanced practice 
registered nurses – and the 3 hours of opioid CE is included in the 50 hours for APRNs with prescriptive authority.  
5. The BON would have to amend two rules if LD 1323 passes: Chapter 8: Regulations Relating to Advanced Practice Registered Nursing; and Chapter 21: Regulations Relating to Use of Controlled Substances for Treatment of Pain, a joint rule with the  Board of 
Osteopathic Licensure, the Board of Licensure in Medicine, and the Board of  Podiatric 
Medicine.  
 
The Board is mindful that the response to the Maine’s opioid crisis is not complete and a multi -
facet approach to the problem continues to be needed. In sum, the current 3- hour CME 
requirement regarding opioid prescribing is not onerous and is available for free.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments on LD 1323  
 
    Sincerely,  
 
 
 Kim Esquibel, PhD, MSN, RN  
Executive Director
 
 

