Dave McCubrey LD286 Testimony 2-14-23' 
Good Afternoon Tax Committee and thank you for allowing me to speak today. 
My name is Dave McCubrey and I am the Chair of the Hollis Select Board. 
I want to thank all the LD286 bill sponsors. I am pleased that this is a bipartisan effort. 
This proposed change to the TIF rules could create a positive benefit for all Maine 
Communities now and in the future along with a potential to bring more business to the 
State. 
I am a small business owner now and have worked for large companies such as IBM. I now 
have 10 years as a Town official. It is very frustrating when rules, regulations, and 
restrictions hinder the best actions for both, especially the Town. 
TIF monies are property tax with restrictions. Yes, there is some sheltering benefit to the 
Town. Without changes, I am not convinced that the benefit outweighs the negatives froma 
community perspective. 
The theory behind the TIF program is solid. Create jobs and entice business with a tax break 
to open in our communities and State. In this case, the negative to Hollis and surrounding 
communities has been the truck traffic and for Hollis is the restrictions on the monies. 
Would the bottling plant be in Hollis without a TIF? I believe so as they were able to 
purchase over 1000 acres of farmland and forest with the key element being a perfect 
aquifer below._ 
Hollis has used most of its TIF funds on Public Safety and Public Works. I would like to be 
able to use more on Economic Development and services to businesses. Hollis currently 
contracts with Southern Maine Planning and Development Commission for planning services 
when needed.I 
I have provided some photos of the Hollis Town Hall facilities. We are out of space and 
overcrowded. It is a split-level ranch that was built in the early 70s. I have shown that 
through the front door, you must navigate stairs to the upper or lower level. There is no 
space to meet with businesses, lay out drawings, private meetings with General Assistance 
clients or employees, and it is only partly ADA accessible. We have added a temporary office 
trailer and a service window. Paperwork and records are stored in the Town barn. 
Page 1 of2
Dave McCubrey LD286 Testimony 2-14-23 
Having a population under 5,000, an expansion of the current building or building a new 
Town hall would be a hardship for many in the Town. Hollis has been described asa 
bedroom community and we have a high average age and a large elderly population that is 
very concerned about tax increases forcing them from their homes. For this current year, the 
school budget increased by over 10%, and now households are seeing large increases in 
utility costs which will also need to be in the budgets for the Town, County, and schools. 
Another increase cost example is that our latest plowing contract increased 25% and we are 
required to plow State roads! We need to find ways to use available funds and streamline 
costs to run these activities. 
Our goal is to build a new Town Hall that will be 100% ADA and accommodate all business 
activities including some facility accommodations that could be used during emergencies. A 
few years ago, the Town voted monies to work on design and engineering for a new 
building. The site has been selected to be behind the current building. Additional monies for 
this preliminary work and the building fund have come from sales of excess Town property. 
This change to TIF rules change may allow us to use the land sales money, TIF money, 
undesignated general fund money, and some ARPA funds to build the new Town Hall 
without needing a loan bond or new property tax appropriation. ln the near future, we will 
also need a new sand and salt shed and also a new fire station. 
I was involved in the conversation during the writing of this bill. After speaking to some 
other communities, l believe that this bill should be amended to remove the percentage. 
This change could help more communities and remove the processes necessary to calculate 
and control the percentages. 
ln Conclusion, l believe that allowing TIF funds to be used for municipal buildings isa 
beneficial and reasonable use of these monies. 
..and the best part of this bill is that it has NO cost to the State. 
Please vote to move this bill forward to help our Communities. 
Thank you 
Page 2 of2
Hollis Town Hall with Office Trailer 2023 
Raised Ranch-Front D001‘-Stairs Up and Down
Town Hall-Lower Floor 
Town Barn-Non Conﬁdential Record Storage
