 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  (MMA)  
In Support of  
LD 286, An Act to Authorize the Use of Tax Increment Financing Funds for Constructing or 
Renovating Municipal Offices and Other Municipal Buildings   
 
February 14, 2022  
 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in support of LD 286 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s Legi slative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest.   
Municipal officials support LD 286 as a necessary expansion of one of the few economic 
development tools available to communities.   
 
The Tax Increment Fina ncing (TIF) program allows new property tax revenues generated 
within the boundaries of a defined development district to be used for specified economic 
development purposes.   The plan describing the boundaries of the TIF district as well as the uses 
of the tax revenue must be certified by the Maine Department of Economic and Community 
Development and adopted by the local legislative body ( e.g., council or town meeting).  The 
state regulations that guide the program allow  for TIF district -based improveme nts, required  
business -based investments and more generalized municipal economic development purposes.   
 
As proposed in LD 286, communities are authorized to use TIF revenues to build and 
renovate municipal buildings, provided the legislative body determi nes that conditions exist that 
impair  the proper function ing of government or otherwise hinder the vitality of the local 
economy.  
The municipal buildings that house planning, financing, assessing, code enforcement and 
licensing departments, all serve to promote economic development and aid the business 
community.  Investments in libraries and community centers, are just as worthy as investments in 
public safety buildings – a currently allowable use of TIF revenues – as a means for attracting 
new economic development opportunities.    
Municipal officials from urban, suburban,  and rural communities find value in the TIF 
program.  For th e state’s largest communities, TIF is the most powerful economic development 
tool available.  In rural municipalities, it is the only tool, allowing investments in infrastructure 
that would not otherwise be funded.  To local officials in rural communities,  the expansion of the 
allowable uses of TIF revenues works to level the economic development playing field among all 
communities.   
 

That being said, the members of the Policy Committee request that the  provisions of the 
bill capping i nvestment of TIF reve nues to the lesser of 10% of the total value of the TIF or $3 
million be excluded from LD 286 .  Municipal officials, and their residents, can be relied on to 
make decisions that best suit their needs.  There is no reason to limit that authority.  
 
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  If you have any 
questions about our position, please contact me at kdufour@memun.org  or 592 -4038.   
 
