1TESTIMONY OF
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
Hearing Date: 2/14/23
LD 286 - An Act to Authorize the Use of Tax Increment Financing Funds for 
Constructing or Renovating Municipal Offices and Other Municipal Buildings
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 286 - 
An Act to Authorize the Use of Tax Increment Financing Funds for Constructing or 
Renovating Municipal Offices and Other Municipal Buildings.
While the Department of Economic and Community Development (DECD) 
has usually taken the lead on municipal tax increment financing (TIF) bills, Maine 
Revenue Services would like to raise a few technical considerations regarding this 
bill.
First, the restriction of costs to “10% of the total current assessed value” 
needs clarification.  Specifically, it is unclear whether the language restricts costs 
to 10% of the original assessed value of property in the TIF district, or to 10% of 
the current assessed value of TIF district property for that year, which is 
recalculated annually.
Next, it is worth noting that this bill appears to eliminate most of the 
restrictions under 30-A M.R.S. § 5225(2) that generally prohibits the use of TIF 
funds for buildings used predominantly for the general conduct of government or 
2for public recreational purposes for municipal projects that fall within the project 
cost limitations.
Finally, projects covered in this bill may overlap with projects covered under 
30-A M.R.S. § 5225(1)(C)(9), which allows the use of TIF funds for public safety 
facilities in certain situations, but contain different limitations.  Therefore, this bill 
should clarify which paragraphs and subparagraphs apply in these instances.
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.
