STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
JANET T. MILLS                                        HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                GOVERNOR                                                                               COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION•AUGUSTA•MAINE•04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800•FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
February 14, 202 3 
 
Senator Nicole Grohoski  
Representative Joe Perry  
Committee on Taxation  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Dear Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and members of the Committee on Taxation ,  
 
I am writing regarding LD 286, An Act to Authorize the Use of Tax Increment Financing Funds 
for Constructing or Renovating Municipal Offices and Other Municipal Buildings . This bill would 
allow property taxes redirected as part of a municipal tax increment financing district to be used 
for municipal office construction and renovation. Currently, under municipal tax increment 
financing, or “MTIF”, statute, municipal building s unrelated to the development are explicitly not 
eligible uses of diverted property taxes . The only exceptions allowed  in statute are public safety 
buildings  directly related to economic development  and buildings in a downtown TIF district that 
are leased by a government office . 
 
The general purpose of the MTIF program  is to allow new property taxes from a project to be 
redirected towards expenses supporting commercial and industrial development  and 
redevelopment . MTIF is designed to be an important but specific tool in a community’s toolbox. 
Given that it redirects property tax revenue from the usual municipal budget mechanisms,  the ways 
in which municipalit ies use these funds  must meet a standard of relevance to the program purpose 
in order to justify that diversion . Previous  precedent, including the original MTIF law, sees 
diverting revenues from general municipal budgets to a municipal building project as only 
appropriate in certain  circumstances.  
 
Our department does have technical suggestions regarding the allocation of the language of LD 
286 within the MTIF statute . We would be happy to discuss those suggestions further during work 
session if that is something the committee would like to pursue.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Phoenix McLaughlin  
Tax Incentive Policy Manager  

