 
21398499_2   
 
 
 
 
LD 286, An Act to Authorize the Use of Tax Increment Financing Funds for Constructing or 
Renovating Municipal Offices and Other Municipal Buildings  
 
February 14, 2023 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joi nt Standing Commit tee on Taxation, my name is 
Stephen Gorden and  in addition to serving as a member of  the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, 
I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Mai ne County Commissioners 
Association . We appreci ate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee  in support of LD 286, with 
one recommended amendment  discussed below. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county go vernment in providing vital services to Maine cit izens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta , represents all of Maine’s 16 counties , and is governed by a b oard 
with representation from each par ticipating count y.  
 
Discussion.  Maine law currently permits municipalities to utilize revenue from tax increment  financing districts 
for several purposes. Under LD 286, municipalities  would be permit ted to use revenue from tax increment 
financing districts to construct  or renovat e municipal offices or other  municipal buildings when the legislative 
body of the municipality determines that certain conditions are met. Our Association writes in qualified support 
of LD 286 if the language  of the bill is amended to incorporate counties in addition to municipalitie s. Counties 
maintain a number of buildings, including offices, courthouses, and jails. For this reason, we feel that this 
proposal should apply to counties, as well. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to pr ovide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional informat ion, please do not hesitate to let us know.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Stephen Gorden  
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legisl ative Counsel  
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2  Augusta, ME 04330 , 207-623-4697  
www.mainecountie s.org  
 
