TESTIMONY OF MATT DUNLAP, CIA 
MAINE STATE AUDITOR 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 696, An Act to Allow the People to Elect the State Auditor 
LD 1307, RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Allow the 
People to Elect the Constitutional Officers 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government; my name is Matt Dunlap and I live in Old Town, 
and I have the distinct privilege and high honor of serving as Maine’s state auditor. I am here 
today to provide some additional information to the committee as it prepares to deliberate this 
series of bills to change the process by which we elect not only the state auditor, which this bill is 
particular to, but all of the Constitutional officers as Well, which is considered in a separate 
resolution. 
The ﬁrst item to consider in these bills, as with any legislation, is to contemplate precisely what 
will be achieved by this change. These bills may give the people more direct say in how ofﬁcials 
such as the state auditor, secretary of state, attorney general and state treasurer are selected. This, 
in a philosophical sense to some, represents an improvement. More democracy can’t be bad, 
right? 
In a sense, the public does have a say; after all, they elect the Legislature, and then the 
Legislature elects the constitutional and statutory ofﬁcers. At least one editorial board has 
agitated about this situation longer than I can remember, editorializing that some of the most 
important positions in state government are elected Without the input of the public. Somehow no 
one seems to mind that the Legislature also elects the Speaker of the House and the President of 
the Senate and the respective chamber ﬂoor leaders; to be fair, shouldn’t the same principle 
apply? 
Philosophical arguments aside, let’s consider how such ofﬁces were set up in the ﬁrst place. 
Let’s leave the Auditor aside for a moment, since We didn’t have an audit function in state 
government at all until 1883, and no state auditor until 1907. 
In 1820, the legislatively-elected constitutional ofﬁcers were limited to the Treasurer and the 
Secretary of State. In 185 6, added to that number was the Attorney General (who previously had 
been appointed by the Governor), the Adjutant General, and the State Land Agent—whose 
appointment by the Governor was restored by a Constitutional Resolution that took effect in 
1893. By the l880’s, We eliminated the state Land Ofﬁce. In 1907, the State Auditor was 
established in law; the ﬁrst, Charles Hatch, was appointed by the Governor until he was elected 
statewide. The Auditor was elected by statewide vote until 1931, when the Joint Select 
Committee on Administrative Code recommended that the Auditor be elected by ballot of the 
Legislature, among a number of other sweeping changes that included the creation of the 
Department of Administration and Finance.
The discussion at the time wasn’t just about consistency —after all, by 1931, all of the 
Constitutional ofﬁcers were elected by the Legislature. As we can imagine, people who train to 
be expert professionals aren’t always keen to throw their professional fates to the will of the 
voters; I can see how it could have become difficult to both ﬁnd qualiﬁed candidates to actually 
run for the position. Then, once they were on the ballot, the voters weren’t entirely sure what 
they were voting for. When I was ﬁrst elected Secretary of State, the most common question I 
got was “What is it exactly that you do?” When a family member asked me that, I deadpanned 
that I answered the state phone. They nodded in sudden and appreciative understanding. 
That’s not to imply that voters aren’t smart. Quite the contrary. In my experience, I have found 
that voters are ardent students of the ballot and take their role in our democratic fonn of self- 
governance very seriously. But voters, I’m sorry to say, don’t hang on every word Matt Dunlap 
has to say about the topical news coming out of Augusta. Voters have the temerity to have lives 
of their own; they have bills topay, businesses to run and jobs to get to, soccer practices to pick 
kids up from, meals to prepare, and did anyone feed the cat? 
In the early days of our nation, voters considered very little at the polls. They voted for the 
Legislature and the Governor; for members of the Federal House of Representatives, and for 
presidential electors —-and that was just about it. Maine didn’t have a citizen initiative process 
until 1907, and until 1913 and the ratiﬁcation of the 17th Amendment, legislatures also elected 
U.S. Senators. 
The operative theory on that was that among elected ofﬁcials, hardly anyone is closer to the 
voters than a state legislator, with the exception of a town ofﬁcial. Legislators, no more then so 
than now, became clearinghouses for all kinds of constituent issues. As Secretary of State (which 
has far more citizen contact, for obvious reasons, than State Auditor), I made a point of 
patrolling the halls of the State House every session day. I would pick up constituent questions 
and issues and spend the day trying to resolve them. 
I’ve gotten the question about legislation like this bill and the bill regarding direct election of the 
Constitutional ofﬁcers for many years. My response has been, generally, like my position on this 
bill—neither for nor against. It’s really nothing to me, personally. But pragmatically, as either 
Secretary of State or as State Auditor, if I were elected by the people, you’d probably never see 
me again. Why would I visit the State House? I would need to be campaigning and raising 
money. Someone in your district needs an expedited road test before a family trip? Call the one- 
eight hundred number. A town ofﬁcial can’t ﬁnd an accounting ﬁrm to review their ﬁnances? 
Have them call Maine Municipal or someone else. In other words, you would stand to losea 
great deal of responsiveness. Come to think of it, when was the last time you saw a U. S. Senator 
ﬁom Maine in the hallways? 
To me, speaking not as an elected ofﬁcial but as a voting citizen, What would the campaigns look 
like? “Matt Dunlap will fight to root out waste, fraud, and abuse!!! ” In my mind, I even have 
sign colors picked out and mailers ready. The problem with a campaign slogan like that for this 
position is that we are entirely dependent on the cooperation of the state agencies whose 
programs we review in order to do our job. I get elected on a public platform like the one Ijust
described ——and good luck getting a Warm Welcome from Department of State Holidays when we 
show up with our slide rules and jeweler’s loupes. 
There’s a bit of a deeper problem in who I would raise money from. The big CPA ﬁrms? 
Industries that are regulated by the state? Frankly, I’ve done that kind of fundraising, and I’m not 
sure where I’d start. Likewise for the Constitutional officers; where would the Attorney General 
go but the major law ﬁrms they face in court? Or the Secretary of State—an obvious place would 
be the corporate ﬁling and election software companies. And the Treasurer would have to hope 
for willing donors galore on Wall Street. 
About that: at one time, in the not-so-distant past, a Maine constitutional ofﬁcer caused 
legislators to suffer quite a stomachache over the massive PAC they had built up. The ofﬁcer in 
question had access to anything you wanted—courtside seats at a Celtics game, behind the 
dugout at FenWay—you name it. That made legislators squeamish enough that the law was 
amended so that constitutional ofﬁcers can’t even be in the room when fundraising is being 
discussed, and are strictly forbidden from having campaign committees or PACs. 
But to the original question: What would the change itself fundamentally accomplish? Would you 
elect a better Auditor, or, in the case the resolution on the Constitutional ofﬁcers, a better 
Secretary of State? Would the ofﬁces themselves be more—~or less—accountable and responsive 
to you, the oversight committees representing the public? To me, that’s the operative question. 
History doesn’t offer us a direct, lighted path to ﬁnd the answer. The danger is that in trying to 
ﬁnd the answer, We may eventually lose sight of the mission of the agencies as instruments in the 
dynamic orchestra of self-governance as they are swept up in the vortex that is today’s political 
discourse. 
Thank you for your patience, and I am happy to answer any questions at the pleasure of the 
Chair.
