Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Support For
LD 96 – An Act to Ensure Release of Relevant Background Investigation Material to Current Employers 
of Law Enforcement and Corrections Officers
January 30, 2023
Sen. Beebee-Center, Rep. Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing testimony, in general support of 
LD 96, An Act to Ensure Release of Relevant Background Investigation Material to Current Employers of 
Law Enforcement and Corrections Officers, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which 
represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. The positions of the Association 
are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils 
and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts.
Municipalities, like all other levels of government must adhere to stronger employment law 
requirements, have longer records retention, transparent disclosure and confidentiality requirements and 
employee appeals protections around such information than most private sector entities. Because of this, 
decisions around what is allowed to be collected, shared, and with whom at each stage of the employment 
and termination process is frequently scrutinized and often litigated, resulting in an overly cautious 
approach to disclosing information outside the entity. 
Due process rights of employees operate in balance with the costly use of public funds to defend 
a municipality even when acting in good faith. For instance, operationally, an arrest record does not 
establish that a person engaged in criminal conduct.  Arrest records may also be inaccurate (e.g., 
mistakenly identify the arrestee) or incomplete (e.g., do not state whether charges were filed or dismissed 
against the arrestee).  Thus, the federal government recommends that an arrest record alone should not be 
used by a current employer to take an adverse employment action.  However, an arrest may trigger an 
inquiry into whether the conduct underlying the arrest justifies an adverse employment action even 
without a conviction. 
Officials do not want to hire or retain individuals who bring disrepute to our policing agencies or 
place our communities in harm’s way. Any attempts to clarify what municipal officials can share 
regarding non-employees, particularly in the context of avoiding passing around bad law enforcement 
employees, is welcomed. Statutory clarity that permits the sharing of candidate information among 
agencies is needed and should include protections not only for municipal officials, but also the taxpayer 
who must foot the legal costs of defending the municipality for perceived violations of federal or state 
employment law. This is even more important if the individual in question is not an employee because 
doing so may drag an agency into a legal action taken against another employer.
Federal law requires that municipalities obtain permission from the individual applying for a 
municipal position to collect background information for the purposes of making an employment 
decision, but must disclose a list of sources queried, and provide an opportunity for rebuttal should the 
information received be used as the reason to not hire an individual. In practice, if an agency chooses not 
to hire an individual, a waiver to disclose information obtained that led to that decision to the current 
employer is necessary. This acts as the due process mechanism that protects the non-hiring agency from 
litigation and provides notification of that disclosure to the employee in question. An employee may be 
unwilling to supply their current employer with a signed waiver for that purpose.
There is a clear public interest in allowing a prospective law enforcement agency to share such 
information directly with a current employer when they are potentially in violation of their state 
certification standards. A law enforcement background check on a prospective employee who is already 
employed in law enforcement for another agency, may (and anecdotally has in fact) uncover pending and 
adjudicated criminal charges in other states unknown to the current employer. However, disclosure of 
such information to an outside agency without notification to the individual and an opportunity for 
rebuttal, may expose the non-hiring agency to employment law violation claims without express 
obligation and authority for that disclosure, particularly if the agency employing the individual takes 
adverse employment action. 
Municipal officials seek to attract and retain the best individuals as law enforcement officers in 
our communities and have no desire to pass around problem officers. Yet, we know this happens. As 
officials operate in a litigious reality, additional language may be necessary for the committee to consider 
in the process of protecting and encouraging the sharing of information for conduct outside the high bar 
we seek in our policing staff. 
Officials thank you for this important work, and also ask that you consider language or processes 
that protect the potential hiring agency if a current employer takes adverse action against the 
applicant/employee that is later judged to have in been in violation of federal or state law and may have 
originated from a candidate background check disclosure. 
