TESTIMONY OF DIRECTOR RICHARD R. DESJARDINS 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
MAINE CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACADEMY 
p (In Support) L.D. 96 
“An Act to Ensure Release of Relevant Background Investigation Material to Current 
Employers of Law Enforcement and Corrections Ofﬁcers” 
Submitted by the Department of Public Safety pursuant to Joint Rule 204. Reference to the Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered printed. 
Sponsored by: Rep. Cyrway 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Hearing Date: January 30, 2023, at 10:00 a.m. in Room 436, State House 
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and members of the Joint Standing Cormnittee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety. My name is Richard R. Desj ardins, and I am the Director of the Maine 
Criminal Justice Academy, representing the Maine Department of Public Safety. 
I am here today to testify In Support of LD 96, “An Act to Ensure Release of Relevant 
Background Investigation Material to Current Employers of Law Enforcement and Corrections 
Officers ” . I want to express my support for this modiﬁcation/clari ﬁcation to Sec. 1. 25 MRSA §2805- 
B, sub-§5, that will codify the requirement to share relevant background information to current 
employers of law enforcement and corrections ofﬁcers regarding previous or ongoing criminal 
conduct. I believe the inclusion of information gathered during a background investigation froma 
prospective employer will help to resolve an existing weakness in our current system. 
The Maine Criminal Justice Academy and the Board of Trustees have the statutory responsibility 
to train and certify all law enforcement and corrections ofﬁcers in Maine. Part of the initial Academy’s 
standards for an individual to be accepted into a certiﬁcation training program, is an extensive 
background and polygraph examination. These examination and attesting documents, conﬁrm the 
individual has no criminal conduct or convictions that would prevent the individual from being 
certiﬁed. 
Once an individual has met all the initial certiﬁcation and training standards, the employing 
agency and the individual must annually report to the Academy, conﬁrmation of compliance with all 
mandatory training standards and adhere to the statutory requirements regarding restricted behavior, 
which include criminal conduct. 
Employing agencies also have a statutory requirement to report to the Director of the Maine 
Criminal Justice Academy, Within 30 days of knowledge, any prohibited conduct or convictions ofa 
law enforcement or correctional employee they become aware of.
1
The proposed change would conﬁrm that agencies that are looking at a prospective, currently 
certiﬁed law enforcement or corrections ofﬁcer, would be required to share relevant background 
information to the current employing agency and that agency would then be responsible to conduct an 
Internal Investigation and report ﬁndings of prohibited conduct to the appropriate jurisdictions i.e., 
District Attorney, Attorney General’s Ofﬁce, etc. and would include the Maine Criminal Justice 
Academy. 
In closing, I believe the vast majority of Maine’s Law Enforcement and Corrections 
Professionals have the highest degree of ethics and integrity and work tirelessly to serve Maine’s 
citizens. However, when a member of our profession conducts themselves contrary to the ethical 
standards of our profession, We support appropriate actions to identify the behavior, make corrections 
or remove these individuals from our profession when needed. 
I would be happy to answer any questions you may have, either now or at any future work 
session.
2
