LEGISLATIVE TESTIMONY 
In Favor of LD 461 
On 
Tuesday, March 28"‘ at 1:30 PM 
Andrew L. Allen 
President/Administrator 
Maine Alliance for Road Associations 
The Maine Alliance for Road Associations (MARA) is a volunteer public service Non-proﬁt 
Corporation. Our main purpose is to gather and distribute information and educational materials 
to road associations who are forming, or who have formed and are operating according to the 
Maine Private Ways Statute, §§ 3101 — 3106. In addition, we advocate for fair and equitable laws 
relating to private road associations and residents living on private roads in Maine. 
We gage the interests of our membership and the public through frequent email correspondence, 
member posts on our website Discussion Forum, and participation in our Annual Private Road 
Conference that is open to our members and the public. 
The goals LD 461 as amended include, clarifying temiinology around the term “private way", 
easing Notice of Claim renewal requirements, providing for installation of pavement and 
maintenance of existing pavement, permitting reserve accounts, and quantifying the increasing 
number of Maine’s private roads with 4 or more parcels maintained privately. 
MARA would like to thank Attomeys John Cunningham and Mary Denison for their pro bono 
work to clarify the confusing terminology surrounding the terms, “private ways” , “private 
roads” , and “public easements ” . We had begun this process. Attorney Cunningham encouraged 
us to expand the number of statutes involved. Attorney Denison joined in and, as we speak, she 
and her paralegal team are choosing the appropriate terms for between 30 and 40 statutes with 
confused terminology. This will become our Addendum 1. Attorney Cunningham ’s experience 
and expertise are responsible for most of the withdrawals. He helped us insert the “pavement 
installation ” (2/3 majority approval), and “reserve accounts ” amendments. It is remarkable that 
these two busy attorneys made the time to help us. MARA is grateful to both of them. 
We favor LD 461 because we believe the changes we propose are in the best interests of private 
road associations and residents living on private roads in Maine. Thank you for this time. Do you 
have any questions?
