Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Meirose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Ernest Carie 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Mullil<en Court a PO Box 836 é Augusta, ME 043320836 aTelephone: 20745260005 Email: info@malnewoodlandowners.org % Website: wwwmainewoodlandowners org Dieting COMMUNiTY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Karla Black 
Deputy Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 461 
“An Act Regarding Private Roads” 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Govemment, my name is Karla Black, I am 
the Deputy Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today Neither 
for Nor Against LD 461, “An Act Regarding Private Roads.” 
The bill before you today makes a change to the deﬁnition of a “private way” in Title 
23 to have the same meaning as a “public easement ” and creates a new deﬁnition for 
“private road.” The proposed amendment drafted by the Maine Alliance for Road 
Associations (MARA) and circulated prior to this hearing eliminates the proposed 
deﬁnition of a “private road” but in the foreword suggests they are still gathering in an 
Addendum the 30 or 40 statutes that will need to be amended to eliminate the tenn 
“private way” and replace it with the terms “public easement ” or “private road.” The 
Addendum will be available in mid to late April. 
This Committee has made helpful changes regarding roads in recent years. You know 
the challenges with making changes in this area. The complexity of the task of ﬁnding 
all of the statutes that utilize the term “private way” and determining what word to 
replace it with is signiﬁcant. It is a task that shouldn’t be hurried. You have also 
recently created the Abandoned and Discontinued Roads Commission, of which I ama 
member, and tasked the Commission with reviewing legislation of this nature when 
you request such assistance. 
The Abandoned and Discontinued Roads Commission met recently regarding LD 461 
and recommends that this bill be held over until the next session of the legislature. 
This will give the Commission time to work with MARA to review the terms and the 
Addendum in a comprehensive fashion and provide this Committee with its 
substantive recommendations. 
Maine Woodland Owners supports this recommendation. 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - lRC 501(c)(3)
