A M Moine Municipal 
Association 
so COMMUNITY DRIVE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04330-9486 
(207) 623-8428 
www.memun.org 
Testimony of The Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition To 
LD 46l - An Act Regarding Private Roads 
March 28, 2023 
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony in opposition LD 461, An Act 
An Act Regarding Private Roads, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the 
interests of municipal government before the Legislature. 
While I understand there are amendments in the works, these comments pertain to the language in 
the printed bill. 
As drafted, the bill seeks to require municipalities inventory all roads in their communities both 
private and public, and those that are private with easements. As we have indicated previously, this is not 
simply making a list of roads and whether or not they are maintained. It is determining the legal status of 
those roads, which not only requires a legal review but is subject to appeal and judicial processes to 
protect the interests of all involved parties. This is akin to a municipality drawing the legal property 
boundaries on a parcel of land, and determining that which the town owns and that which the owner 
retains. As with all property boundary line establishments, it is subject to challenge, often doesn’t reflect 
the ways in which current abutters use their property and often results in challenges. 
These legal conditions are necessarily protective processes that are not only expensive, but should 
be initiated only when necessary to avoid unnecessary public expenditure to create problems where there 
are none currently. As such, the bill would require a mandate preamble and 90% of the costs for that 
activity to be shouldered by the state should the activity be mandated. A low-ball estimate of the legal 
fees that would be necessary for the review is around $7,000-$10,000 per community, excluding dispute 
costs. 
Most communities also have road standards established in their subdivision ordinance and asa 
requirement for accepting any new roads that are built. There is no need for an additional ordinance to 
establish that establishes a standard for private roads as they would apply if there was a desire for a newly 
built road to be accepted or maintained. Historic roads often cannot be brought up to that standard without 
a takings process, as they have grown organically often in a pre-vehicle reality. 
Roads that are currently maintained have a state database already available to the public through 
the Local Roads Assistance Program and the Department of Transportation is working to make a listof
roads by name publicly available. These roads are reported to the state by the municipality through the E- 
9ll reporting system- which shares that information with the Local Roads Assistance program. Officials 
believe that this process is a low barrier for town reporting, requiring an addressing agent to report to only 
one entity, and leverages the appropriate sharing of the information between state agencies that use the 
information in two different ways. Additionally, the process also provides the public access to the 
necessary information about what they most care about —if the road is publicly maintained. The 
information does not change frequently and the department has offered to update the list periodically and 
make it available through the same map viewing website. 
With regard to the deﬁnitions of private road, private way, and public easement, these terms are 
used in different sections of law differently because of the functionality of the statute that is intended. For 
instance, the deﬁnition of “Private way” in title 29-A is intentionally all encompassing of the ways in 
which the tenn has been used in title 23 or title 12 because the purpose of the statute is to provide law 
enforcement authority to charge for operation offenses on any road or easement that has public access, not 
address the legal status of a road. The deﬁnition here does not supersede or change the fact-finding ways 
in which the court determines if an easement is subject to gates and bars, or cannot be gated and barred, it 
is exclusively to allow moving violations on those ways to be enforced. This creates confusion for 
someone simply reading the statute.- 
For these reasons, and for the confusion in the general public between which definition is applied 
when, ofﬁcials and the Association feel the work of the Abandoned and Discontinued Roads Commission 
is vital to unpick and unify the appropriate definitions sensitively. This will prevent residents on a private 
road or a private road with an easement, from being disenfranchised from the enforcement tools used 
against risky drivers in title 29-A, or damage until title l7-A, which could occur with a blanket change to 
the definitions, while also clarifying the intent uniformly across all statutes. To do this, the Commission 
needs time and support. Alternatively, the unintended consequences will continue to be addressed on an 
ad hoc basis further confusing the rights of all parties based on arbitrary changes in law at different points 
in time. 
Officials ask that you table or carry over the definitional changes in the bill until the Commission 
has had enough time to review and make appropriate recommendations on those changes informed by all 
stakeholders. They also ask that the provisions in the bill placing mandates on municipal government be 
removed unless there is clear intent from the state the resources will be dedicated not from the property 
taxpayer ’s pocket for the activity if it is truly of state-wide importance.
