Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, Members of the State and Local Government Committee, 
My name is Roberta Manter, and I live in Fayette. Regarding LD 461, I ﬁnd myself wearing 
several hats. As a Board Member of MARA, I strongly believe in this bi1l’s objectives. MARA 
and the Abandoned and Discontinued Roads Commission (ADRC) agree that sorting out the 
confusing terminology will require more time. As founder of Maine ROADWays, and living on 
a road that has been declared a “private way”and a “public easement, ” the one issue of the 
terminology and its meaning is of utmost importance to me. My husband will speak on that in 
more detail. , 
MARA agrees with the ADRC’s recommendation to deletethe three paragraphs (6, 13, and 14,) 
regarding town standards for private roads. 
With regard to Section 12, l’m glad Pete Coughlan of the DCT has offered to provide a more' 
readily available list of town maintained roads and E-911 information. But more work will be 
needed to distinguish E-911 addresses on private roads from those on abandoned and 
discontinued roads. 
The ADRC focused on parts of LD 461 and MARA’s proposed amendment that relate to 
abandoned and discontinued roads. If you follow their recommendation to hold parts of the bill 
over, I hope you can allow the paragraphs regarding 23 MRS §§3 101-3 105-A to move forward 
this session. Having been a Board Member of a Road Association, I can tell you how urgent 
these reforms are.- 
The intent of §3101's prohibition against paving was to prevent well-to-do members who want 
paving from imposing high dues payments on other members for whom that would be a hardship. 
But it ties the hands of those who need to repair roads that were paved after 2007 but beforea 
road association was formed. My daughter ’s family bought their land in 2006 because the road 
was not paved and therefore would not be expensive to maintain. Later the owner ofa 
subdivision on part of the road paved his portion before forming a road associtation. It already 
needs repair, but §3 101 prohibits it.* 
MARA’s amendment offers options - specifically allowing “reclaim, ” and, in §3103, allowing 
reserve accounts to build funds for long range projects. 
What follows is my own personal opinion regarding 23 MRS §3104, not the position of MARA. 
Iwas present when the bill was passed that created the 18 month expiration of Notice of Claim, 
and I opposed it then. It was supposed to make the process easier for volunteer laymen running 
road associations. It has had the opposite effect. Getting people to agree to serve on a road 
association board is difﬁcult; getting them to tackle filing Notices of Claim is even more 
difficult. 
I think it Was assumed that most people will pay their overdue dues when a Notice of Claim is 
ﬁled. If that were the case, an 18 month expiration would be reasonable. What actually happens 
is that some will pay when they get the advance warning letter. A few more will pay or set upa
payment plan when the Claim is actually ﬁled. But then there are those who have no intention of 
paying unless or until they are forced to pay because they want to sell the property. These claims 
can linger for years, and the longer they go, the more money is at stake for the road association. 
But miss the deadline by just one day and the claim expires. There is some disagreement as to 
whether a new claim can be ﬁled by starting the process over again, or whether that claim is 
forever lost. MARA originally proposed repealing the 18 month expiration entirely. After being 
told that Title Insurers would object to that proposal, MARA conceded to a six year expiration. I 
favor repeal. 
My concem is that the ofﬁcers of a road association may change more than once in six years. 
Who is going to keep track of the date on which they must renew a claim ﬁled a few officers 
ago? I‘ve seen what happens when a town closes a road to winter maintenance for a ten year 
period. After ten years, when the road should be reviewed to see whether to restune snow 
removal or renew the closing, there may be new town officials who don’t know the history. No 
one remembers the road had been maintained by the town, and by the time someone questions it, 
the town claims the road abandoned. I have no reason to believe the volunteers who run a road 
association will be any better at keeping track of what a previous Board has done. 
Since 2017, an amendment to 33 MRS 173 has required real estate disclosure when the access to 
a property being sold is not maintained by the public. That law has been a great improvement in 
that realtors now routinely contact the road association before the sale to ask if there are any 
outstanding dues, or to clear up any Notice of Claim. Locating the ofﬁcers of the road 
association should not be a problem, since everyone who lives on the road must know where to 
send their armual dues payment. 
On the other hand, I can see the point of the Title Insurers that if a road association no longer 
exists, ﬁnding who to contact can be impossible. With no expiration date, the Notice of Claim 
cannot be cleared. Would it be possible to set up a process whereby a Notice of Claim would be 
extinguished if the road association is dissolved or fails due to lack of participation? If residents 
on the road report that there is no longer a road association, then there is no one to whom the 
overdue dues need be paid. 
Finally, I cannot stress enough the issue of the unconstitutionality of “private ways” and “public 
easements ” - public roads that are not maintained by the public. How can you reconcile Jordanv 
Canton (public roads with no public maintenance are unconstitutional in the absence of just 
compensation,) with Fayette v Manter (a public easement gives the public an “unfettered right of 
access” but the public has no maintenance responsibility)? How do you reconcile Brownv 
Warchalowski (Unconstitutional to establish a private way without public exigency) and Lambv 
New Sharon (Public loses its rights to a road after 30 years) with 23 MRS 3026 and 3028 (Roads 
discontinued or abandoned become public easements)? 
I would love to have the chance to elaborate on this point for the Committee. 
Thank you.
