|)v_ P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2074303334 
Testimony of Francine Stark and Andrea Mancuso on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
LD 1436: ”An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation ” 
Tuesday, April 11, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)‘ regarding LD 1461, “An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation. ” 
Since first opening their doors, Maine's domestic violence resource centers have 
provided support and a broad range of services to survivors of domestic abuse and violence 
who have experienced sexual exploitation. The ways in which intimate partners are 
exploited or coerced to comply with sexual demands are myriad, up to and including sex 
trafficking. In 2022, our network provided services to 202 individuals in Maine who identified 
as sex trafficking survivors. Beyond those who have been sexually exploited or trafficked, 
our network also recognizes that any member of our community who engages in sex work, 
including those who are criminalized for it, is best served when community service providers 
support them and help them meet their needs without judgment. The needs of all of these 
Mainer’s, regardless of how they categorize their experience, are complex and deserving of 
our thoughtful attention and response. 
Maine’s first needs assessment on human trafficking was conducted in 2015, almost 
10 years ago. That study provided useful, albeit incomplete} information about the 
prevalence of sex trafficking in Maine, the needs presented by survivors, gaps in services, 
and system approaches that were creating barriers to safety. ln response, progress has been 
made, not only in the enhancement of services available for survivors, but also as regards 
awareness and education on the issues of sex trafficking and sexual exploitation in Maine. 
MCEDV supports the need for a subsequent collaborative assessment to best inform our 
collective understanding and the continued forward progress of this important work. 
1 
MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to approximately 14,000 victims of 
domestic violence in Maine last year. 
2 
While the 2015 needs assessment completed by Hornby Zeller involved the participation of several services 
providers and stakeholders, it did not collect data or information from the full range of service providers 
working with survivors of sex trafficking and sex exploitation statewide. In particular, Maine's domestic 
violence resource centers were not involved in this prior assessment, and so the final report does not 
sufficiently reﬂect data collected by Maine's DVRCs about the survivors of sex trafficking and/or sex 
exploitation who sought or received any of the services available at these organizations or the gaps and 
challenges experienced by the survivors and the advocates who worked with them. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
IVICEDV Page 2 of2 
In 2018, Safe Voices, the domestic violence resource center that serves 
Androscoggin, Oxford and Franklin Counties, opened the first 24-hour emergency safe 
house in Maine for survivors fleeing sex trafficking and sexual exploitation. This project isa 
result of a collaboration between Safe Voices, Sexual Assault Prevention and Response 
Services, MCEDV, the Department of Health and Human Services, Maine Housing, and the 
Office of the Maine Attorney General. Domestic violence resource centers across Maine 
work as part of regional, multi-disciplinary teams to offer a range of aid to survivors fleeing 
sexual trafficking and exploitation, including advocacy, support, help connecting with 
housing resources and health care services and assistance with finding stable employment. 
Each year, these programs collectively serve survivors of sex trafficking and sex exploitation 
from both rural and urban parts of Maine. This is work that is best done collaboratively to 
ensure that there is no wrong door for those who need support - that outreach to any one 
of a number of community touchpoints will result in the engagement of the full network of 
resources to create or enhance safety and wellbeing. 
As noted by Elise Johansen, Executive Director of Safe Voices, what our advocates 
often see is “people who have been living in Maine - perhaps lived here their whole lives- 
are being trafficked. ” ln Maine, these are typically girls and women aged 14 to 30 years old 
with a history of sexual and physical abuse, lacking in basic needs and a strong emotional 
support system. In addition to sex trafficking, we also see a lot of sex exploitation, where, 
for example, a person with nowhere else to go is offered a couch to sleep on but only in 
exchange for sex. A survivor recognizing they are being exploited or trafficked is only the 
first step. Escaping from the person who is trafficking or exploiting the survivor can be very 
difficult. Law enforcement, health care providers, advocates, educators and policy makers 
are all critical partners in identifying, addressing and ending sex trafficking and sex 
exploitation in Maine. We all have a responsibility to ensure that Maine's response to some 
of our most vulnerable community members is moving in the right direction and is better 
meeting their needs; if this proposal will help to update to roadmap and provide support for 
what might additionally be needed, MCEDV and our member programs appreciate the 
opportunity to participate. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share the work of our network. MCEDV and our 
member programs are happy to be a resource to this Committee and work with other 
interested parties as you continue to discuss LD 1436. Should the proposal be enacted, we 
look forward to continued collaboration with the Department of Health and Human Services 
on these issues. 
Contact Information: 
Francine Stark, Executive Director, and Andrea Mancuso, Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 430-8334, Email: francine@mcedv.org, andrea@mcedv.org
