 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1261 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1261, An Act to Establish Mandatory Minimum Sentences for Gross Sexual Assaults 
and Sex Trafficking of Children  
 
DA: April 1 1, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1261.  
 
As a general matter, CLAC members, including both prosecutors and defense counsel, 
oppose mandatory minimum sentences.  The Criminal Code gives  judges  broad  discretion, within 
the parameters set by the Legislature, to address the conduct of the offender and to tailor sentences 
to the circumstances of each case, including the harm to the victim, the age of the victim, and the 
history and circumstances of the o ffender.   
 
Mandatory sentences can have unintended consequences, which may diminish respect for 
the criminal justice system.   A mandatory sentence may not be the appropriate sanction  in a 
particular case, because it does not account for the many differen t circumstances and situations of 
each defendant and victim.   As a result , to avoid an unduly harsh result, prosecutors may charge a 
different crime, or the prosecution and defense may negotiate pleas to charges other than those that 
require a certain sen tence.    Mandatory sentences can also force more trials, to the detriment of 
victims, because a defendant willing to accept responsibility , when faced with a non-negotiable 
mandatory sentence , may opt to go to trial in the hope  of acquittal . 
 
CLAC’s testimony should not be interpreted as a la ck of appreciation for the gravity of the 
heinous conduct associated with crimes of gross sexual assault and trafficking of children.  On the 
contrary, the current sentencing scheme gives judges authority to impose sentences for “any term of 
years” on conv iction of gross sexual assault against a child under 12.  This means that there is no 
statutory maximum on the length of the sentence.  By striking this language, the proposal would 
subject the crime to a statutory maximum of 30 years, which is the limit t hat applies to Class A 
crime s.     
 
The current sentencing structure for gross sexual assault against a child under 12 requires 
the court to set the basic sentence (the first step in the sentencing process outlined by 17 -A M.R.S.  
§ 1602) at a minimum of 2 0 years.  This is the starting point from which the judge can th en increase 
or decrease a sentence , depending on aggravating and mitigating circumstances, and reflects the 
approach taken by the Legislature in response to a previous proposal to establish ma ndatory 
minimum sentences.   The Legislature has identified  aggravating factors that the court must 
 
 consider as part of this process.  17 -A M.R.S. § 253(3).  In addition, a sentence for gross sexual 
assault against a child under 12 must include a period of  supervised release following release from 
incarceration; this supervision may be for up to life for the offender.   17 -A M.R.S. § 1881.   
 
The proposal of a mandatory life sentence for repeat sexual assault offenders who are 
currently exposed to sentences of “any term of years” would be the only such provision in the 
Criminal Code.   In contrast,  life sentences for crimes of aggravated attempted murder and murder 
are subject to both statutory and judicially -created factors th at must be considered and found before 
a court can impose a life sentence.  17 -A M.R.S. § 152-A (aggravated attempted murder); State v 
Lord , 208 A.3d 781 (discussing factors applicable to life sentences and difference between life and 
“any term of years”) .    In light of the existing caselaw regarding factors that must be considered 
before a court can impose a life sentence, it is likely that a statutory mandatory life sentence would 
result in litigation challenging the validity of the statute.    Mandatory  life sentence s for any juvenile 
bound over and prosecuted as an adult  are not constitutionally permitted, and any statutory change 
mandating a life sentence should exclude that result .   Montgomery v. Louisiana , 577 U.S. 190 
(2016); Miller v. Alabama , 567  U.S. 460 (2012).   
 
If the Legislature proposes to make changes to the sentencing structure for aggravat ed sex 
trafficking, such a change should be reflected in section 852 as well as the general sentencing 
provisions in section 1604.  (The current propos al places the change only in section 1604.) See, e.g., 
17-A M.R.S. § 253-A, Special sentencing provisions for gross sexual assault.   It is important to 
maintain consistent drafting approaches within the Code, and essential to include these cross -
referenci ng provisions to provide notice to the public, the court and practitioners regarding the 
applicable laws.     
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
