STATE or MAINE 
KATHRYN SLATTERY 
DISTRICT I 
JACQUELINE SARTORIS 
DISTRICT II R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY 
DISTRICT V 
NATASHA IRVING 
Drsrmcr VI 
V TI 
NEIL ]\/[CLEAN .-p._. 
' Hi,» ROBERT GRANGER 
““-’- ' ‘ ‘I =* I’ *-' Drsrnrcr VII DISTRICTIII » \ 
_. 
'-3‘ 
DISTRICTIV DISTRICT VIII MAEGHAN MALONEY '4 Tom) R. COLLINS 
12;: .,;i..;rri2<_-*~= ‘r“;-'*§r;» *i"‘ 
ul' 
,r ;_:*~if* 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION 
SHIRA BURNS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
“An Act to Establish Mandatory Minimum Sentences for Gross Sexual Assault and Sex 
Trafficking of Children ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Public Hearing Date: April ll, 2023 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 1261 
Senator Camey, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary. My name is Shira Burns and I represent the Maine Prosecutors Association. I am here to 
testify in opposition of LD 1261. 
Maine Prosecutors Association absolutely Want to hold sex offenders accountable for their actions. 
However, minimum mandatory sentences do not accomplish that and can actually lead to less 
accountability. Sex crimes against children are one of the most heinous crimes that can be 
committed and they leave traumatized children left having to play a role in the criminal justice 
system. 
These crimes happen behind closed doors With very little, if any, witnesses around. The children 
bear the burden of having to tell graphic details of what happened to them, sometimes by the person 
that is responsible for their care, to complete strangers. If faced with a trial, the child victim may 
have to see the person that perpetrated these acts on them and again tell very graphic details toa 
room full of strangers. As prosecutors work with these victims, we constantly balance the public 
safety concerns for Mainers against the ongoing trauma this child victim faces by interacting with 
the criminal justice system. 
Minimum mandatory sentences do not take into account how much a victim wants to participate in 
the criminal justice system. Many victims want to avoid going through the trial process and ask the 
prosecutor to offer a plea that would be less than these minimum mandatory sentences. Prosecutors 
are also dependent on what evidence is available at trial to prove the case beyond a reasonable 
doubt. This is all taken into consideration when a prosecutor recommends a certain plea agreement. 
Minimum mandatory sentences lead to more trials, which might not have favorable outcome for the 
victim, and different charging decisions being made. By going to trial on some of these cases where 
there could have been a plea agreement, the State risks losing the victim hearing their abuser take 
responsibility for their actions, a deﬁnite term of imprisonment, supervision when the offender is 
released from incarceration, and registration on the sex offender registry.
To help hold sex offenders accountable for their actions and provide better victim safety, laws 
should be drafted to support a child victim through the criminal justice process and provide them 
services for the trauma they endured. 
For these reasons, the Maine Prosecutors Association is in opposition of LD 1261.
