  
2021-202 2 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walter F.  McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2021-2022 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sher man  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXE CUTIVE DI RECTOR  
 
    
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523- 9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com 
 
April 6, 2023 
 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matt Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augus ta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 1261 – A n Act to Establish Mandatory Minimum Sentences for Gross  
 Sexual Assault and Sex Trafficking of Children   
        
Dear Senator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 1261. 
 
Mandatory minimum sentences are never a good ide a.  We have judges here in Maine 
that regu larly and routi nely sentence defendants who have been convicted of gross 
sexual assault and sex trafficking , and we rely on their judgment to impose a n 
appropriate sentence that is individualized to the defendant. Every defendant is 
different , and every gross sexual assault and sex trafficking case is different. Judges 
look at each and every individual  case and do n ot have a  “one size fits all ” approach 
and sentence def endants accordingly.  
 
Additio nally, given the current s entencing structure, defendants are already facing 
significant potential sentences for gross sexual ass ault and sex trafficking, and judges 
are already imposing major sentences in these cases.  
 
Finally , the mandatory minimum sentences here that involve s entences of not less 
than 25 years in prison are on the  same level as a murder  case.  While we can all 
appreciate that gross sexual assault and sex trafficking of children are terrible crimes, 
they shoul d not be put on the same pl ane as murder cases.  
 
Thank you for the oppor tunity to address  this issue.  
 
  Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legi slative Committee                       
 

