March 2, 2023 
Senator Michael Tipping, Chair 
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing, Cross Building, Room 202 
Re: LD 426 an Act to Amend the Eligibility Criteria for 
Creditable Service in the Armed Forces of the United 
States under the Maine Public Employees Retirement 
System 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
My name is Arthur Ledoux. I am the Veteran Service 
Ofﬁcer for the City of Westbrook, and I am here today for 
the third time in support of LD 426. Hopefully it’sa 
charm. As some of you may know, last year this Bill 
made it all the Way to Appropriations Where it sat 
unfunded and is now shredded. 
I was going to submit 20 copies of a blank sheet of paper 
and speak to you from the heart, however the process 
requires me to submit Written testimony. 
I am not going to review my 10 years in the Marine 
Corps, or my Work as the ﬁrst and only municipal Veteran
Service Ofﬁcer in the State of Maine in addition to my 
duties as an Operations Manager. lt’s all on the record. 
It is clear to me when I look at the statute, as currently 
Written that the United States and the State of Maine, 
recognizes and honors active-duty service in times of war 
and conﬂict, but not this one. Why? 
Maine men and Women who volunteered and served 
during these conﬂicts under LD 426 checked all the 
boxes. 
0 Volunteered to serve - check 
v Answered the call - check 
1 Sent to foreign soil — check 
1 Engaged the enemy — check 
v Body bags —- check 
0 Purple Hearts - check 
v Loss of equipment - check 
¢ Bravery and heroism- check 
¢ Accomplished the mission - check 
0 Served honorably — check 
We [veterans] didn’t volunteer for the money, and it’s an 
injustice to hold a ﬁscal note over our heads. We learn 
about honor, integrity, in boot camp and are constantly
told how lawmakers “have our backs.” This is your 
chance. 
It troubles me that in 2023 some 40 years after these 
conﬂicts that our service is somehow “less than, not 
enough, too expensive. ” If not, then what’s the rationale. 
If we are not going to treat all veterans the same, then 
let’s at least have consistency to treat all veterans who 
served during wars and conﬂicts the same. 
Honestly, after the Bill died last year in the 
Appropriations in basket, I gave up on you and this 
process, especially when I learned that this was nota 
funding priority from this Committee. You let us down. 
However, Rep. Salisbury reached out to me and said we 
can’t give up. None of the veterans who served during 
Beruit and Grenada gave up and neither can we. So hereI 
am. I’ve done my part, I’ve given, and now it’s your turn 
to “have our backs.” 
Ladies and gentlemen, this is it for me. If everything goes 
as planned, I may be retiring next year. After going to 
work at age 16, enlisting in the Marines at age 17 and 
serving 10 years, and Working for 35 years after that, it’s 
time for my wife and I to take our packs off and hang up 
our boots.
So, once again and for the ﬁnal time, on behalf of all 
veterans Who served during Beruit and Grenada I ask for 
your support of LD 426 by adding and funding these2 
military conﬂicts, (16 months) to the statute and 
recognize the service of veterans Who served bravely and 
honorably during that period, some of whom made the 
ultimate sacriﬁce. _@ can ﬁx this as it is long overdue. 
Please make this a priority. 
I thank you for your time. 
Respectfully, Arthur Ledoux
