CATHERINE 
CUTLER usm 
UNlVESlY or 
e tarrmmm 
Informational Testimony from the Catherine Cutler Institute 
at the University of Southern Maine 
Presented by Alison Grey, M.S., Policy Associate 
Regarding LD 1092, An Act to Prevent the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of 
Children in the State 
March 27, 2023 
Hello Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Sen/ices: 
My name is Alison Grey, and l am a Policy Associate at the Catherine Cutler institute at 
the University of Southern Maine. l lead research and evaluation sen/ices for sponsored 
projects and my content expertise focuses on sexual assault and domestic violence. 
ln 2019, I led a study on Child Welfare Identification and Response to the 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in Maine. This research was sponsored 
by the Maine Coalition Against Sexual Assault with funding obtained through the 
Children ’s Justice Act. 
l am here today to share findings from that study to inform your consideration of LD 
1092, which would fund several of its key recommendations including: 
o Increase training and specialized positions at the Department of Health and 
Human Sen/ices (the Department). 
o Strengthen use of children ’s advocacy centers statewide. 
o Promote additional improvements to the multidisciplinary response, including 
anti-trafficking resources in the community. 
For context, it was federal legislation in 2014 that required state child welfare agencies 
to develop and implement strategies to identify, respond to, and report on sex trafficking 
and commercial exploitation. Under this federal law, states have the flexibility to develop 
policy, tools, and procedures that best meet their needs. Maine’s leaders at the 
Department partnered early on with the Maine Coalition Against Sexual Assault to 
develop Maine’s response and those initial measures were implemented by 2016. 
Fast forward to 2019, MECASA contracted with our research team to evaluate Maine’s 
response and make recommendations for systems improvement. Our team applied a 
mixed methods approach and included:
o Analysis of de-identified data from the Departments child welfare database. 
0 Surveying Maine’s current child welfare staff, from intake to assessment workers 
to supervisors. 
o lnten/iewing key staff at all seven of the state's children's advocacy centers. 
o Assembling a multidisciplinary focus group, including an assessment worker and 
a supervisor from the Department, detective, prosecutor, juvenile community 
corrections officer, advocate, and others to gather their perspectives. 
I do want to include a note about prevalence data in Maine and nationally. Trafficking 
and commercial sexual exploitation have been a growing concern and yet determining 
reliable prevalence data continues to be a challenge. These crimes are typically under- 
reported, and some children may not even consider themselves the “victim” of a crime. 
Youth experiencing a range of adverse childhood experiences and youth from 
marginalized populations are most at risk. National research has also demonstrated a 
clear connection between trafficking and children already involved in child welfare 
systems, juvenile justice systems, as well as teen runaways and homeless youth. 
We learned a lot, and many of our recommendations were implemented immediately by 
the Department. There were some additional findings and recommendations that are 
very relevant to LD 1092. 
o Identification oftrafficking and commercial sexual exploitation of children in 
Maine is underreported and there is a need for specialized case assessment. 
o The Department had implemented training, however, because these types of 
cases are so complicated, there is a need for routine training and designated 
specialists to consult on case management, policies, and procedures. 
~ Resources for youth experiencing these crimes are limited and difficult to 
navigate. There is a tremendous need for a range of services for youth and 
families to provide support, and to prevent further victimization. 
I will conclude with a bright spot in the research and that was the role of chiIdren ’s 
advocacy centers in Maine. 
o It was clear that the children ’s advocacy center-led systems response is the 
preferred method, ideally when there is a dedicated commercial sexual 
exploitation coordinator, although that was not available statewide. This 
formalized approach brings the multidisciplinary intervention, resources, and 
follow-up procedures to the family and determines a response matched to the 
specialized needs of each individual. 
I could go on and on, but in conclusion, we found that systems in Maine have some real 
strengths, and there are some areas in need of attention due to the complexity of this 
issue. LD 1092 is an opportunity to focus on this important issue and bring resources 
and hope to some of our state's most vulnerable and often overlooked youth. 
Thank you. .
