 
34 35th Street, Suite 4 -2A, Brooklyn NY 11232  t 212 334 1300  f 212 941 9407 vera.org  
 
Testimony of Vera Institute of Justice  
Submitted to the  Maine Legisl ature’s  Health and Human Services Committee on  
LD 1092 An Act to Prevent the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in the State  
March 27, 2023 
 
Good morning. My name is Hannah Green, and I am a  program manager at the Vera Institute of Justice’s 
Initiative to End Girls Incarceration (EGI). Thank you, Health and Human Services Committee for holding 
this important hearing . Thank you also to Representative Holly Stover for introducing LD 1092  and to the 
bill’s numerous co -sponsors. LD 1092 will help Maine better prevent and respond to commercial sexual 
exploitation of children  (CSEC),  and I am pleased to offer this testimony in support of it.  
 
The Vera Institute is a 60 -year -old national nonprofit that works to end mass incarceration, protect 
immigrants’ rights, ensure dignity for people behind bars, and build safe, thriving communities . Vera’s 
Initiative to End Girls Incarceration (EGI)  works to end the incarceration of girls and gender expansive 
youth in our country by 2030. Through partnerships in jurisdictions across several states, including 
Maine, we aim to create reforms and programs that will better support the well- being of young people  
in their communities, address the root causes of their incarceration, and permanently close the doors to girls’ juvenile detention and placement facilities. From 2018 to 2020, Vera worked with the Maine 
Department of Corrections (DOC) to advanc e a gender -responsive , youth development approach  to 
ending girls’ incarceration statewide , giving us a view into the awful effects of CSEC in Maine.  
 
Maine has many dedicated providers who work tirelessly to support youth who  experience  CSEC and 
their families, but the current resources are simply not enough to meet the need. Experts estimate that 
hundreds of individuals survive sex trafficking in Maine each year.
i We also know that 12.1 percent of 
high school girls and 9.8 percent of middle school girls in Maine report that they have been physically 
forced to have sexual intercourse. The same is true for 4.9 percent of high school boys and 2.3 percent 
middle school boys, according to the 2021 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey.ii  Without trauma -
informed care, coordinated services, a greater understanding of how and why youth experience CSEC in 
Maine, and new strategies to prevent it, we will continue to see girls with complex, unmet needs, many 
of whom will end up in the youth justice system, and/or accessing homelessness or behavioral health services, at great cost to the state.  
 Sexual exploitation has lifelong consequences. Youth who experience CSEC may experience depression, anxiety, anger, and PTSD, and may engage in self- harming behavior.  Physically, they may experience 
severe injuries, sexually transmitted and other infections, and may not receive care for chronic 
conditions such as asthma or diabetes.
iii In our work in Maine, as in many other communities across the 
country, we  have  seen th at child -serving systems often struggle to support their most vulnerable and 
marginalized girls and gender- expansive youth, many of whom are entangled in multiple systems (child 
welfare, juvenile justice, etc.) and are managing complex trauma across multip le facets of their lives.  
 
Too many of these young people end up in the juvenile justice system , which compounds the harms 
they have experienced . Most incarcerated girls have experienced some combination of commercial 
sexual exploitation, family violence,  sexual violence, substance use, and homelessness from a young age. 
Most have had touchpoints with multiple child -serving systems. In our work in Maine, specifically, our 
casefile review of girls admitted to Long Creek between 2014 and 2019 found that 60  percent of the girls 
 
 
   
 experienced multiple instances of sexual assault and 48  percent  had concerning evidence suggesting or 
actual confirmation that they had been commercially sexually exploited.iv Youth incarceration is 
associated with poorer physical and m ental health as adults, worse education outcomes, and higher 
recidivism rates .v 
 
In order to prevent these negative outcomes, Maine needs to develop a n array of resources across 
multiple child- serving systems  (what is often referred to as a “continuum of care”) . This range of 
resources  would  provid e trauma -informed, coordinated, holistic services  targeted at the unique needs 
of the girls and gender -expansive youth with the most complex needs. LD 1092 would support Maine in 
achieving this  by help ing to  strengthen Maine’s continuum of care for youth experiencing or at risk of 
CSEC, identify gaps in the current continuum  of care , and enable  systems to work together to ensure 
that youth can  access and benefit from current  programming.  
 LD 1092 is an import ant step towards improving the Department of Health and Human Services’ ability 
to prevent CSEC throughout Maine and to better support youth who do experience it. The workforce expansions it supports, and the programming and advisory functions included, wi ll move Maine towards 
a more coordinated and comprehensive continuum of care for youth at risk of or experiencing CSEC , 
immeasurably improving the lives of these young people.  
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony. Please do not hesitate to c ontact me if the Vera 
Institute of Justice may provide further support to you all.  
 
 
 
i Hornby Zeller Associates, Inc., Maine Human Trafficking Needs  (Augusta, ME: Maine Coalition Against Sexual 
Assault , 2015), 16- 20, perma.cc/GMU7 -VNVC . 
ii Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey, 2021 MIYHS High School Report  (August, ME: Maine Department of 
Health and Human Service and Main Department of Education,  2022), 89, perma.cc/6MYQ -HPDS ; and Maine 
Integrated Youth Health Survey, 2021 MIYHS Middle School Report  (August, ME: Maine Department of Health and 
Human Service and Main Depart ment of Education, 2022), 45, https://perma.cc/Y77E -9DN8 . 
iii Roya  Ijadi -Maghsoodi, Mekeila Cook, and Elizabeth S. Barnert, et al., “Understanding and Responding to the 
Needs of Commercially Sexually Exploited Youth: Recommendations for the Mental Health Provider ,” Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America  25, no. 1 (2016) , 107-22, perma.cc/83DE -4JY8 .  
iv Vera’s EGI team and NYU research partners conducted a case file review of girls admitted to Long Creek in 2018 
and 2019.  Through our casefile analysis, we reviewed and coded files for 25 girls who had been admitted to Long 
Creek between t he years of 2014 and 2019, although the majority of files were for girls with recent admissions. 
The 25 girls accounted for a total of 49 admissions.  For an overview, see Vera EGI, Care, Not Confinement: A Better 
Solution for Maine’s Girls  (New York: Vera, 2021), perma.cc/TV8V -96JQ . The full results, including the figures cited 
in this testimony were provided to the Maine Department of Correction as Initiative to End Girls’ Incarceration in 
Maine- Recommendations on Diversion Strategies . For any questions, contact Hannah Green, hgreen@vera.org . 
v For physical and mental health, see  Elizabeth S. Barnert, Rebecca Dudovitz, Bergen B. Nelson, et al.,  “How Does 
Incarcerating Young People Affect Their Adult Health Outc omes?” Pediatrics  139, no. 2 (2017), perma.cc/5S7X -
ACSM .For education outcomes and recidivism, see Anna Aizer and Joseph J. Doyle, Jr., “Juvenile Incarceration, 
Human Capital, and Future Crime: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics  
130, no. 2 (2015 ), 759– 803, doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjv003 ; and  Samantha Harvell, Chloe Warnberg, Andreea Matei , 
et al.,  Closing Youth Prisons: Lessons from Agency Administrators  (Washington, DC: Urban Institute, 2020) , 
 
 
   
  
perma.cc/S6Y9 -D24T . For youth rec idivism in Main specifically, Robyn Dumont and Erica King, Youth Recidivism: 
Diversion to Discharge in Maine’s Juvenile Justice System (Portland, ME: University of Southern Maine,  2017), 3, 
perma.cc/L8EB -QGDT  (“Between time of commitment and community reintegration, overall youth risks scores 
decreased by 6.7 points. However, those youth who were initially measured as low -risk averaged a 1.2 point 
increase in risk score. ”). 
