Preble Street 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Terry Sutton 
Preside//r 
Chip Leighton 
I/ire P/widen) ‘ 
Yemaya St. Clair 
Serre/my 
Jennifer Wilson 
'I' 
r'earnrer 
joann Bautista 
Terry Davies 
Lauren Gauthier 
john Roberts 
Elaine Rosen 
Kini Schoop 
Maurice A. Selinger III 
jay Tansey 
Lannie W/elch 
Lori W/hynot 
Mark R. Swann 
Exem/iue D/rer/or 
55 Portland Street 
Portland, ME 04101 
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org 
\v\vw.preblestreet.org 
u ‘ted 
“way 
United Way 
0| Southern Maine 
="' - cmxnnv 
‘\ mvxsmnn 
‘ saga , Fm: Sun llhamy Good afternoon, Chair Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Committee on Health 
and Human Services members. 
My name is Jade Johnson and I am the Director of Preble Street’s Anti-Trafficking 
Services. I am here today to ask for your support in the passage of LD1092: An Act 
to Prevent the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in the State. 
Since 1975, Preble Street has served some of the most vulnerable people in Maine 
and won’t rest until hunger and homelessness are a thing of the past. Preble Street 
ﬁrst became involved in anti-traf ﬁcking Work over ten years ago when clients at 
our Teen Center came to us asking for help. They were afraid for their lives— 
caught up in coercive work and exploitative relationships, forced to choose 
between basic survival and their physical and emotional safety. 
Since 2013, Preble Street Anti-Traf ﬁcking Services (ATS) has provided services 
and support to more than 600 victims of human trafficking throughout the state, 
representing all ages, genders, and forms of trafficking. ATS provides intensive 
case management to survivors by connecting them to safe shelter and housing, 
access to medical care, mental health and substance use treatment, legal system 
advocacy and more. 
For the past ﬁve years, We have worked closely with the Cumberland County Child 
Advocacy Center, collaborating in support of the identiﬁcation and response to 
survivors of CSEC and their families. We see firsthand the success of this model, 
which currently exists only in Cumberland County. Yet we know that children are 
being exploited all over Maine. ATS has received calls and referrals from every 
single county—indicating the prevalence of CSEC crimes and the need for 
establishing services beyond Maine’s most populous centers. Replicating and 
expanding services with sustainable funding is necessary for Maine to effectively 
respond to this horriﬁc crime. 
We worked with one school-aged survivor who has navigated systems for most of 
her life. Starting at nine years old, she was groomed by a close family friend, and 
exploited in her home. She spent years being manipulated and monitored by those 
closest to her, missing school and being isolated from friends. Most often, children 
experience exploitation and abuse at the hands of trusted adults. After years of 
attempted outreach, she took a chance, and chose to reach out to us for services. 
With support from an ATS case worker, she returned to school and started 
counseling, initiated a student advocacy campaign at her school and ﬁnished 
driver's ed. After some time, she told her caseworker she felt “changed for the 
better” by her engagement with services. Intensive Case Management created 
opportunities for her to empower herself towards healing and be able to refocus on 
being a kid once again. 
Meeting urgent needs O Empowering people 0 Advocating for change 0 Creating solutions to homelessness and hunger
Preble Street 
This...is true success and just one example of how intensive case management 
services are a lifeline for survivors who have experienced the trauma of 
Tern, Sutton exploitation. These services are a critical part of a comprehensive, coordinated, and 
Pm.,~,,,,,, trauma-informed response to exploitation. We urge you to pass LDl02 to ensure 
Chip Lgighton that CSEC survivors across Maine who have lived through the immense trauma of 
L/,~ ,,, Pm-i,1’¢;;;; exploitation have access to needed services to help them on their journey to safety, 
Yemaya st. Clair healing, and recovery. 
Serra/‘ag 
Jennifer Wilson 
T/‘ea:///‘er BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Joann Bautista 
Terry Davies 
Lauren Gauthier 
john Roberts 
Elaine Rosen 
Kini Schoop 
Maurice A. Selinger III 
Jay Tansey 
Lannie W/elch 
Lori W/hynot 
Mark R. Swann 
E.\'er11I/ ‘ 1/e Dizwior 
55 Portland Street 
Portland, ME 04101 
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.0rg 
WW\v.preblestreet.org 
United“; 
Way 
United Way 
oi Southern Maine 
l 
Milli 
Fouiﬁglztgiirit ﬁg 
Meeting urgent needs I Empowering people 0 Advocating for change 0 Creating solutions to homelessness and hunger
