 
 
 
LD 1092 - An Act to Prevent the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in the State – testimony 
in support of the bill as amended by t he sponsor  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services , my name is Dr. Julia Oppenheimer  and I live in Portland, Maine.  I am a resident physician training 
in pediatrics. I  represent the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics, and thus, represent a 
large network of pediatricians across the state of Maine. We stand in support of  LD 1092  as amended as we 
feel passionate that provision of a coordinated, multidisciplinary, and trauma- informed approach to youth 
victims of sexual abuse and exploitation is necessary to reduce trauma , foster trust, and facilitate recovery.  
 
Many youth experience c ommercial sexual expl oitation, and children in Maine are no exception.  The Maine 
Sex Trafficking and Exploitation Network has estimated that 300 -400 people experience sex trafficking or 
exploitation each year in Maine. Some of these victims are children, and many adult victims  report that the 
exploitation started when they were younger than 181. The Maine Coalition Against Sexual Assault reports 
that in 2019, approximately 50% of calls to Maine’s sexual assault crisis and support line involved child sexual abuse
2. LGBTQ+ yout h, youth of color (particularly black girls), youth with unmet basic physical or 
emotional needs, and survivors of child abuse or neglect are particularly vulnerable3,4. Victims of sexual 
exploitation are at high risk for drug use and dependence as well as incarceration1.  
 Child and adolescent victims of sexual abuse and exploitation are seen in our health clinics and emergency 
rooms , although they may not readily disclose  this history . I recently met an adolescent who had just  
immigra ted from a country with political unrest. She arrived in Maine without family and was staying in a 
homeless shelter. She had presented to the emergency department multiple times with different symptoms 
before disclosing that she had been a victim of traffi cking . As healthcare providers  and mandated reporters , 
we have a responsibility to ensure that child and adolescent victims of sexual abuse and exploitation receive 
appropriate health care, community services and legal protections /actions . We also know tha t delivering care 
and services in  a nonjudgmental , trauma -informed  approach is crucial for building trust. Early involvement of 
a specialized, multidisciplinary team to provide such services and coordination is essentia l.   
 Child advocacy centers  offer a multidisciplinary approach and critical  wrap around services to connect victims 
of commercial sexual exploitation in children (CSEC)  with health care, mental health care, case management , 
and other services to support recovery
2. For example, the C umberland County Children’s Advocacy Center 
(CCCAC), housed at Spurwink’s Center for Safe and Healthy Families, provides coordination with medical  
 
  
 
1 Maine Sex Trafficking & Exploitation Network, www.mainesten.org  
2 Maine Coalition Against Sexual Assault, www.mecasa.org  
3 Maine Coalition Against Sexual Assault. (2022, Nov 15). Addressing the Adultification of Girls of Color and LGBTQ+ 
Youth.  https://youtu.be/1CJIPl7VyuU   
4 Jordan Greenbaum, James E. Crawford- Jakubiak, COMMITTEE ON CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT, Cindy W. 
Christian, James E. Crawford- Jakubiak, Emalee G. Flaherty, John M. Leventhal, James L. Lukefahr, Robert D. Sege; 
Child Sex Trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation: Health Care Needs of Victims. Pediatrics March 2015; 135 
(3): 566 –574. 10.1542/peds.2014- 4138  

 
 
providers, the Department of Health and Human Services ( DHHS ), law enforcement, juvenile prosecution, 
school teachers and staff , and advocacy members  to perform a risk assessment  and connect the child to the 
appropriate services5. 
 
As pediatricians, we know that childhood abuse and trauma can have detrimental effects on mental and 
physical health throughout an individual’s lifetime. There is robust evidence that adverse childhood 
experiences  (ACEs) , which includes abuse, neglect, and household dysfunction, not only increases  the risk 
for developing posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety , and depression, but also increases risk of poor adult 
health outcomes, including heart and lung disease and cancers. The more ACEs a child or adolesc ent is 
exposed to, the higher their risk.  Many victims of sexual exploitation have already been exposed to multiple 
ACEs , compounding the effects of past trauma. We recognize that asking victims to tell their story, often 
multiple times, also compounds thi s trauma. That is why it is so important that child advocacy centers have 
adequate funding and staffing to provide services, as well as a team of case managers who have expertise in working with commercially exploited children.  
 
We urge you to stand with us to ensure that Maine’s  child advocacy centers and community agencies are 
adequately  funded and staffed to provide youth victims of sexual  abuse  or exploitation with appropriate 
trauma -informed care and  wrap -around services. A vote for LD 1092 is a vote for Maine’s children.  
 
Thank you.  
 
5 Spurwink Center for Safe & Healthy Families, https://spurwink.org   
