SEXUAL ASSAULT 
March 27, 2023 
Senator Baidacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
My name is Katie Church and i am submitting testimony today on behalf of the Maine Coalition 
Against Sexual Assault (MECASA), the organization which represents and serves Maine's sexual 
violence prevention and response programs as well as Maine's Children's Advocacy Centers. 
MECASA initiates and advocates for victim-centered public policy; provides expert training, 
technical assistance, and resources for providers and partners; and funds the service providers in 
your communities. 
MECASA is here today in support LD 1092, ”An Act to Prevent the Commercial Sexual Exploitation 
of Children in the State." Many thanks to Representative Stover for introducing this bill. 
While often perceived to be a problem of larger states, the commercial sexual exploitation of 
children (CSEC) happens all over the country, including here in Maine. Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation of Children is a form of human trafficking and includes a range of crimes where 
someone is profiting financially from the sexual abuse of a childl . Since 2018, our sexual assault 
support centers and Children's Advocacy Centers have seen 135 cases of CSEC and we know that 
this is far from the full picture. 
While Maine's current response to CSEC has many strengths, there are also significant gaps that 
need attention. For background, l’ll start by describing Maine’s current response. Mandated 
reports about concerns of CSEC are made to DH HS or prosecutors. DHHS and partners then make 
I 
Commercial sexualexploitation ofchildren. Maine Sex Trafficking and Exploitation Network. (2017). Retrieved March 16, 2023, from 
https://www.mainesten.org/commercial-sexual~exploitation-of —children.html
1
referrals to Maine's Children's Advocacy Centers (CACs) who convene a team of law enforcement 
and community providers to wrap around the child and family and address their needs. 
The proposal outlined in this bill is designed to respond to l\/|aine's specific challenges following a 
needs assessment with providers around the state. The assessment highlighted what l\/laine's 
communities already know — resources are lacking all along the continuum of care. What we're 
proposing addresses three of the most vital components of service expansion that can becomea 
strong foundation for l\/1aine's future work. 
First, the coordination of teams responding to trafficked kids needs more resources. CSEC cases 
are resource intensive — requiring larger teams of providers staying engaged for longer periods of 
time and demand workers with specialized skills in identifying and supporting trafficked kids. In 
one place in the state, we have a CSEC Coordinator housed at a CAC (you'll hear from her soon) 
who has the skills to lead these teams — effectively increasing identification of CSEC in that area 
and improving the quality of the response to the child and family. We want and need to expand 
this model. This bill would expand this model to cover the middle and northern parts of the state. 
Second, CSEC victims and their families require intensive, flexible, and ongoing support that is 
currently unavailable to them. Trafficked kids have complex needs — housing, trauma exposure, 
school retention, substance use treatment, criminal justice engagement, poverty — l could go on. 
They need case workers who are specially trained and who are part of a program committed to 
spend significant resources on individual kids and families to truly wrap around them. These case 
Workers need to be persistent and to respond to signs of trafficking even before there isa 
confirmation. By doing this, we can not only respond to more kids in a better way, but also can 
prevent trafficking by identifying kids who are at high risk but not yet trafficked. This bill would 
create three of these intensive case managers. 
Finally, l\/laine needs to better support the systems who are already responding to trafficked kids. 
This bill would fund one position within the Department of Health and Human Services to improve 
identification and response from the department on CSEC and sexual abuse (a significant risk 
factor for trafficking) and a half-time position at l\/IECASA to support the specialist at the 
Department as well as the growing programming around the state. 
Survivors of CSEC are strong. They are capable of healing. And they're falling through the cracks in 
the system that is designed to protect them. Please help us to build out the services to support 
these kids and give them the chance to heal. 
lwould be pleased to answer any questions you might have.
2
About Maine's Sexual Assault Service Providers 
lVlaine’s sexual violence service providers provide free and confidential services across the state 
to victims/survivors of sexual harassment and sexual assault and those close to them, as well as to 
individuals who wish to increase their understanding of the issues. Just some of the services 
include a 24-hour statewide sexual assault helpline, crisis intervention and information, support 
groups, in-person accompaniment and advocacy through the medical and legal systems, and 
school- and community-based prevention education. Services are provided for a victim/survivor 
regardless of when they experienced sexual violence, and regardless of what type of sexual 
violence they experienced. Types of sexual violence include, but are not limited to, sexual 
harassment and gender~based bullying, child sexual abuse, elder sexual abuse, stalking, sex 
trafficking, and sexual violence within an intimate partner relationship. 
24/7 Confidential 
Maine Sexual Assault Helpline: 1-800-8 71-7741
3
