March 27, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:y 
My name is Steven Rappold, and l am submitting testimony today in support LD 1092, ”An Act to 
Prevent the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in the State." Many thanks to 
Representative Stover for introducing this bill. 
l am a Detective with the Town of Gorham Maine. l have been in Law Enforcement going on 23 
years. Over the course of my career, l have seen many changes occurring in how law enforcement 
investigates reports of sexual assault. The approach of how we investigate differs a little bit 
depending on if we are investigating the report of a sexual assault of an adult or a juvenile. Both 
are extremely important, and will be handled with the greatest respect with a trauma informed 
approach, and also with empathy and understanding. The ultimate goal ofa successful prosecution 
is the same, but investigating an exploitation case involving a minor is inherently different because 
the child's brain is not fully developed. Therefore, it is very important we (as investigators) 
approach the interviews, and investigation, in a manner that does not cause unnecessary trauma 
to the child. 
In terms of sexual exploitation of children, I have noticed a pretty steep increase in the number of 
cases with juveniles involved being reported. Prior to the introduction of Cumberland County 
Children's Advocacy Center (commonly referred to as the CCAC), the way we investigated was 
different. This way unintentionally caused more trauma then intended because it required a child 
to tell their story multiple times. First, a patrol officer working a particular shift would take an 
initial report having the victim tell the details, then a Detective would come in the next day to 
schedule another interview and ask the details again, to include any additional information. After 
that, the District Attorneys would get involved and might need more questions asked. This way of 
investigating was not to the fault of any agency and\or any officers involved, it was due to the lack 
of training, education, and knowledge of trauma. 
What the Children's Advocacy Center was formed and the commercial exploitation of children 
(CSEC) coordinator was hired, we developed a better way to obtain the necessary details 
important to develop probable cause to make an arrest. At the CAC, an interview is conducted
1
one time with a non—leading style of questioning. The CAC model is very important to a successful 
investigation. After experiencing this way of investigating, I cannot imagine any other way of 
proceeding. The CAC and CSEC Coordinator are an invaluable resource that creates a more positive 
and child-friendly approach. 
I can say that I have built a really good working relationship with all staff at the CAC, and together 
I truly believe we are making a positive impact. I have been fortunate to be trained in the trauma 
informed approach, and I am one of only of a couple male officers that I know of that has 
completed the Sexual Assault Forensic Examination (SAFE) course. Having these trainings, I know 
just how important it is to have this collaboration with all involved to include the CAC, DHHS, and 
the CSEC coordinator. I am also actively involved in investigating child sexual abuse material more 
commonly referred to as CSAIVI. I have found that a major nexus to the exploitation of minors is 
many social medial platforms. With the help from the CSEC coordinator in Cumberland County, 
we have started a conversation about how to approach these growing concerns. 
I strongly encourage you to join our commitment to help fight to stop child sexual abuse, and 
sexual exploitation of minors. By supporting this bill, you will allow us to expand CSEC Coordinator 
coverage statewide which will better support children who are sexually exploited and support 
prosecution for those responsible. Thank you, and I am happy to answer any questions you may 
have.
2
