Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office 
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333- 0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
M
arch 27, 2023 
S
enator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
S
enator Baldacci, Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and  Human Services : 
T
his letter is to provide information regarding the Department’s opposition to LD 1092, which 
has been retitled as  An Act to Prevent the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in the 
State . The goal of this bill is to provide a coordinated, child-centered approach to addressing 
suspected sexual abuse and child sexual exploitation, reducing trauma, and connecting youths and their families more rapidly and effectively with the services they need to begin healing and prevent further harm.  
O
CFS supports this goal, but we do not support this bill because this work is already being done. 
OCFS’s Violence Prevention  Program  administers a contract with the Maine Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault (MECASA) and included in that contract is funding for the Children’s Advocacy Centers (CACs) . Beyond the coordinated approach to criminal and child protective investigations 
of alleged sexual abuse of children, one of the primary roles of the CAC is to provide coordinated and streamlined referrals, support, and follow- up for the victim and their family . As 
stated in the report, “Increased prosecution rates and more eff ective services for children and 
family members are examples of the benefits created by CAC’s innovative approach to responding to child sexual abuse. In calendar year 2022, the CACs provided over 3,300 hours of family advocacy for victims and their families. ”  
T
his bill would propose additional efforts focused solely on commercial sexual exploitation of 
children  (CSEC), including a program in the Department dedicated to CSEC and specific grants 
to providers to add additional staff dedicated to work regarding CSEC. OCFS is already undertaking significant efforts to address CSEC in Maine. OCFS has a specific child welfare policy on Human Trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children which was 
updated in February of 2022 with input and recommendations made by MECASA and other providers. Under that policy, OCFS child welfare staff at Intake and in the districts have specific policy expectations to screen for and address known or suspected trafficking and exploitation.  
I
n the 130th Legislature , OCFS introduced LD 837 which, in part, amended the definition of 
abuse or neglect in the Child and Family Services and Child Protection Act to ensure that the definition captured CSEC regardless of whether the trafficking is perpetrated by a “person responsible for the child” (as defined in statute). This gives OCFS additional authority to become 
involved in known or suspected CSEC and was a change supported by MECASA and 
recommended by the University of Southern Maine in their Findings and Recommendations of 
research the y conducte d on the State’s response to CSEC. I have attached those 
recommendations  to thi s letter for your reference and note that none of those recommendations 
include the approach proposed in LD 1092.  
LD 1092 would require grants to providers to support the hiring of five and a half new positions 
and includes funding of $467,500 per year to support those grants. OCFS would question 
whether that funding is sufficient to provide for salary, benefits, and other costs associated with 
this number of new positions,  if passed.  
MECASA and the CACs receiv e $2,353,000 p er year to meet the needs of victims of sexual 
abuse and exploitation, including CSEC. According to t he Maine Sex Trafficking and 
Exploitation Network, w hich i s a ne twork supported by MECASA, “Sexual Assault and 
Domestic Violence Programs ar ound  the stat e engage in support to people who have experienced 
sex trafficking at all ages. Advocates can help connect survivors to a network of support 
including therapy, support groups, case management, and survivor networks. Some programs 
also facilitate preventi on programs, including a program for at-risk girls called My Life My 
Choice.” OCFS also funds MCEDV and  the Domestic Violence Programs statewide. 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forwar d. If 
you have any further questions , please feel f ree to co ntact m e. 
S
incerely,  
D
r. Todd A. Landry, Director , 
Office of Child and Family Services 

Research Services on Child Welfare Identification and  
Response to the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of C hildren in Maine  
 
1 
  
Muskie Findings and Recommendations  
1.  Policy - DHHS policy and screening tool need some improvement.  
• Update Policy IV. D -2B. Human Trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation  
language  and screening tool to provide less subjective interpretation.  
o Ambiguity with use of “ confirmed” “suspected victim” and “human 
trafficking” is problematic.  
o Thresholds  for confirmed, high risk, moderate risk, and at risk  need to be 
recalibrated, and any case of moderate risk should be referred to a 
children’s advocacy center (CAC) . 
o Social media and use of internet and other electronic communications to 
lure, entice , or purchase  sex acts are missing from risk factors.  
• Provide OCFS practice guidance for the timelines , protocols , and procedures for “ See 
by 24 ” that does not  align with t he CSEC/HT screening protocol . 
 
2.  Legislation - Maine’s child welfare statute is not in alignment with the federal Justice for 
Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015  requirements. Maine Revised Statute 22, section 4002, is not 
broad enough to include commercial sexual exploitation of children by third party, non-
familial offenders.  
• Propose legislation to e nsure state law enable s child welfare staff to respond to all 
cases of  suspec ted CSEC so all children are thoroughly assessed , eligible for 
protections, and have access to resources.  
o Sample language available from Shared Hope International recommendations  
and Massachusetts state law .   
 
3.  Training - Child welfare workers indicated a need for more training. Assessment workers 
employed between one and five years were the most likely not to remember being trained 
on how to respond to suspected HT/CSEC.  
• Continue mandatory training for all child welfare personnel on HT/CSEC via 
Foundation s Training . 
• Add training for child welfare personnel at  one year employment mark, and then 
annually to include data trends and case reviews . 
• Implement evaluation tool for each training session to be shared with trainers .  
• Increase awareness of HT/CSEC and knowledge about statutes, policy, identification,  
and screening tools, and resources by including in Mandated  Reporter training 
curriculum provided by OCFS .  
• Increase awar eness of HT/CSEC and knowledge about statut es, policy, identification, 
screening tools, and resources through CAC  training  of MDT responders . 
Research Services on Child Welfare Identification and  
Response to the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of C hildren in Maine  
 
2 
  
4.  Implementation of policy - Identification of HT/CSEC survivors is underreported and 
suggests a need for specialized case assessment. 
• Designate specialists within intake and each OCFS district office to consult on case 
management, policies, and procedures . 
• Improve tracking of HT/CSEC in MACWIS and AFCARS, noting additional AFCARS 
screen was added,  but there was some discrepancy in data share. Also, there is not 
“a button” to pus h to indicate CAC referral, which would be useful for data analytics. 
MACWIS likely migrating t o a new platform soon and referral to CAC should be noted .  
• Collaborate with C AC on a broader range of suspected cases, with special attention 
to cases involving neglect, runaway  and homeless youth, and other higher risk cases 
beyond those noted as suspected sexual abuse . 
 
5.  Children’s advocacy centers - A CAC system response is the preferred method but not 
consistent statewide.  
• Create a specialized CSEC protocol and tracking system of cases (with preference for 
a designated , localized  CSEC coordinator position as funding allows ) at all CACs 
statewide.  
• Share CAC tools developed to track law enforcement and DHHS referrals , per 
National Children’s Alliance requirements , to promote efficiencies in data tracking 
and promising practices.  
• Formalize process for CAC to conduct needs assessment with at risk children for 
interventions, resources, and follow -up procedures.  
 
6.  Systemic changes in the multidisciplinary disciplinary team (MDT) response are needed. 
• Implement District Attorney  (DA) tracking of HT/CSEC case outcomes  and create a 
model policy for standardized approach.  
• Provide training for  DA’s office staff to learn about  CSEC/HT and resources ( perhaps 
adding CLE credit to incentivize training ). 
• Revisit DA reporting  from OCFS staff , noting that MACWIS data indicated r eferral s to 
DA is not 100% . Consider  tracking back to the loca l CAC,  as the convener of MDT 
team , and to coordinate resources . 
• DHHS, CAC, and MDT should prioritize collaboration with anti-trafficking resources in 
the community, including Preble Street and housing placements , and evaluate 
contract service providers based on their capacity to provide culturally sensitive and 
specialized services to survivors  of HT/CSEC.   
