March 27, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members 
of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services: 
My name is Tricia Grant and I am submitting testimony 
today on behalf ofJust Love Worldwide and If Only 1. 
Our organization provides direct support to people of all 
ages who have experienced trafficking, exploitation, and 
prostitution. We also offer education to our community 
and engage in legislative efforts to combat efforts to 
legalize prostitution and to advocate for bills that will 
better protect and offer much needed services to people 
being victimized. 
I am here today in support of LD 1092, ”An Act to 
Prevent the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children 
in the State." Thank you Senator Stover for introducing 
this bill. 
As a survivor of CSEC, in addition to being the Executive 
Director oflust Love, I also share my personal story to 
better help our community understand that the 
trafficking/exploitation of vulnerable people is happening
now and has been happening for many years in every 
community of our state. 
At 12, I had been living with family other than my parents 
and at 15, I was living on my own with my little boy.3 
months after my son was born, I was being sold in strip 
clubs, hotels, truck stops, and people's homes while still 
caring for my son, attending school and managing my 
home. This exploitation would happen several daysa 
week for a year and a half and I wouldn't know that there 
was a name for what was being done to me or that it 
wasn't my fault, for 16 years and I wouldn't talk about it 
for another 18 months. IVIy story is not at all uncommon.. 
A 13 year old I have been connected with since 
November, due to suspicions of having experienced 
exploitation ,is currently in a hospital up north because 
she needed a safe space to be while processing the 
trauma of being assaulted by 2 men and is now dealing 
with an STI and suicidal thoughts. Her mom has fought, 
from the beginning, harder than most to put protections 
in place to prevent this assault from happening and is 
now picking up the pieces while falling apart herself. 
Just this morning, I was called by a nurse in a local 
hospital because somebody I had worked with in a group
home here in l\/laine when she was 15, is now 20 and has 
disclosed that she is being exploited and does not know 
who she can trust so she reached out to me. WhenI 
leave here today, l will be spending the night helping her 
feel safe and just being with there and spend the next 
few days helping her connect to the very few services 
that we have to offer. 
The services that are being requested through this bill 
are necessary and long overdue. We need to better 
support people being exploited and the people working 
tirelessly to offer services. If these services had been in 
place when I was 15, my life would have looked very 
different. The 13 year old l’m now supporting, needs 
these services now to start her healing journey. The 20 
year old I'll be connecting with this evening could have 
surely benefited from these services 5 tears ago. We 
need to better protect our youth and this is why I am in 
support of LD 1092. 
Please reach out if you'd like to discuss further. 
tricia@justloveworldwide.org, 207-212-0036
