CHILDREN'S 
HDVOCHCV CENTER 
March 27, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
My name is Wendy Gilbert and I am submitting testimony today on behalf of the Penquis 
Children ’s Advocacy Center (CAC). The Penquis CAC has two locations, one in Bangor anda 
satellite center at the Dover Foxcroft Police Department. We work with children and families 
who reside in Penobscot and Piscataquis counties. 
I am submitting testimony in support of LD 1092, “An Act to Prevent the Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation of Children in the State.” 
I have been employed at the Penquis CAC for the last 5 1/2 years. I am a certified Forensic 
Interviewer and manage the day-to-day operations and staffing at the Penquis CAC. 
The Penquis CAC is a safe, child-focused place that provides support and services to children 
and their non-offending caregivers when a child may have experienced sexual abuse. Adhering 
to an evidence-based model, the CAC convenes a multidisciplinary team (MDT) including 
representation from the following sectors: law enforcement, child protective services, 
prosecution, medical, mental health, and victim advocacy. Only law enforcement, child 
protective services, and the District Attorney's Office may make referrals to the CAC. 
The central focus of the CAC experience is a one-time comprehensive forensic interview of the 
child by a trained, neutral professional. The interview is observed by members of the MDT and 
is recorded. The value of this single interview cannot be overstated, primarily because it 
precludes the child having to go through the stress of sharing his or her experience with separate 
agents through multiple interviews. 
The forensic interview provides the child with an opportunity to disclose and talk about the 
sexual abuse they experienced in a neutral and safe environment. The CAC model helps to 
Penquis Children's Advocacy Center 
Phone: 207-974-2469 
Fax: 207-973-3699 
1-800-215-4942 
a program of Penquis C.A.P., Inc. 
262 Harlow St. Bangor, ME 04401 
www.penquis.org
identify and discuss child sexual abuse in a trauma-informed way, thereby reducing ongoing 
trauma that could occur later into adulthood. 
The identification of the children who are being trafficked looks proportionally different than the 
average child sexual abuse case. A lot of times these children do not have a protective or an 
engaged caregiver to support them and thus they are not able to be identified as being trafficked. 
CSEC cases involve more time in working with the MDT on how to proceed and schedule a 
forensic interview. It is difficult to get all the MDT at the CAC for the forensic interview as the 
allegations of CSEC may not always be clear. CSEC survivors require a quicker trauma focused 
approach in supporting them after they leave the CAC. For some of these children, the 
exploitation has been happening for years. It is challenging to manage the coordination of 
additional supports and services for these survivors given the lack of resources, case 
management and staffing hours. 
By supporting LD 1092, you would be giving a voice to these children by providing extra 
resources to help identify them, a chance for them to speak with a forensic interviewer to talk 
about their abuse at a CAC and obtain services to promote their healing. Healing starts when 
there is intervention. 
I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
