 
Chair,  Marine Resources  Committee  * Health  Coverage, Insurance, and  Financial Services Committee  
State  House  (207)  287-1515  * Fax (207) 287 -1585  * Toll Free  1-800-423-6900  * TTY 711 
Cameron.Reny@legislature.maine.gov  * legislature.maine.gov/senate   
 
Cameron Reny  
Senator,  District  13 THE  MAINE  SENATE  
131st Legislature  3 State  House  Station 
Augusta,  Maine  04333  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 292, “An Act to Establish Maine Needham Day ” 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
February 14, 2023  
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and honorable members of the State and Local Government  
Committee,  I am Senator Cameron Reny and I represent Senate District 13 which includes most of  
Lincoln County and the towns of Washington and Windsor. I offer the following testimony  in support 
of LD 292, "An Act to Establish Maine Needham Day." As a state senat or and proud Mainer, I strongly 
believe that we should recognize and celebrate the unique aspects of our state's culture and history, 
including our iconic Needhams.  
 
For over 150 years, Needhams have been a beloved Maine tradition. These sweet treats, made  with 
Maine potatoes, coconut, and chocolate, have been produced in kitchens and storefronts throughout the 
state, and have become a staple of many Mainers' holiday traditions.  I myself purchase  Needhams from 
local stores and give them to new neighbo rs as part of a housewarming gift.  
 
LD 292 would designate the last Saturday in September as Maine Needham Day, and require the 
Governor to issue a proclamation recognizing the Needham's place in Maine culture and tradition. This 
is a simple and straightf orward bill that celebrates a uniquely Maine pleasure.  
 
Establishing Maine Needham Day would promote Maine history, agriculture, and local candy makers. 
It would also provide a platform for small businesses across the state to showcase their Needhams  and 
other Maine -made products.  
 
I urge you to support LD 292 and establish Maine Needham Day , which will not only promote our 
state's culture and heritage but also provide a much -needed boost to our local economy . Let us come 
together to celebrate this de licious and iconic treat, and recognize its rightful place in Maine's rich 
cultural history.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Cameron Reny  
State Senator, District 13  
Representing Lincoln County  and the towns of Washington and Windsor  

