 
 
 
 
 
February 13, 2023  
 
Senator Tim Na ngle, Chair  
Representative Holly Stover , Chair  
Members of the State and Local Government Committee  
 
RE: Testimony  in SUPPORT  of LD 292, An Act to Establish Maine Needham Day  
Dear Senator Nangle , Representative Stover  and members of the State and L ocal G overnment 
Committee : 
My name is Curtis Picard and I am the President and CEO  of the Retail Association of Maine. I am a 
resident of Topsham.  We have more than 350  members statewide and represent retailers of all sizes.  
Maine’s retailers employ more than 80,000 Mainers.  I am here today in support of LD 292, An Act to 
Establish Maine Needham Day. 
 
First, Happy Valenti ne’s Day!  Today is one of the busiest days for Maine ’s candy makers and retailers 
that sell candy. So, it ’s fitting t o have the di scussion today to help establish a Maine Needham Day in 
Maine. As drafted, LD 292 would establish the last Saturday in S eptember for Maine Needham Day, but 
we are flexible on that if there is a date that is more relevant and impactful . 
 
We certainly reco gnize that this issue is far from the most pressing issue facing you this session. 
However, the Maine  Legislat ure has previously recognized wild Maine blueberry pie as the official state 
dessert, and Maine whoopie pi es as the official state treat. It would be f itting to reco gnize a specific day 
honoring Maine Needhams . The use of Ma ine pot atoes in their composit ion generally solicits a raised 
eyebrow from people who ar en’t famil iar with the m, but once they t ry one, they un derstand why they 
are so great.  
 
As special day dedicated to Maine Needhams will help gene rate earned media around this confection, 
and help support Maine ’s small business candy ma kers, and retailers that sell Needhams. It would also 
help Maine potat o farmers . 
 
I want to thank Repres entative O ’Neil for bringing this bi ll forward , and w ould urge the committee t o 
support the bill as well.  
 
Thank you for the consideration of our comments . 
 
Curtis Picard, CAE  
President and CEO  

