 
 
   
 
 
LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.  
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333  
(207) 621-0087   Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)  
www.mainelse.org   
 
 
April 12, 2023 
LD 1335, An Act to Amend the Property Tax Stabilization for Senior Citizens Law - 
Rep. David Boyer of Poland 
LD 1413, An Act to Amend the Laws Establishing a Property Tax Stabilization 
Program for Senior Citizens - Rep. Ronald Russell of Verona Island 
Testimony of John Brautigam, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation: On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer a few 
words regarding LD 1335 and LD 1413 and the general topic of property tax relief and 
how it affects Maine seniors. We testify today neither for nor against any specific bill 
but instead hope to offer information of use to the Committee. 
Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonprofit legal services organization with the 
mission of providing free legal assistance to Maine’s older adults when their basic 
human needs are threatened.  
Rather than take a position on any one of the property tax proposals under consideration 
this session, we would like to offer some principles and guidelines that in our opinion 
should inform the work of the Committee. 
First, property tax relief should be targeted to those with the greatest financial need. This 
means homeowners or renters with low incomes and especially those, such as most 
retirees and other seniors, on fixed incomes. Property tax increases hit these residents the 
hardest. While everyone would like to see lower taxes across the board, there are wealthy 
folks whose need for these benefits is not as great. 
Second, where eligibility for property tax relief depends on an income threshold, we 
would ask the Committee to include all forms of income  in determining eligibility. It is 
appropriate to consider not just a person’s income from work, but also income from all 
sources such as bonds or IRA proceeds.  
Third, the Committee should consider the unique advantages of a refundable tax 
credit. A credit can be made available to anyone, even if they do not ordinarily have to 
2 
 file their income taxes. A credit has immediate benefits and does not directly depend on 
increases in the local mil rate or assessed value. And a credit has a known fiscal impact to 
the municipality and/or the state budget. 
Fourth, an enormous number of your constituents are renters, and they also bear some of 
the costs of increased property taxes through higher rents. We encourage the Committee 
to consider approaches that spread the benefit of property tax relief to this population. 
In short, we would like to see property tax relief that is effective, immediate, and targeted 
to those who most need assistance. That would include seniors on a fixed income who 
own their homes or are renters. 
Finally, we are not testifying on Representative Moriarty’s bill LD 1380 regarding 
allowing municipalities to create a program by ordinance. We will listen with great 
interest to that proposal and the testimony of those who have analyzed it in detail. 
Thank you for letting us share our thoughts on this legislation.  
 
 
 
 
