 
 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association   
 
In Opposition to  
LD 1335, An Act to Amend the Property Tax Stabilization for Senior Citizens Law   
 
April 12, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in opposition to LD 1335 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s Legislative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest.   
Municipal officials oppose the proposal found in section 1 of the bill , which appears  to 
extend eligibility under the Property Tax Stabilization program  to property held in both 
revocable (current law) and irrevocable (proposed) trusts because it lowers the eligibility bar for 
a policy intentionally designed to target property tax relief to qualifying Maine homeowners.  It 
is one of the very few eligibili ty criteria found in this law.  In a revocable trust, the homeowner is 
the trustee, and not the beneficiary.  This differs significantly with an irrevocable trust, where the 
trustee is the beneficiary who may or may not reside in the home, community, or state.    
Furthermore, as estimate d by Maine Revenue Services, the cost of reimbursing 
municipalities for 100% of the lost property tax revenues  will more th an double over the course 
of two years , increasing  from $15 million  in FY 2024 to $31 million in FY 2025.  If the program 
becomes too  costly, municipal officials fear that the Legislature will revert to the minimum 
established in Maine’s Constitution (Article IV, Part Third, Section 23), providing 
reimbursement for only 50% of the lost property tax revenue , which will be devasting to th e 
property taxpayers  that are unable  to stabilize their taxes .  
The expense of the current program is too large of a financial burden as it is.  Further 
increasing the program’s price tag is of great concern.      
While municipal officials, in theory, supp ort the language in section 2 of the bill, which 
clarifies that individuals who are married are only able to stabilize taxes on one property, it is 
unknown how assessors will obtain the data necessary to determine eligibility.  The concern 
among municipal officials is this requirement will make administering  the program  far more 
burdensome.  
While the proposal requiring applicants to disclose information  regarding additional 
improvement s made to the homestead since the filing of their previous application is interesting, 
municipal officials question the purpose of the requirement and whether the self -reported data 
would be of the quality necessary to assist communities.   
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue .  If you have any 
questions about our position, please contact me at kdufour@memun.org  or 592 -4038.   

