1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 4/12/23 
  
LD 1335 – An Act to Amend the Property Tax Stabilization for Senior Citizens Law 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1335 – An Act to Amend 
the Property Tax Stabilization for Senior Citizens Law. 
This bill expands the eligibility for homeowners applying to participate in 
the Property Tax Stabilization Program.  It expands the “homestead” definition to 
include those who have arranged their affairs away from direct ownership of their 
homestead to achieve other purposes, for example estate tax considerations and 
healthcare benefits.  Bringing those decisions into the Property Tax Stabilization 
Program, however, departs from the longstanding basic principle of direct home 
ownership under the homestead exemption program, adds complexity to the 
program, and raises inconsistencies with other property tax benefit programs. 
As was the case in LD 149, previously heard by this Committee this Session, 
LD 1335 expands the definition of “homestead” in the Stabilization Program 
statute to include property held in irrevocable trusts.  Generally, income and estate 
tax law recognize property held in revocable trusts established by the homeowners 
for their benefit as effectively owned by those people.   For revocable trusts, the 
grantor retains the power to revoke the trust and take the assets back during their 
2 
 lifetime. Conversely, however, and again generally, income and estate tax law 
align with Maine property tax law in not recognizing an individual who lives in a 
homestead that is held in an irrevocable trust as the owner of that property.   
This proposal creates inconsistency between the ownership eligibility 
requirements in other taxpayer benefit programs that make an exception for only 
revocable trusts, such as: 
• The property tax exemption for veterans; 
• The property tax exemption for legally blind persons; 
• The Deferred Collection of Homestead Property Taxes program; 
• The Municipal Property Tax Assistance program; 
• The Property Tax Fairness Credit; 
• The Homestead Property Tax Exemption. 
The bill requires taxpayers to report annual property improvements, but it is 
unclear the purpose of this requirement.  If the intent is to require adjustments to 
the stabilized amount for improvements to the property, specific provisions 
addressing such changes should be added.   
Additionally, restricting qualification to a single property for married 
taxpayers will limit stabilization for taxpayers who are married but may be 
separated and living apart.   
Finally, expanding the definition of “homestead” only in the stabilization 
law would have little practical effect.  Any additional properties that fell under the 
new expanded definition in 36 M.R.S. § 6281(1)(C) would still not qualify for 
stabilization because 36 M.R.S. § 6281(1)(A) also requires that the property be 
eligible for the homestead exemption under 36 M.R.S. § 681(2), which does not 
include the expanded language.  
3 
 The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill, and the important issues raised by the Property Tax Stabilization Program in 
general; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
