TO:The Honorable Tim NangleThe Honorable Holly Stover, Co-ChairsMembers of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government
DATE:March 2, 2023
RE:LD 577 - An Act to Increase Availability of Election Information on Local GovernmentWebsites
Good afternoon Senator Nangle and Representative Stover.
My name is Lane Sturtevant. I’m a resident of Warren. I am the statewide organizer for the League ofWomen Voters of Maine. I am testifying in support of LD 577, An Act to Increase Availability of ElectionInformation on Local Government Websites.
The League of Women Voters of Maine is a nonpartisan political organization that has been working forover 100 years to encourage informed and active participation in government, to increase understandingof major public policy issues, and to influence public policy through education and advocacy. We neversupport or oppose any political party or candidate.
As part of our work in the public interest, the League works with Mainers all over the state, helping themengage in self-governance at all levels: local, state, and federal. Some of the most immediate andimpactful civic engagement can be at the local level, where decisions are made that affect our roads, ourschools, our businesses, and our homes. Helping Mainers connect to their local government is part ofthe League’s work in the public interest. In recent years, we have heard from Mainers about thedifficulties of readily finding information about local government, including local election information.
Last year, the League set a goal of covering all elections in Maine – state, federal and local – in our onlinevoter guide,Vote411.org. In the process of coveringlocal elections, our volunteer researchers realizedthat many municipalities in Maine do not post important local election information, like municipal ballotquestions or the names of candidates for local office, anywhere online. In some cases, this is because themunicipality does not have an official website; by our estimate, at least 86 municipalities in Maine do nothave an official website, though that figure could be higher.  In other cases, municipalities have officialwebsites, but they don’t routinely post upcoming local election information. If a voter in thatmunicipality wanted to know what was on their local ballot, they would have to call the town clerk orvisit the town office to see the sample ballot. These interactions not only disrupt the busy election workof the clerk, but also require that the voter is free during the hours the town clerk is working or the townoffice is open. Many Mainers work or provide child or elder care during those times.
The information that we would like to see provided online is information that town clerks alreadycompile. This readily available information would include, whenever applicable: the day, date and title of
PO 18187
Portland, ME 04112
info@lwvme.org
207.622.0256
www.lwvme.org

LWVME to SLG
March 2, 2023
LD
577
the election, the voting district designation, if any, the names and location of voting place or places,opening and closing times of the polls, and a specimen ballot or list of the offices and referendumquestions for that election. While these pieces of information are not specifically outlined in theamendment brought forward today, we would encourage the committee to consider adding them.
Two decades into the 21st century, we are living in a world where smartphones, search engines, andsocial media have made the internet the default information tool for most Mainers.Voters expect that1
election information will be available online, and they might not know to seek that information out inperson or over the phone. Local elections in Maine see much lower turnout rates than state or federalelections, and one significant reason could be this lack of easily accessible information about what is onthe ballot, as well as when the local election is happening, and where.
We understand that municipalities, especially smaller towns, do not always have the resources tomaintain an up-to-date official website where clerks can easily post local election information. That iswhy we support having the Secretary of State’s office provide a way for municipalities to submit localelection information to be centrally posted through the Secretary of State’s website. Such an optionwould be a significant public service; it would solve the problem for voters without overburdening townclerks.
We are grateful to the sponsor, the clerks, and the Secretary of State for their encouragement in bringingthis bill forward. We support the amendment presented by the sponsor. Thank you for the opportunityto testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee.
1This recently published Democracy Playbook from the NewDEAL Forum makes a similar recommendation aboutproviding more readily available election information.https://newdealforum.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Democracy-Playbook-Final.pdf
PO 18187
Portland, ME 04112
info@lwvme.org
207.622.0256
www.lwvme.org
