Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
,.w~. _ I Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation 
ll State House Station, 41 Anthony Avenue 
,1 Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 
J@ﬂI"1<= 
_ M; LambreW- Ph-11 Tel.: (207) 287-9300; T011 Free: (800) 791-4080 
C°mm'55'°"e' TL“ TTY: Dial 71] (Maine Relay); Fax: (207) 287-5815 Janet T. Mills 
Governor 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
Re: LD 938, An Act to Assist Nursing Homes in the Management of Facility Beds 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services: 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide information and note the opposition of the Department 
of Health and Human Services to LD 938, An Act to Assist Nursing Homes in the Management of 
Facility Beds. We offer the Committee the following information for your consideration. 
This bill restores the ability of nursing facilities to voluntarily reduce the number of their licensed 
beds and then later increase the number of their licensed beds to the prior level after obtaining a 
certiﬁcate of need and meeting certain conditions. The bill also modiﬁes that process to obtain 
certiﬁcate of need approval to reopen reserved beds, requires the Department of Health and Human 
Services to include in its calculation of reimbursement for services provided by a nursing facility 
the cost incurred by the facility for a medical director, and requires the cost incurred by a nursing 
facility for the acquisition, use and maintenance of computer or cloud-based software systems to 
be included as a ﬁxed cost. 
DLC understands that long-term care facilities would like to be able to reserve beds to avoid 
penalties for low occupancy at the time of audit. However, if a long-terrn facility takes beds “off- 
line” and reserves them, then later brings them back into service, we expect there will be an 
increase in cost to the MaineCare system due to inﬂation and other adjustments to their rates. Put 
simply, nursing facilities would beneﬁt from the changes in this bill because the reimbursement 
rate gets adjusted using a total occupancy based on fewer beds. This would increase their per-day 
reimbursement. There would be no beneﬁt to the Department or members, however. Bed capacity 
would be reduced but MaineCare would not receive a corresponding reduction in costs. 
We also believe the current proposed language would signiﬁcantly impact our Rate-Setting 
(changing reimbursement rates due to occupancy adjustments) and Audit teams’ based-on cost 
settlement procedures. Finally, we assume beds would be taken “offline” when there is low need 
and reopened when there is necessity, however that process may not be immediate. This could 
reduce our ﬂexibility and response time to fluctuations in bed need.
The Department is currently working on long-term care reform and this bill will likely frustrate 
those cunent efforts. DLC has discussed this proposed bill with both the Ofﬁce of MaineCare 
Services and the Ofﬁce of Aging and Disability Services, and they join us in our opposition. We 
thank you for your attention to this matter, and again, the Department suggests this bill ought not 
to pass. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and make myself available for 
questions at the work session should you request. 
Sincerely, 
mgr Director William Montejo, RN 
Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation
