Jim McClymer
AFUM
LD 891
17 May 2023
TO: Joint Committee on Labor and Housing
FROM: Jim McClymer UMaine Physics and AFUM President
RE: In Support of LD 891, An Act to Protect Due Process for Certain Public Sector 
Employees
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, Members of the Committee:
I am Jim McClymer, a physics professor at UMaine and President of AFUM, the 
full-time faculty union for the University of Maine System.
In the past UM and UMS have played fast and loose with due-process rights. In some 
cases AFUM was able to get inappropriate administrative actions reversed (a 
suspension for a faculty member for her speech), in others we have had to go to 
arbitration so that our members could get a fair hearing out of the UMS echo 
chamber. We have prevailed in these cases. Instead of learning from these cases UM 
continues to deny rights without due process nor do they respect Loudermill rights.
Turning my attention from the recent past to the present, UM is currently working to 
create a new policy associated with scientific misconduct. I don’t plan to get 
distracted with the disastrous process UM is using nor the misinformation they spread
in support of the policy except to ask the committee to take anything UM says in 
relation to the Policy with a huge grain of salt. I am glad to comment on provide 
information on any UM/UMS statements related to the policy.
This new policy expressly states (DO is Deciding Official) {emphasis added}:
 “During the Misconduct Proceedings under this Policy or any subsequent activities, 
the DO may take administrative actions that are, in their judgment, appropriate to 
protect Research funds, materials, equipment, or records, or the legitimate interests of 
Research subjects, patients, clients, or Research animals. Such administrative actions 
will not be deemed disciplinary in nature.
In reality, discipline is subject to rules given in the Collective Bargaining Agreement, 
policy, and laws. Yet, even as this bill is being considered, UM still asserts that its 
processes are not answerable to anyone. The Policy also attempts to claim that none 
of the actions of University officials are subject to a grievance, as required by the 
CBA and State labor law. Instead the University, with assistance from UMS General 
Counsel office, are creating a policy that has no accountability to anyone but those 
making the decision. I, and others, recently assisted a member who was subject to 
capricious actions and what I believe to me professional misconduct in bringing 
obviously false charges.
These concerns are not hypothetical. We have UMS General Counsel conducting 
yearlong “investigations” in which the accused was not told what they were being 
accused of or investigated for. During this process our member had their reputation 
damaged as other administrators were told the charges were “credible”. The member 
had discipline imposed with no due process. In the end nothing happened, the 
investigation just stopped, but not before spinning off Equal Opportunity and 
misconduct investigations that determined no cause for action.
These kinds of abuses have been occurring too often lately. In my long experience I 
have seen nothing like this.  Much of the blame goes to the Chancellor for his 
continuing failure to reign in the abuses. Unfortunately much of the blame must 
extend to the UM administration for failing to enforce policies that protect people’s 
due process rights. 
UMS & UM certainly talk a good game. In reality they continue to have a culture, 
either allowed to develop by the current Chancellor, or actively developed by him, 
that routinely abuses the power of the organization to violate people’s rights.
Enacting this legislation is one step in not only holding the administration 
accountable, but in developing a higher quality organization.
 

