May 13, 2023 
 
TO: Joint Committee on Labor and Housing 
 
FROM: Margo Lukens, Professor of English, University of Maine (lukens@maine.edu) 
 
RE: In Support of LD 891, An Act to Protect Due Process for Certain Public Sector 
Employees 
 
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, Members of the Committee: 
 
My name is Margo Lukens, and I have been at the University of Maine since 1992, 
tenured since 1998.  During the past 31 years I have held a number of administrative 
positions in which I have supervised colleagues: chair of Department of English (2004-
2007), director of Academic Programs in Innovation Engineering (2007-2016), chair of 
New Media (2014-2016), and director of the McGillicuddy Humanities Center in the 
College of Liberal Arts and Sciences (2018-2020). 
 
I write in support of LD 891 because I now realize that when I began my employment on 
the tenure track in 1992, I was never informed I could earn the rights provided by the 
Loudermill v Cleveland Board of Education decision of the United States Supreme 
Court. Loudermill states that public employees after a probationary period have a 
property right to their employment, and that under the 5th and 14th Amendments, public 
employees may not be deprived of that property without due process.  When my 
probationary period ended, there was no mention that in fact these rights were mine.  
Even worse, when I was hired into administrative positions at the University of Maine, I 
was never informed that those I supervised had such rights.  All of us were at risk of 
losing our constitutional rights because we were ill-informed, and because the institution 
did not describe or observe a process to guarantee those rights would not be abridged. 
 
L.D 891 can address this threat to our rights. All employees, and importantly, all 
supervisors should be provided with the details of the Loudermill decision. All members 
of the University of Maine System community need to be informed of these rights. We 
should require the University of Maine System to inform the Legislature on a regular 
basis of its process to protect Loudermill rights, and the specific steps it takes to 
acknowledge and respect these rights for all its employees. 
