1 
  
 
 
 
May 15, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing: 
 
My name is Melissa Martin, and I am submitting testimony today on behalf of the Maine Coalition 
Against Sexual Assault (MECASA), the organization which represents and serves Maine’s sexual 
violence prevention and response programs as well as Maine’s Children’s Advocacy Centers. 
MECASA initiates and advocates for victim-centered public policy; provides expert training, 
technical assistance, and resources for providers and partners; and funds the service providers in 
your communities.  
 
MECASA opposes LD 891, An Act to Protect Due Process for Certain Public Sector Employees, as 
amended.   
 
We would encourage this Committee to avoid legislating in this area because of the overlap with 
the federal Title IX law and potential unintended consequences.  Last session, the Legislature 
passed a bill related to rights of students who are sexually assaulted or harassed on campus.  The 
bill was brought by student activists and was strongly intended to protect students reporting 
sexual harassment and sexual assault. Part of that bill included language about certain 
requirements for hearings.  After the bill was passed, the federal government issued new proposed 
regulations removing the requirement of a hearing at the college and university level.  
Unfortunately, Maine law seems to now require these hearings.  Taking away options for student 
survivors was neither the intent of the bill drafters or the Committee voting on the bill, but it was 
the result based on changes in federal law.   
 
In particular, there are at least three ways in which this bill could be either squarely inconsistent 
or simply functionally incompatible with federal Title IX law.  First, this amendment requires a 
hearing in all cases whether or not termination is being recommended.  In sexual assault cases, 
best practice is for a neutral, training investigator to first investigate a case and allow both parties 
access to the investigatory record.  Upon investigation, most cases are able to resolve without a 
need for a hearing.  The procedure outlined in LD 891, as amended, seems to skip an investigation 
and move directly to a hearing.  This sort of trial by surprise benefits neither party’s ability to be 
able to prepare for a hearing and can be incredibly re-traumatizing for a survivor of sexual assault.   

2 
  
Second, the bill as outlined requires the university president to conduct a hearing for termination.  
In sexual assault and harassment cases, it may be more appropriate for a university to hire a 
trained hearing officer or use an internal officer with specific training on Title IX and sexual violence 
issues.   
 
Finally, the bill as amended seems to prohibit a university from taking any action without a full 
hearing, including placing an employee on temporary paid leave.  This would mean any time a 
student reported sexual violence from staff, the student would be burdened by having to continue 
to attend the class of the person who assaulted them or continue to live in a dorm with a security 
person who harassed them likely for several months.  This violates the student’s Title IX rights.   
 
For all these reasons, we do not support the amended bill.  At a minimum, we ask that you remove 
the requirement of hearings in all cases, remove the requirement of the university president to 
hold certain hearings, and include exceptions allowing a school to place an employee on paid leave 
pending an investigation.   
 
Thank you for your consideration.  I will be available at the work session to answer any additional 
questions you may have.   
 
 
 
 
About Maine’s Sexual Assault Service Providers  
  
One in five Mainers will experience sexual assault at some point in their lifetime.1 Each year, 
14,000 Mainers will experience sexual violence.2 
 
Maine’s sexual violence service providers  provide free and confidential services across the state 
to victims/survivors of sexual harassment and sexual assault and those close to them, as well as to 
individuals who wish to increase their understanding of the issues. Just some of the services 
include a 24-hour statewide sexual assault helpline, crisis intervention and information, support 
groups, in-person accompaniment and advocacy through the medical and legal systems, and 
school- and community-based prevention education. Services are provided for a victim/survivor 
regardless of when they experienced sexual violence, and regardless of what type of sexual 
violence they experienced. Types of sexual violence include, but are not limited to, sexual 
harassment and gender-based bullying, child sexual abuse, elder sexual abuse, stalking, sex 
trafficking, and sexual violence within an intimate partner relationship.     
  
 
1 Dumont, R. & Shaler, G. (2015). Maine Crime Victimization Report: Informing public policy for safer communities. 
Muskie School of Public Service, University of Southern Maine. 
2 Ibid. 
3 
 24/7 Confidential  
Maine Sexual Assault Helpline:  1-800-871-7741  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
  
 

5 
  
 

