        15 May, 2023 In Support of  LD 891, An Act to Protect Due Process for Certain Public Sector Employees Greetings, Members of  the Joint Committee on Labor and Housing, As one of  the faculty member grievance officers for the Associated Faculties of  the Universities of  Maine, I have seen recent instances in which faculty members receiving disciplinary actions from the University of  Maine for alleged violations of  various professional codes have been denied the opportunity for an evidentiary hearing.  In each case, disciplinary action has been taken by the university without meeting the requirements of  federal law articulated in the Supreme Court decision on Loudermill versus the Cleveland Board of  Education in 1985. On several occasions, UMaine has pressed charges against faculty members without the benefit of  giving them access to the details of  charges and allowing them sufficient time to review the charges to ensure that they have an adequate understanding of  them.  One recent case presented an accused faculty member with a two inch thick stack of  papers and absurdly asked him to immediately respond to all of  the charges. In cases where the university has decided to recommend termination of  a faculty member, the University has not offered the the accused a pre-termination hearing in which they might address the recommendation.  Terminated faculty members have not then been offered the opportunity for a post-termination hearing in which they could address any failures of  processes, mishandlings of  evidence, or conflicts of  interest, whether intentional or unintentional. Over recent years, the university has prolonged investigations into alleged faculty misconducts, dragging out cases inexcusably for well over a year.  Upon recommending faculty members for disciplinary actions, the university has likewise too frequently felt it could proceed at an unscheduled rate, leaving accused faculty members unable to plan for their futures as processes continue to drag out without explanation.   LD 891 would not only protect the rights of  university employees; it would also ultimately benefit the university itself  because in their violations of  Loudermill rights, the university has found itself  in the unenviable position of  losing their cases, which has cost them greatly in backpay, defamation, and severance settlements.  In several cases, adherence to Loudermill regulations would also help stem the loss of  valuable faculty members, who in their feelings that the university had not given them due processes, have left for other institutions or sought early retirements. I strongly recommend passage of  LD 891, for it will benefit both universities employees individually and the institution as a whole by ensuring a more open process of  investigation that initially result in recommending disciplinary actions and adhering to federal law resultant from the Loudermill decision.        Thank you,          Dr Michael Grillo

Michael Grillo
Penobscot, ME
LD 891
15 May, 2023
In Support of LD 891, An Act to Protect Due Process for Certain Public Sector 
Employees
Greetings, Members of the Joint Committee on Labor and Housing,
As one of the faculty member grievance officers for the Associated Faculties of the 
Universities of Maine, I have seen recent instances in which faculty members 
receiving disciplinary actions from the University of Maine for alleged violations of 
various professional codes have been denied the opportunity for an evidentiary 
hearing. In each case, disciplinary action has been taken by the university without 
meeting the requirements of federal law articulated in the Supreme Court decision on 
Loudermill versus the Cleveland Board of Education in 1985. On several occasions, 
UMaine has pressed charges against faculty members without the benefit of giving 
them access to the details of charges and allowing them sufficient time to review the 
charges to ensure that they have an adequate understanding of them. One recent case 
presented an accused faculty member with a two inch thick stack of papers and 
absurdly asked him to immediately respond to all of the charges.
In cases where the university has decided to recommend termination of a faculty 
member, the University has not offered the the accused a pre-termination hearing in 
which they might address the recommendation. Terminated faculty members have not
then been offered the opportunity for a post-termination hearing in which they could 
address any failures of processes, mishandlings of evidence, or conflicts of interest, 
whether intentional or unintentional.
Over recent years, the university has prolonged investigations into alleged faculty 
misconducts, dragging out cases inexcusably for well over a year. Upon 
recommending faculty members for disciplinary actions, the university has likewise 
too frequently felt it could proceed at an unscheduled rate, leaving accused faculty 
members unable to plan for their futures as processes continue to drag out without 
explanation.
LD 891 would not only protect the rights of university employees; it would also 
ultimately benefit the university itself because in their violations of Loudermill rights,
the university has found itself in the unenviable position of losing their cases, which 
has cost them greatly in backpay, defamation, and severance settlements. In several 
cases, adherence to Loudermill regulations would also help stem the loss of valuable 
faculty members, who in their feelings that the university had not given them due 
processes, have left for other institutions or sought early retirements.
I strongly recommend passage of LD 891, for it will benefit both universities 
employees individually and the institution as a whole by ensuring a more open 
process of investigation that initially result in recommending disciplinary actions and 
adhering to federal law resultant from the Loudermill decision.
Thank you,
Dr Michael Grillo
