 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent  
University of Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
 
DATE:  March 16, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Labor and Housing  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                       samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   LD 891, An Act to Protect Due Process for Certain Public Sector   
  Employees  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Labor and Housing: I write on behalf of the University of Maine System (UMS) 
to inform your consideration of  LD 891,  An Act to Protect Due Process for Certain Public 
Sector Employee s. 
Maine’ s public universities value and respect our 4,700 regular employees and our productive 
partnership with the six labor organizat ions that  represent many of them, the rights of which 
are statutorily governed by the University of Maine System Labor Relations  Act (Title 26, 
Chapter 12) . 
Collective bargaining agreements between UMS and these six  units detail mutually agreed 
upon working conditions, compensation and benefits, and processes and procedures for 
working together in good faith to resolve d ifficult issues such as termination . 
UMS maintains that it is through collective bargaining — and not legislation — that 
terms of employment should be decide d. This would include the specific timing for various 
written notices and meetings associated with potential employee suspension and termination, 
as needs may vary across bargaining units. For this reason, we cannot support LD 891 . 
However, the due process outlined in this legislation by which employees are provided written 
notice and the opportunity to  meet with their public employer prior to being temporarily or 
permanently removed from the performance of their duties is generally consistent with UMS 
practice and our existing collective bargaining agreements. Thus, while the passage of LD 
891 would req uire minor adjustments to future collective bargaining agreements, it would not 
result a substantive change to the due process afforded to the System’s represented 
employees, though it would extend these pre -disciplinary benefits to those who are non -
represented . 
As the Committee knows, if current or former employees or their representatives believe that 
UMS has not fulfilled its obligations under the UMS  Labor Relations Act or our collective 
bargaining agreements, redress can be s ought through various statutory mechanisms for fact -
finding, mediation and arbitration , or through the Maine Labor Relations Board.  
I hope this information is helpful to your consideration of LD 891. Please let me know if I can 
provide additional information on behalf of UMS prior to your work session . 
 
