TO: Joint Committee on Labor and Housing 
 
FROM: Tony Brinkley, Professor of English (retired), University of Maine at Orono 
 (tonybrinkley600@gmail.com) 
 
RE: In Support of LD 891, An Act to Protect Due Process for Certain Public Sector 
 Employees. An addendum. 
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, Members of the Committee: 
 
Having reviewed written testimony in support and in opposition to LD 891, I would like to 
supplement my May 9th testimony with a few observations. 
 
I think it is important to recognize that Loudermill rights for public employees in no way 
interferes with rigorous Title 9 investigations and judgements on the part of a public 
employer, but Loudermill rights cannot be suspended by a public employer's investigation of 
a public employee to whom those rights apply. For this reason Warren's argument - that the 
issues involved are better handled by collective bargaining than by legislature - misses the 
reality that Loudermill is not subject to negotiation anymore than other Constitutional rights 
are subject to negotiations and that it is the Supreme Court that determines when and how 
those rights apply. The University of Maine System was informed as much in Cotnoir v UMS 
in 1994. 
 
Melissa Martin's concern that LD 891 may interfere with Title 9 enforcement can also be 
easily addressed. Loudermill does not require a public hearing and whether as an advisory or 
as a matter of law Title 9 does is outside the scope of Loudermill. When restricted to an 
advisory, Title 9 protocol for due process was not a matter of law but the requirement for due 
process was. In the 2016 investigation of Wesley College, the Obama Administration's Office 
of Civil Rights ruled that respondents to Title 9 charges were entitled to due process and 
failure to assure due process was a violation of Title 9. All claims under Title 9 should be 
rigorously honored and fully investigated. Neither requires a violation of due process. 
Furthermore,  Loudermill rights involve all investigations of public employees, not simply 
those involved in Title 9. To take a different case, if a public employee is charged with a 
misappropriation of funds and if the public employee has not misappropriated the funds - and 
if the preponderance of evidence supports innocence, due process protects that innocence. 
 
The Loudermill ruling determined two things. Certain public employees have property 
interests in the jobs and under the 5th and 14th Amendment - like life and liberty- they cannot 
be deprived of property without due process. The recognition of those interests represented a 
landmark decision that has yet to be fully explored. In Loudermill, the Supreme Court applied 
this finding to cases involving termination of employment by public employers of public 
employees: full disclosure of claims against the employee, a pre-termination hearing, a post-
termination review. Samantha Warren believes that an employee can always defend these 
rights through contractual grievance procedures and in federal court. Both would put the onus 
for enforcement of Loudermill on the employee. LD 891 will make demonstrative honoring 
of Loudermill a responsibility for the public employer. Given the University of Maine 
System's negligence in this regard (and despite the finding in Cotnoir v UMS), LD 891 has 
become essential for Maine's public university system. Once again I urge its passage. I hope 
with due considerations of specific concerns, both Warren and Martin will agree. At a time 
when (whatever your political persuasion) constitutional protections are under assault, those 
protections should be rigorously enforced as a matter of law. 
