 1 9 May 2023  TO: Joint Committee on Labor and Housing  FROM: Tony Brinkley, Professor of English (retired), University of Maine at Orono  (tonybrinkley600@gmail.com)  RE: In Support of LD 891, An Act to Protect Due Process for Certain Public Sector  Employees   Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, Members of the Committee:  My name is Tony Brinkley, and I am a retired Professor of English from the University of Maine at Orono. I began there at 1983 and retired in 2021. During my tenure at the University, I was Chair of the English Department for 5 1/2 years (1999-2004). While I was the Faculty Associate in Academic Affairs (1991-1994), I coordinated the process that created the Native American Program and the Wabanaki Center. I also wrote the University's five-year interim accreditation report among other responsibilities. From 2006-2019 I was the Senior Faculty Associate at the University's Franco-American Centre where a primary responsibility involved protecting the Centre from the University's repeated attempts to defund it out of existence. Funds I secured over the opposition of successive Deans of Arts and Sciences supported Research Associates who worked with Director Susan Pinette and recently secured a $350k grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities for which the University can now take pride. When I was promoted to Full Professor in 2008, the Provost and the President thanked me for my "extraordinary" achievements as a teacher, a scholar, and a public servant.  In January 2018, the University placed me on administrative leave while the Office of Equal Opportunity investigated claimant charges of Title 9 offenses. After an intensive investigation, I was cleared of all Title 9 charges. Nevertheless the University Human Resources Vice President opened a new investigation which led to my termination in 2019. During the HR investigation, however, the University never conducted any additional investigation except to meet with me and mischaracterize the meeting as a confession. The investigation led to no report or recommendation, only to a termination letter. The President of the University participated actively in the HR process, and no one independent of the investigation ever reviewed the merits of the President's judgment. Termination was immediate because I was said to pose an imminent threat on campus.  AFUM took my case to arbitration where I won decisively. The Arbitrator characterized the University's actions as an "academic lynching." I accepted a generous early retirement offer and am now living happily and prosperously.  I offer this history as background in order to suggest why I believe passage of LD 891 is essential. There were numerous violations of due process in my case and as a result there was not - could not be - a valid determination of just cause. What LD 891 addresses is the Constitutional Rights of public employees, which in my case the University ignored. What were the violations?  In her testimony before the Labor and Housing Committee, Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government and Community, spoke for the University Maine System: "UMS maintains that 
 2 it is through collective bargaining — and not legislation — that terms of employment should be decided. This would include the specific timing for various written notices and meetings associated with potential employee suspension and termination, as needs may vary across bargaining units. For this reason, we cannot support LD 891." With all due respect for Director Warren, Due Process for public employees is not subject to collective bargaining or legislation. It is a constitutional right that collective bargaining and legislation can acknowledge or protect but is not dependent on either.  In Loudermill v Cleveland Board of Education, the United States Supreme Court determined that public employees after a probationary period have a property right to their employment and that under 5th and 14th Amendments public employees may not be deprived of that property without due process (arguably the due process protection in the Constitution is the bedrock of all other constitutional protections which are endangered when due process is violated).  Having recognized the property right of public employees, Loudermill (in the Majority Opinion written by Justice Byron White) required three steps to assure due process:  1.) That before a respondent can be interviewed with regard to all charges, the respondent must be given full access to the details of the charges and sufficient time to formulate a response.  2.) When the investigation is completed and in its report recommends termination, the respondent is entitled to a pre-termination hearing to address the recommendation.  3.) If termination occurs, the public employer should conduct of post-termination hearing to address any flaws in the investigation (conflicts of interest, absence of evidence on which the report's recommendations and employer's judgement is based). In Loudermill, the Supreme Court specifcally refers to Ohio laws which require this review). Like the other steps, this too constitutes a inalienable right of the employee regardless, for example, of any union advocacy.  In my case - and I believe in other's cases - the 1st step was violated by USM from the start. In December 2017 and January 2018 I asked for specifics with regard to complaints before any scheduled interview. I was told that I would only learn specifics during an interview. My first lawyer (Stephen Langsdorf, Preti, Flaherty) wrote to EO investigator Angela Tizon on 27 December 2017 and asked for details: “Could you please forward the complaint or at least give me some more details about what the charge and process is?” Investigator Tizon responded: “University protocol is to notify a Respondent of only the basic nature of the allegations when a complaint is filed (e.g. protected class, whether it's harassment or retaliation,etc.), and any further detail regarding the specific allegations or any information provided by the Complainant is addressed and shared during the meeting with the Respondent.” This protocol is a clear violation of Loudermill, and while Justice White's opinion does not detail what full disclosure should include, a U. S. Department of Education 2017 Advisory does: “Once it decides to open an investigation that may lead to disciplinary action against the responding party, a school should provide written notice to the responding party of the allegations constituting a potential violation of the school’s sexual misconduct policy, including sufficient details and with sufficient time to prepare a response before any initial interview. Sufficient details include the identities of the parties involved, the specific section of the code of conduct allegedly violated, the precise conduct allegedly constituting 
 3 the potential violation, and the date and location of the alleged incident. Each party should receive written notice in advance of any interview or hearing with sufficient time to prepare for meaningful participation." The “university protocol” in my case clearly violated this Title IX guideline as well. Only because my lawyer Valerie Wicks (Johnson, Webbert & Collins) insisted, were brief summaries of allegations offered and then, only a day before the interviews. Should anyone need a lawyer to assure that the University complies with Loudermill or with a DOE Title IX advisory?  After HR and the President decideed to terminate my employment without a report to which I could respond, I was also not offered a pre-termination hearing in compliance with step 2. The pre-termination hearing, while not requiring a comprehensive review of the case, is nevertheless required to avoid avoidable mistakes. A pre-termination hearing is not a fact-finding interview which occurs before any recommendation of termination has been made. In the fact-finding interview the employee answers specific charges but does not address the outcome of the investigation.  After I received a termination letter from the President, no post-termination hearing or process occurred. As a result, conduct by the Chair of English (in which he misled one of the claimants and helped choreograph charges informed by this misinformation) was not reviewed by the University. Conflicts on interest on the part of the Dean of Arts and Sciences and the President of the University were not examined by the University. Demonstrable defamation and slander were never investigated. Only because AFUM was willing to fund arbitration was University conduct judged.   At no point during my case or after has the University recognized Loudermill rights. Unlike 2017 Title 9 protocols, Loudermill is not advisory and compliance is not optional. When violation of Loudermill by the University of Maine System was litigated in Federal Court in the 1990s, the University was informed that compliance was mandatory. Nevertheless in years since and in my experience, few if any employees or supervisors at the University are aware of Loudermill or have heard of its protections and obligations (certainly when I was Chair of the English Department, I had never heard of either).  L.D 891 can address this lapse. All employees and all supervisors should be provided with the details of Loudermill. The University should fully inform members of its community of these rights. The University of Maine System should regularly inform the Legislature of the specific steps it takes to acknowledge and respect these rights.  To end on a personal note, I was 70 in 2018 when the University initiated my case. I was nearing the end of what I believe had been a useful career and distinguished by my achievements as a scholar, translator, poet, teacher, and administrator. Also as a public servant. At the same time I had antagonized certain members of the administration, chiefly perhaps by my effective advocacy of Franco-American and other community interests. I was one of the founders of Bridge Year Academy and its first Board Chair. I was working intensively on rehabilitations programs with MPAC and Maine State Prison Warden Randall Liberty. I was useful in part because I could be aggressively and empathically pragmatic. All this became impossible at the beginning of 2018. There was an unexpected effort on the part of the University to destroy me both professionally and personally. While I was unwilling to be destroyed and I was vindicated, I wonder what would have happened if I had been younger or less politically experienced. As my case evolved, quite unexpectedly I began to enjoy the process - in part because I was protecting a principle in addition to myself and 
 4 because I had the support of valued friends and colleagues. When I won, I felt that I had won in a good cause and also to the benefit of the University of Maine System. Laudermill helped me to understand the cause and the benefit. Private employers hire "at will," but for public employees  Loudermill defines an inalienable right. As a matter of daily practice (not of litigation) and in the interests of its community and the State, the University of Maine System should celebrate Loudermill without hesitation.  
