13 May 2023 
 
TO: Joint Committee on Labor and Housing 
 
FROM: Yvon Labbé, Director (retired), Franco-American Centre, University of Maine 
(Orono) 
 
RE: In Support of LD 891, An Act to Protect Due Process for Certain Public Sector 
 Employees 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, Members of the Committee: 
 
My name is Yvon Labbé. Before retirement (2014), for many years I was the founding 
Director of the Franco-American Centre at the University of Maine (Orono). In that capacity 
I struggled over many years to secure adequate funding for the Centre and Maine's French 
reality. I have been recognized by the Maine State Legislature, the French Government, and 
the Quebec government for this effort. Beginning in the 1990s, Professor Tony Brinkley was 
a crucial partner since, as I have said many times, while I speak French, he speaks 
"University." Other partners with whom Tony and I worked included, Severin Beliveau, Troy 
Jackson, Jerry Talbot and Rachel Talbot-Ross, Wayne Newell, Governors King, Baldacci and 
LePage, among many others. Repeatedly this network encouraged the University to honor 
commitments (oral and written) to the Franco-American Centre and Franco-American 
communities, commitments that the University repeatedly tried to ignore, and I have no doubt 
that Tony's subsequent trials reflected administrative anger at his successful insistence that 
the University keeps its promises, not only to talk its talk but to walk its talk. 
 
During my time at the University (42 years) I do not recall anyone who addressed the 
constitutional rights of public employees. No one raised them with me as an employee. No 
one raised them with me as a supervisor of other employees. The existence of employees' 
constitutional rights was something about which we didn't know and didn't know that we 
didn't know. In retrospect it is clear to me that the University must have actively encouraged 
that ignorance. Clearly this should not have been the case and clearly the University should 
actively protect the constitutional rights of its employees. The University community and the 
people of Maine deserve no less. LD 891 advocates for both and empowers both. We all of us 
know, perhaps particularly now, that the survival of constitutional rights is not a given. We 
know that many of us have had to fight so that our rights would be recognized and honored. 
LD 891 contributes to that work. 
 
I strongly support its passage.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
