 
 
 
 
March 15, 2023  
 
Sen. Craig Hickman , Chair  
Rep. Laura Supica , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 768 An Act to Authorize State Political Parties to Opt Out of Ranked -choice Voting for Primary 
Elections  
Chair Hickman , Chair Supica , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs. My name is David O’Brien and I am Policy Director  for RepresentUs, the nation’s leading 
nonpartisan anti -corruption organization. RepresentUs is submitting testimony today in opposition to LD 
768 An Act to Authorize State Politi cal Parties to Opt Out of Ranked -choice Voting for Primary Elections . 
Our organization believes strongly that Ranked -choice Voting enhances the democratic electoral process 
and should be maintained  across the board  in Maine.  
RepresentUs is a nonpartisan advocacy organization dedicated to the idea that the government  
should be representative of and accountable to the people. It advocates for policies to  
strengthen our democracy and provides activists with the resources and training to bring  
meaningful change.  Regarding the electoral process, we work to  pass powerful state and local laws that 
expand voter access , make elections more representative,  and enhance  election  security.  To that end, 
we are supportive of Ranked -choice Voting  (RCV) . 
LD 768 would allow a political party in Maine to opt out of ranked -choice voting for the party's primary 
election . This would erode Maine RCV system and potentially cause confusion for voters.  
RCV has many benefits. It  gives voters the opportunity to express their true preferences without fear of 
accidentally helping candid ates who they don’t support. Since successful candidates need to win a 
majority of the vote, they have to go beyond their base and build broader coalitions to govern. RCV also 
opens the door for more voices in our elections, as candidates no longer have to  fear the “spoiler 
effect”.   
When voters have the opportunity to better express their preferences, and candidates are incentivized 
to go beyond a narrow base to connect with the broader community, the officials who win elections 
need popular buy -in to main tain support. For officeholders, this backing becomes a clearer mandate to 
govern in exchange for more responsive governance.  
RCV is used by approximately 13 million voters, in 59 cities in over 10 states and statewide in 2 states. In 
addition to Maine, t his includes places from  Alaska to New York City where RepresentUs has thrown our 
full support behind the locals leading the way.  When Alaska adopted RCV, becoming the second state to 
use the system statewide after Maine, 85% of Alaskans reported RCV to be simple and successful.  

Mainers have strongly supported R CV twice at the polls , first with the initia l ballot measure to enact R CV 
and later with  the people's veto  to repeal it.  
We urge the committee to follo w the will of Maine people and protect Maine’s Ranked -choice Voting 
system by voting no on LD 768. 
