'
. 
; ’}1l 1‘ ‘YTs
Q f.’“Ti<.'_$'*"l ‘\' 
. -LL , . c‘ _*’ ~' 
1' 
an 4' 4 /.':F;;1 ‘q =;=;-kw* 
Eric Brakey 131“ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 - 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 768, An Act to Authorize State Political Parties to 
Opt Out of Ranked-choice Voting for Primary Elections 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
March 15, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New 
Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Thank you for your presence today as I present L.D. 768, "An 
Act to Authorize State Political Parties to Opt Out of Ranked-choice Voting for Primary 
Elections. ” 
This legislation would allow state political parties, through rules established at state conventions, 
to opt-out of ranked choice voting for their primary nomination processes in favor of the 
traditional, plurality-win system. This bill represents a simple compromise on the matter of 
Ranked Choice Voting, keeping the system intact for federal general elections, while allowing 
state parties more ﬂexibility in setting their own rules for 
For any unfamiliar, here is a brief overview of the history. 
While RCV was adopted by the voters in the 2016 general referendum, it has not been without 
controversy. The Maine Supreme Court found that state constitutional provisions about plurality- 
win elections in contests for state ofﬁces (the governorship and legislative ofﬁces) trumped the 
new statute. As such, the court found that only races for federal ofﬁce and partisan primary 
nominations could be governed by RCV statutes. 
With then Secretary of State Matt Dunlap waming about the logistical burden of running two 
separate systems of electing candidates, the Maine Legislature voted in 2017 to vote to delay its 
implementation until 2021, allowing time for efforts to amend the Constitution. A people's veto 
effort overtumed the delay in 2018 with 53.9% of the vote, though many noted the wording of 
the question was difﬁcult to understand due to a double negative:-
_ 
Question 1 - June 2018 
Do you want to reject the parts of a new law that would delay the use of ranked—choice 
voting in the election of candidates for any state or federal ofﬁce until 2022, and then 
retain the method only if the constitution is amended by December 1, 2021, to allow 
ranked-choice voting for candidates in state elections? 
To date, only one election outcome in Maine has been deﬁnitively changed due to RCV with the
2nd District Congressional Election of 2018. In the aftermath of that race, federal courts uphold 
the constitutionality of RCV in federal elections. Still, RCV remains controversial to many. 
I Won't spend time today on the pros and cons of RCV as a system versus traditional plurality- 
Win voting, except to say that I have observed a voter suppression effect among some individuals 
who are confused, suspicious, or outright opposed to the new system. For some, choosing to stay 
home is preferable to voting under RCV. 
While I anticipate RCV is likely here to stay for at least the near future, I believe it would be 
proper for the statutes to at minimum respect the right of political parties to establish rules for 
their own nomination processes. For political primaries, this means that if you like your RCV, 
you can keep your RCV. But if a political party wants to return to the traditional system, 
delegates at a state convention would be able to make the change. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
