Testimony in Support of LD 768:
“An Act to Authorize
State Political Parties to Opt
Out of Ranked-choice Voting for Primary Elections”
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as
director of policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a
nonpartisan, non-profit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic
freedom in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 768.
This bill is an important one; it would make a small, but meaningful change in
Maine’s election laws. LD 768 would simply allow political parties to use plurality voting
for their nominating contests, instead of being forced to use Ranked-Choice Voting
(RCV).
RCV has many inherent flaws. From the piles of exhausted ballots it leaves in its
wake, to a generally more confusing electoral system, it can disenfranchise voters, and
research shows that it does. As described in the University of Cincinnati Law Review,
“RCV’s multiple elections treat some voters more favorably than others.”
1
This can cause
higher levels of voter fatigue, and as shown in research from Jason McDaniel at San
Francisco State University, can lead to “increased disparities in turnout between groups
who are more likely to vote and those who are less likely to vote.
2
”
The state should not force political parties, which are private institutions and
make their own bylaws, to use a system which relies on exhausted ballots—those
discarded from the final tally—in order to achieve its purported “majority” winner.
For a system which is sold by proponents as one that enhances democracy, voters
should be extremely disappointed to learn that most often, winners in RCV races do not
earn a majority of all votes cast. That only occurs in about 40% of single-winner RCV
elections.
3
Please deem LD 768 “Ought To Pass” and return the right to run party primaries
the way that the parties desire. Thank you for your time and consideration.
3
A False Majority: The Failed Experiment of Ranked-Choice
Voting – Maine Policy Institute
2
https://lca.sfsu.edu/archive/lcanews/2019/11/01/819496-study-professor-mcdaniel-finds-ranked-choice-vo 
ting-affects-voter-turnout.html
1
Bryer, Brandon. “One Vote, Two Votes, Three Votes, Four: How Ranked Choice Voting Burdens Voting 
Rights and More.” University of Cincinnati Law Review, Volume 90, Issue 2. December 2021. 
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1432&context=uclr
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

