_ Department of the Secretary of State 
at 
Bureau of Corporations, Elections and Commissions 
A “iii. 
trrj$f_/ \w:» 
Julie L. Flynn 
Shenna BellowsA 
Deputy Secretary of Stale 
Secretary ofState_ 
JOINT STANDING COMIVHTTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
March 15, 2023 
Testifying in opposition 
L.D. 768 “An Act to Authorize State Political Parties to Opt Out of Ranked-choice Voting for Primary 
Elections ” 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows, and I am the Secretary of State. I am speaking today in 
opposition to L.D. 768. 
In a General Election year, a calendar with the order of operations and tasks is assembled to. ensurea 
well-run election. In December of the year prior, the Elections Division prepares the forms for 
candidates to collect signatures, and on January 1, candidates can begin collecting signatures. Once 
they have collected enough signatures, primary candidates turn in their signature petitions by March 
15th. At that point, staff in the Elections Division get underway preparing ballots for the state primary 
election in June. 
In 2022, there were 544 different ofﬁcial ballot styles, plus the same number of sample ballot styles, 
with each being proofed by a team of 4 staff, sent to the printer, and printed in time to get to the 
municipalities for distribution to voters. In 2022, our deadline to get the ballot styles to the printer was 
April 15th, so that ballots could arrive in towns in time for absentee voting to get underway in mid- 
May. Party conventions are usually held in late spring, which would put Elections in the untenable 
situation of having to print ballots that may not be the correct style, should a party decide to opt out— 
or then someday opt back in to — ranked choice voting for primary elections. 
Additionally, in 2024, the Presidential Primary will be held on March 5“‘ for any qualiﬁed party that 
certiﬁes it has a contest between 2 or more candidates by October ls‘ of 2023. The ranked-choice law 
applies to the Presidential Primary in 2024, and ballots would be printed and delivered to 
municipalities by 30 days before that election. Therefore, the party convention would be held too late 
to decide whether ranked-choice voting would be used for that party’s Presidential Primary. 
The Elections Division must have certainty that what is being sent to the printer will be the correct 
ballot style for the Presidential Primary and June primary elections. 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.g0v/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
Moreover, we have concerns about voter confusion should this bill pass. Right now, we know which 
elections are held in which manner, and changing that — potentially at the last minute before voting 
occurs — would sow deep confusion and could ultimately result in cynicism of our elections. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
I 01 Stale House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.g0v/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
