(j\)g’(fot§T 
LD 1459, First Regular Session of the 131“ Maine Legislature 
An Act to Reduce Abuse of the Civil Ex Parte Attachment and Trustee Processes 
April 24 2023, Public Hearing before the Judiciary Committee 
Written Testimony of Colby Wallace of South Portland, Maine 
Sometimes in litigation a plaintiff will deem it necessary to secure a possible monetary award 
from a defendant who may hide assets during the lawsuit. In such circumstances the law 
provides a plaintiffs lawyer the opportunity to attach a defendant's assets through a legal process 
known as attachment or attachment through trustee process. (For simplicity I refer to the process 
generally as “attachment ” as opposed to attachment and trustee process.) 
In an attachment process the plaintiffs lawyer ﬁles a motion with the court and serves it upon the 
defendant and the court holds a hearing on the matter with all parties present. The judge 
determines if the attachment can proceed based upon several legal criteria. If it does proceed the 
plaintiffs lawyer will then serve the court papers granting attachment upon various institutions 
(such as banks). The papers inform the institution that it must freeze the defendants accounts 
until further notice. At that point the defendant no longer has access to the frozen accounts. In 
the initial hearing on the plaintiff ’s motion the judge may put limits on the order attaching assets 
so that the defendant may continue to have access to cash to pay for essentials such as food, 
shelter and clothing for the defendant and the defendant's family. 
The Legislature through current law also provides an extraordinary remedy to a plaintiff ’s lawyer 
seeking to freeze a defendant ’s assets in secret without letting the defendant know that it is 
happening. This is called “ex parte attachment. ” The phrase ex parte (pronounced ex par-tay) is 
“Latin meaning ‘for one party,’ referring to motions, hearings or orders granted on the request of 
and for the beneﬁt of one party only. This is an exception to the basic rule of court procedure that 
both parties must be present at any argument before a judge, and to the otherwise strict rule that 
an attorney may not notify a judge without previously notifying the opposition. ” See the 
www.law.com deﬁnition of ex parte at https://dictionary.law.com/default.aspx?selected=696 as of 
March 24, 2023. 
In ex parte attachment, before the complaint against the defendant has even been served on the 
defendant, the plaintiff ’s lawyer can have a secret meeting with the judge without the defendant 
or a lawyer present and give the judge the plaintiff ’s facts only. Based upon those facts and 
applicable court rules a judge usually must approve the request and enter an order for ex parte 
attachment. The plaintiff ’s lawyer will then serve the court papers upon various institutions 
holding the defendant's money without telling the defendant. At that point the defendant no 
longer has access to the frozen accounts and only ﬁnds out when they attempt to use their debit 
card or withdraw money. The defendant does not even know they have been sued, let alone that 
the plaintiff ’s lawyer was able to have a secret meeting with a judge to freeze their accounts.
Typically the plaintiff ’s lawyer will freeze all accounts because the ex parte order has no 
restrictions meaning that the defendant will have no money to pay for essentials. 
To remove an ex parte attachment the defendant must hire a lawyer (if they can afford one) and 
ﬁle a motion with the court and ask for a hearing to explain that certain assets should not be 
attached or that the plaintiff ’s lawyer overreached in the attachment. Many times the judge will 
indeed remove the attachment from certain cash accounts so that the defendant may continue to 
pay for essentials such as food, shelter and clothing for the defendant and the defendant's family 
during the litigation. Since the pandemic Maine's judiciary has been working hard to catch-up 
on many backlogged cases and often is unable to schedule a hearing on the attachment for many 
months. In the meanwhile a defendant may be unable to pay rent or a mortgage, buy groceries or 
generally provide for their family's well-being until such time as a judge is able to modify the 
attachment. In addition credit ratings can be ruined, evictions commenced and foreclosures 
threatened even if eventually the judge ﬁnds that the plaintiff ’s lawyer did in fact overreach. In 
such a case there is no punishment for the overreaching plaintiff unless the defendant has the 
wherewithal to commence an entirely new lawsuit for abuse of process against the plaintiff after 
the ﬁrst lawsuit is over. 
This bill does not prohibit ex parte attachment but instead gives the plaintiff ’s lawyers incentive 
to carefully apply the power granted to them by this extraordinary privilege to secretly freezea 
person’s assets. By choosing to have the secret meeting with a judge to obtain this ex parte 
attachment (as opposed to the open hearing with all parties) this bill provides the defendant the 
ability to have their attorney paid for by the plaintiff if the plaintiff does in fact overreach. Also, 
the plaintiff will have to pay interest on any cash assets that the judge removes from the 
attachment if, for instance, the judge allows access to cash so that the defendant may continue to 
pay for essentials such as food, shelter and clothing for the defendant and the defendant's family 
during the litigation. To avoid the penalties in this bill, a plaintiff ’s lawyer could simply not 
overreach by leaving a defendant access to some form of household operating account while 
attaching all other assets. In sum, the scope of this bill is not only limited to abuse of ex parte 
attachment but also may be further mitigated by a lawyer’s careful application of this 
extraordinary privilege.
