Q‘? 
-r 
ii’-5-ta 
James Libby, Ph.D. THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 22 131st Legjgjaturg Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator James D. Libby 
Sponsor of LD 1459 
“An Act to Reduce Abuse of the Civil Ex Parte Attachment and Trustee Processes ” 
Public Hearing, Tuesday, April 24, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Jim Libby, and I am a State Senator representing Senate District # 22, comprised of the towns of 
Naples, Sebago, Baldwin, and Standish in Cumberland County; Hiram and Porter in Oxford County; and, 
Limington, Limerick, Cornish, Parsonsﬁeld, Newﬁeld, Acton, and Shapleigh, in the County of York. 
It is my honor to bring to your attention the contents of LD 1459 “An Act to Reduce Abuse of the Civil Ex Parte 
Attachment and Trustee Processes. ” 
Sometimes in litigation a plaintiff will deem it necessary to secure a possible monetary award from a defendant 
who may hide assets during the lawsuit. In such circumstances the law provides a plaintiffs lawyer the 
opportunity to attach a defendant's assets through a legal process known as attachment or attachment through 
trustee process. (For simplicity I refer to the process generally as “attachment ” as opposed to attachment and 
trustee process.)I 
In an attachment process the plaintiffs lawyer ﬁles a motionwith the court and serves it upon the defendant 
and the court holds a hearing on the matter with all parties present. The judge determines if the attachment can 
proceed based upon several legal criteria. If it does proceed the plaintiffs lawyer will then serve the court 
papers granting attachment upon various institutions (such as banks). The papers inform the institution that it 
must freeze the defendants accounts until further notice. At that point the defendant no longer has access to 
the frozen accounts. In the initial hearing on the plaintiffs motion the judge may put limits on the order 
attaching assets so that the defendant may continue to have access to cash to pay for essentials such as food, 
shelter and clothing for the defendant and the defendant's family. 
The Legislature through current law also provides an extraordinary remedy to a plaintiff s lawyer seeking to 
freeze a defendant ’s assets in secret without letting the defendant know that it is happening. This is called “ex 
pa_rte attachment. ” The phrase ex parte (pronounced ex par-tay) is “Latin meaning ‘for one party,’ referring to 
motions, hearings or orders granted on the request of and forthe beneﬁt of one party only. This is an exception 
to the basic rule of court procedure that both parties must be present at any argument before a judge, and to the 
otherwise strict rule that an attorney may not notify a judge without previously notifying the opposition. ” See
the wwW.law.com deﬁnition of ex parte at https://dictionary.law.com/default.aspx?selected=696 as of March 
24, 2023. 
In ex parte attachment, before the complaint against the defendant has even been served on the defendant, the 
plaintiffs lawyer can have a secret meeting with the judge without the defendant or a lawyer present and give 
the judge the plaintiffs facts only. Based upon those facts and applicable court rules a judge usually must 
approve the request and enter an order for ex parte attachment. The plaintiffs lawyer will then serve the court 
papers upon various institutions holding the defendant's money without telling the defendant. At that point the 
defendant" no longer has access to the frozen accounts and only ﬁnds out when they attempt to use their debit 
card or withdraw money. The defendant does not even know they have been sued, let alone that the plaintiff s 
lawyer was able to have a secret meeting with a judge to freeze their accounts. 
Typically the plaintiffs lawyer will freeze all accounts because the ex parte order has no restrictions meaning 
that the defendant will have no money to pay for essentials. 
To remove an ex parte attachment the defendant must hire a-lawyer (if they can afford one) and ﬁle a motion 
with the court and ask for a hearing to explain that certain assets should not be attached or that the plaintiff ’s 
lawyer overreached in the attachment. Many times the judge will indeed remove the attachment from certain 
cash accounts so that the defendant may continue to pay for essentials such as food, shelter and clothing for the 
defendant and the defendant's family during the litigation. Since the pandemic Maine's judiciary has been 
working hard to catch-up on many backlogged cases and often is unable to schedule a hearing on the 
attachment for many months. In the meanwhile a defendant may be unable to pay rent or a mortgage, buy 
groceries or generally provide for their family's well-being until such time as a judge is able to modify the 
attachment. In addition credit ratings can be ruined, evictions commenced and foreclosures threatened even if 
eventually the judge fmds that the plaintiff s lawyer did in fact overreach. In such a case there is no 
punishment for the overreaching plaintiff unless the defendant has the wherewithal to commence an entirely 
new lawsuit for abuse of process against the plaintiff after the ﬁrst lawsuit is over. 
This bill does not prohibit ex parte attachment but instead gives the plaintiffs lawyers incentive to carefully 
apply the power granted to them by this extraordinary privilege to secretly freeze a person’s assets. By 
choosing to have the secret meeting with a judge to obtain this ex parte attachment (as opposed to the open 
hearing with all parties) this bill provides the defendant the ability to have their attorney paid for by the 
plaintiff if the plaintiff does in fact overreach. Also, the plaintiff will have to pay interest on any cash assets 
that the judge removes from the attachment if, for instance, the judge allows access to cash so that the 
defendant may continue to pay for essentials such as food, shelter and clothing for the defendant and the 
defendant's family during the litigation. To avoid the penalties in this bill, a plaintiffs lawyer could simply not 
overreach by leaving a defendant access to some form of household operating account while attaching all other 
assets. In sum, the scope of this bill is not only limited to abuse of ex parte attachment but also may be further 
mitigated by a lawyer’s careful application of this extraordinary privilege. 
Thank you for your consideration of this legislation.
