 
 
   
 
 
 
LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.  
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333  
(207) 621-0087   Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)  
www.mainelse.org   
 
 
 
April 24, 2023 
Testimony of John Brautigam, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in opposition to 
L.D. An Act to Reduce Abuse of the Civil Ex Parte Attachment and Trustee Processes. 
Senator Carney,  Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on the Judiciary. 
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to speak briefly in opposition to 
LD 1459.  
Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonprofit legal services organization with the 
mission of providing free legal assistance to Maine’s older adults when their basic human 
needs are threatened.  
The purpose of the attachment and trustee process is to secure assets for potential 
recovery by a plaintiff.  At LSE, we often use the attachment process in cases in which 
our client has lost their life savings and/or home as a result of financial exploitation. 
Litigation to recover what was fraudulently or unlawfully taken may take quite a while. 
Without the protection of the attachment, financial exploiters can spend or hide the assets 
and prevent any chance of recovery. At the end of the day, this defeats the ability of 
plaintiffs to secure recovery and justice in their case.   
If a plaintiff moves for ex parte attachment, they already have a heavy burden. They must 
establish (1) that it is more likely than not they will recover judgment in an amount equal 
to or greater than the sum of the attachment, (2) that there is a clear danger that defendant 
would remove, conceal, or destroy the property if notified, and (3) that there is no 
insurance, bond, or other security to satisfy a judgment. Defendants’ rights are also 
protected with the ability to request an immediate hearing to challenge any attachment. 
Sanctions are already available under Rule 11, including attorney’s fees, for any motion 
that fails to have proper support or is filed for delay. 
Clients of LSE could face significant costs, in the form of attorney’s fees and damages, in 
situations that are part of the normal litigation process.  For example, it appears the 
proposed bill would allow fees and damages if a defendant posts cash or a bond as a 
 
 
 
April 24, 2023  Page 2 
LD 1459  
 
 substitute for attached property. That possibility undermines the purpose of Rule 4A.  For 
the same reason, there are many reasons for dissolving or modifying an attachment order, 
and that effort should not be considered prima facie evidence of a tort.       
As explained in the Advisory Notes, the threshold to be cleared for approval of an 
attachment has already been heightened to protect defendants and strike the right balance 
between the parties.  
Thank you for the opportunity to make these comments. If you have questions about this 
testimony or related matters, I may need to speak to some of our line attorneys in order to 
give you a full response. I would be happy to provide written answers and/or try to 
respond at the work session. 
Thank you for letting us share our thoughts with you and we hope that you vote ONTP 
on this bill.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 24, 2023  Page 3 
LD 1459  
 
  
