, 
, HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES
5 
“ 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287 1400 ~é.l£@’$"" 
Daniel J. Ankeles TTYI MAINE RELAY 711 
7 Beech Drive 
Brunswick, ME 04011 
Daniel.Anke1es@legislature.maine.gov AA 
Cell Phone: (207) 756-3793 
Wednesday, February 15, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Dan Ankeles 
, Before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Presenting LD 276, An Act To Assist Municipalities In Preventing Damage From Storm water 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and honorable members of the Enviromnent and Natural Resources 
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. l am Representative Dan Ankeles, and I serve House District 
100, a central slice of Brtmswick that includes our downtown, Bowdoin College, the former naval airbase, Mere Point, 
Maquoit Bay and the Mere Brook Watershed. It’s an honor to be with you to present LD 276, An Act To Assist 
Municipalities In Preventing Damage From Storm water. 
This is the ﬁrst of three bills I have put forward this year seeking to address the environmental infrastructure challenges 
facing the former Brunswick Naval Air Station, known today as Brunswick Landing. And I will say right off that while 
the origin story of these bills begins in the heart of my district, the bills themselves would yield beneﬁts and useful 
applications throughout Maine. 
This particular bill allows municipalities to appropriate funds to repair a private road, way or bridge to prevent storm 
water runoff pollution from reaching a threatened natural resource. The bill is conceived under the premise that just 
because a resource isn’t entirely located on public land doesn't mean it can’t be part of a systemic enviromnental threat, 
and that municipalities need to be able to say - especially when they are applying for funding - that they have the authority 
to act on the whole problem and not just do something piecemeal and potentially ineffective. Even the slowest natural 
disasters don't respect property lines, and towns need the ﬂexibility to respond as needed if we want things like clean 
water, a functional working waterfront, resilient coastlines, and healthy lakes, rivers, ponds, marshes and streams. 
There are a few things you should know about Brunswick Landing if you don’t already. It is, to the best of my. knowledge, 
the fastest growing commercial and residential area in the southern midcoast region. And yet both its conventional and its 
environmental infrastructure - speciﬁcally the storm water system - are simply getting too old. There are others testifying 
who might be able to give you a closer approximation of the number of years until the situation is critical, but you should 
consider this hearing and the eventual hearings on my‘ other two bills as our community sounding the alarm to this 
Legislature and this Administration that we are sitting on both a ﬁscal and an environmental time bomb. We feel strongly 
that the state has an interest in facilitating preventative action and that doing so is key to the continued enviromnental and 
economic health of the southem midcoast region. . 
For the purposes of LD 276, you also need to know that Brunswick Landing contains an inconsistent mix of jurisdictions. 
When the naval air station went through the BRAC closure process, the Navy began to convey properties to various 
entities, including the Town of Brunswick, Bowdoin College and the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority -a 
quasi-government state agency we refer to as MRRA. MRRA in turn has managed the further transfer of multiple parcels 
District 100: Brunswick (part)
of land on the former air station to various private and non-proﬁt entities, and we actually have quite the economic 
success story to tell. 
But what I am trying to alert you to today is that, as the Town of Brunswick and MRRA work together to oversee this part 
of our community, we worry that our future efforts to seek grant funding or other outside funding sources for 
environmental or conventional infrastructure upgrades and other efforts at coastal resiliency, environmental cleanups and 
storm water management will be hindered by this jurisdictional mix. Ask yourself: Would you give someone a 
competitive grant if there was any question about whether they had the authority to act? 
And so what I have done here is to bring back beforeyou the Ought To Pass As Amended committee report on LD 1616 
from the 130th Legislature and ask you to look at it once more, this time from the perspective of a community leaving no 
stone unturned as it looks to successfully reintegrate a complicated mix of properties into the greater Brunswick 
community. 
When a town is trying to solve an environmental problem involving a natural waterway system of any kind, it needs to be 
able to look atthe whole picture, not just a small part. That’s true when you’re planning, applying for funding, and when 
you’re carrying out the work. 
I understand there was some pushback in the prior version of this bill. The question was asked “Wouldn’t We just be 
enabling taxpayers to subsidize rich coastal landowners? ” I can ensure you that my community doesn’t see it that way. In 
fact, that line of thinking has it completely backwards. We have a working waterfront with some of the most productive 
clam ﬂats in Maine and a thriving aquaculture industry. It supports hundreds of primary and secondary jobs in our, 
community. We have working farms that draw from the groundwater. And people come from all over to walk and bike 
our coastal and our river trails. So much of what Brunswick is depends on our ability to keep our natural world clean and 
healthy. To be artiﬁcially limited in how we can fulﬁll our role as stewards of our waterways just doesn’t make sense. 
And further, there is nothing in this bill that prevents stakeholders, including landowners from contributing ﬁnancially to 
restoration, resiliency or remediation efforts. In fact, you could even require it if you decided that’s where you wanted to 
go with this. 
In terms of other potential changes the committee might consider making to this bill in the work session: you might 
consider specifying that this bill enables municipalities to act, not just on roads, but on everything under or alongside the 
roads - any sort of infrastructure speciﬁcally meant to convey storm water. Instead of limiting the bill to cover private 
infrastructure, you might also consider including a clariﬁcation that speciﬁes that this bill also covers infrastructure under 
the jurisdiction of a quasi-govemmental state agency like MRRA. - 
A note of caution as I close: Everything I’ve just explained is complicated by the fact that Bl'l1I1SWiCl( Landing also 
happens to be a somewhat overlooked PFAS hotspot, thanks largely to all the firefighting foam that was used when the air 
station was active. In fact, the testing and remediation of multiple hazardous materials,»not just PFAS, is why the Navy 
has been conveying parcels on Brunswick Landing at such a careful pace. That process is still very much ongoing, andI 
will have a whole lot more to say about it to you at a future public hearing.A 
I see LD 276 an important piece of a broader multi-year effort to prevent further enviromnental degradation on Brunswick 
Landing and continue the remarkable success that has done so much for my region and indeed the entire state. I would ask 
this committee to please make good use of this legislation. 
I am happy to attempt to answer questions or seek out answers in advance of the work session. Just bear in mind that there 
are other, far smarter people likely to testify after me. Thank you for taking the time to listen to my testimony and all the 
testimony you will hear today.i
