 
 
 
 
 
  
15 University Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330  
207-623-9511  
 
 
Feb 15, 2023  
 
Honorable Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Honorable Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on  Environmental and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -100 
 
Re:  LD 276, An Act To Assist Municipalities In Preventing Damage From Storm Water   
 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources : 
 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA)  appreciate s the o pportunity to provide  a letter  
in support  of LD 276, An Act To Assist Municipalities In Preventing Damage From Storm 
Water .  
 
About MWUA.   The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonprofit association based in 
Augusta that provides support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in 
advocating for safe drinking water through educational and technical programming as wel l as 
advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The Association was formed in 1925 and counts 
approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members.   
 
Discussion.   Current State of Maine statute  authorizes municipalities  to appropriate funds to 
repair private roads  to prevent storm water runoff from polluting great ponds.  (This helps protect 
the water quality of the many surface water supplies in Maine .)  However, 94  percent  of Maine’s  
public water systems  use groundwate r supplies.  LD 276 proposes  to expand a municipality’s 
ability to ap propriate funds to protect all community public water system primary protection 
areas  including wellhead protection area s. 
 
Efforts protecting source water quality translates  to less money required for treatment  and an 
increase in public health protection .  The ability to appropriate  funds that this bill provides is a 
policy MWUA strongly encourages you to support.  
 
Yours for safe drinking water,  
 
 
 
Ken Knight , 
Maine Water Utilities Association , Legislative Committee  
Chair, Board of Trustee s, Greater Augusta Utilities District  
