Page  1  
 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
Neither For Nor Against  
LD 276 - An Act to Assist Municipalities in Preventing Damage from Storm Water  
February 15, 2023 
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham and I submitting testimony neither nor against LD 276, An Act to 
Assist Municipalities in Preventing Damage from Storm Water, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, 
which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70 -member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by the coun cils and 
selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts.  
It's important to understand why the section of law that this bill seeks to amend has a prescriptive 
resource as key to the use of public funds to maintain what is private property. Because great ponds have been identified as at risk by the department , and carry a substantial  statewide  public benefit, the protection of that 
public benefit outweighs the public harm caused by expenditure of funds on private roads that only benefit a few and which the public has no legal right to traverse.  
Many housing developments have been constructed near water resources and those owners have 
specifically chosen to keep their roads private to restrict public access to these neighborhoods. Howeve r, when 
they are adjacent to a great pond, they can affect  the water quality to significant waters of the state that are 
owned by us all and in some cases are the drinking water source for entire regions.  
While officials appreciate the permissive aspect of  this bill, the broad language of “threatened natural 
resource” is too broad to be interpreted in balance with the public benefit. Without additional more prescriptive language its goals are unachievable  however, the reference to Great Pond is necessary fo r the purposes of this 
section to maintain its original intent and should not be removed.   
The Maine Supreme Court has determined that the use of public funds to reconstruct or repair private 
infrastructure  for which there is no permanent right for the public to use, specific to roads, is unconstitutional. I 
have attached that decision to my testimony.  
While some towns have public easements that keep the road from being closed for winter maintenance, 
such r epairs are  limited to the maintenance of the easement, and not adjacent ditching or culverts for diversion 
of stormwater. The goal of the maintenance is to appropriately protect the great ponds which many of these winter maintenance activities were establi shed to accomplish and monitor potential run off threats to the 
waterbody. 
Public access to privately owned roads is not permanent and is revokable by its very definition. 
Defined, “the public has no legal right of travel" over any privately owned road on which the bill would authorize the expenditure of public funds. While there  is a process in municipal law that allows a community to 
accept a private road, generally it must meet a minimum standard prior to that acceptance and must be voted on 

Page  2  
by the residents of that community. Even if the owners provide a public easement , a com munity cannot expend 
public funds without approval of their legislative body – the residents of the municipality. As communities 
struggle to maintain the effects of increased stormwater runoff on public ways, they are unlikely to allocate very finite local  resources for such expensive projects that benefit the very few.  
 The generalized language of “important natural resource” can be interpreted too broadly to fit how the 
department would advise a municipality on what is best practice. Additionally, the constitutional challenge remains because a municipality would need clear measures of public benefit for the protection activity  which 
the definition and importance of “Great Pond” provides .  
As with all shorefront and flood plain property, many private citiz ens will need technical and mitigation 
assistance to understand their threats and options.  If the Legislature would like to assist individuals mitigate the effects of increased stormwater runoff on such roads, it may be better to create a fund for such purposes that allows the owners of a private road, bridge, or way to apply for funds for that mitigation. This would allow 
those residents to play a bigger role in understanding how to protect their assets and make them better stewards 
for the natural resources they benefit from having exclusive access. Strengthening the definition of what 
constitutes an important natural resource will also be necessary for the department to establish best practices around mitigation activity as well .   
Officials believe that state- level fund ing will better work in conjunction wit h the statewide efforts to 
combat climate change and better help all residents of private roads to meet those challenges with access to 
equal threat -based funding resources, rather than rely on inequitable — assessed value driven —local resources.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page  3  
 
 
LEXSEE 560 A.2D 552 
 
OPINION  OF THE  JUSTICES  OF THE SUPREME  JUDICIAL  COURT  given  un- 
der the Provisions  of Section  3 of Article  VI of the Constitution 
SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT OF MAINE  
560 A.2d  552;  1989 Me. LEXIS  351 
 
 
Questions  Propounded to the House  in an Order Dated  May  16, 1989  
 
SUBSEQUENT  HISTORY:  [**1]   June  13, 1989,  
Answered  
 
 
OPINION  
[*552]  HOUSE ORDER PROPOUNDING QUESTIONS  
House Order Propounding Questions to the Justices 
of the Supreme Judicial Court  
WHEREAS, it appears to the House of Representa - 
tives of the 114th Legislature that the following are im - 
portant questions of law and that this is a solemn occa - 
sion; and  
WHEREAS, the Constitution of Maine, Article VI, 
Section 3 , provides for the Justices of the Supreme Judi - 
cial Court to render their opinion on these questions; and 
WHEREAS, there is now before the 114th Legisla - 
ture, for its consideration, House Paper 271, Legislative 
Document 383, "An Act  to Clarify Maintenance of Pri - 
vate Roads and Ways by Municipalities" and the consti - 
tutionality of the Act has been questioned; and  
WHEREAS, it has long been recognized that mu-  
nicipalities have an obligation to protect the health and 
safety of their r esidents, and as municipalities have tax - 
ing powers to generate the funds for such activities; and  
WHEREAS, it has also been long recognized that 
municipalities have authority to create special service districts to provide specific public services to segm ents of 
the municipality's population and the exact scope of the municipal power to raise taxes [**2]  or assess fees  in 
relation to specific services is now unclear; and  
WHEREAS, it has generally been an accepted prin - 
ciple  that municipalities  could not expend general  tax revenues for private benefit and as it is also not uncom - 
mon for municipalities in Maine to maintain and plow private roads and this practice has arisen because of the concern of municipal residents to ensure access over these roads for  police, fire and other emergency vehicles and for 
the safety and welfare of  [*553]  those resi - dents or 
visitors also traveling these roads; and  
WHEREAS, it appears that several municipalities 
have  made such expenditures  for many  years,  while  other 
munici palities have refrained from doing so because of 
doubts as to municipal authority; now, therefore, be it  
Ordered, that in accordance with the provisions of the 
Constitution of Maine, the House of Representatives respectfully requests the Justices  of the Supreme Judicial 
Court  to give their opinions  on the following  questions  of 
law: 
Question No. 1: Do the provisions of this bill allow - 
ing the use of municipal  tax revenues  for the purposes  set 
out therein violate the "public purpose" limitation of the 
Constitution of Maine, Article IV,  [**3]  Part Third, 
Section 1?  
Question No. 2: Do the provisions of this bill, al - 
lowing a municipality by vote of its legislative body to 
assess the users of a right -of-way for the maintenance of 
that way, violate any provision of the United States Con - 
stitution or the Constitution o f Maine? 
Question No. 3: Do the restrictions in the definition 
of a "privately owned road" contained in the bill violate any provision of the United States Constitution or the 
Constitution of Maine?  
EXHIBIT A  STATE  
OF MAINE  

Page  4 
560 A.2d  552, *; 1989  Me. LEXIS  351, **  
IN THE YEAR  OF OUR  LORD NINETEEN 
HUNDRED AND EIGHTY -NINE  
H.P. 271 -- L.D. 383 
An Act  to Clarify Maintenance  of Private  Roads  and 
Ways by Municipalities  
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as 
follows:  
23 MRSA  § 3106  is enacted  to read:  
§ 3106.  Maintenance of privately  owned  roads  
1. Purpose: findings.  This section is intended to 
explicitly recognize and limit a municipality's home rule 
authority to repair, maintain, sand, salt or remove snow 
from privately owned roads within the municipality. The 
Legislature finds that expenditures for this activity are 
made in furtherance of a public  purpose in that  it protects 
the health and safety of the members of the public [**4] who reside along the privately owned road by ensuring 
adequate access and egress f or police, fire and other 
emergency  vehicles,  as well as other  vehicles  traveling  to 
and from those residences.  
2. Privately owned road defined.  For the purposes 
of this section, "privately owned road" means a road, the 
fee of which is owned by a private person or persons, 
which serves as the primary means of access and egress to 
2 or more private year -round residences and over which 
the public has no legal right of travel.  
3. Authorization.  Under its home rule authority, a 
municipality may, by vote of its legislative body, author - 
ize the repair, maintenance, sanding, salting or removal  of 
snow from privately owned roads within the munici - 
pality,  if the requirements  of subsection 4 are met, for the 
purpose of protecting the health and safety of those  who 
reside along or must travel on the privately owned road.  
4. Requirements.  A municipality may repair, 
maintain, sand, salt or remove snow from a privately owned road under this section only if:  
A. The road is not obstructed, marked or identified 
in any manne r that discourages public travel, such as 
gates, bars or other physical barriers and signs [**5] 
reading "private  road," "no trespassing," "residents only" 
or similar phrases which have the effect of discouraging 
public travel;  
B. The road was constructed bef ore the effective 
date of this section; and  
C. The municipality has enacted an ordinance or 
adopted a regulation that requires  [*554]  all roads 
constructed within the municipality after the effective date of this section to be built to certain standards.  5. Raising money.  A municipality may raise money 
for the repair, maintenance, sanding, salting or removal of snow from privately owned roads in the manner provided in section 3551 or may assess, on a proportional basis, the 
amount necessary to perform  these  services against  those  
persons  who possess  a right -of-way to use the privately 
owned road in the same manner provided for the 
apportionment of damages and benefits regarding public 
ways under chapter 311, sub-  chapter II.  
6. Expenditures. Any funds available to t he munic - 
ipality, including surplus revenue and money raised un-  
der subsection 5, may be used to pay the total expenses  of 
repairing, maintaining, sanding, salting or removing snow 
from a privately owned road or may be used to supplement 
money raised by [**6]  those persons who possess a right -
of-way to use the privately owned road and provided to 
the municipality for the purpose of pay-  ing for any 
services provided under this section.  
7. Liability.  The Maine Tort Claims Act, Title 14, 
chapter 741, applies to a municipality and any officer, 
official or employee of a municipality which performs 
repairs, maintenance, sanding, salting or snow removal under this section.  
8. No duty.  This section shall not be construed to 
establish any duty upon a municipali ty to repair, main - 
tain, sand,  salt or remove  snow  from  any privately  owned 
road.  Whether to perform maintenance and the level of 
maintenance to be provided is solely a decision of the municipality, except as provided for in any contract be - 
tween the municipality and any private party.  
9. No interest acquired.  A municipality's repair - 
ing, maintaining, sanding, salting or removing of snow 
from a privately owned road under this section does not 
result in the acquisition, by prescription or otherwise, of any interest in the privately owned road or the services 
provided by the municipality under this section by any 
person, including the municipality, the general public or 
the persons possessing [**7]  a right -of-way over the 
privately owned road.  Section 3656 does not apply to any 
repairs performed by a municipality under this sec - tion. 
In House  of Representatives,  ... 1989 
Read  twice  and passed  to be enacted.  
... Speaker  
In Senate,  ... 1989 
Read  twice  and passed  to be enacted.  
... President 
Approved ... 1989  
Page  5 
560 A.2d  552, *; 1989  Me. LEXIS  351, **  
... Governor  
--- 
[*555]  ANSWERS  OF THE JUSTICES  
To the Honorable House of Representatives of the 
State of Maine:  
In compliance with the  provisions  of section 3  of ar - 
ticle  VI of the Constitution  of Maine,  we, the undersigned 
Justices  of the Supreme Judicial Court, have the honor  to 
submit the following responses to the questions pro - 
pounded on May 16, 1989.  
QUESTION NO. 1: Do the provisions of this bi ll 
allowing the use of municipal tax revenues for the pur - 
poses set out therein violate the "public purpose" limita - 
tion of the Constitution of Maine, Article IV, Part Third, 
Section 1?  
We answer Question No. 1 in the affirmative.  The 
legislative power  under Article IV,  Part Third,  Section  1, 
of the Maine Constitution includes the power to tax, but 
only to the extent that the tax revenues are  spent for pub - 
lic purposes.  See Common Cause  v. State,  455 A.2d 1,  8 
(Me. 1983) . [**8]  The maintenance at taxpayer expense 
of privately owned roads as defined in L.D. 383 would be 
an unconstitutional appropriation of public funds for the benefit of the private property owners.  
The public's access to "privately owned roads" as 
defined by L.D. 383 is both uncert ain and potentially 
transitory.  By the definition in the proposed section 
3106(2),  "the public  has no legal  right  of travel"  over any 
privately owned road on which the bill would authorize 
the expenditure of public funds. Any possible consent by 
the privat e owners to the public's use of the road at most 
would arise only by inference from the absence, at the 
time of expenditure, of any barrier or sign "[having] the 
effect of discouraging public travel." But even that ques - 
tionable implicit consent could dis appear at the whim of 
owners who subsequently put up a "no trespassing" sign or similar barrier. Any indirect public benefits derived 
from the proposed public expenditures upon private  roads 
from which the public is or may be barred are outweighed 
by the p ublic detriment.  See Common Cause v. State, 455 
A.2d at 25. We have no occasion to comment on the validity of a general statute [**9]  ad- dressing the 
maintenance of access to private property  for the use of 
emergency vehicles.  
QUESTION NO. 2: Do the provisions of this bill, 
allowing a municipality by vote of its legislative body to assess the users of a right -of-way for the maintenance of 
that way, violate any provision of the United States Con - 
stitution or the Constitution of Maine? 
We construe the term "users of a right -of-way" in 
Question  No. 2 to be the equivalent  of "those  persons  who possess a right -of-way to use the privately owned 
road" who under L.D. 383 could be assessed to pay mu-  
nicipal costs of maintaining that road.  We answer 
Question  No. 2 in the affirmative  for essentially  the same 
reasons as Question No. 1.  For the spec ial assessment that 
would be authorized by L.D. 383 to be valid, it must involve  both a public purpose and a special  benefit to the 
persons to be assessed over and above that accruing to  the 
public.  See City of Auburn v.  Paul,  84 Me.  212, 215, 24  
A. 817, 818 (1892) ; Montgomery  County  v. Schultze,  
302 Md. 481,  489,  489 A.2d  16, 20 (1985) . As we state  in 
our answer to Question No. 1, maintenance [**10]  of 
privately owned roads as contemplated in L.D. 383 does not meet the public purpose test.  
Because of the absence of a public purpose, an in - 
voluntary assessment under L.D. 383 to pay for mainte - 
nance costs  on a privately  owned road would be invalid.  
L.D. 383 would authorize a municipality to require the 
owners of a privately owned road, over which the public 
has neither  taken  nor been  given  any public  rights,  to pay 
the municipal costs of maintaining their private road.  The 
owners would be required to bear those costs even though some or all of them did not wish the road main-  tained by 
the municipality at all, or did not wish it main - tained in 
the way elected by the municipality. The as - sessment 
system that would be authorized by L.D. 383 is not the 
voluntary contractual arrangement upheld by the New 
Hampshire Supreme Court in Clapp v. Town of Jaffrey, 97 
N.H. 456, 91 A.2d 464 (1952) , by which the private 
owners of the road contracted for municipal ser - vices.  
Imposing the proposed [*556]  assessment on those 
owners whose private road the municipality main-  tained 
against their will would  violate the Due Process Clauses  
of both Constitutions.  [**11]  Me. Const.  art. I, § 6 -A; 
U.S. Const. amend. XIV . 
QUESTION NO. 3: Do the  restrictions  in the  defini - 
tion of a "privately owned road" contained in the bill 
violate any  provision of the United S tates Constitution or 
the Constitution of Maine?  
We construe Question No. 3 to address the consti - 
tutionality under the Equal Protection Clauses of the 
Maine and the United States Constitutions of the defini - 
tional limitation of "privately owned roads" to those that 
"serve as the primary means of access and egress to 2 or 
more  private  year-round residences." We conclude  that if 
L.D. 383 were otherwise constitutional, that limitation 
would not contravene the constitutional requirements of 
equal protection of the laws.  Under either the Four - teenth 
Amendment or section 6 -A of the Maine Declara-  tion of 
Rights, exercises of the police power that do not infringe on fundamental rights or implicate a suspect classification 
are subject  to only a rational  basis scrutiny. See Town of 
Kittery v. Campbell, 455 A.2d 30, 34 (Me. 1983) . If the 
municipal  expenditures  under  L.D. 383 
Page  6 
560 A.2d  552, *; 1989  Me. LEXIS  351, **  
passed constitutional muster as being for a public pur - pose, it would not violate the Equal Protection [* *12] Clause 
of either Constitution to limit those expenditures to private  roads  that at the minimum serve  more  than one year -
round home.  
VINCENT  L. McKUSICK  
Chief  Justice  
DAVID G. ROBERTS  
Page  7 
560 A.2d  552, *; 1989  Me. LEXIS  351, **  
DANIEL E. WATHEN CAROLINE  D. GLASSMAN ROBERT W. CLIFFORD  
D. BROCK HORNBY SAMUEL  W. COLLINS,  Jr. 
Associate  Justices  
 
