Roberta Manter
Fayette
LD 276
Ladies and Gentlemen of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources:
My name is Roberta Manter, and I live in Fayette on Hale’s Pond  I am on the Board 
of Directors of the Maine Alliance for Road Associations (MARA).  I am writing in 
favor of L.D. 276.
Maintaining roads with private funds can often be a struggle, particularly where there 
are steep slopes leading down to lakes.  Controlling erosion is difficult, and there is 
also the problem of roads that cross streams or seasonal runoffs, where aging bridges 
and culverts may be insufficient to handle major storms.  
There is an Opinion of the Justices of the Maine Supreme Court (560 A.2d 552 
(1989)) that says it is unconstitutional for towns to maintain private roads, because 
that would be using public funds for a private purpose.  But that does not prohibit the 
use of public funds on a private road if there is a legitimate public benefit.  An 
example is 23 MRS §3105-A, which allows the use of town equipment on private 
ways when it is deemed in the best interest of the public for fire and police protection.
This has been variously interpreted by towns, with some using the statute to authorize 
regular snow removal, and others insisting it only authorizes snow removal when 
there is actually a fire in progress.  But I know of no town that has used this statute to 
do summer maintenance on a private road, even when the public water supply or 
threatened natural resources are at stake.
23 MRS §3106 has been used to provide some protection for at-risk lakes (which is a 
public benefit) by offering a measure of assistance for residents on private roads in 
keeping these roads from contributing non-point source pollution to the watershed.  
But often, there are roads that don’t qualify for this assistance because the parameters 
are so narrow.  L.D. 276 would broaden the types of cases where this funding could 
be applied.
MARA has been working on obtaining an estimate of how many private roads there 
are in Maine. While we are only in the preliminary stages of this project, the numbers 
have been eye opening. For example, the Town of Fayette has 100 roads, 67 of which 
are privately maintained. The Town of Freeport has over 350 private roads, adding up
to 49 miles. The Town of Windham has 101 private roads surrounding its lakes - 
that’s over half the roads in Windham, totaling 32 miles.  So the impact these roads 
have on our threatened natural resources is substantial.  This bill would not require 
towns to assist with routine maintenance of all private roads, but would allow towns 
to appropriate public funds in cases where a road association’s private funds are 
inadequate to address a public environmental concern.
MARA often has people ask if there is any assistance available where a road 
association is struggling to control erosion and runoff, or to replace a failing culvert 
that is in danger of washing out and dumping silt into the watershed.  Unfortunately, 
there are few resources we can suggest that might provide assistance.  Towns feel 
bound by what they see as a total prohibition against using public funds on private 
roads.  By identifying the public benefit, L.D. 276 could be a tremendous help in such
cases. I ask you to support this bill.
