Emma Cooper, RN, BSN Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services LD 1321: "An Act to Address Income Disparity in Health Care by Limiting the Compensation of Hospital Executives"  April 14, 2023 Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Emma Cooper and I am a registered nurse of almost five years. I currently work in the postpartum unit at Maine Medical Center and am a proud union member of the Maine State Nurses Association.   When I was in nursing school, at the University of Southern Maine, I remember thinking that not only would a career in nursing satisfy my desire to be of service to my community but that it was a smart and economical career choice to make. I would be making a good salary doing what I loved, or so I thought.  Over the last five years, the strain nurses have been operating under only intensified further, especially aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Yet, when nurses asked for hazard pay during this time period we were told no. At my former job, during the height of the COVID pandemic, staff received mailers from Northern Light Mercy Hospital requesting monetary donations for their hospital expansion . It is confusing to me how hospitals continue to cry out and claim that they have no money to pay their nurses, and in some cases are requesting money from their own staff,  yet continue to increase the pay for their top executives.  Maine Medical Center and Maine Health executives received astounding wage increases over the last five years. The following figures come from ProPublica, and I’m happy to share them in writing with anyone who would like them. From 2019 to 2020, former Maine Health CEO William Caron’s pay increased from $1,555,829 to $1,992,044, an increase of 28% In that same period, current Maine Med President Jeff Sanders’s pay increased 30%, from $690,339-$904,107.  Overall, from 2018-2019, Maine Health executive compensation increased 111%, from $5,656,270 to $11,936,638. The hospital industry will tell you that it can’t possibly hire the best talent for executive positions without paying them exorbitant salaries. Yet, when asked to increase pay for nurses to assist with nurse recruitment and retention hospitals sing a different tune.  Nurses are unwell. We were unwell before the pandemic, and suffered through it. I know many nurses that are questioning whether they can stay at the bedside or even in the nursing profession as a whole. We need legislation that improves working conditions for 
nurses across the state of Maine and I wholeheartedly believe that LD 1321 helps to do that. We have cared for our communities and now we ask that you help care for us. Please support LD 1321 "An Act to Address Income Disparity in Health Care by Limiting the Compensation of Hospital Executives." Thank you for your time.  
