Geof Gratwick
Bangor
LD 1321
Good aternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of HHS.  I am 
sorry that I missed testifying in person April 3 but I am not used to zoom and failed 
the test. My apologies.
My name is Geoff Gratwick, I live in Bangor, practiced medicine for 35 years, and it 
was a great honor and pleasure to have been a member of your august body in the 
past.  I am speaking for myself today, not as a member of any group. I am speaking 
neither for nor against LD 1321.
Our health care system is failing and excessive executive pay is only the tip of the 
iceberg. 
Our system is complex, confusing, expensive, and inequitable. There is no one 
individual at fault but rather it is the system that we have created to deliver care: the 
for-profit insurance industry, medical device companies, pharmaceuticals, 
consultants, waste, bureaucracy, and more. They are profit oriented and 
bureaucratically driven. They - and we - have forgotten that health care exists to keep 
us healthy, not to build wealth for the few. 
There is no one individual at fault; there are many good people who work with noble 
intentions. But as a society we have lost sight of the goal, health for all of us. 
Sobering statistics:
•22% of Maine’s total $62b state economy is spent on health care
•18% is the average for all U.S. states
•10-13% is the average for Canada and the E.U.
•The administrative overhead of Medicare is 3-4% vs 15-25% for private insurance 
carriers. 
What does this mean? Simply that we are not getting our money’s worth, that we are 
spending more money than any other country with suboptimal results.  Government 
(e.g. Medicare) is doing the job for less money than private industry. Our conceit that 
America is better than other countries is tragically misplaced when it comes to health 
care. 
I was on the medical staff of Eastern Maine Medical Center for 35 years and on the 
Executive Committee for a number of these. Although I am now retired and out of the
day-to-day loop, I agree with others that spoke to you that there are too many 
administrators at EMMC and that they are paid too much. But what troubles me is 
that they are not doing an adequate job; they don’t deserve their inflated pay. 
Negotiations are confrontational. Morale is poor. Medical and nursing staffs are in 
disarray. 
EMMC is no longer a local hospital answerable to its local community. The System 
recently sold off EMMC’s laboratory and organizational functions to Optum, an 
international for-profit health care organization. 1600 employees (1/3 of all 
employees) are now off the books. Given their lesser responsibilities did 
administrators cut their budget and salaries by 1/3?  No. 
Should administrative salaries be linked to nurses’ salaries, to the health indices of 
our community, to the number of drug overdoses, to preventative services? I don’t 
know.
But what I do know is that your Committee should pass LD 1321 or at the very least 
establish a Commission that will examine how we can more effectively spend our 
health care dollars. We can no longer afford to spend 22% of our state’s scarce 
resources with such a poor return on investment. I and a number of others would be 
very happy to work with you on this project. 
Thank you for your ongoing work.
Geoff Gratwick MD, 1230 Kenduskeag Ave, Bangor, Me 04401

