1 
20474784.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Opposition to L.D. 1883,  
An Act to Enact the Protection of Shared Physical and Digital 
Property from Warrantless Searches Act
May 22, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey. I am the Chief of the 
Cumberland Police Department, and the President of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association against LD 1883.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill requires a search warrant for physical property and digital property 
held by a 3rd party in the same manner as required for property held by the 
person against whom a warrant is executed. 
The Maine Chiefs do not believe that statutory changes are necessary for search 
warrants. The body of law dealing with the Fourth Amendment in the United States 
Constitution and Article 1, Section 5 in the Maine Statute Constitution has been 
properly balanced by the courts to ensure that individuals continue to have a 
reasonable expectation of privacy and to ensure that the governments’ need to 
protect the public.  
The rights of a third party in physical and digital property are up in the air and, is 
something that, as the suitable branch of government to interpret the bounds of the 
constitution, the courts are currently dealing with to ensure that the appropriate 
balance is struck. We are deeply concerned that the passage of this legislation 
would make it more difficult to investigate crimes such as child pornography, and 
to rapidly respond to and mitigate the danger of threats posted online to commit 
acts such as school shootings.  
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 
20474784.1 On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank the 
committee members for your work on this Committee. And we would ask that 
you oppose LD 1883.  
