. _’ *:}:¢ 2'5’
, 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Traffic Safety Unit 
State House Station 20 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS ACT. COL. WILLIAM ROSS 
GOVERNOR CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT 
COMIVHSSIONER DEPUTY CHIEF 
Testimony of Lt. Bruce Scott 
IN SUPPORT or LD 23 
An Act to Limit Public Access to or Dissemination of Electronic 
Citation Information 
Senator Carney, Rep. Moonen and distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary. My name is Lt. Bruce Scott, and I am the Commanding 
Officer of the State Police Traffic Safety Unit. I am here today to testify on behalf 
of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police in Support of 
LD23. 
This bill is to clarify that electronic traffic citation data becomes public after it has 
been adjudicated by a court. 
Many Maine law enforcement agencies have recently adopted newer technology 
that allows for electronic ticketing (eCitations) of traffic violations. With this new 
technology comes an electronic database that houses the names, dates of birth, 
license numbers, addresses, etc., of individuals that have been cited for traffic 
violations. This data base didn’t exist prior to the use of eCitations and therefore 
the need to have a law that specifically protected this sensitive data wasn’t 
necessary. This type of pre-adjudicated data is generally not accessible (per 
Maine rules of civil procedure 80-F(p)) through the courts, unless you are an 
involved party. But, because this database houses the data prior to it being 
transmitted electronically to the Violations Bureau, it has led to the 
interpretation of a Freedom of Access Act (FOAA) requestor, that this data is not 
protected by that rule. In addition to rule 80-F(p), we believe this data is 
currently protected by the Federal Driver’s Privacy Protection Act (DPPA)(18 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
U.S.C. §§2721 to 2725) because at least some of the data is derived from the files 
housed by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles. With that being said, to ensure the 
protection of this sensitive data while avoiding an unwarranted invasion of 
privacy of hundreds of thousands of individuals and to avoid potential litigation 
with this and subsequent requestors, we feel it is important to protect this data 
through statute, similar to that of crash records. 
The previous Maine State Police Staff Attorney Chris Parr, the Maine Assistant 
Attorney General Kent Avery and I have invested countless hours defending our 
position on this issue and to date have denied the public release of said data. 
Once this data makes it way to the Court, the courts become the owner of the data 
and the protections that the courts currently have in place remain the same. Post- 
adjudication data becomes part of the person’s driving record and at that point 
becomes publicly available. This bill will prevent the personally identifying 
information of those that don’t get adjudicated of an offense from becoming 
publicly available. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote in favor of LD23. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I thank 
you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any questions that you 
might have. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624~8945 (Fax)
