OFFICERS
President
Chief Charles Rumsey
Cumberland Police Dept.
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth Police Dept.
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn Police Dept.
Sergeant-at-Arms
Chief Scott Stewart 
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer
Chief John Kilbride
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary
Chief Michael Tracy
Oakland Police Dept.
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of PortlandMAINE  CHIEFS  OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com 
Statement in Support to L.D. 23, 
An Act to Limit Public Access to or Dissemination of Electronic 
Citation Information 
Submitted by Chief Charles Rumsey 
February 2, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the 
Chief of the Cumberland Police Department. I am here today to testify on behalf 
of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association in Support of LD 23. 
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in 
law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of 
Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property.
We support LD 23 because we believe that the protection of personal 
information is a vital part of protecting Maine residents. The personal identifying 
information, which includes driver’s license numbers, dates of birth and home 
addresses, are information that police officers collect before a person is adjudicated 
of traffic violation.  Unless a court enters judgment that a person has violated a 
traffic law, this pre-conviction data should be treated a confidential. 
LD 23 is a necessary statutory change because people, like employees at 
companies that collect consumer information and sell it for information, have tried 
to gain access to this confidential information through the Freedom of Access Act 
(FOAA). Although we believe that FOAA does not apply in this cause because the 
data is protected by Federal Driver’s Privacy Protection Act (DPPA), we think that 
a statutory change would clarify this situation and protect sensitive information 
from being shared before a person has their chance to submit their case to the court. 
We would also support the proposed amendment that would add a 
definition of “personal identifying information” that the Department of Public 
Safety stated that it will propose. 
For these reasons, we hope that you will vote in favor of LD 23. And, on 
behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank you for your 
work on this Committee.
