! ll-S Maine Equaljustice 
People Policy Solutions 
126 Sewa“ Stmet Frank D'A!essandro 
Augusta’ ME 043306822 Legal Services Director 
TTY/Volce: (207) 626-7058 (207) 6264058’ ext 202 
Fax (207) 621-8148 ,rank@meJp org 
www.me]p.0rg 
Testimony of Frank D’Alessandro, 
Maine Equal Justice 
In support of LD 23 
“An Act to Limit Public Access to or 
Dissemination of Electronic Citation Information ” 
January 26, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished 
members of the Committee on Judiciary. My name is Frank D’Alessandro, 
and I am the Legal Services Director of Maine Equal Justice. We area civil 
legal services organization, and We work with and for people with low income 
seeking solutions to poverty through policy, education, and legal 
representation. Thank you for the opportunity to offer written to you in 
support of LD 23. 
Maine Equal Justice supports LD 23 because the beneﬁts of moving records 
online should not come at the expense of basic individual rights. 
Maine citation records show an individual ’s ﬁrst and last name, the year of their 
date of birth, the type of traffic infraction, the disposition of the infraction, and the 
date and amount paid for the ﬁne. In addition, these records are available whether 
the individual is found to have committed the infraction alleged in the citation. 
Currently, Data Mining Companies are making FOAA requests to the Department 
of Public Safety requesting the release of all data contained in the electronic 
citation database. The release of all of these records have the potential to be used 
unfairly to unreasonably to deny individuals housing, credit or employment.
What This Bill Does 
This bill makes personal identifying information on citation records conﬁdential 
on online state databases thus preventing the wholesale release of citation records. 
Why Maine Equal Justice Supports LD 23 
Online Citation Records Can Be Used to Deny Housing to Otherwise Eligible 
Individuals 
As more and more records are put online, more and more companies are scraping 
that information together to for tenant screening reports that are used by 90% of 
landlords in the United States.‘ But, the companies that are selling the information 
and services for tenant screening reports are not required to be registered under 
federal or Maine laws? Furthermore, these companies are not well regulated, and 
this allows them to be neither careful nor judicious in gathering and analyzing the 
info1mation.3 Particularly in analyzation, the opaqueness of their methods means 
that it is extremely unclear how these companies create their scores and ratings of 
potential tenants based on the information that has been scraped togetherf ‘ Many 
times the scores and ratings are not accompanied with the information used to 
create the rating, but landlords still rely on these scores and rating to deny or 
accept an application.5. 
What is known, is that these companies often use partial or incomplete names, 
partial or incomplete dates of birth, and automated systems with negligible human 
oversight that err in including too much rather then excluding errors.‘ As a result 
of these opaque, poor, and possibly illegal practices, tenant screening reports are 
often faulty and include inaccurate information.7 For individuals applying to be 
tenants, these faulty and inaccurate reports lead to rejection and remaining 
unhoused, and because of the practices tenants are unable to easily understand why 
they are being rejected and how to proactively ﬁnd solutions to the issues.8 These 
1 
Lauren Kirchner & Matthew Goldstein, Access Denied: Faulty Automated Background Checks Freeze Out Renters, 
N.Y. Tnvnzs & THE MARKUP (May 28, 2020), https://themarkup.org/locked-out/2020/O5/28/access-denied-faulty- 
automated-background-checks-freeze-out-renters?ref=hackernoon.com.' 
2 
CONSUMER FINANCIAL Pnorscnon BUREAU, TENANT BACKGROUND CHECKS Market 10 (2022), 
https:1/fiIes.consumerfinance.2ov/f/documents/cfpb tenant-background-checks-market report_2022-11.pdf 
(hereinafter CFPB) 
5 
Kirchner & Goldstein, supra note 1. 
4 Id. 
5 Id. 
5 
CFPB, supra note 2, at 27-29. 
7 
Id. 
8 
Kirchner & Goldstein, supra note1
practices effect people of color disproportionality because minority groups tend to 
have fewer sumames.9 For example, around l2 million Latinos and Latinas share 
just 26 surnames. ” This means that when partial, or even full, name searches are 
made, minority groups are more likely to be rejected for faulty or inaccurate 
information. 
Adding to the issue of faulty and overinclusive searches by tenant screening 
companies, the citation and courts records that can be found online are not always 
complete. The National Center for State Courts (N CSC) has speciﬁcally 
Warned these companies that the “databases are not official records ‘and may 
be subject to error[s] or omission[s] ’ that require further veriﬁcation for 
‘accuracy, currency, and completeness. ”’“ Though the NCSC have warned 
these companies, they still continue to use the records to deny individuals housing. 
Citation records in Maine can be used as part of the tenant screening reports that 
are created because of the identifying information that is included in Maine 
citation records online. 12 There is “limited evidence ” that criminal records are in 
any Way predictive of whether an individual may be a problematic tenant.“ There 
seems to be even less evidence, if any, of any positive value of using citation 
records to predict a tenant’s behavior. Yet, unfettered access to citation records in 
Maine makes it exceedingly easy for those records to be used in tenant screening 
reports regardless of the type of infraction or when it occurred. For example, in 
researching for this testimony, we were able to search the names of our family 
members in the Maine eCourt system to fmd every citation they had ever received. 
This Bill Does Not Prevent Release of Violation Bureau Court Records In 
Individual Cases 
Pursuant to Maine Court Rule 80F(p) “On a request for a particular record, 
members of the public shall have online access to data contained in an 
individual case ﬁle maintained by the Violations Bureau” . This Rule permits 
access to records in a particular case While preventing the wholesale release of 
records to Data Mining Companies. 
9 Id. 
1° Id. 
11 CFPB, supra note 2, at 27 (citing National Center for State Courts, Why Court Records DON'T Provide a Person's 
Criminal History, https:[/www.ncsc.0rg/consulting-and-research/areas-of-expertise/technol0gy]on|ine —records 
(last visited Jan. 25, 2023)). 
12 See Lauren Kirchner, When Zombie Data Costs You a Home, THE MARKUP (Oct. 6, 2020), 
https1//themarkup.org/locked-out/2020/10/06/zombie-criminaI-records-housing-background-checks 
13 CFPB, supra note 2, at 36-37.
Conclusion 
Maine Equal Justice urges the Committee to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 23 to 
prevent data mining and tenant screening companies from inaccurately and 
inappropriately using citation records to deny individuals housing when they 
are otherwise eligible. 
We thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.
