Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
Neither for Nor Against
LD 23 - An Act to Limit Public Access to or Dissemination of Electronic Citation Information
January 24, 2023
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen and distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is 
Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting placeholder testimony, neither for nor against LD 23, An Act to 
Limit Public Access to of Dissemination of Electronic Citation Information, on behalf of the Maine 
Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. 
The positions of the Association are established by our 70 member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), 
who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. 
The LPC meets monthly to establish positions on bills proposed that impact the work of municipal 
government, and will meet this Thursday, January 26 to establish the Association’s position on LD 23. I 
will submit additional testimony following this meeting and hopefully before the work session. 
While the Association’s official position has not yet been established, it is important to note that 
historically municipal officials have been concerned about how to appropriately manage public access to 
this centralized database in response to Freedom of Information Access (FOIA) requests that are 
frequently received by municipalities. Increasingly, FOIA requests to municipalities are being used by 
corporate data mining entities to create centralized repositories and resell public information where it has 
value to other entities. Such entities collect and aggregate this data to provide crime scores for 
neighborhoods, school ratings by testing scores, and constituent profiles to enhance other commercial 
transactions from real estate sales, business and retail investment, debt collection and insurance risks. 
The E-Citation information under current statute may be accessible for this use when a FOIA 
request is submitted to a participating municipal police agency. As this information is non-adjudicated 
and contains personally identifying information of individuals involved in a traffic stop, it is important to 
understand all the ways the information may be used. 
Traffic stop data has value to many industries including the risk industry which may make 
insurance premium decisions based on the number of times an individual is pulled over by the police, 
regardless of the outcome of the stop or an actual conviction. Additionally, such detailed information may 
be mined to locate individuals who may have protection orders in place in other states, or are victims of 
stalking, and have a real need to keep their address information from disclosure. Paper citations issued by 
municipal agencies have established rules on what is able to be disclosed for public purpose and 
identifying information is limited. Warnings for traffic violations received by individuals outside the E-
Citation system are not currently disclosed and may not even be recorded in local police databases with 
the identifying information that is now required to be collected in the E-citation system.  As such 
information is now being collected in a way that reduces data entry errors and provides opportunities to 
understand law enforcement trends, the information also has power and value for less than scrupulous 
purposes without adequate protections.   
I will submit additional testimony once the MMA LPC has established their official position if 
the committee yet voted on this matter at that time. I am always available for the work session on this 
matter should the committee have any additional questions that I may be able to answer from the 
municipal perspective. Municipal officials thank you for your careful consideration of all the ways such 
information may be accessed and used as you deliberate this subject.
