 
 
 
PO BOX 263 •254 ALEXANDER REED RD 
 RICHMOND, ME  04357
PHONE: 207-737-4092 • FAX: 207-737-7150
 E-MAIL: MRWA@MAINERWA.ORG
WEBSITE: WWW.MAINERWA.ORG
 
 
To:   Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services 
 
From:   Bradley Sawyer, Deputy Director  
 
Date:   April 12, 2023 
 
Re:  Testimony in Neither For Nor Against L.D. 775, An Act to Require and Standardize Labeling of 
Water Treatment Equipment 
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony neither for nor against 
L.D. 775. The Maine Rural Water Association is a member-driven non-profit organization based in 
Richmond that specializes in training, technical assistance, and advocacy on behalf of our almost three 
hundred members. The majority of our membership is made up of water and wastewater utilities from 
around the state and are committed to ensuring clean and safe drinking water and a healthy environment 
through the proper treatment of wastewater.  
The Maine Rural Water Association’s policy committee does not object to this legislation 
provided that these requirements are intended to apply to private water system installers and not public 
water systems. Public water systems are highly regulated entities that do not have competing pieces of 
hardware in ratepayers’ homes, and as such should not be required to label every piece of equipment 
they install. There are extensive rules stemming from the Public Utilities Commission1 that govern how 
ratepayers interact with their respective utility and what steps must be taken by the utility to ensure 
fairness and transparency in those interactions.  
I have spoken with the sponsor of this legislation and believe his intent was not have public 
water systems impacted by this concept, and as such would respectfully request that the committee 
slightly modify the language of this bill to explicitly state that this legislation does not impact public 
water systems, including, community, non-transient non-community, and transient public water systems.   
I am happy to be present at the work session if the committee would like. If you have any 
questions, please do not hesitate to contact me at Bradley.Sawyer@MaineRWA.org  of 207-737-9014.  
 
1 https://www.maine.gov/mpuc/legislative/laws-rules 
