S'l‘ .~‘\'I‘i:' . 01* MA!Z\’£ 
UFFICE or THE (;0x’1~;Rz\oR 
.~ 
. ISTATE Hausa STr\T§()t\I 
- 
A{i(;iiS'l ‘A,lV1Ai;\ €li 
O4333~0{)i)l 
.. ._§;,_.. 
JA?\’i:‘.'i' MILLS DAN BURGESS 
G(}\’ERiY()R DIRECTOR 01* Gov1:Rl\=0R ’s 
ENERGY Ormcs 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
Resolve, to Conduct a Vehicle-to-grid Pilot Project Using Electric School Buses 
L.D. 519 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
March 7, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and l am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governofs Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in support of L.D. 519. 
L.D. 519 is a Resolve that would provide for the establishment of a two-year pilot project to use electric 
school buses to store energy from the electric grid during times of low demand and usage rates and 
discharge the stored energy to the grid during times of high demand and high usage rates. 
As the Committee may recall from our testimony on L.D. 122, Maine has already successfully pursued 
federal funding to support deployment of medium-duty and heavy-duty zero-emission vehicles. ln 
October 2022, 13 school districts across the state, with the support of the Department of Education, 
Department of Environmental Protection, and GOPIF, were awarded rebates from the Environmental 
Protection Agency under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to deploy up to 34 new electric school buses. 
The Wells-Ogunquit School District, contemplated by this Resolve as the host of the pilot initiative, was 
awarded 11 of these buses. 
As these and other vehicles are placed in service across the state, there are likely to be useful 
opportunities to explore their use as energy storage resources through vehicle-to-grid (V26) or vehicle- 
to-building (V2B) technologies. V2G has the potential to deliver significant benefits to both vehicle 
owners and electricity customers through innovative technologies that allow vehicle batteries to provide 
energy, grid balancing, and other services to the electrical system such as backup power during outages. 
At the same time, with these new opportunities come new questions about the existing regulatory, 
market, and infrastructure necessary to enable them. We anticipate such a program would require 
collaboration between several entities including school districts, utilities, vehicle manufacturers, and the 
host community, among others. 
The GEO is generally supportive of these concepts and recommends identification of federal grant 
funding for implementation. The potential value of the pilot program may be increased by expanding 
the opportunity for participation to a broader sample of locations; we recommend amending this 
language to specify the pilot initiative occur in one or more school districts. Additionally, the 
administration of such a pilot warrants further consideration in order to ensure alignment with other 
existing and planned initiatives to maximize the likelihood of scalable, actionable outcomes at its 
conclusion. We look forward to working with the sponsor and Committee on this Resolve.
1
Thank you for your consideration. 
C~..xw_C4z-_ 
Caroline Colan, Legisiative Liaison 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
