¥srsr~-*- 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 519 
Resolve, to Conduct a Vehicle-to-grid Pilot Project Using Electric School Buses 
March 7, 2023 
Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler, and members of the EUT Committee, my name is James Cote and I am 
here on behalf of Versant Power to testify neither for nor against LD 519. 
Generally, this legislation proposes positive and innovative ideas with the potential to ultimately strengthen 
Maine’s electric grid while cost-effectively moving the state closer to our climate and energy goals. 
In fact, Versant Power is currently engaged in discussions about some of these very same concepts with key 
stakeholders, including Fennata Energy, in our own service territory. We will plan to stay connected with the 
PUC, Efﬁciency Maine Trust, Governor ’s Energy Office, OPA, and other relevant stakeholders as those 
discussion progress to ensure that all parties are informed and engaged as appropriate. We would also be happy to 
keep the committee updated. 
Energy storage will be a critical tool in Maine’s effort to transition toward a future where large parts of our 
economy, transportation systems, and buildings are electriﬁed and higher and higher penetrations of renewable 
energy resources are interconnected to the grid. From a utility perspective, storage systems can not only help to 
accommodate the intermittent generation proﬁles of some renewable resources, but also can provide critical grid 
management beneﬁts such as voltage control. 
Innovative storage systems like Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) technologies that leverage existing large mobile batteries 
(such as those in V2G-equipped electric school buses, which also generally offer predictable schedules), have the 
potential to strengthen our grid, provide reliability and resiliency beneﬁts, and enable the integration of renewable 
resources. 
While grid-scale energy storage is a relatively mature technology, learning from targeted pilot projects in the case 
of more cutting-edge technologies such as V2G systems, is an appropriate way for Maine to reﬁne how these 
technologies can be integrated at a larger scale in the future while minimizing ratepayer exposure. 
As stated in the summary, this resolve requires the Efﬁciency Maine Trust to design and operate a 2~year V2G 
pilot project to use electric school buses to store energy from the electric grid during times of low demand and 
low usage rates and discharge the stored energy to the grid during times of high demand and high usage rates. LD 
519 further requires the pilot project to be operated at the We1ls- Ogunquit Community School District and use 
the electric school buses acquired by the district through a grant from the United States Environmental Protection 
Agency. Versant Power believes there are a number of potentially beneficial locations for such pilot projects in 
our service territories in eastern and northern Maine and asks the Committee to consider expanding the 
permissible geographic footprint of this program. 
When creating these types of pilot projects it is important to clearly identify who is responsible for each 
component of the pilot and how it will be paid for. Again, these types of pilots are important for purposes of 
learning and beneﬁting from new technologies, but Versant believes it is imperative that they are paid for by 
means that do not disproportionately affect customers who do not beneﬁt, and that responsibilities for 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District —- PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
¥5t$€R'*“" 
administering such a program are clearly deﬁned amongst utilities, Efficiency Maine Trust, community 
organizations, and others. Leveraging federal and other grant funding for targeted pilot programs has the potential 
to lead to longer-term customer beneﬁts. 
There may also be additional use cases other than those identiﬁed in the current bill language which may be 
helpful for pilot projects to explore. For example, in addition to modeling the ability of mobile storage systems to 
shift energy from periods of low demand to periods of high demand, V2G systems also have the capability of 
providing resiliency beneﬁts in the event of an unplanned outage or allowing for the integration of additional 
renewable energy resources in certain areas. We believe the partners in such pilot projects should have the 
ﬂexibility to explore various scenarios and use cases in order to understand how energy storage systems can 
provide the maximum beneﬁt to ratepayers at the least cost. 
Thank you for your consideration, and we would be pleased to provide more information as requested at the work 
S€SSlOIl. 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
