.‘.5 
CENTRAL MNNE POWER 
Kathleen Newman, Director of Government Affairs and Community Relations 
LD 519 Resolve, to Conduct a Vehicle-to-grid Pilot Project Using Electric School Buses 
March 7, 2023 
Testifying: Support 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology, my name is Kathleen Newman, presenting testimony in support of LD 
519 Resolve, to Conduct a Vehicle-to-grid Pilot Project Using Electric School Buses. 
CMP supports exploring Vehicle-to-Grid (V26) programs using the pilot project approach as 
outlined in this bill. As the entity responsible for reliability and safety of the grid, ultimately CMP 
will need to evaluate this pilot project at the Wells-Ogunquit Community School District froma 
load and generator perspective for potential impacts to the grid —just as we do for other 
distributed generation projects. 
Depending on demand size and charge/discharge timing, multiple studies or screens may be 
required. The questions we'll ask as part of our analysis include the time of day the buses will be 
charged and discharged, the l<W size of the EV charger(s) for the buses and the anticipated size of 
the discharge for the bus by kW. 
The project will need to seek an interconnection agreement (IA) as required by either lSO-NE or 
MPUC, and unless specifically exempted, at a certain size or dollar threshold would need to be 
reviewed by the non-wires alternative coordinator. 
ClVlP will assess the infrastructure supporting the location, and as with all distributed generation 
projects, any upgrades needed to support the load would be the responsibility of the project 
owner. It isn't completely clear whether that would be the school district or Efficiency Maine 
Trust and we recommend that be clarified. Additional language to make clear the need for 
interconnection review would be valuable, as well. 
We look forward to working with the school district and Efficiency Maine Trust to get this pilot 
project up and running. 
Thank you for your consideration.
