Testimony of the Efficiency Maine Trust 
Michael D. Stoddard, Executive Director 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST (NFNA) 
LD 519 - Resolve, to Conduct a Vehicle-to-Grid Pilot Project Using Electric School Buses 
Presented to the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology (EUT) 
March 6, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology, the Efficiency Maine Trust (the Trust) appreciates the opportunity to testify today neither 
for nor against LD 519 - Resolve, to Conduct a Vehicle-to-Grid Pilot Project Using Electric School 
Buses. We offer the following comments on the bill as drafted for your consideration: 
1. The Trust strongly supports policies and programs seeking to accelerate l\/laine's transition to electric 
vehicles (EVs), and to minimize the associated costs of this transition to EVs while maximizing the 
beneﬁts to electricity ratepayers. 
2. The Trust recognizes that, it is possible, in theory, to harvest value from the large batteries in electric 
school buses by dispatching their stored electricity onto the grid (vehicle-to-grid or "V2G") at times 
when the batteries are not needed for propelling the buses and when the grid would value these 
dispatches the most. 
3. The Trust currently has all the authority it needs to run a pilot project on V26. In essence, V26 is an 
energy storage project. (Efficiency l\/laine is currently running another pilot project to test the cost- 
effectiveness of large batteries at critical care facilities and other commercial or industrial facilities.) it 
has a budget, already approved by approved the Trust Board and the Public Utilities Commission, for 
electric efficiency pilot projects of approximately $500,000 for next year, and a similar amount for the 
following year. 
4. The chief questions that the Trust has with this proposal to pilot VZG using electric school buses are: 
a. what is a reasonable estimate of the range (low to high) of costs to run a V2G pilot project? 
b. what characteristics of a V2G project, including such factors as existing capacity of the utility 
distribution circuit where the batteries are located to accommodate dispatches, 
c. what is the value of the potential benefits?
2 
6. We appreciate the Sponsor's approach of having reached out to EMT when this bill was still in the 
early concept stages, and for engaging with us to think about the proposal. We agree with the Sponsor 
that the approach of using a Resolve was more appropriate than proposing a change to the statute. 
7. Uncertainty of costs. The Trust has researched all similar V2G pilot projects across the country where 
the results have been published, and has conferred with the school bus company that will manage the 
buses in Wells-Ogunquit, and we have spoken to CMP about the possible costs of transformers and grid 
interconnection. The Trust estimates that the costs for a V2G will include, but not be limited to: 
0 Between $7,000 and $48,000 to upgrade an EV charger to accommodate V2G dispatching; 
0 Between $15,000 - $30,000 for early replacement of the EV battery during its lifetime due to 
degradation from repeated discharging; 
0 Between $10,000 and $25,000 to upgrade the transformer; 
0 Between $2,000 and $120,000 for software and controls; 
0 Between $80,000 and $175,000 for consultants/sub-contractors to operate the pilot, dispatch 
the batteries (this is based on a 2019 pilot by PSEG in Long Island for a pilot with three EV buses 
that had expenses of $190,000 for consultants/sub-contractors to operate the pilot). 
These costs do not include any additional costs to compensate the battery owners for 
dispatching the batteries to the grid, nor any costs for interconnecting to the grid. CMP 
informed the Trust that they could not provide a cost estimate for interconnection until an 
interconnection study could be completed. These costs also do not include any amount for 
EMT's staff time. 
8. Current rules around such battery installations have implications for sizing the interconnection (and 
determining its cost) and for compensating dispatches. (Batteries are not considered eligible for Net 
Energy Billing under current Maine policy.) 
9. Given the uncertainty of costs, if this Resolve is approved the Trust would ask that the language be modified 
to clarify that the decision to proceed, and the nature of the pilot design, and the strategy for implementing the 
pilot, be left to the Trust's discretion. Among other things, this would empower the Trust to seek out and pursue 
specific conditions of the site to minimize costs and maximize benefits. It would also enable the Trust to 
discontinue the pilot if it determines that the costs are so significant that they outstrip the Trust's available 
lnnovation Program budgets or draw into question the viability of using electric school buses in this way. The 
Trust suggests that this Resolve be amended to: ask the Trust to consider conducting a V2G pilot and to 
determine whether: (a) there is a reasonable likelihood that the V2G technology/application has a pathway to 
being cost-effective; (b) the Trust has available budget to pursue a 2-year pilot; (c) Efficiency Maine sees a path 
forward to design and implement a pilot within the budget of its lnnovation program; and (d) the potential 
benefits for a V2G pilot are greater than other competing options for the use of the available lnnovation budget. 
Respectfully submitted, 
[s[MDS 
Michael D. Stoddard 
168 Capitol Street, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330 l (866) 376-2463 l efficiencymainecom
