 
 
To: Members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
From:  Rachel Lane, VP , Electrification and Sustainability, Student Transportation of America  
Date:  March 7th, 2023 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 519: Resolve, to Conduct a Vehicle -to-Grid Pilot Project Using 
Electric School Buses  
 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and the members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities, 
and Technology,  
 
I am speaking on behalf of Student Transportation of A merica, the parent organization of Ledgemere 
Transportation, the contracted entity providing school bus transportation to the Wells -Ogunquit School 
District.   
 
As the second largest provider of contracted school bus services in the United States and Canad a, our 
mission is to provide safe, reliable, and cost -effective transportation to the 1.25 million students we 
transport per day.   Part of our commitment is to provide greener transportation options to create 
healthier environments for the communities we s erve.  We are excited to bring electrified buses to 
Maine as part of the EPA’s Clean School Bus Program.  Through the receipt of this EPA grant, we will 
deploy 11 electric Type C buses and complementary charging infrastructure.  This will result in the 
largest electric school bus fleet in the state of Maine.   This district will be an example of school bus 
electrification for the state, naturally leading it to be an ideal site for a Vehicle to Grid pilot program in 
Maine.  We urge an “ought to pass” report o n LD 519: Resolve, to Conduct a Vehicle -to-Grid  (V2G)  Pilot 
Project Using Electric School Buses.  
 
Maine has already proven to be a leader in renewable energy. Adding Vehicle -to-Grid technology to the 
existing mix of wind , solar and hydropower will further accelerate Maine’s progress toward  meeting its 
goal of being carbon neutral by 2045.   This technology treats an electric vehicle like a battery storage 
device .  By exporting excess stored energy in vehicle batteries during peak hours, Vehicle -to-Grid 
technology reduc es the strain  on the electrical grid and deters the need for electrical infrastructure 
investment.  Batteries can also be called upon following natural disasters or mass power outages to 
provide power otherwise not available.  School buses are ideal for controlled V ehicle -to-Grid testing, as 
they have large battery packs, predictable usage models, and low utilization during summer months , 
peak periods  and weekends.  
 
Vehicle -to-Grid capability can also provide a revenue stream for school districts.  The establishment of 
this pilot program enables  Efficiency Maine to determine the optimal price point for energy purchased 
from the buses, offsetting any additional up -front infrastru cture costs  and battery usage , to entic e 
district participation .  This pilot will also verify if operational requirements for a utility -beneficial 
program can be support ed with school district operational constraints.   
 This Vehicle -to-Grid pilot could also be used as a starting point for further development in vehicle -to-
battery programs , creating additional resiliency for bus providers and districts , and, if employed at a 
large enough scale, redundancy for entire communities.   
Student Transportation of Amer ica 
3349 Hwy. 138 │ Bldg.  A, Suite C │ Wall , NJ 07719  
(732) 280-4200 │ ridesta.com  
  
In conjunction with the Wells -Ogunquit School District, Efficiency Maine, and bus and charging 
infrastructure partners, we support participating in this Vehicle -to-Grid pilot program.  We welcome the 
opportunity to increase our operational understanding of this capability.  This pilot will allow all parties 
to understand the challenges and benefits of deploying Vehicle -to-Grid solutions  in Maine, with the goal 
of allowing us to further proliferate V2G in  Maine and throughout our other electrified sites across the 
country.   
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 Sincerely,  
Rachel Lane  
  
VP, Electrification and Sustainability  
Student Transportation of America  
 

