Maine Public Testimony to 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
In Support of LD 450 
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Upgrade and Replace Emergency Alert System 
Infrastructure of Maine Public 
Rick Schneider, President & CEO of Maine Public 
April 25, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, my name is Rick Schneider, President and CEO of Maine Public, and 
l am speaking in support of LD 450. I am grateful to Senator Pierce for sponsoring, and to the eight 
bipartisan legislators for co-sponsoring this proposal. 
lam here on behalf of the nearly one million Mainers we touch weekly, through our nine television 
transmitters and 14 FM radio stations. Every day, we provide news, weather, educational content, and 
information that connects Mainers statewide. 
The most important part of our partnership with state government is our role in public safety and 
emergency communications. Maine Public works with the Maine Emergency Management Agency— 
MEMA — to coordinate the Emergency Alert System. 
The best recent example of using this network in an emergency was during the pandemic, when we 
quickly adapted to coordinating Dr. Shah's daily briefings. Our crew worked with the Maine CDC to 
produce and broadcast those briefings on radio, television, and online streaming. 
As you see from the handout, our transmission network is extensive, from Sanford to St. Francis, Mars 
Hill, and Calais. The towers, transmitters, and microwave links spread across nearly 30 sites that must be 
on the air at all times. 
Our network of towers and transmitters was built in the 19605 and requires modernization and 
replacement. More than 10 years ago we created a plan with an estimated price tag of $20 million to 
accomplish that task and began pursuing state funding support. ln 2021, we were allocated $10 million 
through the Maine Jobs and Recovery Plan. That $10 million is helping with significant modernization, 
including replacing our two primary television transmitters. However, it is only a partial fix and the 
overall cost has grown. 
What was a $20 million project more than a decade ago has grown to $27 million — with $17 million 
outstanding after the 2021 allocation. Our $17 million request through this bill is structured as a bond 
issue because that is the typical way to support infrastructure. But if there is the opportunity to direct 
one-time support as you did in 2021, that would also be a welcome and efficient way to accomplish the 
goals of LD 450. 
lt is helpful to understand that Maine Public is unusual among public television statewide networks 
nationwide, many of which are state agencies. In 1992, the University of lVlaine’s public broadcasting 
network merged with Channel 10, founded by Colby, Bates, and Bowdoin colleges, to create the 
independent nonprofit we now know as l\/laine Public. 75% of our budget comes from private sector
fundraising, which pays for the programs and services we provide. But because of this structure, Maine 
Public, unlike most other state networks, doesn't have access to regular capital replacement funds. 
The towers, transmitters, antennas, and microwave links are the essential backbone of the network. 
They are infrastructure that the public doesn't see but are essential to providing reliable service to the 
state. 
We saw during the pandemic how valuable it is to have a reliable statewide communication system. This 
one-time request for support is a strategic investment that future generations can rely on for emergency 
information, public safety, educational content, and information. 
We are available for any questions. Thank you for your time and attention.
