  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph M ekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Pren dergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
April 25, 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matthew Moonen  
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Room 43 8 
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1596– An Act to Facilitate  the Creation of an Aroostook County 
Drug Treatment Court  
 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary : 
 
MACDL provides this testimony neither in support of  nor opposition to LD 1 596. 
Instead, I write to stress the importance of Maine Treatme nt and Recovery Courts  
(TRC) .  
 
In additi on to being the President of MACDL, I am also one of the defense attorney 
representatives assigned to the Cumberland County TRC. Many years ago, while an 
Assistant Attorney General, I also had the privilege of servi ng as  the prosecutor 
representative to the York County TRC  in addition to my regular workload. As both a  
prosecutor and defense attorney , I have seen firsthand the TRC ’s ability to effect 
positive change in the live s of the partic ipants and the communities they are part of.  
 
Unfortunately , Aroostook County  has been impacted  like so many other counties with 
substance use, arguably  more so  than some others . Maine created its first Adult Drug 
TRC  in August 2000 and began accepting participants in April 2001. In the last 22 
years, there has never  been a TRC  in Aroostook County. For me, it has always been 
unclear  why a TRC has not existed in one of the counties that could stand to benefit 
the most . As a lawyer and a Maine citizen , I find the lack of a TRC in Aroost ook 
County  astounding.  
 
“The mission of Maine ’s TRC ’s is to enhance public safety b y reduc ing recidivism 
with respect to crimes primarily related to substance use or ment al health issues; to 
hold participants accountable for their behavior; and to increase the likelihood  of 
participants entering a recovery li festyle through intensive judicial supervision, case 
management , peer support, and specialized treatme nt for substance use or mental 
health disorders. ” See Maine TRC ’s Polic y and Procedure  Manual: 
https://www.courts.maine.gov/courts/treatment/mtrc -policy -manual.pdf . 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is unclear whether  an appropriation of the type contemplated by LD 1 596 is necessary  to 
imple ment a TRC in Aroostook County. Whether the District Attorney ’s Office in its current form  is 
understaffed and unable to  absorb extra duties associated with attending weekly staffing  meet ings 
and weekly TRC obligations is  unknown to me , and I would defer to the Maine Prosecutor ’s 
Association and District Attorney Todd Collins on that point. To the extent that such an 
appropriation  is determined to be necessary to mov e forward with creation of an Ar oostook TRC, 
then MACDL would support  LD 1596.  
 
We look forward to the day when there are well -funded and staffed TRC ’s in all of Maine ’s 
counties .  
 
Thank you for allowing MACDL to address  this important issue.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
/s/ Amber L. T ucker  
Amber  L. Tucker  
President  
 
