Clement Deveau, LCSW, CCS 
Program Director of Behavioral Health & Integration Services 
 Washington/Hancock Counties 
Aroostook Mental Health Services (AMHC) 
127 Palmer Street, Calais, ME 04619 
cdeveau@amhc.org  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1596 
An Act to Facilitate the Creation of an Aroostook County Drug Treatment Court 
Sponsored by Senate President Jackson 
April 25, 2023 
  
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my 
name is Clement Deveau, I am a program director for behavioral health and integration, and a mental health 
and substance use clinician and I am representing Aroostook Mental Health Services or AMHC.  AMHC 
supports the implementation of adult drug treatment court program to effectively serve individuals in the 
criminal justice system in Aroostook County.  Adult drug treatment court is nationally supported and 
recognized as an evidenced based model.  This is supported by National Association of Drug Court 
professionals (NADCP) with ongoing evidence-based research.  In addition, the model is used throughout the 
United States and recognized nationally as the gold standard of providing treatment services for individual 
dealing with substance use and co-occurring challenges in the criminal justice system.  This program 
provides effective treatment outcomes, saves lives, reduces costs and keeps individuals out of the criminal 
justice system while helping to support local communities.     
 
To further support such, the Maine Adult Drug Treatment court was evaluated in 2020 by a national research 
group, (Public Consulting group).  Conclusions and Recommendations. Maine Adult Drug Treatment Court. 
2020 Evaluation.  (2021, January 7).  Public Consulting Group. 
Data was gathered from nine treatment courts that had been providing such services in Maine since before 
2016 in Maine in order to provide sufficient time evaluation for the research study.  Adult Drug Treatment 
court has clear evidence of the effectiveness and positive outcomes.   
 
Some of these data from the study include: 
 
• Lower arrests: 1/3 to 1/2 less (12 months data 13% vs 40%) 
• Lower convictions: 12 months 11% vs 35% and 24 months 6% vs 41%       
• Individuals who did not fully complete the program also attained a lower recidivism rate. 
• Reduced overdose. 
• Decreased mortality. 
• Savings:  in 12 months 27% savings and 18 months 28% savings compared to non-treatment court 
group. 
• In addition, these savings do not even take into account the added savings from reduced recidivism 
costs for those re-entering the system.   
 
AMHC has been providing the clinical treatment services component for Adult Drug Treatment Court for 
over 10 years.  We provide such services in Washington and Hancock Counties.  We, along with many 
partnering organizations in other Maine Counties providing Drug treatment court services, have witnessed 
the noticeable impact.   
 
AMHC supports the creation of an Aroostook County Drug Treatment Court program and recognizes the 
many benefits of such a program.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Clement Deveau, LCSW, CCS 
