Eric "Joe" Finnemore
machias
LD 1596
My name is Eric J Finnemore. I am from Aroostook County and I am in support of 
LD1596, bringing Treatment Court Services to Aroostook County Maine. We are in 
the grips of a severe public health crisis with addiction running strong in our 
communities. We have an obligation to our State to promote public wellness and we 
fail to do that by sending people to prison who suffer from the disease of addiction for
symptoms of their disease. I am a Treatment Court graduate. I have also been to 
prison for drug possession and trafficking. I will tell you firsthand that prison wasn't 
fun. It also didn't treat my disease. I was told I had a 76% chance of reoffending when
I was released. Basically they told me I would be back again. July 24,2020 I was 
charged with possession of a small amount of scheduled drugs  while on probation. A 
ticket back to prison. But I was offered a chance at Treatment Court in Washington 
County instead of prison and I agreed to sign the contract to enter the program. The 
program is designed to be challenging and accepting of those who might struggle with
fighting their addictions, by having different treatment responses and sanctions for 
every situation that may be faced. Even termination if it comes to new criminal 
activity while in the program. The programming that I went through in this program 
has changed my life. After completing I.O.P. (intensive outpatient program) I was 
introduced to M.R.T. (moral reconation therapy), a step work guide that has taught me
how I've manipulated everyone and everything in my life to keep me from reaching 
my full potential. Since my graduation in July of 2022 I have gone on to become 
employed at AMHC as the Recovery Support Navigator. I am a trusted member of the
community and employed through the agency that helped me break the cycle of 
revisiting prison because of symptoms of my disease. Programming and therapy 
work. I am proof of that. This program has offered me hope that I can be more than 
just another hopeless person who will die in addiction. I love being a mentor and a 
sober support for the people of my community and being able to offer hope to 
someone who feels hopeless. I support LD1596 and Treatment Court for Aroostook 
County.
