Testimony in Support of L.D. 1596 “An Act to Facilitate the Creation of an Aroostook County Drug 
Treatment Court” 
 
Jamie Corbett, LCSW-CC, LADC, CCS, Mother in Recovery 
 
 Members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is Jamie Corbett. I am a resident of Marshfield, 
Maine. I am a Master Clinical Social Worker – Clinical Conditional, a Licensed Alcohol and Drug 
Counselor, a Certified Clinical Supervisor, and a mother in long term recovery. I have worked within a 
Treatment and Recovery Court team for eight years. I have thirteen years’ experience working as an 
addiction counselor, sixteen years of sobriety, and twenty-one years of recovery experience. I have 
worked with and known many individuals impacted by substance use disorder whose symptoms have 
led to intersecting with the criminal justice system including myself. I am testifying today in support of 
L.D. 1596, An Act to Facilitate the Creation of an Aroostook County Drug Treatment Court. 
 There is no dismissing the enormous need in the state of Maine to help those suffering from 
substance use disorders. While addiction for many started as a choice the subtle gradual chemical 
changes that occur in the brain lead to automatic compulsive use that controls an individual life. I have 
never evaluated an individual with substance use disorder who reported they began using due to 
wanting to be an addict or a criminal but rather that substance use was normalized, often prescribed, 
and available within their communities. Individuals with substance use disorder suffer from a chronic 
health condition not unlike hypertension and diabetes. We didn’t know scientifically when the Nixon 
Administration waged the War on Drugs, that drug use isn’t a moral failing but a chronic relapsing 
disease. Addiction like many other chronic health conditions can be managed and remission obtained 
with access to treatment and support services.  
 Treatment and Recovery Courts use evidence-based practices to treat addiction. Unlike standard 
outpatient treatments utilizing evidence-based treatments, Treatment and Recovery Courts also provide 
social learning, re-enforcement of treatment concepts and learning, and accountability to engaging in 
treatment. I have had the privilege of watching Treatment and Recovery Courts change lives and 
support individuals in obtaining and maintaining long term recovery. An evaluation of Maine Treatment 
and Recovery Courts conducted in 2020 leaves no room for debate on the cost effectiveness and 
treatment effectiveness of Treatment and Recovery Courts verse the traditional methods of 
incarceration or probation alone. This evaluation points out two hundred- and fifty-eight percent 
difference between recidivism rates of individuals participating in these programs verse probation 
alone, decreased mortality rates, and a cost savings of twelve percent for each person which can rise to 
as much as twenty-eight percent saving when recidivism rates are also taken into account.  
 As an individual who didn’t get the opportunity to engage in a Treatment and Recovery Court 
when my own addiction led me to intersect with the criminal justice system, I often find myself 
wondering how my own recovery path would have been different had I been given this opportunity to 
receive a hand up verses handcuffs. I wonder if I would have been able to recover without the trauma of 
homelessness and loss of guardianship of my eldest son. Despite not being able to access this hand up in 
my own recovery process I was able to find recovery and maintain long term sobriety. I live a life beyond 
my wildest dreams today, where stakeholders in my community respect my assessment and treatment 
recommendations and together, we help individuals arrest their addictions and become contributing 
members of our community. Therefore, I have am testifying in support of L.D. 1596, An Act to Facilitate 
the Creation of an Aroostook County Drug Treatment Court.  
