295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1596  
An Act to Facilitate the Creation of an Aroostook County Drug 
Treatment Court  
Sponsored by Sena te President  Jackson  
4.25.2023  
 
Good afternoon , Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary . I am Malory 
Shaughnessy, a Westbrook resident,  and the Executive Director of the Alliance 
for Addiction and Mental Health Ser vices. The Alliance is the statewide 
association representing the majority of Maine’s safety net community -based  
mental health and substance use treatment providers. The Alliance advocates 
for the implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practic es that 
serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in favor of LD 1596  
An Act to Facilitate the Creation of an Aroostook County Drug Treatment 
Court . This bill appropriates ongoing funds to establish one Assistant District 
Attorney position to facilitate th e creation of a drug treatment court in 
Aroostook County . 
  
Maine currently operates Adult Drug Treatment Courts in Androscoggin, 
Cumberland,  Hancock, Penobscot, Washington, and York Counties .  As an 
alternative to incarceration, drug courts reduce the burden and costs of 
repeatedly processing low‐level, non‐violent offenders through the nation's 
courts, jails, and prisons while providing offenders an opportunity to receive 
treatment and educat ion. Individuals in the judicial system who are at least 18 
years of age, have a substance use disorder and a  significant risk of future 
criminal conduct without intervention, and a poor prognosis for success ful 
treatment  without supervised intervention may be admitted to a drug 
treatment court program .  
 
Entry into a drug treatment court is strictly voluntary. Components of the 
treatment involve intensive judicial oversight,  comprehensive an d 
individualized substance use disorder treatment plans, community 
supervision, and drug  testing, among other things.  
 
These Adult Drug Treatment Courts are important to our State given the 
scope and growth of substance use  disorder throughout all parts of Maine, 
both rural and urban. We know  from research  that incarceration  is not the 
best way to deal with an  individual’s underlying substance use disorder, and 
Adult Drug Treatment Courts are an effective way to keep  individuals out        
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
of jail and help treat the underlying issues that may have resulted in them endi ng up in the  
criminal justice system in the first place.  
 
In the long run, such an approach saves money, and saves lives.  Recidivism drops, on average, by 
38% -50% among adult drug court participants, according to a review of 154 evaluations .1 
 
The Alliance supports this first step towards creating a  Drug Court in Aroostook County. We know 
they can be very successful if designed well and supported  fully. Please vote Ou ght to Pass .  
 
 
 
                                                           
1 https://www.innovatingjustice.org/sites/default/files/documents/Assessing_Efectiveness.pdf   
