                                
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                             
               
  
 
OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY  
AROOSTOOK COUNTY  
PROSECUTORIAL  DISTRICT  NUMBER  8 
                                                                                                                 
  
April 21, 2023  
 Susan Pinette, Clerk of the  
Committee on Judiciary  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
          
         SUBMITTED VIA EMAIL  
RE: Public Hearing on LD1596  
 
Good day Senate Chair Carney, House Chair Moonen, and  Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee.  
Thank you for this opportunity to present written testimony on the proposed legislation affecting Maine’s 
criminal laws and access to criminal justice befor e you today.  I am offering this testimony individual ly as the 
District Attorney for Aroostook County and not on behalf of any organization or other prosecutorial district.  
 
I write in support of LD 1596.  While we know that this Bill seeking to facilitat e a Drug Court in Aroostook 
County is not a “silver b ullet” or a complete answer to serious substance abuse problems in our communities; 
LD1596, never -the-less, can be a significant part of the solution.     
 
While the ultimate causes of drug abuse and add iction are as varied and individual as those caught i n its 
powerful grasp, the effects of drug and substance abuse are too well known to the law enforcement community and 
the friends, neighbors, and families of the abuser.  Those effects are concrete, wide spread, and often tragic.   
 
Within the last several years, even in an often idyllic and rural County like Aroostook, we have lost too 
many people to the dire consequences of drug abuse – some have been hospitalized or have died from self -poisoning 
by over dose; some have been injured, maimed, or have died at  the hands of an intoxicated substance abuser operating 
a motor vehicle or ATV; some have succumbed to the years of abuse and expired years before their natural time; 
others, compelled by a seemingly ins atiable hunger and desire for drugs, have preyed upon  their communities 
committing thefts, ranging from the petty – by pilfering money, property, and prescription medications from family 
and friends – to the absolutely destructive – by invading people’s ho mes and stealing money and property, or by 
raiding me dicine cabinets, or by stripping buildings of copper wire and plumbing; by assaulting or robbing others, 
often to either acquire more drugs or to settle some sort of drug debt, real or imagined; others r esort to selling the 
very poison of their own addicti on and spread their affliction to an ever -growing supply of new customers.   
 
Our tools in responding to the drug problem are rough – jail and the threat of jail.   Jail offers a deterrent, but 
only to th ose who will listen.   Those who are not deterred ofte n wait for a “bottom” before they seriously attempt to  
 STATE OF MAINE  
 
 144 Sweden Street    
Caribou, ME 04736 -2353  
207-498-2557  
FAX 207 -493-3493   _____  
   
 
27 Riverside Drive    
Presque Isle, ME  04769 -2730  
207-764-0504  
FAX 207 -764-2046  _____  
   
 
25 School Street   
Suite 210  
Hoult on, ME   04730  
207-532-4294         _____  TODD R. COLLINS  
District Attorney  
 
 
 
KARI WELLS -PUCKETT  
Deputy District Attorney  
 
 
 
 
CHRISTIANA REIN 
MATTHEW HUNTER  
AMANDA BRIDGES  
IAN M. ANDERS ON 
Assistant District Att orneys  
 144 Sweden Street    
Caribou, ME 04736 -2353  
207-498-2557  
FAX 207 -493-3493    
   
 
27 Riverside Drive    
Presque Isle, ME  04769 -2730  
207-764-0504 
FAX 207 -764-2046   
   
 
26 Court Street, Suite 101   
Houlto n, ME  04730 
207-532-4294        
FAX 207 -532-1504   
__________________  
 
remove themselves from the influence of drugs and other drugged people.   Far too often, that “bottom” comes at the 
expense of others – usually in th e form of significant criminal activity.   I do not  see how we can, in good conscience  
wait for someone to kill, injure, maim, burglarize, rob, or steal before we step in and demand a “serious” response to 
a serious problem.  These are only some of the m ore significant and serious consequences of drug and  substance 
facilitated crime and not the equally destructive, painful, and far -too-often tragic social and economic effects of drug 
and substance abuse – like babies born drug -affected or other children caught in the crossfires of addiction.     
 
We can se ek to reduce the demand of drugs by limiting the number of people in Maine who start down the 
path of abuse and addiction by enacting tough laws to discourage those who will listen from being experimental and 
casual users of illicit substances. We can atte mpt to limit the supply of drugs into Maine by making it riskier to 
import, possess, and deliver those drugs wit hin our borders.  We need people to enforce those laws.  Additionally, we 
can seek to give current users the tools they need to successfully lea ve the drugged life behind and to escape the 
heavy gravity that illicit drugs and the drug scene provides and cr eate opportunities for a successful recovery process.  
 
As my initial commentary would indicate, the criminal activity surrounding the abuse of i llicit substances is 
not limited to drug trafficking and drug “crimes” alone.  The scope of drug related crime e xpands into nearly every 
corner of the criminal justice system; from OUI enforcement to petty and grand thefts, to home invasions and 
burglaries , to crimes of violence and retribution, and even to fatal self -poisonings and drug -induced vehicular 
homicides.    
 
LD1596 focuses on the creation of a Drug Court in Aroostook County, which is both admirable and has the 
potential to significantly impact th e lives of those Defendants in a positive and productive way.  Ideally the creation 
of a Drug Court will have a po sitive impact across all facets of Aroostook County life.  Increased education, 
increased access to treatment, and more treatment providers in  the community are just some of those potential 
positive impacts.   
 
The goal of any successful substance use prog ram in the criminal justice system must balance the individual 
needs of a defendant without losing sight of the crime committed and the harm t o the community that their conduct 
created.  Accountability is an important facet of recovery.  When we address th e whole of the person, the good, the 
bad, and the in between then we can build bridges to successful reintegration with their community, even if those 
successes start small.  As we gather small successes and build on them with the client, we will slowly ex change the 
external motivating factors of avoiding prison with internal, but concrete motivating ones like home, family, and 
work or education .  Intervention will be a success when the client’s reasons for not doing drugs or alcohol outweigh 
their desire t o use.  In other words, we want to mitigate a defendant’s desperate desire to escape reality, not just by 
force and fear, but by making their reality better.  
  
The drug problem facing Maine and Aroostook County is multi -faceted and complicated; and it req uires a 
broad, community -based solution.  LD1596 and the creation of a Drug Court in Aroostook County will be an integral 
part of that solutio n. 
 
Thank you for your time and your consideration of LD1596.  I apologize that I am unable to attend today’s 
public hearing, but if you would like to hear from me more, I will endeavor to be available to you at the time of the 
work sessions for this Bill.  
 
Be Well and Stay Safe,  
 
 
 
Todd R. Colli ns 
District Attorney, Aroostook County  
 
