_,..'i'@» 
we r Q 
1..."‘ :."=1>>;§- 
3" 
ii 
~:~»-wt 
~ - ‘V ";=2‘ 1).. 
§_;§;/l 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 1596 
An Act to Facilitate the Creation of an Aroostook County Drug Treatment Court 
Presented to the joint Standing Committee on judiciary 
Tuesday April 25, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Troy Jackson. i serve as President of the Maine Senate and 
proudly represent Aroostook County in the Legislature. lam here today to present LD 1596, ”An 
Act to Facilitate the Creation of an Aroostook County Drug Treatment Court." 
At this point, there is almost no corner of the state that has not been impacted by the opioid 
crisis. it has devastated families and communities in both rural and non~rural parts of the state, 
and landed many folks in our criminal justice system. l\/laine Treatment and Recovery Courts are 
designed as options for individuals whose interaction with the criminal justice system is largely 
due to substance use disorder. 
Maine currently offers treatment and recovery courts in Androscoggin, Cumberland, Hancock, 
Penobscot, Washington, and York counties. The legislation before you would lay the foundation 
for the establishment of a treatment and recovery court in Aroostook County. It seeks to ensure 
that Aroostook County residents with substance abuse disorder have the option to participate 
in this type of program when dealing with the criminal justice system. 
In order to participate in a treatment and recovery court program, individuals are required to 
live in the county in which the court sits. lf a participant does not live in one of the six counties, 
they must have reliable transportation to meet with a case manager and the required Court 
Team. You do not have to have a map of the state of Maine to understand how far away any of 
the present Treatment and Recovery Courts are located from Aroostook County towns. The 
closest treatment is in Calais. Calais is 189 miles away from Fort Kent; 132 miles from Presque 
lsle; 145 miles from Caribou; and 91 miles from Houlton. 
S/ate House (207) 287-1500 * Cell (207) 436»0763 * Fax (207) 287-5862 * T0lIFree 1-800-423~6900 * TTY 711 
Seiialonlacksonl@gmail.c0m * Web Sire: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
The establishment of one Assistant District Attorney position is critical in getting this type of 
court up and running. These are specialty dockets for eligible persons whose involvement in the 
criminal justice system is predicated on the use of drugs and/or alcohol. 
The participants have serious substance abuse disorders and must enter a plea agreement and 
accept responsibility for their conduct. The program is intensive. lt requires comprehensive 
treatment and supervision. There is strict accountability and sanctions for missteps. Major 
requirements of this program are weekly meetings, drug testing, curfews, and education. The 
treatment and recovery team that manages the day-to-day operations of the court is multi- 
disciplinary and requires a prosecutor. For a treatment and recovery court to be successful, it 
needs a dedicated, full-time prosecutor. LD 1596 will make this a reality for Aroostook County. 
If we are serious about combating the opioid epidemic and helping Mainers get their lives back 
on track, we need to use every tool available. Establishing a treatment and recovery court in 
Aroostook County is one important tool. 
Thank you for your time today. l hope you will join me in supporting this proposal. l'd be happy 
to answer any questions I can.
