Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the HHS Committee:  
I represent no entity or agency other than myself and would like to testify in support of both LD73  and 
LD1248 . 
1.) We need bottled water labeling, as the State certainly won’t help the public know the source and 
quality of bottling water extracted. The State already conceals commercial large scale bottled 
water extraction wellhead s/source s from the public , and hides many of its actions and the bottlers 
actions from FOAA. And we can’t fix this until the backdoor conflict within our own state 
government is closed that allow s bottlers to control water rulemaking and decisions from inside 
powerful state agencies like the MDWP and BEP ; and  
2.) We need initial and subsequent monitoring, testing, treatment, and reporting regulations, a s well 
as sales restrictions surrounding  persistent chemicals such as the PFAS six involving bottled water 
here in Maine , largely again because of the lack of State control and lack of transparency  noted 
above . 
Maine has dropped the ball on respect for , and protection of , its water for the last 30+ years, at our own 
peril.  
We are one of only a handful of states in the nation who has not kept up.  
 

Our conflict of interest laws allow water bottle rs to infiltrate powerful boards and commissions within the 
state to influence their profit and risk models, and to lobby for legislation favorable to the mother 
corporation and market speculators. Our conflict of interest laws regarding MDWP and BEP appointments 
still violate federal law  (Section 402 of the Federal Pollution Control Act, 33 USC, Sec. 1342 ), and thankfully after 
years  of the public trying to educate legislators, Sen . Rick Bennett , Rep. Gramlich , and others are studying 
the issue and  stepping forward  to correct this wrong.  
These conflicts of interest have also brought about the full concealment of water bottling export  activities  
from public view /FOAA  (See MRSA 35 -A Section 6109 -B subsections 5.A.1 and 5.B implemented in 2009 ), fully 
obscuring the be haviors of state agencies, departments, commissions, public water utilities , and water 
bottlers .  
For an overview of the egregious behaviors of this industry  here in Maine , please review my testimony for 
LD11 11, link below :  
https://legislature.maine.gov/backend/app/services/getDocument.aspx?doctype=test&documentId=10014
346 
A major water bottler who controls the entire market in this state  knew for years of PFAS contamination 
throughout th is state, including Fryeburg where they pump  for profit , well before the PFAS story broke out 
at a farm in Arundel Maine , and well before PFAS hit the media news cycle on contamination in Fryeburg, 
Maine drinking water  where bottling water is extracted under a n absurd  40+ year contract . 
The reason I know this because two high -level bottling market operatives were seated on the MDWP and 
BEP between  2017 -2019 , respectively, MDWP public agendas and min utes reflect knowledge and 
discussion of PFAS  during that period , and state law requires significant cooperation and interface between 
the MDWP and BEP regarding protecting and properly managing our water here in Maine.   There is a lso a  
landfill in Hollis that has not  completed post -closure obligations ( Maine DEP ID#27761), a landfill that exists 
roughly 1000 feet from where bottling water is extracted for bottling and export  in one of the largest plants 
in the United States , and where they recently applied to increase withdrawa l by an additional 30 million 
gallons . What are the PFAS results of this landfill  and the water being pulled just a 1000  feet or so away ? 
If PFAS is encountered and filtered out by a major water bottler here in Maine, in Hollis, or Fryeburg, or any 
of the other major water bottling extraction sites, where is the screened and  filtered spoil material 
distributed? Is it put back onto the ground at the wellhead site? Is it at the processing plant? How close to 
our waterbodies and streams has it been spread?  
How would the public even begin to know where they are, given the State conceals bo ttling extraction site 
wellhead locations from the public?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
What was interesting was that on April 10, 20 19, of the twenty -nine (29) ‘’experts’’ that gave testimony 
against LD1474  (An Act to Ensure Water Equity and Accountability for the People of the State – 129th 
Legislature)  and instead glorif ied our high -quality  and plentiful water coupled with  antiquated and shoddy 
water oversight laws  they professed  were ‘’all -encompassing’’ , NONE  of them mentioned the current 
efforts to test PFAS in Maine’s drinking water or the results of the physical testing performed over the prior 
two (2) years . 
Eight (8) of these ‘’experts’’ included: Farmington Water District ( location of PFAS concern ), Presque Isle 
Utilities District ( location of PFAS concern ), Maine Rural Water Association, Maine Water company, Maine 
Water ‘’Environmental’’ , Association, Maine Water Utilities Association, and Southern Maine Regional 
Water Council, and two (2) Nestle Waters, N.A. representatives ( one of which is a Water Resource Manager 

for Nestle Water NA with a long -standing multi -decade water contract in Fryeburg Maine, also an area of 
PFAS concern, and who is also a MDWP Commissioner for the State of Maine where the PFAS concerns are 
being discussed ).  
 
It was odd ( and frankly  disturbing ) that these eight (8) who testified , omit ted PFAS contamination in their 
testimonies, given there are very recent PFAS concerns currently published regarding Fryeburg , Presque 
Isle, Farmington,  York, Trenton, Stonington, Belfast ( a current large -scale aquaculture speculation 
interest ), Oxford, Princeton, Limington, Caribou, Houlton, and Carmel.  
What is notable is that the only testimonies  left out of  the April 17, 2019 OPLA  summary report on LD1474 
and associated water bills were from Nestle Wate rs, N.A. ( testimonies were submitted under the label 
acquired from Perrier, who purchased a bankrupt 6 -employee company in the 1980’s called Poland Spring ). 
It is Nestle Waters, N.A. who cut  the paychecks checks for employees, ( such as one of Maine’s Drinking 
Water Program Commissioners and one of Maine’s Board of Environmental Protection members  during that 
period ) not Poland Spring.  
 
The fact that our State government  and the MDWP ( with a high -level Nestle, N.A./Poland Spring Water 
Resource Manager at the helm , and another sitting on the BEP  at that time ) knew of PFAS in Fryeburg and 
said nothing was disturbing. What else are we not being told about the other large -scale extraction sites?  
 
For the last six (6) years, our state  ‘’experts  and advisors ’’ and the largest contr olling interest in the bottling 
water market here in Maine have  been steadfast and consistent in  vehemently f ighting  against any and all 
legislation that  seeks to  improve transparency, defen ds of home rule authority, limits unreasonable 
contract lengths, remov es conflicts of interests, nullifi es absolute dominion due to waste, neglect, and 
abuse  by large -scale bottlers and aquaculture speculators , restores economic and social equality, improves 
accountability and democracy regarding our water , or anything water stewardship that is  in the long -term 
best interests of all Mainers.  
 
Even here in the 131st, when LD1111 was introduced to limit contracts and reaffirm that political 
subdivisions have Home Rule Authority ( water utilities  are not municipalities, although they may feel they 
are), the testimony in opposition from water district s was that honoring Home Rule was hurting  Home Rule 
by prevent ing water utilities from doing whatever they want , with whoever they want, however they want, 
without any oversight or transparency , and being able to caus e negative impacts to regions of Maine 
without accountability .  
Maybe if the se public utility trustee s spent  less tim e in Augusta fighting against transpar ency, 
accountability, and democracy , they  would have more time to properly manage  their  own  infrastructure  
and recover decades of depreciation  neglect . 
Blue Triton , Poland Spring, Nestle N.A., whoever they are, had operatives in the MDWP and BEP who knew 
of PFAS contamination years before it hit the news cycle  and did nothing.  
A number of public wa ter district operatives in the State of Maine knew of PFAS contamination years 
before it hit the news cycle and did nothing.  
We’ve now got a water bottler that controls roughly 9 6% of the  market here in the State of Maine wh o is 
also desperate to recover f rom recent losses and to restore promised profit margins to its shareholders of 
water futures (see below ): 
 
“[A] big buy out fac ing fi nancial pres sure is One Rock Cap ital Part ners LLC and Metropou los & Co.’s $4.3 bil lion 
purchase in 2021 of  Blue Triton Brands, which owns Poland Spring wa ter and other bev erage mak ers. The com pany 
doesn’t have in terest-rate hedges to mit igate the im pact of ris ing rates on its $2.4 bil lion buy out loan, ac cording to a 
report by Moody’s, which down graded Blu eTriton to a low -junk rat ing on March 27. “ (April 10, 2023 – WSJ article)  
When large corporations get a low -junk rating they take calculated risks . What will this mean for Mainers , 
do you think they will make sound decisions in our best interest regarding P FAS? Do you think our water 
utilities will make sound decisions based on good faith either? Right now, neither  of them have to legally do 
anything.   
Maybe t he bottler who controls 96% the market  in Maine  and has our state government in  complete  
paralysis will  send its lapdog public utilit ies to speak to you on its behalf . Maybe  the water district  who has 
the cheapest and most embarrassing large -scale extraction rate fee in all of Maine , can ’t manage its 
infrastructure , and  who only needs a few  trinkets in return to be a shill  will continue to come to Augusta 
and rail against democracy an d transparency . ‘’It will make things hard for us’’, ‘’ They (insert monopolist)  do 
so much for helpless us’’, ‘’ We have so much clean water it’s insane, no one will ever know’’, 
‘’Accountability, transparency, and quality  cause burden s and  stress  on trustees’’,  ‘’This is unfair’’, ‘’  
transparency and quality assurance hurts Home Rule’’ …….who knows .  
Water is one of the most precious things on Earth, yet Maine has been poisoning it and giving  it away.   
Maybe we st op doing that.  
Recommendations:  
- It is necessary to make a distinction that initial PFAS testing is to be at  the source/wellhead, not at 
end-ofline processing of from the bottle to be sold.  Subsequent testing can confirm water quality 
from the product in the bottle after remediation , 
- That a chain of custod y from cradle to grave for persistent chemical spoils encountered in water 
extraction  for bottlin g be articulated ; and  
- LD73 and LD1248 are similar in many regards but have important differences  that are needed  in a 
single proposal  (eg. Labeling in LD1248, Subsequent Testing in LD73 ).  
- I have provided a proposed amendment language to merge the two bills (below) for the committee 
to evaluate .  
I strongly urge the committee to : 
A.) Combine  the two bills to assure that  initial and subsequent testing from LD73  and the labeling 
requirements from LD1248 are included in the final prod uct,  
B.) Do not give th is task  to conflicted  or compromised  ‘’water experts , water advisors, or water 
lobbyists’’ to do the work  for the legislature; and  
C.) Then vote  OUGHT TO PASS for the merged bill proposal .  
Thank you.  
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA c. 601, sub-c. 9 is enacted to read:  
SUBCHAPTER 9  
BOTTLED WATER  
§2660 -AA.  Definitions  
As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have 
the following meanings.  
1.  Bottler.  "Bottler" means a person that extracts water i n this State to be sold as bottled 
water.  
2.  Community water system.  "Community water system" has the same meaning as in 
section 2660 -B, subsection 2.  
3.  Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances or PFAS.  "Perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substan ces" or "PFAS" means a perfluoroalkyl substance or polyfluoroalkyl 
substance that is detectable in drinking water using standard laboratory methods established 
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, including regulated PFAS 
contaminants.  
4.  Regulated PFAS contaminants.  "Regulated PFAS contaminants" means 
perfluorooctanoic acid, perfluorooctane sulfonic acid, perfluorohexane sulfonic acid, 
perfluorononanoic acid and perfluoroheptanoic acid.  
§2660 -BB.  Bottled water monitoring, testing , reporting , treatment , and sale 
requirements  
A bottler shall comply with the provisions of this section.  
1.  Initial testing and m onitoring.   A bottler shall conduct initial testing and monitoring  for 
the level of PFAS applicable to a community water system detectable using standard 
laboratory methods established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency in effect 
at the time of sampling. A bottler shall conduct testing and monitoring  under this subsection for 
all regulated P FAS contaminants and additional PFAS included in the list of analytes in the 
standard laboratory methods established by the United States Environmental Protection 
Agency applicable to community water systems in effect at the time of sampling.  
2.  Subsequent testing and monitoring.  After completion of initial monitoring under 
subsection 1, a bottler   shall conduct continued testing and monitoring for the presence of 
regulated PFAS contaminants in water extracted for bottled water  by the bottler according to 
this subsection.  
A.  If initial monitoring under subsection 1 detects the presence of any regulated PFAS 
contaminants individually or in combination at or above the standard applicable to a 
community water system, the bottler shall conduct con tinued quarterly monitoring until 
regulated PFAS contaminants are mitigated as described in subsection 4.  
B. If initial monitoring under subsection 1 detects the presence of any regulated PFAS 
contaminants at or above each analyte's lowest concentration minimum reporting level as 
specified in the standard laboratory methods established by the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency applicable to community water systems in effect at the 
time of sampling, either individually or in combination with other detected regulated PFAS 
contaminants, the bottler shall conduct continued monitoring annually.  
3.  Reporting.  A bottler shall report the results of testing and monitoring  required by this 
section to the department in the same manner as a community water system is required to 
report under department rule.   
3.  Sale  and 4.  Treatment  of Water  containing regulated PFAS contaminants ; notice.  
A person may not sell bottled water in this State that contains a regulated PFAS contaminants 
individually or in combination at or above  contaminant in an amount that exceeds  the standard 
for regulated PFAS contaminants applicable to a community water syst em, either under a 
standard set by this State or a federal standard, whichever requires a lower level of 
contaminant. If monitoring results under subsection 1 or 2 confirm the presence of any 
regulated PFAS contaminants individually or in combination at or  above the standard for 
regulated PFAS contaminants applicable to a community water system, the department shall : 
A.  Direct the bottler to implement treatment or other remedies to reduce the combined 
levels of regulated PFAS contaminants in the bottled wa ter below the applicable standard; 
and 
B.  Direct the bottler to issue a notice by publication on the bottler's publicly accessible 
website to inform the bottler's customers of the detected PFAS concentration and potential 
risk to public health until the treatment under paragraph A is completed.  
4.  Labeling.  A bottler or a person who sells bottled water in this State shall indicate o n the 
label of bottled water:  
A.  The source of the water in the bottle;  
B.   The date the water was tested for PFAS contaminants; and  
C.  The level of PFAS contaminants present in the water or a statement that the water is 
free from PFAS contaminants, as applicable.  
5.  Enforcement.  The department may enforce the requirements of this section in the 
same manner as for a violation of subchapter 2. A bottler  or a person who sells bottled water  
may appeal the acts or decisions of the department under this sec tion in the same manner as 
described in subchapter 2 --A. 
6.  Rules.  The department shall adopt rules to implement this section. Rules adopted 
under this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 
2--A. 
Sec. 2.   Rules .  The Department of Health and Human Services shall adopt rules as 
required by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 22, section 2660 -BB not later than 30 days after 
the date of adoption of rules required under Resolve 2021, chapter 82.  
Sec. 3.  Complian ce.  A person that extracts  water or a person who sells bottled  water in 
this State to be sold as bottled water is not required to comply with the provisions of the Maine 
Revised Statutes, Title 22, section 2660-BB until the Department of Health and Human 
Services has adopted rules as required under Resolve  2021, chapter 82 and Title 22, section 
2660 -BB.  
SUMMARY  
This bill  requires persons that extract water in this State to be sold as bottled water to 
conduct testing and monitoring  for perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances , or PFAS, in 
the bottled water. The bill prohibits the sale of bottled water that contains a PFAS contaminant 
in an  amount that exceeds state or federal standards. If the monitoring detect s the presence of 
perfluorooctanoic acid, perfluorooctane sulfonic acid, perfluorohexane sulfonic acid, 
perfluorononanoic acid or perfluoroheptanoic acid at a level at or above  the standard  
applicable to community water systems , the person is required to conduct additional 
monitoring.  The bill also imposes reporting , treatment and notice  requirements on persons that 
extract water in this State to be sold as bottled water  and labeling r equirements on bottled 
water sold in this State . 
 
