                                                                                                 
 
 
Comments on LD 1248 and LD 73   
  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
of the  
Maine State Legislature   
 
 
International Bottled Water Association  
and 
Northeast Bottled Water Associatio n 
 
 
Chair s Baldacci and Meyer , and members of the  Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services , the International Bottled Water Association (IBWA)1 and the Northeast Bottled Water 
Association (NEB WA) 2 appreciate this opportunity to provide comments on LD 1248 and LD 73 , which 
impose  per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances ( PFAS ) testing  and labeling  requirements for  bottled water in 
the state.   
 
IBWA and NEBWA are opposed to any state laws or regulations  for bottled water that are different from 
what is required by the United States Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ). The current FDA regulations 
protect the public health of Maine citizens and permit bottled wate r companies to sell their products in an 
efficient and cost -effective manner in interstate commerce.   
 
Dissimilar state labeling laws and regulations would create a patchwork of requirements that would 
interfere with interstate commerce. It would be very d ifficult, if not impossible, to make sure that products 
labeled to comply with the law of one state are not sold in another state with a different requi rement. It 
would also make it difficult for companies to provide needed bottled water products during em ergencies or 
natural disasters in a state that has labeling regulations that are different from those required by FDA.  
 
1 The International Bottled Water Association is the trade association representing all segments of the bottled water industry,  
including spring, artesian, mineral, sparkling, well, groundwater and purified bottled waters. IBWA’s mission is to serve the  
mem bers and the public, by championing bottled water as an important choice for healthy hydration and lifestyle, and 
promoting an environmentally responsible and sustainable industry. IBWA represents bottled water bottlers, distributors and 
suppliers througho ut the United States, including several small, medium and large size companies doing business in Maine . 
 
2 The Northeast Bottled Water Association is a non -profit trade association whose members are connected with the bottled 
water industry in some way. Me mber companies include those engaged in the bottling, packaging, delivery or distribution of 
bottled water as well as those engaged in equipment, supplies and services for the industry. Geographically, NEBWA members 
are from throughout the Northeast - New England, New York and New Jersey. NEBWA members are kept updated on the state 
legislatures, learn industry details through seminars taught by trained educators in the field, meet with others who may be a ble 
to offer solutions to business problems and stay in contact with present and potential customers.  

IBWA and NEBWA Comments on  LD 1248 and LD 73  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
April 27, 2023  
Page 2 
 
In November of 2019, IBWA sent a letter to FDA asking them to establish a standard of quality (SOQ) for 
PFAS in bottled water. FDA respon ded to IBWA’s request stating that “establishing an SOQ for PFAS in 
bottled water at this time would not significantly enhance FDA’s mission of public health protection.”  This 
was based upon FDA’s testing and analysis of 30 different bottled water products  with none of them 
showing any detectable levels of PFAS.  
 
FDA ’s response to IBWA’s request went on to detail their views on state laws or regulations that are 
different from FDA requirements. Citing section 403A(a) of the Federal Food, Drug , and Cosmetic Act , 
FDA noted that :  
 
“no State or political subdivision of a State may directly or indirectly establish under any authority 
or continue in effect as to a ny food in interstate commerce – (1) Any requirement for a food which 
is the subject of a standard of identity established under Section 401 that is not identical to such 
standard of identity of that is not identical to the requirement of section 403(g)… FDA has 
interpreted this provision to apply to standards of quality (21 CFR 10 0.1(c)(4)).”  
 
In 2003, the Maine legislature enact ed a law that require d source labeling for bottled water  products . A 
lawsuit concerning th is statute was subsequently filed against Maine ’s Attorney General , noting that 
federal law prohibits states from enacting food labeling requirements that are different from FDA  
regulations. FDA wrote to  Maine’s Att orney General on September 3, 2003 , informing h im that Maine’s 
law was preempted by federal law. FDA ’s letter stated:  
“Many bottled water  products sold in the United States are manufactured  and packaged in one 
location, for sale in multiple States. Thus , a uniform national standard is needed to permit 
manufacturers to produce and apply the same label, and package their product for shipment,  
without regard to the State to which it will be shipped. Moreover, a uniform  national standard 
facilitates broader consumer understanding by providing one simple, easy -to-read label for 
purposes of comparison, and prevents potential deception that could be caused by various an d 
conflicting state requirements .” 
 
In October 2003, Maine’s Attorney General signed a Consent Order agree ing not to enforce the Maine 
source labeling law  for bottled water . 
 
FDA previously conducted a study that examined the best methods of  providing bottled water information 
to consumers. The study determined that including a long and detailed list of specific substances found in 
bottled water on the product labeling was not feasible because : 
 
“[s]uch information would be excessive in limit ed label space, particularly on the small, single 
serving bottles. In addition, information that requires frequent changes due to changing test results 
may result in a product label that is no longer accurate, which may result in a misbranded product. 
Costs of frequent label changes that are necessary to ensure accurate information on the contents 
of a bottled water product, due to frequently changing information, may present an economic 
hardship to companies.”   
 
IBWA  members  have  always  been  committed  to providing  the highest  quality  bottled  water  products  to 
consumers.  When  PFAS  started  becoming  a more  prevalent  issue  in tap water,  IBWA  began  requir ing its 
members  to test for PFAS  in all the bottled  water  products  they sell. In addition,  IBWA  established  the 
IBWA and NEBWA Comments on  LD 1248 and LD 73  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
April 27, 2023  
Page 3 
 
following  Standard  of Quality  for PFAS  in member  company  bottled  water  products:  5 parts per trillion  
(ppt)  for one PFAS  substance  and 10 ppt for more  than one PFAS  substance.  
As mandated by federal law, FDA’s bottled water standards and treatment requirements must be no less 
stringent and no less protective of the public health than Environmental Protection Agency ’s (EPA) 
regulations for public drinking water. Once EPA issues a  regulation regarding tap water, FDA has 180 days 
to either issue a corresponding regulation for bottled water or publish a rationale for why the EPA’s 
regulation is not applicable to bottled water. If FDA does not do either within the prescribed time fram e, 
then the EPA regulation automatically becomes applicable to bottled water by operation of law. Thus, the 
statute assures parity in the regulation of bottled water and tap water, either through required FDA action 
or, in the absence of such action, by op eration of law.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments in opposition  to LD 1249 and LD 73 , and please do not 
hesitate to contact me with any related concerns or questions.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
James P. Toner, Jr.  
Director of Government Relations  
Interna tional Bottled Water Association  
 
