 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
900 LONG RIDGE ROAD, BLDG 2 STAMFORD, CT 06902- 1138 
109 POLAND SPRING DRIVE, POLAND, ME 04274  
TESTIMONY SUBMITTED TO THE  
 JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES  
April 2 8, 2023 
 
In Support , LD 73 An Act to Require Bottled Water Companies to Monitor for Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances  
 
In Opposition to LD 1248, An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water  
 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and honorable members of the Health and Human 
Servi ces Committee,  
Thank you for your service to the pe ople of Maine. My name is Liz Donohue , and I am the Director of 
Government Relations at  BlueTriton Brands , owner of Maine’s iconic Poland Spring® brand. We take 
tremendous pride in the Poland Spring®  brand, the hard work of our 900 Maine employees at  our H ollis, 
Kingfield and Poland facilities , and in our springs. We  sustainably source our water and c onserve 6000 acres of 
land surrounding our 10 spring sites . In 2022 we donated 1 million bottles of water and $1 million to community 
and educational organizations in Maine.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 73 and in opposition to LD 1248 . We applaud the Maine State 
Legislature for your leadership on  the issue of PFAS. Like you, we at Poland Spring®  take the issue of PFAS very 
seriously.  
Bottled water is highly regulated as a food product and we support that. The U.S. Food  and Drug 
Administration ’s (FDA)  regulations,  along  with  the federal Safe  Drinking  Water  Act, state regulations  and 
industry  standards,  offer  consumers  assurance  that the bottled  water  they  purchase  is stringently  regulated,  
tested  and of the highest  quality.   
In addition to ensuri ng compliance with federal standards, Poland Spring ® takes great care in the purity of its 
bottled water. For these reasons, Poland Spring ® has and will continue to test regularly for PFAS and other 
impurities. Since testing  for PFAS  became commercially available years ago , Poland Spring ® has tested its bottled 
water products  and put the results online  for the public’s review . Poland Spring follows the stringent industry 
standard set by the International Bottled Water Association (IBW A) for all 18 PFAS compounds detected under 
EPA method 537.1  for bottled water products. Additionally, EPA has recently announced a stricter standard – 4 
parts per trillion (ppt) which we support and will continue to meet. We anticipate FDA will also adopt  this 
standard and we hope states will do the same to ensure uniformity across the country.  
For more information about the purity of Poland Spring’s bottled water product, see our annual  Bottled W ater 
Quality Reports , which  are publicly available online . These reports include information on a number of potential 
minerals  or contaminants that may be found in water and provides any detected levels of those impurities. You 
will see that our bottled water products meet, if not exceed,  required  state and federal standards – we will 
continue to proudly maintain this high level of quality.   
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
900 LONG RIDGE ROAD, BLDG 2 STAMFORD, CT 06902- 1138 
109 POLAND SPRING DRIVE, POLAND, ME 04274  
While we do not believe LD 73 is necessary because federal and industry standards already ensure strict quality 
for finished bottled water products,  we do not oppose  the testing and reporting provisions contained in the bill 
and ask for some simple  clarifying language in the legislation.  
LD 1248 contains provisions which are both preempted by federal law and unworkable as a matter of 
practicality. As noted in other  testimony  today , the FDA has jurisdiction over product labels to ensure 
harmonization of information across the nation. T he information on our labels is standardized  - spring sources 
are included on the label as well as  “traceability .” This means that each bottle includes a p roduction date, a 
manufactu ring plant  code, production line number , the time of p roduction and a best buy date.  Given the 
existing FDA requirements and transparency,  we believe the labeling provisions of LD 1248 are an unnecessary 
overreach.  
BlueTriton Brands, including the Poland Spring® team, goes to great lengths and takes great care to provide safe, 
high -quality bottled water products .  We will continue to work t o ensure the quality and safety of our bottled 
water products that our consumers have trusted for over 175 years.  We look forward to continuing to be an 
important part of the fabric of Maine.  
Thank you.  
Liz Donohue  
Director, Government Relations  
BlueTriton Brands and Poland S pring  
