 
April 28 , 2023  
Testimony of Rep. Lori K. Gramlich  presenting  
LD 1248, An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and my distinguished colleagues on the 
Committee of Health and Human Services. My name is Lori G ramlich, and I represent House 
District 131, the lovely seaside community of Old Orchard Beach. I am here today to present LD 
1248, An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water.  
 
This bill requires persons that extract water in this State to be sold as bot tled water to conduct 
testing for perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances, or PFAS, in the bottled water. It 
further prohibits the sale of bottled water that contains a PFAS contaminant in an amount that 
exceeds state or federal standards. Finally, t his bill also imposes reporting requirements on 
persons that extract water in this State to be sold as bottled water and labeling requirements on 
bottled water sold in this State.  
 
I wanted to provide you with some background on how I came to submit this le gislation, and 
why it is important.  
 
Last session, I proposed legislation to the Taxation Committee regarding water extraction in 
Maine. This legislation was amended to a resolve, which was ultimately passed with the 130th 
Legislature establishing the Commi ssion To Examine the Role of Water as a Resource in the 
State of Maine, of which I was appointed House Chair.   
 
This commission was an 18 -member body composed of stakeholders representing the interests of 
municipal water utilities, the interests of business es that use water in manufacturing or the 
provision of items or services for sale, Department of Health and Human Services, Maine Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Environmental Health, Drinking Water Program, 
members of the public and  others.  
  
Lori K. Gramlich  
154 Temple Ave.  
Old Orchard Beach, ME  04064 
 Phone: (207) 232-1067  
lori.gramlich @legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: Maine Relay 711  
 

This resolve directed the commission to study the role of water resources in the State and the 
nature and extent of infrastructure involved in the use and delivery of water resources, including 
but not limited to:  
 
 The extent of water resources available in the State;  
 Legal principles regarding the ownership of water resources in the State;  
 The extent to which water resources will be needed in the State and nation in the future 
for household, government, business, co mmercial and other purposes; and,   
 Relevant to LD 1248, the quality of available water resources and the need for measures 
to protect water quality.  
 
Based on the information collected by the commission and following discussion and deliberation 
by commissio n members, the commission developed a series of recommendations, including the 
recommendation that the Legislature should consider the enactment of measures that would 
require testing and reporting on the levels of PFAS contaminants in water extracted and used for 
commercial bottling purposes. You can access the full report here: 
https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9405  
 
I am sure that members of the committee are familiar with PFAS. These “ forever chemicals,” 
called such due to the fact that they simply do not break down, have contaminated our 
environment and continue to threaten our public health. PFAS exposure has been linked to 
cancer, childhood developmental delays, compromised immune sy stem and adverse impacts to a 
woman’s ability to get pregnant.  
 
As we all have heard, PFAS have contaminated water and soil across our state, harming our 
environment, compromising farmland and, importantly, contaminating our drinking water. Due 
to the work of Governor Mills with her swift response to addressing PFAS in our soil and 
groundwater through establishing a commission to study PFAS, as well as the work of the 
Legislat ure both in the 129th  and 130th, Maine has become a leader in addressing toxins in  our 
environment.   
 
To that end, and as I am sure you all on this committee are aware, Maine currently has a 
maximum contaminant level for six PFAS chemicals in drinking water of 20 parts per trillion for 
any combination of those six PFAS. There are thousan ds of PFAS chemicals; however, currently 
we can only test for about 30 different PFAS compounds, all of which have adverse 
environmental and public health implications. The more we learn about these compounds, the 
more we find out how dangerous they are to  human health. All public water systems are now 
required to test for PFAS and remediate if their systems test above this  standard  of 20 parts per 
trillion. Let me repeat that: All public water systems are required to test for PFAS.   
 
And recently, the US E nvironmental Protection Agency has released draft drinking water 
standards for six PFAS, which are much stricter than Maine’s standards. It is evident that, while 
we have made great strides, both in Maine and now nationally, we still have much to do to 
ensure that we all have safe, clean, accessible drinking water. Water - the one thing on this planet 
that we literally cannot live without.  
 
Our public water systems are working to protect Mainers from PFAS exposure. Those that 
extract water from our state and  sell it should be doing the same. This becomes even more 
relevant when we consider that over 50% of Mainers get their drinking water from residential 
wells. What happens if their wells become compromised, or if a school district has deemed that 
their drin king water is unsuitable for consumption due to toxins and contaminants? Most likely, 
people will turn to bottled water. The public has a right to know the bottled water they are either 
choosing or need to consume is free from the harmful chemicals - free from PFAS.    
 
LD 1247 is a simple solution in helping to ensure that Mainers are at least informed that the 
water they consume is free of toxic chemicals and safe to drink. I urge you to unanimously pass 
LD 1247. Thank you for your consideration.   
 
