 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 28, 2023  
 
Senator  Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1248, An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members of the  Joint Standing Committee  on 
Health and Human Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1248  An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled 
Water . The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  supports this bill  and 
offers the following information for your consideration . 
 
This bill requires persons that extract water in this State to be sold as bottled water to conduct 
testing for perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances, or PFAS, in the bottled water. The bill 
prohibits the sale of bottled water that contains a PFAS contaminant  in an amount that exceeds 
state or federal standards. The bill also imposes reporting requirements on persons that extract 
water in this State to be sold as bottled water and labeling requirements on bottled water sold in 
this State.  
 
The Department of H ealth and Human Services, Maine Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention (Maine CDC) is in favor of requiring water bottlers to test for PFAS, and intends to 
incorporate this requirement into future rulemaking, required to be in place by June 2024 
(Resolv e 2021, c. 82). The following comments are offered for your consideration.  
 
This proposed bill is very similar to LD 73 , An Act to Require Bottled Water Companies to 
Monitor for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances , introduced in this session by S enator 
Bennett. Similar to LD 73, the definition of “Regulated PFAS contaminants” in LD 1248 lists 
five PFAS compounds but does not include perfluorodecanoic acid, one of the six regulated 
PFAS contaminants under current Maine law. The Committee is asked t o consider adding this 
compound to the definition for consistency.  
 
As written, the labeling requirements of LD 1248 present implementation challenges since some 
bottling companies use multiple source waters, and the most recent testing date would change 
frequently. It may be just as informative and more practical to provide a link or QR code to a 
webpage with test results on the labels.  
 
 
 Additionally, LD 1248 lacks a deadline for the initial monitoring and a required future 
monitoring frequency. However, in light of the EPA’s recent announcement of proposed 
drinking water standards for PFAS, Maine CDC believes that adoption of the federal law, when 
enacted, may represent the most protective regulatory approach for Maine. The Maine CDC 
therefore recommends that bottled water suppliers follow the same regulatory requirements as 
public water suppliers, once that regulatory approach, which may include adoption of federal 
laws rather than finalizing separate State standards, has been determined.  
 
In summary, th e Maine CDC supports the provisions of LD 1248 with the recommendation to 
include one additional PFAS compound to the required testing parameters . The Committee may 
consider the future consolidation of these requirements into PFAS regulations that will app ly to 
all public water systems.   
 
Additionally, the Maine CDC respectfully request the Committee consider the challenges to 
implementing labeling requirements outlined in the bill , if enacted as written, and to note that the 
language is unclear as to whether these provisions extend to bottlers [or ‘persons’] extracting 
water from other states and selling the bottled water in Maine, which the agency opposes as it 
goes beyond the scope of the Maine Drinking Water Program and will require significant 
additional resources to regulate.   
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from the Committee, and I will be available to participate in the 
work session.  
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

