MAI BEVERAGE 
ASSOCIATION 
Testimony of Newell Augur 
Director 
Maine Beverage Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Opposition to LD 1248, An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water 
April 28, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Newell Augur. I am a resident of 
Yarmouth and a lawyer with Pierce Atwood. l represent the members of the Maine Beverage 
Association, your local distributors of a variety of refreshing products including diet soda, soda, 
jUlC6S, sports drinks and, increasingly, water. l am here to testify in opposition to LD 1248, An 
Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water. 
LD 1248 would require an entity extracting water in Maine that will be sold as bottled water to 
conduct testing for PFAS in the bottled water and would prohibit the sale if the amount of PFAS 
exceeds state or federal standards. LD 1248 would also require any entity selling bottled water 
in Maine to identify the source of the water in the bottle, the date the water was tested for PFAS 
contaminants, and the level of PFAS contaminants present in the water or, in the alternative, a 
statement that the water is free from PFAS contaminants. 
America’s beverage companies maintain the highest safety and quality standards for our 
beverages. We follow and fully comply with the protocols, regulations and testing standards 
established by federal and state governments — which are based on the best available science. 
ln 2022, EPA had issued a non-enforceable drinking water advisory recommending that the two 
main compounds of so-called long-chain PFAS — PFOA and PFOS - be limited to 70 parts per 
trillion (ppt). The new proposed rule recommends an enforceable maximum contaminant level
(MCL) of 4 ppt, far lower than the existing health advisory. The proposed limits are based on 
what can be detected with current testing techniques but remain above the non-enforceable 
health-based MCL goals of ‘O’ . An article in Consumer Reports in 2021 discussed tests done by 
a private lab that claimed to have tested various brands of bottled water, and found all had 
between 1 ppt and 5 ppt. 
ln the absence of a mandatory federal standard for PFAS, several states have moved fon/vard 
with regulations to limit their presence in drinking water and in food packaging. Our members 
support a minimum standard, but we believe it should be a nationwide standard rather than 
state by state. 
With respect to the labeling requirements, our members are governed by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), which regulates bottled water as a food product under the Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA). Under the FFDCA, state laws that require additional water source 
information on bottled water labels are preempted. ln issuing the regulations attendant to the 
FFDCA, the FDA found that: 
The brand name and the name of the manufacturer distinguish bottled waters as much as 
specific source labeling would... [The] labeling requirement provides consumers with the 
necessary information to contact the firm and obtain information (e.g., the name and 
location of the source, the well number, or the spring’s legal name) that is not provided on 
the label if they are interested. Therefore, FDA concludes that there is no basis on which 
to require that information concerning the specific source of bottled water appear on the 
label. 
FDA further stated that it interprets the underlying law to mean that “a state may not establish or 
continue in effect a standard of identity for a food...if the state standard is not identical to the 
federal standard. ” This includes state requirements for source labeling. 
Even if the labeling provisions proposed in this bill were not preempted by federal law, the 
requirement is unrealistic and would be incredibly expensive. It would require local distributors 
to print different labels for each filling location — because they are almost always from a different 
water source. This would be a Maine specific label and, as such, would create significant 
complexity and inefficiency for distributors. It would require our members to interrupt their 
production lines to change labels for the very small production runs done for Maine products. It 
would require a separate inventory for full goods and raw materials. lt would require updating 
the information on the label and seeking new label approvals each time additional testing is 
required. 
Beverage distributors are already required to meet specific federal labeling laws regarding the 
contents in the container. We are unaware as to how the additional testing information required 
by this bill would ever be able to fit on the label. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I'd be happy to answer any questions that you may 
have.
