Nickie Sekera
Fryeburg
LD 1248
Greetings Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and HHS Committee Members,
My name is Nickie Sekera and I am a resident of Fryeburg, ME. I am a cofounder of 
Community Water Justice and I recently had the privilege of being appointed by the 
state to serve on the State Commission to Study The Role of Water As A Resource in 
Maine, representing the public. I am testifying in support of LD 73 “An Act to 
Require Bottled Water Companies to Monitor for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances” and LD 1248 “An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water”.
With the signing of LD 129 on June 21, 2021 by Governor Janet Mills, all community
public water systems and non-transient, non-community schools and daycares are 
now required to test and report PFAS levels of drinking water to the state. This was a 
significant advancement in a step to protect public health and believe such measures 
should also include industrial sources for bottled water that is manufactured for public
consumption. 
I support a combination of these 2 bills for there to be a system of accountability and 
public health protection for the long term. Bottled water companies should not be 
exempt from reporting both drinking water and groundwater source contamination to 
the state. This data is important in order to be more effective in assessing the extent of
PFAS contamination and its response after identifying what sources may need 
remediation. Ongoing independent testing, monitoring, reporting and transparency 
between the bottled water industry and state agencies is in the interest of public 
health. 
Drinking water that is taken for private interests from a public resource held in 
common or shared should have site specific labeling in accordance to its municipal or 
community of origin in the interest of public health, accountability, and transparency 
to the consumer, as well as for potential recall purposes. 
The Fryeburg Water Company notified its ratepayers in July of 2022 that we've been 
drinking PFAS contaminated water at almost twice the maximum levels set for the 
State of Maine. This means, for the past 15 years I've been drinking contaminated 
water and feeding it to my child. This hurts and I sit with the pain that many of us are 
feeling as we learn more about the extent of our contaminated water sources and the 
health impacts it could have on our bodies. 
Poland Spring mines groundwater from a nearby borehole to the municipal well that 
is contaminated. They pull from the same source, the Wards Brook Aquifer.
The first document attached is a letter to the Fryeburg Water Company (FWC) from 
the state, that outlines public notification and resolution requirements pursuant to state
law. This system has been put on quarterly testing for 6 newly regulated "forever 
chemicals''. The Fryeburg Water Company is privately owned and has contracted with
Maine Water Company to manage their system. To date, neither entity has responded 
to registered mail sent by the Fryeburg Water District with inquiries of concern from 
ratepayers about our town's drinking water source. The lack of transparency that 
exists at the intersections of privately managed and owned municipal water systems 
and privately owned water extractors is cause for concern.
Attachment #2 & #3 is the notice that the FWC sent out to its ratepayers. (I am a 
renter and received no notice.)
Attachment #4 & #5 are the initial test results and the confirmation test results of 
PFAS contamination of FWC well #2.
Attachment #6 is the map of the wells in Fryeburg, where you can see the close 
proximity of well #1 (where Poland Spring extracts for their bottled water) and well 
#2.
Attachment #7 is an application for a Land Use Permit amendment submitted by 
Poland Spring for their Hollis bottling facility. Poland Spring was granted permission 
to spray wastewater from their plastic bottle manufacturing process onto fields 
adjacent to the facility where they also extract water from. Should this practice be 
reconsidered?
Here is BlueTriton's (Poland Spring's parent company) official response to media 
inquiries on the matter:
"Like the residents of Fryeburg and ratepayers of the Fryeburg Water Company, 
BlueTriton Brands, Inc. owner of the Poland Spring brand, has learned of the recent 
report that a public water well in Fryeburg, that is not used for Poland Spring product 
offerings, has elevated per-and poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) levels that exceed 
Maine’s drinking water standard for PFAS. The borehole used by Poland Spring in 
Fryeburg is not similarly impacted by PFAS."
"Poland Spring has for many years used standard filtration of its water before bottling 
that would also protect against any issue with PFAS.  We routinely test for PFAS and 
our bottled water products have no detectable level of PFAS. "BlueTriton Brands will 
continue to monitor and test for PFAS, just as the public would expect. Consumers 
can be confident that Poland Spring products meet all state and federal health, safety 
and quality standards."
The choice of words "similarly impacted" in the first paragraph draws interest. This 
implies that the well they take from does not have the same impacts of PFAS in their 
water, not that it is absent. Read the sentence again without the word "similarly" and 
it reads quite differently. 
Under current Maine law, Poland Spring /BlueTriton is not obligated to report to the 
state their test results from the sources they take from. The Maine CDC has asked 
them to share this information but to date, I've seen no record that they've received it.
I ask that this committee please pass LD 73 and LD 1248 to ensure that the public and
consumers alike are protected from potential harm, and from those that prioritize 
privatized profits over public health and transparency. 
Thank you for your time,
Nickie Sekera
Fryeburg, ME
April 28, 2023
*Apologies if the attachments get scrambled and out of order.  I find that sometimes 
they arrive in others' inboxes in a different order than they were added. Please see 
email with all attachments in your individual legislative inboxes.

