@ / /» 1» 
W’/ W ‘F AV 
349:’? >1 
Solutions foro 
Toxic-Free Tomorrow 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
In SUPPORT of LD 1248, “An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water" 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
April 28, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee. My name is Sarah Woodbury. l am the director of advocacy for Defend Our Health. 
Defend Our Health's mission is the make sure that everyone has equal access to safe food and 
drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic~free and climate friendly. l am here to 
testify in support of LD 1248, “An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water". 
This bill requires persons that extract water in this State to be sold as bottled water to test for 
PFAS, in the bottled water. The bill prohibits the sale of bottled water that contains a PFAS 
contaminant in an amount that exceeds state or federal standards. The bill also requires those 
that extract bottled water must report and label bottled water in this State. 
PFAS, the so-called “forever chemicals ” are toxic and do not belong in drinking water, whether 
that water comes from the tap or a bottle. They have been linked to interference with normal 
brain development in children, they can increase the risk of some cancers, may lowera 
woman’s chance of getting pregnant, and have been associated with liver problems and 
increased cholesterol levels. 
The Maine Department of Environmental Protection is in the process of testing all farmland and 
drinking water sources that may be contaminated due sludge spreading. There are currently 
over 380 wells contaminated by PFAS and that number will rise as testing continues. When the 
Department ﬁnds a contaminated drinking water well, they provide bottled water to those with 
the contaminated water. Bottled water companies are not required to test for PFAS. That means 
that those getting bottled water because of PFAS scontamination coud still be drinking 
contaminated water, they just wouldn’t know it. We should be sure that the alternative water 
sources we are providing them isn't contaminated. 
Maine currently has a maximum contaminant level for 6 PFAS in drinking water of 20 parts per 
trillion for any combination of those 6 PFAS. All public water systems are required to test for 
PFAS and remediate if the system tests above that standard. in addition, US Environmental 
Protection Agency has released draft drinking water standards for 6 PFAS which are much 
stricter than Maine's standards. Our public water systems are working to protect Mainers from 
PFAS exposure. Those that extract water from our state and sell it should be doing the same. 
They should not be able to sell water for consumption unless it has been tested for PFAS and 
they should be required to label their bottles so consumers know that the water they are drinking 
is safe. Therefore Defend urges the committee to vote unamiously “ought to pass" on LD 1248. 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 I (207) 699-5795 l info@defen<lourl1ealth.org l defendourhealthorg
