 
131st Legislature 
Senate of 
Maine  
Senate District 30 
 
    
Senator Stacy Brenner 
3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
(207) 287-1515 
Stacy.Brenner@legislature.maine.gov 
 
 
Fax: (207) 287-1585 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Website: www.mainesenate.org 
 Testimony of Senator Stacy Brenner supporting LD 1248, “An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled 
Water” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 28, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Distinguished Colleagues on the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Stacy Brenner. I represent Senate District 
30, which includes all of Gorham and most of Scarborough. I am here to speak in favor of LD 1248, 
“An Act to Ensure the Quality of Bottled Water.” 
 
We are facing a debilitating PFAS contamination crisis in this state. PFAS, or “forever chemicals,” 
leech into the ground from sludge and other substances, contaminating plants, animal life, and 
water. We are lucky to have access to clean water throughout the state, but PFAS threatens to 
degrade the quality of Maine’s ground and surface water. Ground water and natural springs from 
which bottled water companies extract their products are especially at risk of contamination. Yet, 
they are not required to test their water for PFAS before selling it nationwide to the public. Let me 
repeat that, we do not test bottled water for PFAS. It is our duty to hold bottled water companies 
accountable for the part they play in the climate crisis.  
 
Given the extent of the current crisis, testing should not be optional. The health of the general public 
is at risk. Our children, families, and friends could be unknowingly drinking PFAS-contaminated 
water. Forever chemicals pose significant health risks, including kidney cancer, reduced vaccine 
response, elevated cholesterol, reduced infant birthweight, and more. 
 
As a farmer, I empathize deeply with those affected by the PFAS crisis and understand its 
devastating effects. As a current Chair of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee, I 
have a thorough understanding of ways that we, as lawmakers, can address this issue through the 
Legislature. This bill is one of those ways. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions.  
 
