Chani Cochrane
Saco
LD 1170
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and the honorable members of the 
transportation committee,
My name is Chani, I am a mother of five and a business owner residing in Saco and I 
am here to testify in support of LD1170, Resolve, To Promote Passenger Rail for 
Commuters. 
As a state, we are extremely dependent on cars. For example, my family requires 
three cars to juggle the multiple schedules that comes along with children and with 
two working adults. I could not imagine being in a situation where my family did not 
have access to a car for our work commutes, school, extracurriculars and so on. 
However, there are folks that don’t have access to a car or spend a great deal of their 
income just to have access to basic amenities. Transportation is not a privilege. It is 
needed for every family and hard working Mainer in order to work, eat, visit the 
doctor’s, etc. It is unfair to simply only have one form of transportation available, 
especially since there are challenges posed to having only cars as a viable option. This
bill addresses these issues because passenger rail is a reliable, accessible and 
convenient option.
 I would also like to add, from a business owner’s perspective, enhancement of 
passenger rail will significantly boost our historic downtowns. My office is located on
110 Main St, so I see the vibrancy of downtown and how connected of a community it
is. However, what takes away from this sense of community, is the constant traffic 
congestion and the lack of safety for walkers and bikers. Saco has the busiest exit on 
the highway and it certainly burdens our Main St. Our downtown is meant to be a safe
and welcoming place. I strongly believe strengthening our public transit reduces 
traffic congestion and encourages a safer downtown community. I believe that this 
bill will also achieve that. 
Overall, as a mother who understands the need for reliable transportation, and as a 
business owner who sees the need for safer downtowns, I urge the committee to vote 
“ought to pass” on LD 1170. I thank you for your time and service. 
