John Clark
Portland
LD 1170
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Transportation 
Committee,
My name is John Clark and I currently live in Portland. I am asking the committee to 
vote "Ought to Pass" on LD 1170, to begin the necessary steps to make commuting 
and traveling via rail feasible for more Mainers.
Transportation is one of the largest expenses for many Mainers, my family included. 
Earlier this year, we made the decision to sell one of our two cars to make some 
breathing room in our budget. While this has helped save money, we frequently face 
the challenges associated with inadequate public transportation, such as significantly 
limiting our schedule flexibility, inability to travel to some locations, and inability to 
consider some jobs due to lack of public transportation to these locations. Increasing 
service on the Downeaster would allow greater access to mobility without a car in 
Southern Maine (and hopefully points north in the future!), creating a more equitable 
transportation network for families who do not own a car, either by choice or out of 
necessity. With the greater Portland area experiencing a housing crisis that prices 
many working families out to the suburbs and beyond, creating a more usable 
Downeaster experience opens the economic opportunities of the region to so many 
more working class Maine families.
In addition to increasing transportation equity, improving the Downeaster service for 
commuters can also lead to reducing our state's emissions caused by transportation, 
which currently accounts for over 50% of the state's total emissions. To reach our 
state's climate goals outlined in "Maine Won't Wait," we need to make drastic 
changes to our transportation infrastructure, and fast. Giving Maine families a 
dignified alternative to driving to work will reduce the number of people who choose 
to drive, resulting in fewer emissions.
Commuter rail is the future of transportation if we wish to accomplish our state's 
climate and economic goals, and this study is a necessary step to begin to make the 
Downeaster more useful as a commuter rail rather than something used solely for 
special events. Please support this LD. Thank you!
