 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1170, Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for Commuters  
 
To the Committee on Transportation  
by Josh Caldwell, Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
April  12, 2023  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Committee on Transportation, 
my name is Josh Caldwell. I am the Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine. NRCM has been working for more than 60 yea rs to 
protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment, on behalf of our 25,000 members and 
supporters. I’m here today to testify in support of LD 1170 , Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail 
for Commuters.  
 
Strengthening a diversified  multimodal  transportation system to move people around the state 
with less carbon pollution is a top priority for Maine. Electrification of personal vehicles — the 
top source of greenhouse gas emissions in Maine — is an essential step toward reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation sector . This approach , however,  must be paired 
with investment in public transit and other transportation options to provide more choices for 
Mainers  that do not , cannot , or can’t afford to drive a car.   
Maine’s  bipartisan Climate Action Plan identifies reducing emissions from the transportation 
sector as “Plan A,” citing that 54 percent of greenhouse gas emissions come from cars and trucks 
in Maine.1 The Clean Transportation Roadmap, commissioned in 2021 to est ablish a pathway for 
reducing emissions from the transportation sector, identifies transit expansion and transit -
oriented development as key recommendations to reduce vehicle miles traveled and diversify 
Maine’s transportation system.2 The 2021 Transporta tion Energy Data Book shows that of all 
major forms of transportation, trains emit the least amount of greenhouse gases  per passenger 
mile.3 Investment in passenger rail research and infrastructure where it’s appropriate is a critical 
step in the decarbonization of Maine’s transportation sector.  
A sustainable climate future for Maine features a n accessible and convenient public transit 
system, and it is common sense for  that vision to include enhancing service along our existing 
passenger rail routes. LD 1170 would study existing Amtrak Downeaster service to determine 
what improvements  can be made to better facilitate travel along the Brun swick to Boston rail 
corridor. We can then apply the learnings from this research to strengthen service along th at rail 
line and to make passenger rail more accessible and appealing to users in communities this 
corridor serves,  and throughout the state.  Not only would this research contribute to climate 
 
1 https://www.maine.gov/climateplan/the -plan  
2 https://www.maine.gov/future/initiatives/climate/cleantransportation  
3 https://tedb.ornl.gov/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/TEDB_Ed_39.pdf#page=68  

change mitigation, it would als o improve  the quality of life for many Maine residents and 
remov e transportation barriers and lower transportation costs for those that do not have access to 
a vehicle  or would prefer not to drive if given the choice . 
For these reasons, w e urge the Committee to  vote Ought to Pass on this bill.  I would welcome 
any questions you may have.  
 
