A, 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES ‘ ‘T * 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
1 AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Margaret O»Neﬂ TTY: Mame Relay 711 
21 Sheila Circle 
Saco, ME 04072 
Phone: (207) 590-1679 
Margaret.ONei1@1e2islature.maine.2ov 
April 12, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Maggie O’Neil presenting 
LD 1170, Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for Commuters 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and honorable members of the Transportation 
Committee, I am Representative Maggie O’Neil. I represent House District 129, part of Saco. 
Thank you for the opportunity to present LD 1170, Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for 
Commuters. 
This proposal was designed by Thoniton Academy senior Cole Cochrane. He serves as a youth 
member of the Climate Council’s Transportation Working Group. Cole is focused on improving 
public transit infrastructure, and he has done a lot of research to develop this proposal. Cole and 
other young people have put suppoit behind this bill because it brings a future focus to 
transportation and passenger rail that is needed. 
Here’s what the resolve does: 
It creates a high-level vision and roadmap for passenger rail in Maine. It directs the Department 
of Transportation, in coordination with the Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority 
(N NEPRA), to study improvements that would maximize use of passenger rail along the current 
Amtrak Downeaster line from Sanford to Brunswick. The study will identify goals and potential 
changes to our current passenger rail system that would make it easier and more accessible for 
locals to travel from town-to-town by train. The study will report back to the legislature by 
January 1- 
, 2024, so that the committee will be able to act upon any recommendations. 
The resolve sets out categories to consider, including: 
. Frequency of trips 
. Scheduling of trips 
. Affordable fares 
Trip time competitive to personal vehicles 
. Station locations 
District 129: Saco (part)
6. Economic impacts 
7. Carbon emission reductions 
8. Equitable access to transportation 
Here’s why it is important: . 
This study will create a high-level roadrnap for passenger rail in Maine through engagement with 
a diverse group of stakeholders. Right now, our process is geared toward short-term planning. 
We establish a handful of action items and work to cross those things off the list. We have an 
opportunity to better engage stakeholders and create a long-term, visionary roadmap for 
passenger rail in Maine. To solve any problem, we first need to gather information and input so 
that we can design the best possible solutions. 
Today, you will hear that this kind of planning is 11ot necessary and that the existing approach is 
sufficient. Here are three major opportunities to improve our current approach to passenger rail: 
(l) robust public input from commuters and area employers, (2) equitable access to transit 
infrastructure, and (3) reducing our carbon emissions. 
1. Robust public input from commuters and employers 
Passenger rail access would improve with more robust stakeholder input. Right now, NNEPRA 
has good plans in the pipeline. They are working on relocating the Portland station to shorten trip 
times. They have also discussed extending service from Brunswick to Rockland, building a new 
stop in West F almouth, and adding one additional round trip to provide northbound service from 
Wells. Both those particular plans and our long—term goals would be improved by gathering 
public input about what local, city—to-city passengers need to utilize the existing network. With 
that input, we can create a more cohesive vision for passenger rail in Maine. 
Through more robust input, we have an opportunity to (a) serve a more diverse group of 
passengers, (b) connect employers with potential workers, and (c) reduce our carbon emissions. 
Right now, the Amtrak Downeaster line is geared toward special occasions and tourism trips 
(e. g., to and from Boston), rather than local town-to-town commutes. The current Downeaster 
line stops in Brunswick, Freeport, Portland, OOB (seasonally), Saco-Biddeford, and Wells- 
Sanford — a convenient corridor for local residents making daily trips from town-to-town. 
That’s why it is so important to gather robust public input to identify changes we need to make 
the Downeaster accessible for local travelers, in addition to special occasions. Stakeholders in 
my community and others along the Amtrak line are very interested in increased access to 
passenger rail, both for their own commutes and for addressing our workforce crisis. With 
planning, we can design Amtrak trips that run at convenient times, charge affordable prices, and 
conveniently get us where we need to go. More community members will be able to access 
transportation to get to work, doctor appointments, and more. That’s why it is so important to 
District l29: Saco (part)
gather robust public input to identify changes we need to make the Downeaster accessible for 
local travelers, in addition to special occasions. 
Director Patricia Quinn from NNEPRA took time to meet with us about our goals for this bill. 
We were grateful for the conversation and information they provided. Later this year, NNEPRA 
will create a new Service Development Plan (SDP). The SDP is our list of action items for the 
next ﬁve years of the Downeaster. The plan sets up a pipeline for accessing federal funding for 
identiﬁed projects. The study we propose today will serve as a high—level guide to making those 
more speciﬁc, shorter-term decisions. We want to see a longer-term, visionary approach toA 
passenger rail as we develop our next five-year plan. 
As part of goal-setting, we will ask stakeholders: How can we equitably serve more Mainers with 
passenger rail? What time of day do we need to access trains to take advantage of passenger rail? 
What fares are affordable, and what trip times are practical to be able to choose a train overa 
car? How will we connect to our ultimate destination from the train station? Our long-term 
priorities will be formed via stakeholder input, including input from (a) local commuters 
traveling from town-to-town along the Amtrak line, and (b) local employers and chambers of 
commerce facing workforce challenges. This study is about identifying commuter needs and the 
ideal system needed to serve those needs to draw upon as we create our five-year plan. 
2. Reduce carbon emissions 
Transportation is Maine’s largest source of carbon emissions. According to the Maine Won't 
Wait climate strategy, the transportation sector accounts for 54% of our emissions. ‘ To reach our 
climate action goals as a state, we must promote low-carbon transportation solutions such as 
passenger rail. 
Better access to passenger rail will further those goals. The section of highway along the Amtrak 
corridor from Brunswick to Sanford is likely our busiest stretch of highway for commuters in the 
state. To address our emissions, we need to take all possible steps to reduce vehicle miles 
traveled along this busy commuting corridor where greater density exists. We do that by creating 
a long-term vision for passenger rail and matching action items to those goals. 
As noted above, our current approach to passenger rail prioritizes special occasion trips over 
routine, local town-to-town trips. Two main objectives in our current plan will extend the current 
line to Rockland line and add a West Falmouth stop. Those are helpful connections to make 
along the current line, especially for special occasions and tourism. However, they are not 
tailored to urgently meeting our climate goals. 
As an example, Saco, Where I live, is the busiest exit on the Turnpike. On weekday mornings, 
many drivers get on the highway and travel north to the Portland area. Although Saco has been 
1 
https:f!www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.gov.future/ ﬁles/inline —tiles/MaineWontWait_December2020.pdf 
District 129: Saco (part)
the busiest exit for many years, the Downeaster does not currently have a trip coming from the 
south up to Portland. NNEPRA plans to add one northbound morning trip in 2025. An overall 
vision that incorporates climate impacts would have likely elevated a project like this one to 
reduce vehicle miles traveled. Long-term goals and stakeholder input would also improve the 
Ways that we implement solutions, so we know they are addressing problems in the best-way 
possible. 
We all know that there’s a red line we cannot cross in tenns of warming temperatures, and we 
are in a battle for our lives Where every moment counts. The decisions we make today about 
transportation policy, including passenger rail access, determine just how much loss and-damage 
my generation and people younger than us will suffer. We need to be strategic about how we will 
give those drivers an affordable, convenient transit option as soon as possible. 
3. Equitable access to transit infrastructure 
Public transit infrastructure must serve all potential commuters, especially those with barriers to 
access. VVhen I learned about our current priorities for passenger rail, I became concerned about 
limited input from community members who do not own and drive cars. I noted a serious lack of 
prioritization of lower-income residents in the Biddeford-Saco area a11d in the Sanford area.I 
grew up in the Biddeford-Saco area, and many of my peers are not able to be mobile and take 
advantage of regional job opportunities due to the lack of convenient and affordable transit. 
Although a new stop in West Falmouth closes an important gap along the line, we must also 
prioritize populations that do not have access to personal vehicles. For many of my peers, access 
to convenient, affordable transportation would mean access to a better job and better lives for 
their families. That lens is missing from our overall vision about commuter rail in Maine. 
Tourism is important; rail trips to Boston are important; and we need to be prioritizing access to 
passenger rail for all community members. 
To sum up, this bill creates a roadmap for passenger rail in Maine. It will create a necessary 
high-level vision and bring in robust stakeholder input. As legislators, we bring the perspectives 
of our community members to the process. I hope to work with DOT and NNEPRA to increase 
public input and long-term vision as we set our goals for the next ﬁve years. 
Thank you for your time. 
District 129: Saco (part)
NORTHERN NEW ENGLAND 
i PASSENGER RAIL AUTHORITY 
More Trains; Better Reliability 
Capacity improvements to improve reliability 
are underway. The Wells Area Improvement 
Project will support a new morning inbound 
Downeaster train between Wells and Brunsw 
making the Downeaster a car-free commuter 
option for workers in Maine. 
Portland Station Relocation 
NNEPRA is exploring mainline station alternz 
which will improve Downeaster connectivity 
and within the greater Portland region by FE: 
overall travel time and decreasing bottlenecl 
West Falmouth/Exit 53 
Station Development 
NNEPRA is exploring an additional Downeas 
stop in West Falmouth at Exit 53, which prov 
improved connectivity from the I-95 corridor 
Rockland Pilot Program 
A pilot service operating 3 daily round-trips 
between Brunswick and Rockland is being 
pursued. 
National Connections 
Efforts are underway to simplify multi-moda 
transfers to the Amtrak Northeast Corridor 
and National Network. 
ei i CA; - “sills? \t§
ax                        
For illustrative purposes only 
~a
$ ‘ 
3?’ 
egg 
‘7'\.l'¢t'i 
e New Haven 
,_ <4 \,,7< '" 
‘r~ . 
\ . f ME \l
~ _ \ ’ \' 
_ 1. 
y ‘I
i 
.-" t ;~, 
, ’v 
\‘ ._ 
Rockland ll 
3’ K '___
\ 
)4 \ _, 
2\ 
,/- ,\ 
Portland . 
_ 2~ >»W|sca‘sset 
West Falrnouth A 
.. Old Orchard Beach I ‘\_"‘ 
Y Saco 
Doveri ;_e.§_/r Wells 
Durham-UNH 
Exeter 4%;, 
‘MV g ’ 
Hayerhill 
MA 
Y 
5 Worcester WMyMy**‘iT"*‘§’TNorth Station Boston 
Q: (6,/,,,~ M’/,:r/,¢.*~ ‘ ,,,,,,;_JFA 1:- ‘*> Woburn‘ 
‘ll 
Back Bay Station Boston 
wtm 5'South Station Boston 
5 Springfield 
= ‘, 
O ri‘ 
artford ' Providence I 
/“ \\ 
/l
\ 
MAP /I: l Amtrak Downeaster 7 Potential Passenger 
KEY A IV 
Route Service Expansion ROCKLAND 
Pilot connecting service 
Brunswick to Rockland 
WEST FALMOUTH 
Add a station stop anda 
passenger platform to pri 
better access to I-95 and 
Central Maine 
PO RTLAND 
Relocate Portland Station 
save travel time and impri 
access to downtown and 
employment centers 
VVELLS 
Add 6 miles of double tra 
and build a second passer 
platform 
Amtrak NEC ant 
National Netwo 
if 
|\u=vu࠯ࡆ
