Maya Faulstich
Yarmouth, ME
LD 1170
April 10, 2023
To: Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Maya Faulstich
Re: Testimony in Support of Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for Commuters, LD 
1170
My name is Maya Faulstich and I live in Yarmouth Maine.  I am writing as a student 
and activist with Maine Youth Action, to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 
1170. This bill would direct the Department of Transportation to study what 
improvements could be made to the Amtrak Downeaster to better serve commuters 
and reduce emissions. As a high schooler, I don’t have my driver’s license yet, and 
would greatly appreciate a way to get around without forcing my parents to drive me 
places. With public transit, the youth can start to be independent without having to 
own a vehicle. Many students cannot afford a car, even if they are old enough to 
drive.  In 2022, the average monthly cost of car ownership was $894! Mainers with 
lower or fixed incomes tend to pay a higher share for transportation, typically 25-38%
of their total income.  High transportation costs burden low-income households, and 
they are often left without money for food, housing, utilities, energy, and other 
necessities. Public transit systems, including passenger rail, also increase accessibility
for older Mainers and Mainers with disabilities who may be unable or unsafe to drive.
Public transportation would allow many people, regardless of economic status, to get 
to places they need to be. Additionally, transportation accounts for 54% of our 
emissions and is the largest source of greenhouse gas emissions in our state! By 
creating a roadmap for passenger rail transportation with this bill, we could reduce 
carbon emissions from personal cars traveling to and from Brunswick, Freeport, 
Portland, Saco-Biddeford, Wells-Sanford, and other places. 
The Amtrak Downeaster runs through my town, so I am very excited about how this 
bill could present more accessible opportunities for me to get to other towns and cities
since I don’t have a driver's license, and can’t afford my own car. With LD 1170, we 
now have an amazing opportunity to significantly cut our carbon emissions, meet the 
needs of a broader and more diverse population of travelers and commuters, and 
reduce the financial strain on people all around Maine! With this study, we would be 
able to understand how we can make passenger rail more accessible and attractive, 
which is desperately needed if we want to mitigate climate change. Climate change 
isn’t going away anytime soon, so if legislators don’t act now, the costs and damages 
will be much higher in the future. Please ensure that everyone I know can have access
to transportation, regardless of age, and financial or physical abilities. Help increase 
the quality of life for people all across Maine today, by passing LD 1170.
Respectfully submitted, 
Maya Faulstich
