Megan Sauberlich
MYA
LD 1170
4/11/2023
To: Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Megan Abigail Sauberlich
Re: Testimony in Support of Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for Commuters, LD 
1170
My name is Megan Sauberlich, I live in Falmouth, Maine and go to school in Orono. 
I am writing as a student and concerned citizen to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on 
LD 1170.
[Insert personal story or why you care.] 
The effort to optimize the railway service caught my attention for multiple reasons. 
As a college student, there are not many easy modes of transportation without having 
my own car. Options are limited and it often feels like I live in an area that is 
somewhat neglected by updated infrastructure. LD 1170 resonates with me, because it
is relieving to know people with the ability and voice, are asking and advocating for 
what more can be done. The Amtrak system is one of the most efficient ways to 
travel, and provides broader opportunities for people who have access to it, and 
businesses who can attract more employees. The following points are also vital to 
account for: 
The Downeaster is already vital to many who travel from southern Maine to the 
Boston area  for work and life. However, many commuters and employers are unable 
to take advantage of passenger rail for day-to-day commuting. We have an 
opportunity to meet the needs of a broader and more diverse population of travelers 
and commuters.
Transportation is Maine’s largest source of carbon emissions. According to the Maine
Won't Wait climate strategy, the transportation sector accounts for 54% of our 
emissions. To reach our climate action goals as a state, we must promote low-carbon 
transportation solutions such as passenger rail.
Transportation is essential for the everyday lives of Mainers. It is a necessity to have 
efficient, clean, attractive, and convenient public transit systems. This study would 
determine how those standards can be reached using passenger rail service in Maine.
Stakeholder input is essential to creating effective public transit. This study will 
engage our communities to determine what is needed to increase availability of public
transit and reduce our carbon emissions.
Consistently developing the railway system is healthy for the environment, and the 
economy. I hope, as someone with similar limitations to those unable to use the 
railway presently, that the effort to increase commuter services is given due 
consideration.
Respectfully submitted, 
Megan Sauberlich

