Scarlet Labbé-Watson
Rockland ME
LD 1170
April 7, 2023
To: Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Scarlet Labbé-Watson
Re: Testimony in Support of Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for Commuters, LD 
1170
My name is Scarlet Labbé-Watson and I live in Rockland. 
I am writing  as an activist to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 1170.
I care about this bill because there are many people who have long commutes and 
expensive car payments. If there was more public transportation they would have 
elevated levels of happiness (due to reduced financial stress) and more streamlined 
daily lives (because both parents and children would be able to get where they need to
be in an organized manner instead of having parents contorting their schedules and 
wasting fossil fuels to try and get their childrens’ needs met). 
Transportation is a crucial part of everyone's lives in Maine. Maine is very 
decentralized and many people have hefty commutes. This means it is important to 
have efficient, clean, and accessible public transport. If this study goes forward and 
the rail is eventually expanded, the daily lives of countless people would be 
streamlined. 
Transportation is Maine’s largest source of carbon emissions. Maine Won’t Wait says
that transportation is 54% of all of Maine’s emissions which is simply unacceptable. 
If we want to reach our decarbonization plans as a state we need to have low-carbon 
options such as increased public transport. 
For many people, the price of car ownership is so high people will be unable to access
good paying jobs, healthcare, healthy food, and stable housing because they are so 
fixated on making their car payments. In 2022, the average monthly cost of car 
ownership was $894. If you are low income the percentage of your income that you 
are spending on car loans is very high (25-28% of total income). If we had more 
affordable public transportation, low income people would be more capable of paying
for basic necessities such as food, shelter, and utilities. 
I have a personal connection with this issue because as a young person I don’t want to
be forced to rely on my parents to get anywhere or contribute to global warming by 
getting a car and making my future and the future of those around me less habitable. 
Cars are also expensive and my family cannot afford to have another car payment. So 
I am unable to have independence and opportunities because there is no public 
transport. If there was a convenient public transportation system I would be able to be
more free to pursue the activities I really want to without needing to be tied to my 
parents work schedule. By not pursuing this study you are limiting people like me 
from accessing anything from a movie with friends to a job. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Scarlet Labbé-Watson

