Skylar  Cook
Portland 
LD 1170
April 12th, 2023
To: Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Skylar Cook 
Re: Testimony in Support of Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for Commuters, LD 
1170
My name is Skylar go to school at Waynflete in Portland. 
I am writing as a student to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 1170.
As a junior in high school who is starting to look at colleges, Boston is a point of 
interest for me. There are so many schools, businesses, and opportunities in Boston 
that I would not be able to get if I stayed in Maine. Having a line of transportation that
is easy, affordable, and quick is very important to me and a lot of my friends who 
make regular trips to Boston. Below I’ve provided a few other reasons why I support 
this bill and you should too. 
-The Downeaster is already vital to many who travel from southern Maine to the 
Boston area for work and life. However, many commuters and employers are unable 
to take advantage of passenger rail for day-to-day commuting. We have an 
opportunity to meet the needs of a broader and more diverse population of travelers 
and commuters.
-Transportation is essential for the everyday lives of Mainers. It is a necessity to have 
efficient, clean, attractive, and convenient public transit systems. This study would 
determine how those standards can be reached using passenger rail service in Maine.
-Transportation is Maine’s largest source of carbon emissions. According to the 
Maine Won't Wait climate strategy, the transportation sector accounts for 54% of our 
emissions. To reach our climate action goals as a state, we must promote low-carbon 
transportation solutions such as passenger rail.
As a teenager who will soon be an adult, it is important to me to have transportation 
that contributes to lessening our carbon emissions. Knowing that our transportation in 
Maine is supporting a healthy environment allows me to feel a little bit better about 
protecting the wonderful nature we have in Maine. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Skylar Cook
