 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  Testimony from the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition regarding:  
LD 1170 : Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for Commuters  
Sponsored By: Repre sentative Mag gie O ’Neal 
Public Hearing:  Wednes day, April 1 2, 2023 at 1 :00pm  
 
 
Dear Chair Chipman, Chair Williams, and Members of the Committee on  Transportation : 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I am the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ Rights 
Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network  of almost 100 member organizations  working to enhance the  lives 
of Maine’s immigrant communities. MIRC works to advanc e systemic change s in Maine through 
collaborative advocacy to ensure that voices of the state’s large, diverse, and growing immigrant 
communities are heard.  
Many members of Maine ’s immigrant communities utilize public transportation for a variety of reasons . 
Some cannot afford a car (plus gas, upkeep, ins urance, parking, and so on) . Some are have not yet p assed 
a driv ing test and/or do not have a valid driver ’s license.  Others have a general pr eference for using mass 
transit opposed to driving a car. Whatever the reason, many of Maine ’s immigrants could conceivably use 
improved train service in addition to existing bus services.   
The passenger rail corridor between Bruns wick and Boston  is nice but there is so m uch r oom for 
improvement.  With more trip fre quency and reliabili ty, more  potential passen gers would consider using 
the train as a n alternative to driving their private autom obiles ; in addition to environmental benefits, this 
could ease t raffic congestion and parking concerns. Improved scheduling for optimal trip times would 
make it easier for local riders to use the train for practical daily transportation.  In addition to better 
options of commuting for work, rail passengers could  utilize these  proposed  improve ments for  better 
access to visiting friends and family, shopping, medi cal appointments, education  opportunities , and 
leisure activities.  
For Maine ’s immigrants,  better tra in service could be particularly impact ful. They would have better 
options for job opportunities. They would be able t o get to Engli sh language or workforce training classes 
easier. They would  have more access to heal thcare for themselves and/or their families. Indeed, passenger 
rail has the potential to be transformative for hundreds of Maine immigrants. Therefore, MIRC  
encourage s you to pass  Repre sentative O ’Neil’s LD 1170 : Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for 
Commuters . Thank you for your consideration of this legislation.  
 
Tobin Williamson  
Lewiston , ME  
MIRC Advocacy Manager  
### 
