L LEAouE or women VOTERS" .31: A ,.‘ 
gt tin
“ 
. §‘~./‘iﬁtii 
T0: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs . 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: May 24, 2023 
RE: LD 1980 - An Act to improve Election Laws and Notariai Laws 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica. 
My name is Will Hayward. I'm a resident of Portland. I am here today as the Advocacy Program Director 
on behalf of the League of Women Voters of Maine. I am testifying neither for nor against LD 1980. 
Most of the provisions in LD 1980 are technical or housekeeping in nature and do not require 
comment. As a general matter, we support necessary changes to statute identified by election 
administrators to support the smooth administration of fair, free, and secure elections. However, there 
are a few provisions in LD 1980 where we wish to share our positions. These points are identified by 
their numbering in Part A of the bill. 
First, we support multiple provisions in this legislation that ease particular burdens on local election 
administrators. In particular, provisions A-3 and A-29 address two concerns we have repeatedly heard 
about from election clerks: the onerous burden that mandatory municipal caucus attendance imposes, 
and the problem of insufficient timelines for notification of absentee ballot inspection. These changes 
will make a real difference for our municipal clerks. In addition, we support provision A-28, which 
mandates that the Secretary of State's office post notice of early absentee processing on its website. This 
is a useful piece of public information that we support being as accessible as possible. 
We oppose a few provisions in LD 1980. First, we oppose provision A-11, changing the deadline for 
write-in candidates to file their declaration from 60 days prior to an election to 70 days prior. Write-in 
candidates can serve a vital purpose in the closing weeks of an election to address situations wherea 
candidate becomes incapacitated, involved in a late-breaking scandal, or is otherwise unable or unsuited 
to serve, but cannot be replaced on a ballot. We find the current filing deadline of 60 days to be 
excessive; changing this to 70 days is a step in the wrong direction. 
Second, we oppose provisions A-12 through A- 15, eliminating the option -- not the requirement — to 
use batch elimination for any ranked-choice voting election. Batch elimination, as currently defined in 
the law, will never change the outcome of a ranked-choice tabulation. The use of batch elimination can 
modify the margin of victory in a ranked choice tabulation, which could reduce the workload duringa 
post-election audit. Why not preserve the option? 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@1wvme.org 207.622.0256 www.1wvme.0rg
LWVME to VLA May 24, 2023 
LD 1980 
We're pleased to see provision A-17, which affirmatively requires public release of the cast vote record 
from a ranked choice contest. However, we oppose the provision to delay the release until the time of 
certification, rather than at the time of the RCV count. Early release allows interested parties to conduct 
an independent tabulation of the data in a timely fashion BEFORE certification. Early release of the cast 
vote record has been the transparent practice of the SOS office in the past, and it has contributed to 
public confidence in the conduct of the RCV tabulation. 
In section A-23 and A-24, we don't understand why tracking the status of the absentee ballot application 
is proposed to be dropped. The application can be rejected; the rejected application can be cured. Why 
would it not be in the interest of the election official and the voter to be clear about the status of that 
application? 
Finally, there are a couple of provisions that change implementation deadlines we wish to comment on. 
These provisions, A-2 and A-22, move the deadlines for implementing online voter registration and 
ongoing absentee voting respectively from November 1, 2023. to February 1, 2024. They also appear to 
give the Secretary of State’s office additional flexibility to implement these systems earlier if they are 
ready. We are mindful of the intensive work the Secretary of State's office is undertaking to modernize 
our election systems, and we support the need for new election systems to be integrated into that 
modernization process. We are also cognizant of the risks in implementing new provisions in the weeks 
immediately preceding an election, even an off-cycle election. However, we believe it is especially 
important for ongoing absentee voting as passed into law in 2021 to be accessible in time for the 
November 2023 election. in advance of the numerous major elections in 2024, it is important to start 
getting voters signed up for ongoing absentee, and to give the system a trial run, as soon as possible so 
they may benefit from it in 2024 without issue. We support any additional resources necessary to make 
this happen. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
PO 13187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@1wvme.org 207.622.0256 www.lwvme.org
