The Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Testimony from Agnieszka Carpenter, Executive Director, BioME 
 
In Support of LD 1475 
 
LD 1475 
An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development by Establishing a Tax 
Credit 
 
18 April 2023 
 
Chair Grohoski, Chair Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation: 
 
My name is Agnieszka Carpenter, I am the Executive Director of the Bioscience Association of 
Maine (BioME)located in Portland, Maine. I am here today to present testimony on behalf of 
BioME in support of L.D. 1417. 
 
Bioscience Association of Maine (BioME) is a trade organization representing over 230 
bioscience companies in Maine. BioME’s mission is to advance economic growth and 
opportunities within the life sciences community in Maine by allocation equal involvement in 
the life sciences advocacy, education, economic development, workforce development, and 
attracting out-of-business.  
 
Maine's life science industry has made steady progress year over year, as demonstrated by our 
industry report, which highlights over 480 companies and 9,500 employees across biotech, 
human and animal health, R&D, diagnostics, medical equipment & supplies. In addition to this, 
we have experienced strong job growth over the past five years, which has had a significant 
multiplier effect on the state's economy, generating substantial income from those jobs. The 
average salary for a life science employee in Maine is $108,000 which is much higher than all 
other industries. 
 
Despite this progress, there is still much work to be done to build this sector into a regional 
player and to fully tap into the Massachusetts biotech ecosystem, which is overflowing. 
However, we are positioned to grow more, and that's why BioME has adopted the following 
four policy priorities this year: tax and regulatory, workforce development, innovation and 
business incentives, and capital formation and access. Our board believes that focusing on 
these areas will grow Maine's bioeconomy. 
 
Senator Jackson's bill is a creative way to position Maine to be competitive in the biotech 
industry. By offering a tax credit to life science companies focused on manufacturing, Maine 
policymakers would show that they understand the potential of this sector and that they are 
taking this opportunity seriously. This legislation touches on three out of our four priorities and 
will help to attract companies to Maine. 
 
When combined with other life science initiatives currently under review by the state 
legislature, such as the research and development bond and funding for the mobile learning 
lab, this bill will enhance the story we tell prospective Maine biotech companies at the BIO 
International Convention in Boston this June. 
 
In conclusion, passing LD 1475 will be a significant step forward for Maine's biotech industry. It 
will attract new companies, generate more jobs and income, and position Maine as a regional 
player in this rapidly growing sector. 
 
For those reasons, we urge you to support LD 1475. 
 
Sincerely, 
Agnieszka Carpenter 
BioME Executive Director 
 
 
