Q1 
I. ’3
i 
The Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Testimony from Amanda McEwen, Vice President of Clinical Development, Salubris Biotherapeutics, Inc; 
Adjunct Lecturer in Regulatory Affairs for Drugs, Biologics, and Medical Devices, Northeastern University 
In Support Of 
L.D. 1475 
An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development 
by Establishing a Tax Credit 
April 18, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee on Taxation, 
My name is Amanda McEwen, and I am a drug development professional with over 15 years of 
experience in the ﬁeld. Throughout my career, my primary focus has been in clinical development and 
operations, helping to bring new therapeutics from the laboratory to the clinic. Most of my career has 
been spent in small, Venture Capital-backed startup biotechnology companies working to develop 
therapies using technology coming from some of the best academic laboratories in the country. I also 
serve as an adjunct lecturer in Northeastern University's Master of Science in Regulatory Affairs program, 
where I am the principal instructor for a course covering the regulation oftherapeutic product safety 
from bench to bedside. 
For the past 3 years, I have also been a permanent resident of Old Cape Road in Kennebunkport, Maine, 
after relocating from Boston with my wife, who is from Maine originally and whose family is also still 
based in the state. On Mondays, Tuesdays, and most Wednesdays, at approximately 5am, just after the 
Cape Porpoise Lobster Co truck barrels down the road a little faster than I would like, I back out of my 
driveway and make the approximately two-hourjourney to the Cambridge Innovation Center in Kendall 
Sq, just across the Charles from downtown Boston. I pay to park, eat, and I pay taxes to the State of 
Massachusetts for the cumulative days spent in an ofﬁce two states away from my home in Maine. 
There are three other biotech professionals on Old Cape Road, that I am aware of, making the same 
weekly trek to the Boston/Cambridge area. On the weekends, my wife and I frequent a local restaurant 
where our favorite bartender, Julia, a young Biddeford resident working on a graduate degree in 
Biological Sciences at the University of New England, shares her concerns about leaving Maine to pursue 
a laboratory-based job in the Boston biotech hub, despite her desire to continue living and working in 
her home state. Julia shares that she has dozens of peers in the program facing the same conundrum. 
I became aware of this legislation during a collaboration with Satish Tadikonda at Harvard Business 
School and I have been looking forward to the opportunity to support this initiative ever since. Having 
spent a lot of time in the car these past three years, I have had a lot of time to envision what it would be 
like if Maine were able to capitalize on the deep scientiﬁc talent pool and robust biotechnology
t§rm>~ 
ecosystem that is thriving not only in Boston and Cambridge but in Rhode Island (where I was born), 
Connecticut, and New Hampshire. 
I look forward to a day when Maine is playing a very active role in the expansion of the New England 
biotech footprint. It would be of incredible value for the state to be able to not only attract scientiﬁc 
talent from neighboring regions, but to also provide job opportunities in biotech for the many young 
Mainers interested in biotechnology careers, many of whom are attending Universities in Maine, who 
are currently forced to look elsewhere 
Thank you for this opportunity to voice my strong support for this legislation. 
Sincerely, 
Amanda McEwen 
Vice President, Clinical Development 
Salubris Biotherapeutics, Inc. 
Cambridge Innovation Center 
1 Broadway, 9th Floor 
Cambridge, MA 02142 
Mobile: +1.617.645.916O
