 
 
 Ashish K Kulkarni , PhD  
Chief Executive  Officer  
(619) 212 -6649  
ashish.kulkarni @kebotix.com  
501 Massachusetts Ave, 
Cambridge, MA 02139   
 
 
 
April 18, 202 3 
 
 
The Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
Testimony from Ashish Kulkarni,  
Chief Executive Officer of Kebotix Inc.  
 
In Support of  L.D. 1475 An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development 
by Establishing a Tax Credit  
 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the committee,  
My name is Ashish Kulkarni, and I am the Chief Executive Officer of Kebotix , the company that 
drives green chemistry innovation s using artificial intelligence and lab automation . Throughout 
my career, I have been committed to driving commercially successful innovation and developing 
innovation ecosystems within mature organizations. My extensive knowledge of chemical 
engineering an d materials science has enabled me to deliver breakthrough products and platforms 
into diverse industries and markets.   
As the  Chief Innovation Officer of GAF Materials Corporation, a $4 -6B leader in the North 
American roofing industry, I developed a new i nnovation strategy and built an organization that 
would leverage R&D, emerging technology, the external innovation ecosystem, and an 
autonomous business unit structure to drive multi -billion, growth over a 5 year period . Serving  as 
Chief Technology Officer  at Avantor, Inc., I totally rebuilt the innovation infrastructure and played 
a key role in the firm's dramatic revenue growth and $3.3B IPO in 2019 —the largest healthcare -
related IPO in US history.  Prior to that I was CTO as Celanese, $ 6B chemical compan y.  
My current company, Kebotix, is revolutionizing  the field of green chemistry. The company 
leverages its AI -powered platform to develop sustainable chemicals, biochemicals  and processes, 
reducing the environmental impact of chemical manufacturing. Kebot ix aims to replace toxic and 
non-renewable chemicals with cleaner and safer alternatives, promoting a circular economy.  
Kebotix is currently  based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, which is the US technology hub . 
However , we are actively looking to expand  our presence to other areas  supporting “green” agenda. 
We are considering Maine as one of the strategic areas that combine its proximity to Boston with 
an improved quality of life . Our growth depends largely on finding great talent, training the talent 
with state -of-the-art AI/ML tools in materials, pharma excipients and green chemistry principles.  
We believe with right local & state incentives a win -win situation can easily be crea ted.  
 
I will greatly appreciate your consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
Ashish K. Kulkarni , Ph.D.  
