The Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Testimony from Dana O'Brien, President of FocusMaine 
In Support Of 
L.D. 1475 
An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development by Establishing a 
Tax Credit 
18 April 2023 
Good afternoon, chairs and members of the committee. My name is Dana O'Brien. l live 
in Ogunquit and am the president of FocusMaine, a statewide economic development 
organization centered on propelling our state's food economy and bloeconomy. I rise 
today in support of LD 1475. 
FocusMaine ’s strategy is to develop and execute multifaceted programs to catalyze the 
growth of very specific economic sectors. Those sectors are chosen based on evidence 
and data showing where Maine has a unique opportunity to make a major play. 
FocusMaine is excited about Senator Jackson's legislation and your interest in promoting 
innovation. LD 1475 is a creative, modest tax measure that would enhance Maine's 
biomanufacturing sector, as well as its competitive advantage in attracting biotech 
companies interested in moving to Maine — or doing some of their research in Maine. 
We must capitalize on momentum in our state. 
There is a blossoming biotechnology and data science hub in Cumberland County where 
transformative investments and collaborations are centered on the Roux Institute, the 
University of Maine System, Southern Maine Community College, the University of New 
England, MaineHealth, and more. 
In other parts of the state, academic, R&D, and business leaders are generating 
innovative health, food, and construction solutions through biotechnology. Think about 
biobased composites work at U-Maine Orono, medical breakthroughs at The Jackson 
Laboratory, and aquaculture advancements via Bigelow, the Downeast Institute, and the 
University of Maine.
For logical reasons, evidence shows that Maine is ripe to capitalize on its proximity to 
the Boston biotech epicenter. We are well positioned to capture the overflow of 
infrastructure and jobs reverberating out of Boston. A recent study published by the 
trade group MassBio notes that so much money is flowing into Boston biotechnology 
that demand is outpacing the Commonwealth's existing infrastructure and workforce 
capabilities. 
Other New England states are taking steps to welcome this overflow - to attract 
businesses and talent, to enhance in-state educational and training opportunities, to 
generate new revenue through business growth. And Massachusetts, after investing in 
transforming the Boston-Cambridge hub, is now incentivizing biotech development 
along the l-495 Corridor and beyond. 
Now is the time for Maine to put its stake in the ground. To partner with the private 
sector. To compete with states in the region and, in doing so, transform our economy. 
Private sector companies in Boston want to come to Maine. They want to be part of this 
blossoming ecosystem. They want their employees to enjoy our quality of life. But there 
is some measure of risk for them to move their companies here. We can be seen as an 
unknown commodity to investors. 
So, let's work to de-risk Maine. Show these companies and their investors that we mean 
business — that our government, our great research organizations, and industry 
understand and are taking overt steps to make Maine a hospitable business environment 
for this set of transformative companies. 
Through our work over the past five years, FocusMaine is connected to more than 50 
small biotech companies eager to explore doing business in Maine — if the right 
conditions exist. Some of those company leaders are testifying today. 
We are excited about this opportunity and look forward to working with you.
