 
 
 
The Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
Testimony from Hunter Goble, CEO, Transcera Inc.  In Support of L.D. 1475 : An Act to Promote  
Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development by Establishing a Tax  Credit  
 
 
18 April 2023  
 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Committee on Taxation , my 
name is Hunter Goble. I am Co -founder and CEO at  Transcera Inc. , a biotechnology startup based in 
Cambridge, MA. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 1475, An Act to  Promote 
Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development by Establishing a Tax Credit.  
Transcera is based  at LabCentral, an incubator in Cambridge’s Kendall Square, where we have 
two lab benches and employ two scientists. Our growth plans involve  remaining in Boston for the 
foreseeable future, not necessarily by choice, but out of necessity for talent, capital, and infrastructure.  
Early -stage  biotech companies like Transcera rely on contract research organizations (CROs) to 
accomplish our rese arch objectives. There are dozens of CROs here in Boston and in the surrounding 
towns such as Worcester  and Lexington. Thanks to their proximity, these vendors can offer courier 
services for pick -up and drop -off of test samples. And with just a short drive , we can visit the se sites and 
observe our  animal studies  as they are conducted.  
While Boston has a strong support system for biotech companies such as ours, we are feeling the 
consequences of operating in a city that is congested.  As Transcera grows, we are interested in 
competing with life sciences companies on both coasts in terms of the quality of life we can offer. 
Important components include cost of living, accessibility, and proximity to nature. Maine’s geography 
offers a uniquely attractive competi tive advantage on the East coast. We would be open to relocating our 
company to Maine if the infrastructure and incentives existed to counteract the “switching costs” of 
leaving the Boston biotech bubble. This includes both private and shared lab faciliti es to enable 
entrepreneurs like us to start and grow their ventures. It also includes biomanufacturing facilities where 
our products can be developed, made, and tested.  
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
 
Hunter Goble, CEO  
Transcera Inc.  
700 Main St  
Cambridge, MA 02139  

