"“' ' 
Nest.Bio Labs 325 Vassar St, Suite 2A 
H n ' b [$35 nestbio/labs I Cambridge, MA 02139 
The Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Testimony from James Weis, Founder and CEO, Nest.Bio Labs 
In Support Of 
L.D. 1475 
An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development 
by Establishing a Tax Credit 
April 18, 2023 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the 
Taxation Committee, 
My name is James Weis. I am the Founder and CEO of Nest.Bio Labs. I am alsoa 
co-founder of MIT Alumni Life Science Angel Group, and co-instructor of the 
Revolutionary Ventures class at the MIT Media Lab. Nest.Bio is on a mission to 
support emerging biotech startups with operational support, shared state-of-the-art 
laboratory equipment, and other product development facilities at our Labs—all with 
the overarching goal of helping develop, ﬁnance, and commercialize their ground- 
breaking technologies. 
A privately-held incubator space is designed to help companies innovate, launch, 
and accelerate the development of new, needed products in today’s markets. More 
speciﬁcally, Nest.Bio provides co-working laboratory and ofﬁce space to emerging 
biotech startups, in a community-based, supportive, innovative atmosphere, to help 
companies move rapidly and ﬂexible from product concept to real-world 
commercialization. The Lab, augmented by support from our extensive network of 
carefully curated partners, helps startups shorten the time for their product to reach 
the market. 
Confidentia/: This message contains confidential information and is intended solely for the recipient. 
Reproduction of, or forwarding to anyone not directly sent this document is strictly forbidden.
"' ' 
Nest.Bio Labs 325 Vassar S1, Suite 2A 
H n ' b legs nest.bio/labs I Cambridge, MA 02139 
Oftentimes, when a company has developed a product at an incubator space and the 
product is ready for its next stage, it will locate its manufacturing facility nearby the 
incubator. 
The types of research that have been or are being conducted by Nest.Bio residents 
include research on the development of targeted CRISPR-based therapeutics, the use 
of glycopolymer-based products to revitalize tissue, delivering drugs as an 
alternative to surgery on the gastrointestinal tract, and advanced medical devices for 
disease diagnosis and treatment. Nest.Bio often provides the first non-academic 
laboratory facilities for early-stage university spin-outs —and we frequently partner 
with academic and student organizations to provide free laboratory space for these 
companies for a period of time, to support them while they develop the initial proof- 
of-concept needed to achieve their ﬁrst ﬁnancing. F or example, we provided free 
laboratory space to a number of organizations conducting COVID-related research 
over the past few years. 
Maine appeals to us because it is close to Boston, offers a high quality of life, and 
has an emerging bioeconomy that we would be excited to help nurture and grow. 
We would look forward to collaborating with Maine’s thriving higher education 
institutions to create the workforce needed for our resident companies. 
For these reasons, we believe the tax incentive provided in LD 1475 would both 
incentivize the investors that Nest.Bio will need to ﬁnancing the construction ofa 
new incubator, as well as incentivize residents of the incubator to expand their 
business into Maine. lt will also send a signal to businesses outside Maine that 
Maine is interested in our industry. This is a signiﬁcant impact, as moving froma 
well-established bioeconomy cluster into a nascent cluster is viewed as an additional 
risk that must be justified to both founders and investors. The knowledge that state 
leaders are willing to work with us and support this economy would go a long way 
to de-risking these investments. 
We are keen to help build Maine’s bioeconomy. 
Thank you for your favorable consideration ofthis legislation. 
Confidentia/. This message contains conﬁdential information and is intended so/e/y for the recipient, 
Reproduction of, or forwarding to anyone not directly sent this document is strictly forbidden.
‘W ' 
NesT.Bio Labs 325 Vassar S1,Sui1e 2A 
5 n ' b [$25 nestbio/labs I Cambridge, MA 02139 
Yours truly, 
J es Weis 
CEO, Nest.Bi0 Labs 
Conﬁdential; Th/5 message conrains confrdenrral /‘nformafron and rs /nrended solely for me recip/enr. 
Reproducrron of, or forwarding r0 anyone nor dlrecf/y senr rh/s document IS srr/cr/y forbrdden.
