The Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
Testimony from Jared Auclair, Ph.D.  
The Roux Institute, Portland, Maine  
 
In Support Of  
  
L.D. 1475 
An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development by Establishing a Tax Credit  
  
18 April 2023  
  
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Taxation  Committee, my name 
is Jared Auclair.   I am Vice Provost Research Economic Development and Director of Bioinnovation at 
Northeastern University. I am speaking today on behalf of The Roux Institute in Portland.   As you may be 
aware , founded in 2020 , the Roux Institute ’s primary mission is to help grow Maine’s economy by 
cultivating the development of advanced technologies and building a pipeline of life sciences talent.   
Unique to  our institution, we focus on higher education from the perspective of teaching, research, and 
entrepreneurship in collaboration with industry, non -profits, governmental agencies, and other partners. 
In doing so, we seek to decrease the gap between educati on and professional practice, ensuring that we 
develop the important talent needed to address the global societal challenges of today and the future.    
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D.1475, An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and 
Biotechnology Development by Establishing a Tax Credit.  
  
As Vice Provost Research Economic Development and Director of Bioinnovation my role is to promote 
economic development in a variety of industries, including biotechnology , my own area of professional 
expertise.  In that capacity, I lead a regional coalition that supports the growth of the biotechnology 
industry ac ross New England.   I am privileged to work  closely with many academic, industry, and 
community partners throughout Maine. We have a common goal –  to support and grow Maine’s 
bioeconomy  so that we can create new career  pathways and economic potential for Maine people and 
communities.  
 
Maine is well positioned to capitalize on its proximity to the Boston life sciences epicenter . But 
government and industry must act for that to happen. Other states are creating and execut ing robust 
strategies to grow the bioeconomy. Massachusetts is a good example. Under the leadership of former 
Governor Deval Patrick, the state established a 10 -year, one -billion -dollar investment in life sciences. That 
investment has transformed the Commo nwealth into the global biotechnology leader. So much 
innovation is happening in  Boston that the city cannot keep up with the demand. Massachusetts is now 
taking action to create additional life sciences hubs along the I -495 Corridor. Other states in the region, 
like New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Connecticut, are moving to capitalize on this too.  
 
Bioeconomy momentum in Maine is growing, but more needs to be done. Over the last several years, the 
state of Maine has had a number of institutions coalescing  around the opportunity to support 
biotechnology through workforce development and research in Maine, from the University of Maine 
System  to the Roux Institute, the community colleges and universities , Maine Health, and  beyond.   In 
addition, BioMaine, Foc usMaine and dozens of others highlighted at bioconnectsne.com (our coalition’s 
website)  support the growing bioeconomy in Maine.  Beyond all that, as someone who has a home in 
Bremen, Maine has an attractive quality of life and is condusive to supporting t he biotech industry; heck, 
as a member of the mature workforce I have no desire to commute into Cambridge daily.           
 
Boston and Cambridge also present a unique opportunity for early -stage companies and 
biomanufacturing in Maine and the region.  The recent example of Moderna initially producing its COVID -
19 vaccine in Norwood, MA (~24 miles southwest of Cambridge, MA) to ensure its success, highlights the 
feasibility and importance of locating early -state companies  and manufacturing activities near research 
and development (R&D). With Cambridge, MA as one of the largest hubs for biotechnology research and 
discovery, co -locating biomanufacturing in adjacent areas throughout Maine and New England will 
accelerate innovation and support economic growth in the region . 
 We have seen tax incentives help the biotechnology industry thrive in Massachusetts since 2008, and I 
anticipat e this bill will do the same for Maine.  However, it is more than just a set of tax incentives but  is 
an announcement by the State of Maine that you are open to and ready to support the biotechnology industry.  It shows state partnership and interest.  
 
LD1475 will be a positive influence to attract biotechnology to Maine.  It will make Maine competitive 
with other New England states trying to attract the industry .  By attracting the biotech industry to Maine 
you will be providing high -quality jobs to residents of the state and provide an opportunity for the youth 
of Maine to stay local as well as attracting new Mainers to become residents.  Beyond all that, however, by supporting the biotech industry you will have a positive impact on Maine patients’  lives  by providing 
opportunity and access to life -saving medicines the industry supports !             
   
Thank you for your consideration.   
  
 
Prof. Jared Auclair, Ph.D.  
Vice Provost Research Economic Development  
Director Bioinnovation  
Northeastern University  
 
 
  
  
 

