' 
P.O. B 3547 
Ii m n Saratoga Springs, N)C/)X 
12866 
E3 S T I 
I > €S > O C 3 207-831-1061 
jim@camoinassociates.com 
www.camoinassociates.com 
Testimony of Jim Damicis, Senior Vice President, Camoin Associates 
Re: LD 1475 An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development by 
Establishing a Tax Credit 
April 17, 2023 
Chairperson Grohoski, Chairperson Perry, and members of the Committee on Taxation 
I am Jim Damicis, and I am a resident in Scarborough, Maine. I am the Senior Vice President of 
Camoin Associates and I am here today with my colleague Angela Hallowell, an Economic 
Research Analyst. Thank you for this opportunity to testify regarding LD 1475. Our firm, Camoin 
Associates, was retained by FocusMaine to conduct an objective economic impact assessment of 
the potential development of four biomanufacturing facilities and biotechnology incubators in 
Maine. The Economic Impact Report was submitted electronically with my testimony. 
We studied each region to represent hypothetical scenarios based on where biomanufacturing 
and biotechnology incubators are more likely to locate based on the current presence of similar 
businesses. The four study areas include: 
o The State of Maine 
0 Portland MSA Study Area (York, Cumberland, and Sagadahoc counties) 
0 Lewiston-Auburn MSA and Augusta-Waterville pSA Study Area (Androscoggin and 
Kennebec Counties) 
0 Bangor MSA + Hancock County Study Area (Penobscot and Hancock Counties) 
Based on the assessment we found the following; 
Positive economic and fiscal impacts would be significant, both statewide and regionally 
within Maine. 
In total, the operation of these four facilities would result in the creation of 573 jobs, an 
associated $42.9 million annual earnings, and $112.8 million annual sales throughout the state. 
These totals are the sum of the direct, indirect, and induced impacts. In addition, these 
economic impacts would be associated with $2.1 million of new sales tax revenue for the state, 
annually. While it is not calculated in this study, it is anticipated that there will be additional local 
property tax benefits and state income tax beneﬁts based on each project. 
The development of new biomanufacturers and biotechnology incubators will support 
overall growth of Maine's biotech cluster. 
This will have positive impacts for both the statewide and regional economies beyond what is 
quantified in a traditional economic impact analysis. This includes:
0 Support new investment in Maine's biotech cluster. The addition of new biotech 
companies in Maine has the potential to increase venture capital investment in the 
industry. By providing funding to grow companies, biotech innovation is transformed 
into economic growth and cluster expansion. 
0 Increase innovation through research and development expenditures. Newjobs created 
by biotechnology tax incentives have the potential to generate new R&D investment in 
the state each year. 
0 Create new opportunities to retain higher education graduates. 46% of Maine public 
university graduates of Biological 8L Biomedical programs leave the state for work,a 
figure that could be improved by new jobs in the biotechnology field. This will further 
the concentration of biotech-related skills and intellectual capital in the state while 
growing Maine's tax base. 
0 Increase opportunities to keep industry workers and wages in-state. ln 2022, most of 
the key occupations in the biotechnology sector in Maine have negative net commuters, 
meaning some workers have to leave the state to access jobs; this could be mitigated 
by growing numbers of biotechnology sector jobs created by the proposed tax 
incentive. 
0 Expand Maine's biotech cluster by utilizing existing talent. Recent data shows that there 
is a relative underutilization of biotech talent in the region, which may be leveraged to 
expand the biotech cluster in Maine. 
Impacts generated as a result of new facilities will multiply on an ongoing basis. 
The nature of incubators and accelerators is such that economic benefits will continue to 
multiply and grow over time. For example, on-site jobs are intended to result in spin off activity, 
leading to the generation of new businesses and products as the cluster develops and more 
companies are established, ensuring continued growth of the positive benefits for years to 
come. 
Demand for facilities is consistent with recent and projected trends in the U.S and 
northeast for biotechnology and biomanufacturing — this policy and investment would 
allow Maine to capture these northeast region economic opportunities and related benefits 
and further grow its biotechnology and manufacturing industry. 
Nationally, the biomedical sector is strong and growing, with projected employment growth of 
4.2% annually over the next five years. Maine's Biomedical Manufacturing sector is strong, 
competitive, and emerging in the state. ln Maine, biomedical manufacturing is one of the fastest- 
growing sectors growing by over 60% and adding over 2,750 jobs from 2017-2022. Meanwhile, 
the sector plays a large role in supporting the state's exports; $3.2 billion of sales were exported 
in 2022. Overall, more than 83% of the biomedical sectors‘ sales are exported out of state. 
Moreover, recent research shows that the Massachusetts life science sector is expected to havea 
talent supply deficit of up to nearly 7,000 positions through 2026 that the state's pipeline would
be unable to fill. This deficit elsewhere in New England, paired with Maine's current 
underutilization of biotech talent, leads to an ideal environment for biotechnology investment 
within the state, which will further accelerate the status of Maine's biomanufacturing and 
biotechnology ecosystem. 
Tax credit and resulting development are consistent with past investments and existing 
strategies and strengths in Maine. 
The biotechnology and biomedical manufacturing industries are a key component of the State's 
recent and historic policy priorities. This plan includes strategies of increasing R&D investment 
and promoting exports through the support of startups, new ventures, and small businesses. 
In the past 25 years, Maine has seen great progress in its biomedical ecosystem and industry 
performance. lt is a critical targeted growth industry with existing assets and strengths, including: 
o Strong industry group and industry —driven initiatives such as BioME and FocusMaine 
0 World-class research and academic institutions including the University of Maine and non- 
profit research labs supported by R&D investments. 
o Start-up ecosystem for support and investment, including organizations like the Maine 
Technology Initiative, Small Enterprise Growth Fund, Maine Center for Entrepreneurs, and 
more. 
In Sum: 
Maine's existing assets in the bio—based economy and its status as an emerging sector contribute 
to an environment that is ripe for the creation of incubators to support spin—off companies in the 
state. Additionally, this proposal fills a critical gap in Maine's emerging bioscience sector. 
Companies that scale to manufacturing are in need of small-to —medium flex space, including 
existing manufacturers investing in more capacity. This proposal would both strengthen the 
specific target sector, but also offer cross-sector benefits for Maine manufacturing overall as well 
as transportation and logistics, providing high paying jobs at all levels. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify and present and we are happy to answer any questions.
