   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1475, An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology 
Development by Establishing a Tax Credit 
 
April 18, 2023 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
Maura Pillsbury and I am an analyst at Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am here today to 
testify in opposition to LD 1475.  
 
This bill would provide up $18 million in tax credits for businesses making qualifying 
investments of between $5 million - $15 million in building a biotechnology incubator or 
biomanufacturing facility. The tax credit is six percent of the qualified investment, limited to 
$900,000 a year for five years, with a total limit of $4.5 million per recipient. 
 
I’d like to first convey that we recognize the importance of attracting high growth sectors to 
Maine and we appreciate the effort to tackle important issues that this bill represents. We 
agree that supporting and expanding high growth sectors in Maine is an important goal, which 
can lead to job growth and boost Maine’s economy. However, we do not believe this proposal 
is an optimal approach for supporting this growth, and there are other approaches that would 
be a better use of public dollars. 
 
First, the bill as written does not actually require attraction of new biomanufacturing or 
biotechnology in order for a business to receive the credit. It requires investment in facilities 
but does not require tenants or occupancy. The bill does limit the credit if over 25 percent of 
the facility is used for a purpose aside from biotechnology or biomanufacturing, but does not 
address what will happen if the facility is built or renovated and remains vacant. 
 
Second, this credit is refundable, which means the state could be writing substantial checks to 
businesses that have no Maine tax liability and are not even primarily located within the state 
of Maine. This means any funds received through this tax credit are not guaranteed to be 
reinvested back in our state. We applaud the inclusion of a clawback provision, which would 
recoup funds if a recipient does not make the promised investment. If the Committee chooses 
to move this bill forward, we urge the Committee to also include a sunset date, which would 
provide for more proactive reconsideration of whether the credit should continue in the 
future. 
 
Third, we believe other types of investments in building Maine’s workforce are more important 
than providing tax cuts to already wealthy businesses. These investments, such as child care, 
paid family leave, and providing education and training, would help support Mainers’ pursuit of 
jobs in these sectors. Research has shown that incubators may not deliver on their promises,i 
 
  
 and their success largely depends on the ability of the incubator to match the services it 
provides to the needs of participants.ii Incubators typically provide support to young firms and 
entrepreneurs. We believe supporting entrepreneurs themselves would be a more effective 
and equitable approach.  
 
Finally, the state of Maine should carefully consider investments we make with public money.  
This program has a high price tag but gives the state limited control. Unlike for example, a 
grant program, a tax credit such as this gives millions of dollars to businesses for qualifying 
projects with limited reporting requirements, and no mechanism to end funding if the state 
decides it is a dubious investment of taxpayer money. The bill as written includes no 
requirements for quality job creation or other benchmarks that would gauge the success of 
this investment of Mainers’ tax dollars. When the state uses public money to subsidize 
businesses, we should have a higher bar for the types of projects we fund than giving 
guaranteed money away without any guarantee of outcomes. With no guardrails on this tax 
credit, recipients will receive the credit regardless of their success. OPEGA has recently 
undertaken evaluations of four programs very similar in structure to this one. Year after year, 
we see reports on these types of credits in our state fail to show any measurable impact on 
improving outcomes for investments and the workforce. Shouldn’t we make investments with 
public money that have a better guarantee of return? 
 
Thank you for your time, I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Contact information: maura@mecep.org 
 
i The Kauffman Foundation, “Are Incubators Beneficial to Emerging Businesses?” 15 March 2015 
https://www.kauffman.org/currents/are-incubators-beneficial-to-emerging-businesses/  
ii van Weele, Marijn Frank J. van Rijnsoever, and Frans Nauta “You can't always get what you want: How 
entrepreneur's perceived resource needs affect the incubator's assertiveness.” Technovation, Volume 59, 
2017, Pages 18-33.  
