 
 
131st MAINE LEGISLATURE 
THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON TAXATION 
   
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1475 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Taxation, my name is Peter DelGreco, President & CEO of Maine & Co.  My 
organization exists to find growing companies and show them how they can be 
successful in establishing an operation in Maine.  Created during the administration of 
Governor Angus King, we are a privately funded 501(c)6.  We compete with states from 
the entire country and countries around the world to attract new jobs and investment to 
Maine.  We also work with existing Maine companies, helping them implement their 
growth plans.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share why I support LD 1475.   
 
At Maine & Co. we are excited to see new tools introduced to attract new investment and 
job creation.  Whether it is from in-state companies growing or out-of-state companies 
looking for investment opportunities, new capital investment in Maine helps create new 
jobs, spur novel innovation, and introduce fresh skills to our workforce.  These activities 
lead to more economic growth, more productivity growth, and more people wanting to 
call Maine home. 
 
LD 1475 is targeted to help create these outcomes in a specific industry.  Over the years, 
we have worked tirelessly with companies outside of Maine in the biotechnology 
industry.  When they expand, we know what kind of programs they are seeking.  LD 
1475 is the type of program that will get the attention of these companies. 
 
I’m thankful that the legislature is considering these types of creative proposals to 
attract new investment to Maine.  Our economic growth is dependent on private sector 
investment into our state.  The more that we can develop smart, affordable programs 
tied to specific outcomes, the more likely we are to build out an economy that we want to 
see throughout the state. 
 
Thank you again and I urge this committee to support LD 1475. 

