i ‘ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUsTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
‘*‘ TTY: (207) 287-4469 
H Sawin Millett, Jr. 
37 Golden Guemsey Drive 
Waterford, ME 04088 
207-583-4842 
Sawin Millett@legislature.maine.gov 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, I am Representative Sawin 
Millett and It is my pleasure to cosponsor LD 1475, An Act to Promote 
Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development by Establishing a 
Tax Credit. LD I475 would provide a meaningful tax credit to a limited 
number of applicants to build some biotech incubators and some 
biomanufacturing operations, likely stemming from these incubators. It 
represents the type of public/private partnership needed to spawn and 
accelerate a nascent industry. It is a short-term state investment to 
bolster the development of a stronger bioscience economy. 
At the outset, I want to clarify that the incubators incentivized by this 
bill would be privately owned and operated. Years ago, some of you 
may recall, the State itself invested in incubator spaces in various 
regions. Those incubators did not prove very fruitful for all sorts of 
reasons. But this bill is targeting something very different. This bill 
would provide an incentive to privately owned and operated incubators, 
as a public/private partnership. 
Biotech is the new economic frontier, and we have a lot of the elemental 
pieces to grow a strong biotech sector. These elements include leading 
higher education research institutions, a strong community college 
system that will help build a pipeline of workers, a growing number of 
biotech companies in Maine, and a manufacturing heritage. We can doa 
lot more to tap into the resources in Boston, and I believe this bill will 
help us to do so. 
Maine House District 81
I recommend this bill to you for several reasons. Perhaps the strongest 
reason is that with a privately owned and operated incubator facility will 
come tenants who will make investments in the form of research and 
development investments, and who will be supported by venture capital 
as they emerge from the incubator. These are the types of investments 
that we need to see in Maine to grow and strengthen our economy and to 
provide good job opportunities for Maine citizens. 
I would also like to say a few words about the ﬁscal note that will be 
attached to this bill. The bill is drafted such that any tax credit awarded 
under this bill will not impact the current biennial budget. We will, of 
course, need to look at the future ﬁscal impact, which is very well 
deﬁned in the bill and would not exceed $3.6 million a year for 5 years, 
if the credit were fully utilized as soon as possible. Likely, it will take 
longer for applicants to qualify, and we’d see that maximum amount be 
spread over more than 5 years. 
While we don’t do dynamic ﬁscal impacts, it is fair to say that should 
any facility be built and qualify for this tax credit, it would be 
stimulating property tax payments, wages that will in turn pay income 
taxes, employment taxes and sales taxes, both directly and indirectly. 
Finally, and importantly, biomanufacturing provides excellent career 
opportunities. ()ur emerging workforce and young adults will beneﬁt by 
our leadership in accelerating this sector in Maine, helping them to 
secure meaningful jobs and a promising career path. Providing our 
young adults with in tum will strengthen our schools and communities. 
For these reasons, I ask that you give favorable consideration to this 
legislation. 
Maine House District 81
