//,\ \' 
my |a!.§Il§S 
The Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Testimony from Dr. Shardule Shah, CEO, Lime Therapeutics 
In Support Of 
L.D. 1475 
An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development by Establishing a Tax 
Credit 
18 April 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Taxation Committee, my 
name is Shardule Shah. I am CEO at Lime Therapeutics, a fast-growing startup dedicated to finding 
breakthrough treatments for diseases of aging, including cancer and neurodegenerative disorders. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD1475. 
The story of Lime Therapeutics is similar to many other early-stage biotech startups currently 
headquartered in established life sciences hubs such as Boston, the Bay Area, and New York. We 
work around the clock to find ways to bring medicines to patients in need. Our team is passionate 
and mission-driven. And we find ways to take advantage of the many resources that large city hubs 
have to offer — a diverse talent pool for recruitment, many other similar companies to collaborate 
with, a large venture capital network, and established universities and hospitals to run clinical trials. 
However, all of these resources come at a cost, literally. Facilities are more expensive. Hiring is 
sometimes cost-prohibitive due to skyrocketing rent prices in large cities. Relatedly, cost of living is 
also an issue for employees of startups, who are often working at below market rates, for the 
moonshot prospect of hitting it big, scientifically and potentially financially. 
The challenge deepens for those with children such as me. I often think, isn't there a place that 
offers everything I could want — great biotech resources, a strong job market for my wife, good 
public schools for my children, and a manageable cost-of-living? No one place is perfect, but LD 
1475 would be a strong step forward toward Maine continuing on its trajectory toward becoming 
an attractive destination for emerging biotech companies. 
Acts in other states similar to LD 1475 have helped to fuel a biotech boom. I want to point toa 
program run by the New York State government called StartUp NY, which provides fantastic 
economic incentives for those desiring to build in New York. This is what led Lime Therapeutics to 
establish its headquarters there. 
As we grow, I personally would be very interested in expanding our operations into Maine when the 
time comes. Though I have never lived here myself, I only hear the most positive stories from both 
lifelong residents and those that have more recently moved to Maine. To me, expansion into Maine
//Q' 
QQJ lfhelrglgugs 
would represent moving toward the kind of union I described above — combining a great place to be 
with a great place to do business. 
By offering the kind of incentives for groups to build incubator facilities and manufacturing facilities, 
this bill would be a critical step in sowing the seeds of the creation of hundreds or thousands of 
high-paying STEM jobs, enriching the state in so many different ways. I'd like to close by 
paraphrasing from Field of Dreams, "lf you provide the incentives to build it, they will come." 
Thank you for your consideration. 
MM Shardule Shah, PhD, MBA 
Co-founder and CEO, Lime Therapeutics
