  
2022 -2023  
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice President  
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasurer  
Walter F. McKee  
 
Secretary  
Sarah E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dylan R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess  
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
May 2, 2023  
 
Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
100 S tate House Station, Room 43 6 
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1625– An Act to Update Criminal Indictment Procedures and 
Expand the Provision of Counsel to Certain Indigent Defendants  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Representative  Salisbury , and Members of the 
Committ ee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety : 
 
MACDL provides this testimony in support of  LD 1625 .  
 
The current law provides  that, “[b]efore arraign ment , competent defense counsel shall 
be assigned by the Superior or District Court , unless waived by the acc used after 
being fully advised of his rights by the court, in all criminal cases charging a felony, 
when it appears t o the court that the accused has not sufficient means to employ 
counsel.” 15 M.R.S. § 810.  See also  Maine  Rule  of Unified Criminal Proc edure 44, 
which additionall y requires the court to a ssign counsel for indigent persons accused of  
murder, Class A, B, or C offenses  (felonies) , and in Class D  and E offenses 
(misde meanors)  unless there is no risk of jail  upon convicti on.   
 
The goal  of LD 1625 is to provide competent de fense counsel not only to those 
indigent persons who are charged with felonies  or have a risk of jail , but also to those 
indigent persons charged with non-felony  offenses where there  is no risk of jail  and 
who have a physical, mental , or emotional disabili ty preve nting them from fairly 
participa ting in the criminal justice system without counsel , and nonciti zens who may 
face a risk of adv erse immigration consequences.  
 
Under LD 1625, those persons  would be enti tled to counsel regard less of whether they 
are charged with a felony or misdemeanor and whether there is any risk of jail. In 
current practice, there are times whe n the court does appoint  counsel to an individual 
charged with a m isdemeanor who has a disability or is a noncitizen , even th ough there 
is no risk of jail. However, the bene fit of counsel shoul d not  be left to the discretion of 
an indiv idual Judge or Justice , resulting in inc onsistent practices throughout the State .  
 
Instead, the Legislature should require that the court always  provide compe tent 
defense co unsel to these cohor ts of defen dants. Assignment of counsel to those 
persons with disabilities  is a reasonable accommodation  that is not unduly 
burdensome to the St ate of Maine. Moreover, assignment of counsel w ould a id the  
 
 
 
 
 
courts in facilit ating resolution of cases in a more efficient manner.  
 
Regarding noncit izens, ofte ntimes those persons face very real, harsh, immigration     consequences 
if they plead guilty or are convict ed of a misdemeanor crime , e.g., theft crimes  and drug possession 
crimes,  even if there is no risk of  jail.  
 
Currently Mai ne Rule of Unified Criminal Procedure 11 (h), states :  
 
(h) Potential Adverse Immigration Consequences to Noncitizens 
of the Plea to Any Crime.  Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo 
contende re for any crime, the court shall inquire w hether the 
defendant was born in the United States. If, based on the defendant ’s 
answer, it appears that the defendant is not a United States citizen, the 
court shall ascertain from defense counsel whether the def endant has 
been advised of the risk un der federal law of adverse immigration 
consequences, including deportation, as a result of the plea. If no such 
advice has been provided, or if the defendant is unrepresented, the 
court shall notify the defendant that the plea can create a risk of 
advers e immigration consequences, including deportation, and may 
continue the proceeding in order for counsel to provide the required 
advice or, in the case of an unrepresented defendant, for in vestigation 
and consideration of  the consequences by the defendant. The court is 
not required or expected to inform the defendant of the nature of any 
adverse immigration consequences.   
 
Practically speaking, if  an indigent defendant has no counsel because  they have  no risk of jail, the n 
it is unlikely that they would be able to do muc h in the way of investigation and consideration of any 
immigration consequ ences prior to entering a plea. I n contrast, if that same indigent defe ndant had 
the bene fit of assigned competent defense counsel, that attorney  would have the benefit and advice 
from a competent immigration attorney that contrac ts with the Maine Commission o n Indig ent Legal 
Services to assist and advi se its rostered attorneys  on potential immigration consequen ces. 
Moreover, this ad vice should not come at the end of case proce edings when t here is a plea agreement 
reached, but instead at the beginning of th e process when coun sel is in a better position to  gather 
information  and use that information in negotiations and provide the necessary advice to their client .  
 
To ensure that al l indigent accused in Maine receive the due process to which they are entitle d and to 
ensure that everyone is being treated fairly and equal ly under the law so that all  noncitizens have the 
benefit of the same competent legal advice concerning consequence s of any guilty plea or criminal  
conviction, MACDL supports LD 1625.  
 
Thank you for allowing MACDL to address  this important issue.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
/s/ Ambe r L. T ucker  
Amber  L. Tucker  
President  
 
