Celeste Carey
Newcastle
LD 952
Celeste Carey
Newcastle, Maine
April 13, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 952, An Act to Create a 21st-Century Electric Grid  
Senate Chair Lawrence, House Chair Zeigler, and members of the Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology,
My name is Celeste Carey. I live in Newcastle. I am in support of this legislation 
presented by Representative Runte.
Today CMP makes its money from transmitting and distributing electricity 
predominately generated from natural gas bought on the open market with prices set 
for the year. Rates are presently high and we are told we could have a rate hike in 
August of 2023 and each summer following for two more years if the PUC favorably 
considers CMP's latest request in Docket 2022-00152. I just attended the PUC hearing
in Saco for public feedback on this matter. People talked of their bills being so high 
they could not imagine how they could possibly pay for any more increases or 
imagine where the money requested by CMP would need to be so urgently spent. 
Another part of CMP's request was for two pilot projects involving battery storage 
that is counter to Maine's divestment statute of 1997. Scientists consider battery 
storage generation by proxy. CMP also wanted money to implement network 
management improvements, which intervenors found would be a way to pass on to 
ratepayers the cost of addressing prior CMP due diligence deficiencies identified by 
OPA.
This is not an auspicious start to our new electrical energy future. We must really get 
down to the business of distributing and managing our renewable energy resources. 
One Parsonsfield testifier at the Saco hearing talked of years of unexplained delays by
CMP in getting their Brownfield site solar project ready for interconnection. The 
project remains undone, we were told.
On April 6th, Larry Holloway, Professional Engineer, asserted in surrebuttal 
testimony on behalf of Maine OPA, “With limited or no oversight, CMP will be under
internal pressure to select projects that generate the most return for its shareholders, 
not projects that may be needed to improve use of the distribution system.”
This is, I think, a strong argument for the need of an independent Distribution System 
Operator.
Thank you for considering my testimony.
Celeste Carey
