Senator Lawrence 
Representative Zeigler 
Members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee 
Re: LD 952, An Act to Create a 21“ -Century Electric Grid 
My name is Debra Hart and I am a resident of Manchester, Maine. I am 
providing these comments in opposition to LD 952 on behalf of the Dirigo 
Electric Cooperative Companies. . 
The COUs see this bill as problematic and unnecessary. There is no need to 
spend money to have a consultant create a proposal for the design ofa 
Distribution System Operator (DSO). Having a DSO in place would take the 
oversight and operation of a COU’s electric system out of the hands of the 
utility and put it into a governmental agency. This would add an unnecessary 
layer of bureaucracy that would impede a COU from performing its utility 
function in a timely, efficient, and effective manner while improving reliability 
and customer service. The listed duties of the DSO are already being 
performed by the utilities and other existing state agencies. Specifically, are 
the following comments: 
Section 1, subsection 1 lists the items the the DSO must be designed to do. 
A. A new state agency is not needed for integrated system planning. 
B. The COUs and the other utitilites are responsible for grid operation, 
efficiency, equity, reliability and customer service. Having another 
entity provide these fundamental functions of an utility would be 
stripping the utility of being an utility and being responsible for its 
utility functions. 
It is unclear what how it is intended for the DSO to “provide” these 
core utility functions. Would the DSO replace the exiting utility 
employees currently responsible for these functions? Would the DSO 
tell the exiting utility employees what they must do and how they 
must do it?
Under either scenario, who is responsible if the utility functions are 
not performed to the level expectd or required? ls it what is left of 
the utility or is it the DSO? 
Again, the creation and even just the studying of a DSO in not needed. 
If an utility is not meeting the requirements of these functions, the 
Maine Public Utilities Commission [MPUC) has the ability to have the 
utility take actions to change and improve. 
There are cost and rate implications for how all of the utility 
functions are performed. The COUs take into account the unique 
circumstances of each of their utilities when making decisions. This 
decision making must remain with the COUs. 
C. We are not completely sure what is meant by electricity market 
administration. If it means procure Standard Offer Service electricity 
supply pricing and terms, the Consumer Owned utilities have the 
ability to do that for themselves and have been doing such with 
overall very reasonably good prices. The ability for the COUs to 
continue to do so must remain. There does not need to be another 
state agency to perform this function. 
D. Electric system planning is a core utility function. Taking this away 
from a COU or another utility would, again be stripping the utility of 
being a utility. 
The end of Section 1 of this bill states, "The DSO design may not include the 
acquisition or ownership of any transmission and distribution utility assets". 
The COUs believe that relieving the COUs of their utility functions takes away 
the relationship between the COUs and its consumers who are its owners. It 
would take away the accountability that COUs have to its consumer/ owners 
as decisions would be made by a state agency and not through the local 
elected Board of Directors. Having a DSO would take away the control that the 
consumer/ owners of a COU have over its utility. 
Section 1, subsection 2 of the bill list items that the DSO may be designed to 
do. Another state agency is not needed for these items as the utilities are 
responsible for them or an existing state agency is.
This bill is not needed as the elements included in the bill are already being 
performed by the utilities or other agencies and the MPUC can take action 
with an utility if necessary. There is no need to unnecessarily spend money to 
study something that is not necessary and if enacted would be to the 
detriment of the consumer/ owners of the COUs. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I'd be happy to answer any questions 
you may have.
