CENTRAL MAINE 
POWER 
Kathleen Newman, Director of Government Affairs and Community Relations 
LD 952 Resolve, To Create a 21$‘-Century Electric Grid 
April 13, 2023 
Testifying: Neither for nor against 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (”EUT"), my name is Kathleen Newman, presenting testimony nether for 
nor against LD 952 Resolve, To Create a 21“-Century Electric Grid. 
This Resolve directs the Governor's Energy Office to hire third-party consultants to designa 
proposal for a distribution system operator (DSO) in Maine that would be charged with 
overseeing integrated system planning for all electric grids in Maine, providing grid operations, 
market administration, and facilitation of power system planning. 
CMP’s primary aim is to cost-effectively position the grid to meet the demands of the future and 
we are working diligently to meet those demands. Storms of greater severity and frequency 
requiring more grid flexibility, planning and managing for more solar generation, battery storage, 
beneficial electrification and demand response type resources, and bringing on greater amounts 
of intermittent renewable resources - all of these scenarios require proactive planning to 
understand and meet the challenges ahead. They will require strategic investment that will be 
costly to customers but will also be highly beneficial as we move to the future. 
ln general, CMP supports the concept of working together with all interested parties on how to 
best plan for the future and believes a study such as that contemplated in Section 1 of this 
resolve, if conducted with significant utility involvement, could be of value. 
CMP is actively engaged in the ongoing grid planning exercise at the Commission ‘ , required by 
the Governor's ”utility accountability" legislationz passed last session. The Commission is hearing 
from stakeholders now and will issue an Order later this year directing utilities to make a grid 
planning filing consistent with the findings in the Docket. We support a comprehensive plan for 
the future because we believe such an effort will more likely lead to cost-effective solutions to 
addressing the new challenges, but caution that costs and benefits of creating a DSO will be 
extremely difficult to quantify. 
Docket No. 2022-00322, Priorities for Grid Plan Filings 
2 Public Law 2021, Chapter 702
The Commission's process already underway will be comprehensive. If the additional effort 
contemplated in this bill goes forward, we would encourage an amendment to assure that the 
work already underway is not wasted by having the two processes dovetail. We look forward to 
participating in any such discussions. 
Thank you for your consideration.
