Maine Conservation Voters 
Inform. VOIE. Protect. 
Testimony of Kelt Wilska, Energy Justice Manager, Maine Conservation Voters 
Before the Energy, Utilities, and Technology Committee 
In Support of LD 952 
An Act to Create a 21st-Century Electric Grid 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and distinguished members of the 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology Committee. My name is Kelt Wilska and I am the Energy 
Justice Manager at Maine Conservation Voters, a nonproﬁt organization dedicated to protecting 
Maine’s environment, democracy, and climate future. Thank you for the opportunity to testify 
today in support of LD 952, An Act to Create a 21st-Century Electric Grid. 
Maine prides itself in being a national leader in the clean energy transition. Governor Mills has 
advanced the goal of 100% clean energy in Maine from 2050 to 2040. The State is ahead of 
schedule in meeting its goal of 100,000 electric heat pump installations by 2025. This bill 
presents another groundbreaking opportunity for Maine to lead in the clean energy transition by 
becoming the ﬁrst state in the nation to establish a Distributed System Operator, or DSO. By 
establishing a DSO after a comprehensive third-party analysis, Maine can more efﬁciently tackle 
the climate crisis and answer the urgent call for action on our electricity grid that so many 
Mainers have been voicing. 
New England’s Independent System Operator, ISO-NE, has the obligation following FERC 
Order 2222 to allow distributed generators such as rooftop solar panels access to wholesale 
electricity markets. By operating its own open-access distributed generation market, Maine’s 
DSO could function as an aggregator for distributed generators, delivering to ISO-NE an eﬁicient 
solution for determining how to bring innovative renewable electricity solutions to our grid at 
least cost. 
There is a resounding community spirit in our state, a desire to look out for our neighbors and 
care for our environment, and this is reﬂected in many Mainers’ choices to install rooftop solar 
panels and small-scale battery storage on their homes and make the leap to electric vehicles. A 
DSO makes the most of these conscious consumer choices and efficiently aggregates them for 
use in Maine and beyond, all the while ensuring a robust Integrated Distribution Planning (IDP)
process that brings together load management, traditional poles and wires, and non-wire 
alternatives under one entity. 
Maine Conservation Voters sees a DSO as a powerful step forward in harnessing our state’s 
distributed generation potential and strongly supports this process to tailor its functions to the 
unique needs of our state. We urge you to support LD 952.
