 
 
 
April 13, 2023  
Senator Mark Lawrence , Chair  
Representative Stanley  Paige Zeigler , Chair  
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: Testimony  on LD 952, “A Resolve  to Create a 21st Century Electric Grid ” 
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler , and members of the Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology  Committee:  
 
Founded  right here in Maine  twenty years ago , ReVision Energy is a local, employee owned , 
certified B Corp oratio n with over 385 employee s across our five branches in  New Englan d, with 
220 staff in Maine at our Montville and South Portland locations . Our mission is to lead our 
community in solving the environmental problems caused by fossil fuels while alleviating soc ial 
injustice to ensure  New England is a thriving place  where our children, grandchildren, and future 
generations can enjoy a clean environment and just society . In 2022 alone, we installed 10,000  
kilowatts of residential solar and nearly 24 megawatts of commercial sola r across the region , 
eliminating over 950,000,000 pounds of future CO2 emissions . 
 
We believe that  modernizing our electric grid is an absolutely critical  component of achieving 
our s tate’s statutory  renewable portfolio standard  of achieving 80% of clean electricity by 2030 . 
That modernization will certainly include infrastructure upgrades, but it also requires 
modernizing grid planning and operation  and for these reasons, we are here today in support of 
LD 952.  
 
Fortunately, there is broad agreement from all parties that Maine must advance its grid planning 
efforts.  In 2020, the Maine Climate Council’s Maine Won’t Wait Climate Plan identified the 
importance of power sector transformation within its strategy  to reduce carbon emissions 
through clean energy innovation . In 2021, the Maine  Utility/Regulatory Reform  and 
Decarbonizat ion Initiative  Stakeholder Group’s top recommendation was the need for a holistic 
grid planning process , agreeing that  while utilities play a critical role , they  should not lead a 
planning process , and noted that Maine should  both act urgently and take advantage of 
innovat ion, with some members supporting the development and leadership of a new 
independent entity.  Last session, LD 1959 started both utility and PUC grid planning processes, 
while LD 936  kicked off the DG 2.0 Stakeholder group, with both bi lls noting the importance of 
comprehensive grid planning. All this to say, it’s clear leaders across Maine’s  energy sector and 
on this committee agree in the need to address the future of our grid. We believe that LD 952 
represents an important first step  in that direction.  
 
In particular, we see significant value  and opportunity  in the creation of a n independent  grid 
planning function  that is transparent, equitable and accessible  to replace the opaque , utility and 
special interest  controlled process we have today . As this c ommittee understands, one  
consequence of our existing regulatory system  is that  the investor -owned monopoly utilities  
have a built-in bias towards capital investment , because that is the basis  upon which their 
shareholders  can earn a healthy return on investment. But as Maine has learned through its 
experience with non wires alternatives and Efficiency Maine -led load shifting and demand 
response programs —in the 21st century , not all distribution  challenges are most cost effectively 
solved through capital investment alone.  An independent  and transparent  grid planning function 
 
 
led by a Distribution System Operator (DSO) would allow for more effective and equitable 
consideration of the whole range o f solutions, which ultimately will result in lower costs for 
ratepayers . 
 
In addition  to solving for the  structural  information and resource asymmetry which hinder s the 
current utility planning process, a DSO led utility planning process  provides an opportunity to 
modernize the planning function and to align those plans with state and regional energy goals.  
Utility led capital investment planning is nearly entirely backwards looking , simply projecting 
forward the trends of the last handfu l of years to anticipate future needs. Given the rate of 
change and evolution  we require  in our  energy system s over the next several decades, that  
model is wholl y insufficient. Without modernizing the planning process,  our grid will continue to 
be the bott leneck to deploying clean energy and beneficial electrification solutions  and will 
ultimately prevent us from  achiev ing our state’s energy portfolio goals.  Maine needs —and 
deserves -- something  more.     
 
Fortunately, w e believe this bill provides a sound and reasonable approach to deep ening  our 
state’s technical expertise  in grid planning by bringing on a consultant and providing time bound 
reports to the Governor’s Energy Office and this committee , allowing key parties the opportunity 
to digest recommendations and adopt solutions that will work best for us here in Maine.   
 
A DSO  is a model that can transform our electric grid to address the needs we have to power 
our society today —and into the future . A DSO —think:  an ISO for distribution —would ultimately 
oversee integrated system planning for all electric grids in Maine (and any interconnecting 
systems) to optimize efficiency and reliability . Essentially , this would separat e distribution and 
transmission , creating an entity that can manage and coordinate the electric system at a more 
granular level, which allow s for more effective coordination of distributed generation and 
demand response.   
 
A DSO operates holistically, creating financial incentives to re shape demand on the system: 
sending economic signals to both generators and consumers and honing in on everything from 
generation to time of use rates to evaluating opportunities behind the meter.  A DSO can 
maximize integration of distributed energy resou rces to help Maine proactively address and take 
advantage of all sources coming down the pike, from offshore wind procurements to small 
modular nuclear. The entity and its management can ultimately help all ratepayers through 
demand response management, ef ficiency, increasing competition, and combatting higher 
pricing.   
 
Ultimately , this structure is  beneficial to utilities  as it helps maintain reliability (something Maine 
has been worst in the nation at for years) and ensure resiliency in the face of a rap idly changing 
environment  (these winter storms aren’t stopping anytime soon) , but even more,  it can 
showcase smart investment opportunities  with viable ROI , too.   
 
Finally , we believe an independent operator model would be effective at bringing current 
functions that are currently executed by multiple entities (i.e. utilities managing poles and wires, 
Efficiency Maine managing DERs, and the Office of the Public Advocate man aging non wires 
alternative s) under one roof to allow for coordination, efficiency, and development of expertise.  
 
Knowing w e all agree that forward -thinking grid planning is part of the solution —let’s act in a 
forward -thinking  manner  and bring in the resources  we need to get us there. We believe the 
fiscal allocation is a small price to pay for expertise that could save Mainers money through grid 
 
 
efficiency and market expansion  for decades to come . This legislation is a thoughtful, 
incremental approach  to moving Maine ’s grid  forward.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of our perspective . We welcome further discussion, and we 
are available to address any questions you may have.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Fortunat Mueller  
President, Co -Founder  
ReVision Energy  
207.221.6342  
 
 

