 
 
 
 
 
Acadia Center Testimony on LD 952, An Ac t To Create a 21st-Century Electric Grid 
 
Committee on Energy, Ut ilities and Technology 
By Oliver Tully, Acadia Center 
April 13, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Represen tative Zeigler, and me mbers of the Committee: 
I’m Oliver Tully, Director of the Utility Innovation initiative  at Acadia Center. Thank you for the opportunity to testify 
on LD 952, An Act to Create a 21st-Century Electric Grid. Acadia Center supports efforts to reform how utilities in 
Maine are regulated and to rethink how energy is provid ed to ensure the best possible outcomes for ratepayers.  
Today, investor-owned utilities face a financial conflict of interest that has a real impa ct on customers. By having a 
financial stake in the types of investments that are approved by regulators, the interests of utilities and their 
shareholders may not be fully aligned with  those of ratepayers. We can see this in the difference between the rate of 
return that utilities are allowed to earn on large capita l investments compared to ot her investments that may be 
cleaner and cheaper but are co nsidered operating expenses  and are passed through to customers without an added 
rate of return and therefore provide less of an incentive to invest in.  
LD 952 proposes an alternative structur e for operating the electricity system and providing energy to customers that 
seeks to overcome problems with the existing utility re gulatory structure. A well-de signed Distribution System 
Operator that has an explicit mandate to improve system resiliency, reduce greenhouse  gas emissions, and support 
environmental justice could oversee grid operations and ad minister a market for DERs and energy services in a more 
neutral way that is divorced from the financial incentives an d capital biases that traditional utilities face today.  
In addition to the important issues listed in the bill, Acadia  Center would like to see any study investigating a potential 
DSO model for Maine consider the general fe asibility of having a sing le DSO entity that sits wi thin a state agency being 
in charge of all electric system planning, grid operation s, as well as administration of a competitive energy market. A 
comparison of possible hybrid models between the utilities, DSO, and other entities that considers different options 
for which entity manages grid operation s, administers a competitive energy marketplace as a platform provider, and 
oversees planning, could be valuable. Ev aluating the pros and cons of allowing  existing investor-owned utilities to 
continue to own and build distribution infrastructure, or to own DER assets that can c ompete in a DER marketplace, 
would also be useful.  
Acadia Center also urges legislators to consider how best  to align any potential DSO model with the important work 
currently being conducted at the PUC with  its Integrated Grid Plan ning process, which was requ ired by last year’s LD 
1959, so that any changes do not undermine the progress that could be made in that planning forum.  
Thank you very much.   
2 
 
 
Oliver Tully 
Director, Utility Innovation Initiative  
otully@acadiacenter.org   
650-796-4250 
