Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street e Augusta, Maine 04330 e (207) 622-3101 Q Fax: (207) 622-4343 » www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 952, Resolve, to Create a 21st-Century Electric Grid 
To the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
By Rebecca Schultz, Senior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology, my name is Rebecca Schultz. I am a Senior Advocate for Climate and 
Clean Energy at the Natural Resources Council of Maine. NRCM has been working for more 
than 60 years to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment on behalf of our 25,000 
members and supporters. I am here today to testify in support of the proposed sponsor’s 
amendment to LD 952, a Resolve to Create a 21“ Century Electric Grid. 
This bill seeks to take a hard look at one of the most substantial and debilitating roadblocks in 
our clean energy transition: an outdated utility business model for the electric distribution 
system. Maine would be wise to get out ahead of this problem by undertaking a rigorous analysis 
of how to establish a distribution system operator (DSO), like that which is being proposed in 
LD 952. 
A confluence of factors is causing a once-in-a-century disruption to the power grid. These factors 
include the proliferation of affordable, scalable, and clean distributed energy resource (DER) 
teclmologies- —like solar PV, battery storage, electric vehicles (EVs), and programable 
thermostats and appliances- —and a public policy imperative to decarbonize the economy to curb 
the most catastrophic effects of climate change. 
Symptoms of this disruption are widely manifest in matters before this Committee, in failed 
rooftop interconnection requests, prolonged interconnection queues, aging infrastructure, 
skyrocketing retail rates, a lack of management for EV charging, an inadequate scheme for 
compensating DER energy export, all exposing the inability of the current regulatory and market 
model to handle 21$‘ century challenges. Distributed energy resource technologies pose not just 
challenges but also promise tremendous benefits: resilience, reliability, independence, equity, 
clean air, avoided infrastructure costs, and energy bill savings. The fact that these manifold 
benefits do not accrue to any one party is at the heart of Why they are so difficult to monetize and 
incentivize under the current model. 
Maine is not alone. Jurisdictions around the world are struggling with similar situations, and 
increasingly so. New York, Caljfomia, Australia, and the UK are among those ahead of the 
curve, proactively looking at ways to restructure the distribution system into an open access 
platform to serve high levels of DERs by separating operational and planning functions from 
conventional utility responsibilitiesl Work in this area is inspired by parallel models of 
1 
For a he ful and recent overview see: Evaluatin Alternative Distribution S stem erator Models for California 
V . .g . _ V __ . .’ 
Grid Works, March 2022, available at irti.r_is://' §.;.r'rri3yo ea/fr} E;- 
_cj;3,r;,§_g.7r1t,*rr33@a,,us5Q3/Iivaiuatr;rg¢Alt§;§riatpryg; 
9 dci_s~io r~{Ia iiii orri ia ._do<;2<_ .9 gii.
1
Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street a Augusta, Maine 04330 a (207) 622-3101 e Fax: (207) 622-4343 e www.nr<:m.org 
neutrality as established in the bulk transmission and power markets some 25 years ago, like the 
Independent System Operator for New England (ISO -NE) and other Regional Transmission 
Organizations (RTOs). 
Different conceptual models of a DSO take different approaches to assigning functions and 
relationships. VVhat’s being proposed here in LD 952 is often called an “independent distribution 
system operator ” , whereby the DSO separates the profit-making opportunities of ownership from 
market operations by charging an independent organization with administering the market. 
Where the responsibilities of the utilities, the system operator, and the utility regulator begin and 
end would require careful delineation. 
We offer these recommendations for consideration to the Committee in refining the legislation: 
0 The proposal process outlined should create meaningful opportunities for comment by 
stakeholders, experts, community groups, and other interested parties. 
I The legislation should be explicit about the basic purpose of a distribution system 
operator, i.e., that any DSO for Maine be designed with the stated purposed of achieving 
an equitable, expeditious, cost-effective clean energy transition through improved 
participation of diverse distributed energy resources, demand management and other grid 
service providers? 
0 Affordability should be included as a priority in Section l.1.B. 
0 Aggregated load management should be listed as a market participant in Section 1.2.B. 
0 Other key issues should be posed as questions for the contractor to research and 
problematize, without being unnecessarily prescriptive at the outset. For example: 
o Is it necessary for the DSO to be the “sole interface ” between NE-ISO and Maine 
state grids, as the amendment as it is currently written specifies in Section l.2? 
o Should utilities be permitted to own DER assets and participate in the market? 
o How do the proposed non—wires altematives (N WA) and integrated planning 
functions interface with those currently undertaken by the Public Utilities 
Commission (PUC), Office of Public Advocate (OPA), Efficiency Maine Trust 
(EMT) and investor-owned utilities (IOUs)‘? 
0 The consultant ’s proposal should provide a detailed delineation of functions across the 
PUC, DSO, EMT and the utilities, including regulatory, planning, ownership, and market 
administration functions, and speak to appropriate regulatory mechanisms to monitor and 
reward performance. 
0 We encourage the Committee to keep Section 3 on consultant qualifications intact to 
ensure a high caliber of technical expertise is brought to the project. 
2 On the importance of maximizing benefits and cost-effectiveness for customers, see: Testimony of Lorenzo 
Kristov, on behalf of Just Solar Coalition, before the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, Docket No. E002/GR- 
21-630, October 3, 2022, available at: 
5}‘ gill Ll iii
2
Natural Resources Councll of Maine 
3 Wade Street Q Augusta, Maine 04330 a (207) 622-3101 s Fax: (207) 622-4343 Q www.nrcm.org 
The disruptions we are witnessing in the power sector will only become more confounding and 
more costly if we continue to trudge ahead without taking time now to reimagine how we plan, 
build, and operate the distribution grid for the 21“ century. This bill takes us in the right 
direction. We urge you to Vote Ought to Pass with the suggested amendments. 
Thank you for your consideration.
