some my mom or MNNE ‘§- * 
* . 
Testimonyin Support of LD 952 
Resolve, To Create a 21st-Centruy Electric Grid 
Steven Weems, Board Member, Solar Energy Association of Maine 
~ 
President, Dirigo Community Solar Group 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and other members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology: my name is Steve Weems,a 
Board Member of the Solar Energy Association of Maine; also President of Dirigo 
Community Solar Group, a nonprofit association of 14 small, member-owned_ 
community solarfarms. We think LD 952 addresses serious, important electric energy 
issues in a thoughtful way. Therefore we support it, albeit tentatively, because we just 
don't understand its content and the implications well enough yet. Hopefully this bill 
will facilitate a productive discussion about how to address the issues of planning and 
operating the electric grid required in the 21st Century. 
We're on the record in previous legislative sessions about the need for more 
effective, long~term integrated grid planning. We support the concept of designating a 
statewide distribution system operator (DSO), aligned with State renewal energy. goals, 
and with a commitment to planning and implementing the dynamic, two-way grid of the 
future necessary to integrate distributed energy resources into the system. Our existing 
reliance on investor-owned utilities (lOUs) to do this on their own is not working. The 
lOUs are reactive and oriented toward maximizing short-term shareholder return. We 
think the tentative steps being taken in the direction of integrated grid planning are too 
weak because the ultimate responsibility for planning still is the responsibility of the 
existing lOUs. We thank Representative Runte for bringing forth a bill to break out of 
these doldrums. _V 
44 Thompson St. Brunswick, ME ﬂﬂﬁll-3926 2Q7.?Sl.9@$7 'www.soiarenergyma§ne.org
We also like his emphasis on mandating the engagement of a consultant with‘ 
appropriate outlook and experience, if one exists! We need to stop talking to ourselves 
about these matters and bring in new thinking. Dysfunction is baked into the existing 
system, and seemingly intractable. We want to support this kind of break-out initiative. 
This said, we are unclear about the powers and duties of a DSO, as currently 
outlined in LD 952, and how it could co-exist with the existing lOUs. lt probably is fair to 
say one purpose of the Resolve would be to sort out questions like this. But the list of 
”musts" (Section 1, subsection 1) and ”maybes" (Section 1, subsection 2) appears to be 
sufficiently sweeping (planning, marketing, and operation) to be at odds with the 
sentence that the ”The DSO design may not include the acquisition or ownership of any 
transmission and distribution utility assets." It is hard to imagine how a third-party DSO 
could be effective if the lOUs still own and operate the system assets. 
Maybe the answer is to rework the bill so the Governor's Energy,Office (GEO) and 
the consultant have more latitude. Perhaps the resolve should simply mandate an 
open-ended look at Maine's existing system of electrical system planning, potential 
distribution patterns of future energy resources, and the value of having a DSO aligned 
with Maine's clean energy goals. 
For example, perhaps the consultant could start with Dr. Richard Silkman's work 
titled A New Energy Policy Direction for Maine, A Path way to a Zero-Carbon Economy- 
by 2050; analyze and modify it as deemed necessary; and then develop one or more 
options about how to actually plan and implement an electrical system to achieve a 
zero-carbon economy by 2050. Caveat: Dr. Silkman said this work is based many 
assumptions. He simply defined one path that indicates a zero-carbon economy can be 
achieved, at a digestible cost. We are just using his work as an example of the value of 
good analysis, then being clear about the goal and taking a fresh, creative look about 
what is actually needed to get there. 
This is the approach we so desperately need, given how trapped we are in the 
straightjacket of entrenched structure. Hopefully LD 952 can be worked to become the 
launching pad for such an effort. 
SEAM LD 952 EUT Committee Testimony 4-13-23
2
