suzanne sayer
Kittery
LD 952
Hello Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler  and esteemed members of the joint 
standing committee on Energy Utilities and Technology Committee.
Thank you for allowing me to address you in Support of LD 952 “An Act to Create a 
21st-century Electric Grid".  I think the funding for the study to set up the DSO entity 
should be doubled.   I’m Dr. Suzanne Sayer, a retired nuclear engineer with degrees 
from MIT, VaTech, and Tufts.  I have 15 years’ experience in groundwater resources,
15 years’ in geophysics and 15 years’ in nuclear engineering. I am from away - 
Kittery and represent myself.  
Recently baseball has changed its rules trying to speed up the game and it's drawn a 
lot of kudos from fans.  Likewise, legislation and regulation need updating from time 
to time to keep up with changing technology.  But not much in regulations in the 
utility domain has been updated in Maine since the mid 2000s. 
(A really short history.)  After the initial competition between Edison (DC) and 
Westinghouse (AC)  in generating and wiring parts of towns, electric utilities 
consolidated and AC was chosen to use for local distribution: eventually utilities  
were more or less considered “Natural Monopolies”.  In response to an energy crisis 
in the 1970s, the Federal Government passed PURPA (Public Utilities Regulatory 
Policies Act) of 1978 restructuring electric utilities, supporting cogeneration, allowing
small generators to compete, and opening the way to renewable energy.  The end of 
vertically integrated public utilities under the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 
1935 was over!  The Energy Policy Act(EPA) of 2005 updated PURPA and 
reemphasized Renewable Portfolio Standards(RPS).  Legislation and FERC 
regulation needed updating to meet national demands and modern technology (rising 
energy prices, more efficient thermal plants, renewable energy and the internet). 
In 1997 the Maine legislature passed “An Act to Restructure the State’s Electrical 
Industry” permanently separating generation from (transmission and distribution) 
wires.   When I moved to Maine, Maine’s legislature had just formed a compact with 
6 other New England states working on among other things (Renewable Portfolio 
standards) RPS standards.  The Internet was expanding.   Oil and gasoline prices were
rising and Efficiency Maine and the Maine Housing Authority were coming up to 
speed. The EUT passed a Net Energy billing regulation (which needs to be 
overhauled) that helped promote small renewables, mostly solar, wind, and tidal.  
Maine supported Efficiency Maine with money from renewable energy credits 
(REC)s and the $1 green energy fee on CMPs bill.  THE EUT was burdened with “the
3 ring binder”.  Governor Baldacci formed the Wind Power Task Force and the Ocean
Energy Task Force. New ideas were coming forth and being debated.  Governor 
LePage stopped an off-shore wind project that would have been paid for by Statoil 
and the Federal Government. 
The EUT and MPUC were relevant at that point.  However, in the past few years, the 
MPUC has ALLOWED CMP (I live in that part of the state) to raise rates due to 
inflation and maintenance work, but there has been no accountability to anyone but 
CMP’s investors.  Customers complain and CMP shrugs.  Who is supposed to be 
watching over CMP?  MPUC has not: its plate is full (they need more 
commissioners): the EUT has not.  CMP wanted to increase its return to the investors 
and the MPUC entertained that idea?  CMP billing errors have been rampant (I got 
$25 back 3 times as a fine on CMP when I proved they were in error). The EUT has 
been busy with many, many new bills, and chose to ignore the increasing complaints 
of the people of Maine.
The MPUC regulates water, natural gas, pipeline and power line corridors, the 
Internet, television, cable?, generating utilities, enhanced cogen,  and transmission.  
Their plate is full.  MPUC does not have the manpower, the expertise, and maybe not 
the authority to PROPERLY regulate the transmission and generation owners. 
ISO-NE has three roles in New England 1) Manages the real-time dispatch of 
electricity 2) oversees the wholesale pricing and market for competing generators  and
3) it uses consultants to provide planning for the electrical infrastructure in the New 
England area.  From the 2021 Economic study FGRS*  paid  for by ISO-NE  “system 
operator actions can help mitigate and localize  . . . imbalances . … It is ultimately 
long-range planning’s responsibility to create a transmission grid that is reliable.”   I 
do not believe ISO-NE has any regulatory authority as to what can be built in the 
various states.  It integrates what has been built, it suggests what way to go, but it 
cannot tell XYZ corporation it cannot build a Power plant in ABC County of IJK 
state.  ISO-NE does not ensure Maine can incorporate distributed generation (DG)  – 
that is up to the State.  BUT WHO IN THE STATE?  In the Navy we say if everyone 
is responsible Nobody is responsible.
What Maine needs is ITS OWN PLANNING authority.  Right now at least two 
“Utilities” in Maine are in trouble.  The PUBLIC IS UPSET.  So upset that they have 
hatched this hare-brained scheme called Pine Tree Power (PTP).   I DO NOT TRUST 
CMP.  However, I THINK PTP has the potential to be even more catastrophic to 
Maine.  The London Economic Group’s study, “Evaluation of the Ownership of 
Maine’s Power Delivery System”  paid for by the MPUC,  stated multiple times in 
multiple ways rate payers may see an INCREASE in rates for the short term and only 
after 10 years would the rates start to lower.  Part 1 of the 2021 Economic Study 
“Future Grid Reliability” (FGRS) paid for by ISO-NE says that renewable energy 
resources are not dispatchable, and a shift to renewable sources requires strategic 
forward planning.  
Maine is in trouble since we do not have the expertise in our State agencies to do 
forward planning. CMP does not have the expertise - repeatedly okaying new solar 
farms, then finding out that the cost to the Substation the solar company was going to 
tie into will cost 2 to 10 times what CMP originally estimated.  This is not good for 
the renewable energy, rate payers or reliability of the grid.  EUT does not have the 
expertise, MPUC does not have the expertise, and the new Pine Tree Power 
(OURPOWER) will not be up to speed for the foreseeable future.  The groups that 
support PTP have varying agenda.  
People have been generally upset over the last few years because they feel powerless. 
COVID-19 and avoiding crowds and other people have taken a toll on all of our 
nerves.  People are supporting PTP as a knee jerk reaction to rising prices.  
Maine’s electricity rates have greatly escalated for a number of reasons beyond most 
customer’s control. CMP and Versant are easy targets:  They are a large part of the 
problem.   But past members of the EUT and some groups or people that are “utilities 
wantabees”  have capitalized on CMP’s and EUT’s poor decision making and 
responses to customer demands.   
CMP is resistant to growing the renewables markets, and independent power 
generally.  CMP and Versant are difficult to deal with when it comes to getting them 
to invest where it will help get us to a more robust, reliable, locally supplied and 
maintained system.  Reading their bills and ensuring that they have correctly 
calculated them is not difficult but it is a pain.  CMPs terrible effort at justifying and 
implementing the New England Clean Energy Connection(NECEC)  and the earlier 
Maine Power Reliability Project(MPRP) have added to the mistrust of the people 
towards utilities.  After the HVDC power line from Hydro Quebec to Massachusetts 
was rejected by the States of Vermont and NH, Maine’s CMP tried to run the HVDC 
transmission through Maine along the NECEC.   I also support Senator Troy 
Jackson’s bill LD 924 to connect the crown of Maine to the ISO-NE region, what is 
its acronym?   But reading the names of the legislation is confusing. NECEC also 
stands for Northeast Clean Energy Council which I support:  the two similar 
acronyms have confused me and I pay attention which most Mainers do not.  People 
are desparate.  They want lower bills and will believe anything.  What’s the adage?  A
lie will fly around the world before the truth puts on her coat. 
PTP is not a viable solution.  ISO-NE is not a regulatory agency.  FERC is Federal. 
Where do we turn??  We have studies that suggest the way forward, but no one is in 
charge! In the past the EUT has ducked responsibility, only half heartedly supporting 
renewable energy, dismissing both climate change as a hoax and grudgingly admitting
our fossil fuel resources are dirty and may one day run out.  The people of Maine 
need leadership from the Legislature - NOT from an unorganized group of entities 
with differing complaints about CMP and Versant.  The disorganization and lawsuits 
and countersuits that will come from starting “Ourpower” or PTP will be dizzying and
won’t be settled for 20 years.  In the short run because of the outlay of monies for 
suits and consultants the costs will  only increase before they level out.  
 LD 952 can be made into a solution to unhappy ratepayers and generators who are 
not being serviced in a timely manner by CMP.  
As far as the problems with the retail electrical market – and Standard Offer. I think 
the PUC has set this up for failure by being too fixed on today’s price and not looking
ahead.  I don’t think they should force people to give up their ability to choose a 
provider, but they need to police the providers better because the bad actors have 
caused significant damage to the retail market and trust in the Public Advocate.  I 
know what I am doing in choosing a company to provide me electricity in the winter. 
I chopse a hydro company to back up my solar in winter, but the company refused me
because of what the woman agent said was “demand charges”. 
 .  The Commissioners on the MPUC are overburdened.  Maine needs at least two 
more.  There needs to be some institutional memory, while they also need to be 
protected from politics, and need to reflect the changing attitudes of the public.  
Commissioners are more like judges than they are like a governor or legislator and 
should be appointed and confirmed by the EUT. 
      Now to introduce myself,  I am Dr.  Suzanne Sayer.  I have a PhD in Engineering 
and Environmental geophysics, and a BSME both from Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
and State University - VaTech- for short.  I earned a Masters in Earth and  Planetary 
Sciences (Geochemistry) from MIT as well as a BS in Geological Sciences from Tufts
University.   I took Electrical engineering courses both for my PhD and BSME:  the 
most recent EE course I took from UMO in 2022.  Until recently I worked as a 
Nuclear Engineer on Los Angeles class Attack submarines at Portsmouth Naval 
Shipyard, where I needed to understand some electrical engineering.   I represent 
myself and am retired.  I have earned the title “Director” from the American Contract 
Bridge league and direct certified duplicate games.   I was on the Utilities 
Subcommittee of Governor Baldacci’s Ocean Energy Task Force and an invited 
speaker to the Wind Power Task Force. 
      I support LD 952 because Maine finally  has the opportunity to enter the 21st 
century in their Utility structure.  I've been hearing horror stories of my neighbors in 
Eliot and South Berwick having Electricity bills of $600 and $900/month. More than 
any mortgage payment I ever made.  My bill has been consistent for 9 months of the 
year at ~$14 a month and for 3 winter months it is less than $100/month and I charge 
my Electric Vehicle(EV) from the Standard Offer, since the competitive generator I 
choose does not want my business. 
In the mid 2000s I used to attend the EUT regularly when Maine was discussing the 
build out of Terrestrial wind and Offshore wind. Net Energy billing was new and 
pretty innovative, but the handwriting was on the wall that renewable energy could 
overwhelm the State with generators that were not dispatchable.  Net Energy billing 
was upsetting to CMP since they had to “eat” the transmission fees.   After all the 
legislation the  EUT seems to have sat on its hands after setting up the REC system 
and funding Efficiency Maine.  The EUT was watching CMP and Versant mess up 
the system, and did nothing to stop it.  Perhaps someone on the EUT was in cahoots 
with one of the groups that wanted to have such a citizens uproar, that they could 
blithely slip in, have the State of Maine condemn CMP and Versant and take over.  
Their estimates of the takeover and the time it will take are greatly underestimated.  
I’m not an economist by any means.  But I know enough math and financing to 
realize that PTP/OurPower is a disaster waiting to happen. 
 I urge the EUT to vote that LD 952 Ought to pass, and to put some rules into the 
regulations that MPUC can quantitatively measure for CMP and Versant to deliver 
on.  Maine needs to start a serious program for dispatching the output of renewable 
energy into storage, whether flywheel, batteries, Electric Vehicles(EVs), hydrogen 
generation or ?  If the day is sunny, solar power production fortunately matches the 
high load usage during the middle of the afternoon in summer months for producing 
indoor energy use and air conditioning.  Wind blows most often in winter and should 
have some storage requirements accompanying the outbuilding of generation.  Wind 
could decompose water and produce Hydrogen gas so that it can be stored in 
compressed form for later use in Vehicles and Fuel cells. Anhydrous ammonia can 
also be produced from decomposition of the Nitrogen in air and Hydrogen from 
water. Anhydrous ammonia can be stored and used in diesel engines(there are tractors
running on ammonia) and fertilizer.  I have a battery backup to my solar roof.  The 
energy converted from the sun can be stored in the electric battery in my EV.  
However, currently I use time of use (TOU) billing so I use more electricity at night 
and charge my EV battery at night and put electrons into the grid in the daytime and 
use Net Energy billing.  
Being an engineer I understood what was going to happen with our energy resources. 
I lived through the gasoline shortage of the 1970s.  I worked on Geothermal energy in
the 1980s in the Salton Sea and  was at Los Alamos during Hot Dry Rock 
experiments. When I moved to Maine to work as a nuclear engineer, gasoline prices 
were rising and I invested in energy efficiency, tightening up my house with help 
from Efficiency Maine  - installing a heat pump,  a hot water heat pump, a Powerwall,
an electric charger and buying an EV.  I made choices that put me in a good place 
compared to my neighbors.  They were not easy to make while other people took 
vacations to Europe, bought "camps," and took cruises. Now I am doing fine while 
my neighbors are hurting because of utility bills.  Maine has been short sighted.  My 
friends keep trying to get me to sign on to the Pine Tree Power plan.  I won’t.  I know 
how poorly run CMP has been, I've received money from CMP for finding and 
proving at least 3 errors in their billing.  They have been slowly getting better and 
informing people of outages and potential outages.  Maine does not need the PTP 
takeover, its a knew jerk reaction to a terrible situation.  The PTP could be a worse 
disaster than CMP.  We would need LD  924 even more urgently.  Maine needs the 
EUT to put some regulations in place to make the utilities upgrade their performance 
and it needs to direct the MPUC to enforce the regulations.  MPUC, the EUT and the 
legislature, are all complicit with CMP for providing one of the worst in the Nation 
electrical utilities.  ISO-NE is not responsible for this. FERC is not responsible for 
this.  MPUC and EUT and the Legislature are responsible because they did not set 
reasonable rates of return,  enact rules and enforce regulations.  
Citations: 
“2021 Economic Study Future Grid Reliability Part I” paid for by  ISO-NE and  
publically available on ISO-NE website. 
“Evaluation of the Ownership of Maine’s Power Delivery System, ”  February 15, 
2020, 93pp,  Prepared by London Economics International, LLC in collaboration with
Peter Brown, Esq. 
