Testimony of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group 
In Support of 
L.D. 952, An Act to Create a 21st-Century Electric Grid, as amended 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology. 
I am Tony Buxton, an attorney with the ﬁrm of Preti Flaherty, here today on behalf of the Industrial 
Energy Consumer Group (IECG). IECG has been representing medium and large sized consumers of 
energy in Maine for more than twenty-ﬁve years at the state, regional and federal level. We advocate 
for policies that reduce the cost of energy for our members and cost-effectively help Maine achieve its 
climate goals. 
Industrial Energy Consumer Group testiﬁes today in support of L.D. 952, An Act to Create a 21st- 
Century Electric Grid, as proposed to be amended by the sponsor’s amendment. The issues to be 
addressed by the study proposed in that amendment are important ones for Maine, and ones which will 
help Maine prepare for the transition to the grid that we need to accomplish to our climate goals in the 
most cost-effective way possible. These issues are numerous enough that, even if they are managed 
superbly, will still strain our collective resources. If we fail to plan and execute at a high level, we will 
waste vitally needed funds, and even more vitally needed time, that will be difﬁcult if not impossible to 
replace. 
IECG does have some suggestions for the Committee to consider as it works on this legislation. We are 
concerned that both the time for the study and funds proposed are inadequate to the task. This 
undertaking seems to rival the electricity restructuring effort which took more than two years to 
accomplish. We would suggest at least a three-year effort, if not more. Perhaps the Committee should 
fund and direct that a work plan be developed between the cooperating agencies and with public input. 
This work plan could be shared with the Committee next session, which might conﬁrm the time and 
funds required to properly undertake the assigned tasks. We would hope that the State could leverage 
recent and ongoing PUC proceedings in this effort. Finally, the Committee should also give itself the 
authority to propose additional funding or allow more time if needed next year.
l 
203406521
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments. IECG is prepared to work with the sponsor, 
this Committee, and all parties to address the issues presented by LD 952. IECG is happy to answer 
questions now or at the work session. 
20340652.]
