 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human  
 
In Opposition to LD 1547 , An Act to Temporarily Prohibit the State from Mandating  
COVID -19 Vaccinations  
 
Hearing Date: April 24, 2023  
 
Senator  Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am Ann Farmer and I am the Associate Director of the Division of 
Disease Surveillance at the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention at the Department 
of Health and Human Services . I am here today to offer testimony in opposition to  LD 1547 , An 
Act to Temporarily Prohibit the State from Mandating COVID -19 Vaccinations . 
LD 1547 prohibits requirements  for vaccination against  COVID -19 for five years from the date 
of a vaccine's first emergency use authorization by the United States Department of Health and 
Human Services, Food and Drug Administration in order to allow for safety testing and 
investigations into reproductive harm.   
 
Placing a fiv e-year moratorium on mandatory vaccinations for COVID -19 to allow for safety 
testing and investigations into reproductive health would cause more harm than benefit to 
Mainers. According to CDC data, adults 18 years and older who were unvaccinated were at 1 0.9 
times higher risk of hospitalization and 7.9 times higher risk of death than those who were most 
up to date on vaccination.  
 
Two of the COVID -19 vaccines available are no longer under Emergency Use Authorization 
(EUA ) and have been shown to be safe and  effective by the FDA. The FDA sets rigorous 
standards and conducts clinical trials which include tens of thousands of study participants. 
Various studies have shown that the ability of COVID -19 vaccines to affect the fertility of both 
women and men has no t been substantiated by any data. These false claims have been charged 
by misinformation  that is irresponsible and counter to the public health . 
 
We have also seen throughout the pandemic and beyond, that despite these claims, Mainers have 
shown to be in s upport rather than opposed to COVID -19 vaccination. As of March 29, 2023, 
approximately 32% of all Maine residents  five years and older have received their bivalent 
booster shots, while 84% have completed their primary vaccination series and 61% have gotte n 
at least one shot of the original booster.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends this bill  ought not to pass . The vast 
benefits of receiving a COVID -19 vaccination far outweigh any of the unfounded claims that 
 
 have been put forth regarding reproductive harm.  Prohibiting COVID -19 vaccination  
requirements  would do a great disservice to the citizens of Maine . 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration  and to participate in future work sessions .  
 
 
 
