Emma Burns
Biddeford
LD 1547
Testimony in favor of LD 1547, An Act to Temporarily Prohibit the State from 
Mandating COVID-19 Vaccinations
April 24, 2023
My name is Emma Burns, a registered nurse, wife, mother, and homeowner here in 
the state of Maine. My family has been greatly impacted from the passing of LD 798 
and Covid-19 vaccine requirements. I am no longer able to work as a nurse in the 
state of Maine due to the above laws and mandates. I know Maine was already short 
healthcare professionals prior to these laws/mandates, yet we chose to discard even 
more professionals from the field.
As I still have friends and colleagues working, I am very well aware of the number of 
staff going into work while Covid-positive (as long as they are feeling well enough to 
work), going to work while clearly sick (Covid or not), and having large gatherings 
outside the workplace that includes merriment and close proximity to each other, all 
while being mask-free.
Yet, I am a loving nurse who still cannot go back to work because I did not feel 
comfortable getting a new vaccine without long-term studies. Let me be clear, 
MaineHealth even denied me a temporary deferral during the Covid-19 mandate 
rollout despite me being pregnant. I even provided MaineHealth with JAMA articles 
showing tables with a higher rate of spontaneous abortions in pregnant women who 
got the vaccine, yet they still didn't care. 
While pregnant, I contracted Covid-19 from my vaccinated husband (who took the 
vaccine through coercion and the need to support his family). He works as a nurse 
anesthetist at MaineHealth. I was due to have my baby any day, yet I was taking care 
of him because I only had mild symptoms, and he had quite the opposite experience.
I've had Covid-19, I have antibodies, but sill cannot work.
None of this makes sense anymore, and frankly, it's obvious it's only continuing due 
to politics.
If the vaccinated healthcare professionals can go to work with Covid-19, or just being 
sick in general, or act like Covid is nonexistent outside of the workplace, then why 
can't I go to work while being healthy?
Please support LD 1547. I believe allowing many of us back to work will shed a light 
on truly how much our medical community is hurting from the mandate.
Thank you,
Emma Burns
