northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 59 An Act to Prohibit Inclusion of the COVID-19 Vaccine in the Universal Childhood 
Immunization Program 
LD 172 An Act to Allow Health Care Workers to Return to Work by Reinstating 
Exemptions from Immunization Requirements 
LD 601 An Act to Reduce the Shortage of Municipal Emergency Medical Services 
Personnel by Removing Certain Vaccination Requirements 
LD 1547 An Act to Temporarily Prohibit the State from Mandating COVID-19 
Vaccinations 
LD 1598 An Act to Allow an Exception to Immunization Requirements for Health Care 
Workers for Vaccines Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization 
 
Testimony in Opposition  
April 24 , 2023  
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am providing testimony 
on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member organizations in opposition to the 
bills before you today. Northern Light Health member organizations include 10 hospitals 
located in southern, central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and 
ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and 
specialty care practices and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  Ninety three 
percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern Light Health service area.  Northern 
Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with over 10,000 
employees statewide. 
 
Northern Light Health is proud of our service caring for the people of Maine and 
approached the pandemic challenge with a culture of “yes.”  Our clinicians provided 
461,849 total doses of COVID-19 vaccine, our hospitals cared for nearly 4000 of the 
most acutely ill individuals with COVID, and our home care team cared for thousands of 
patients in communities throughout Maine.  Our home care nurses also cared for 
patients in homeless shelters and individuals placed in alternative locations for health 
care monitoring. Nursing homes were particularly challenged, and we responded  to 
community requests with all the local support and resources that we could provide. 
Telehealth is an essential service providing access to primary and specialty care services, 
during fiscal year 2022 we provided 152,000 telehealth patient visits to Mainers in their 
homes.   
 
The success of our response is a source of pride for all Northern Light Health employees.  
Our compliance with state and federal COVID-19 vaccine requirements supported our 
staff to be safe when providing care and when our staff did test positive for COVID-19 
the vaccine mitigated the severity of illness so very few staff were hospitalized to 
manage COVID-19 related symptoms.  As vaccines changed to target COVID-19 variants, 
they continued to provide a high level of protection from severe disease, allowing us to 
keep our staff safe and mission ready. 
  
Employing over 12,000 staff during the pandemic period we did have a very small 
number of employees decline to receive the COVID-19 vaccine and terminate 
employment.  We respect the difficult decision made by the staff who left.  A total of 
381 employees left Northern Light Health due to the mandate, 127 were nurses. 
 
In considering the bills before you today impacting health care facilities and workers it is 
important to understand that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) has 
a federal vaccination requirement for health care facilities that participate in the 
Medicare or Medicaid programs.  The requirement applies to  
 
• Home Health Agencies 
• Home Infusion Therapy Suppliers 
• Hospices 
• Hospitals 
• Ambulatory Surgery Centers  
• Intermediate Care Facilities for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities 
• Clinics, Rehabilitation Agencies, and Public Health Agencies as Providers of 
Outpatient Services 
• Long Term Care facilities 
• Physical Therapy and Speech-Language Services 
• Programs for All-Inclusive Care for the 
• Pathology Services Elderly Organizations (PACE) 
• Community Mental Health Centers 
• Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facilities 
• Comprehensive Outpatient Rehabilitation (PRTFs)Facilities  
• Rural Health Clinics/Federally Qualified 
• Critical Access Hospitals Health Centers 
• End-Stage Renal Disease Facilities 
 
Federal regulations require the heath care facility to have policies and procedures in 
place for ensuring staff are fully vaccinated with doses of the COVID-19 vaccine. 
 
In 2019 Northern Light Health was a strong supporter of LD 798 which became Public 
Law 154 upon passage.  This law repealed exemptions to vaccine requirements for 
religious and philosophical reasons.  Prior to passing this law, Maine was one of only 17 
states in which families of school-aged children could state non-medical reasons to opt 
out of school-required immunizations. Maine had the 4th highest rate of non-medical 
opt-outs, which put our community immunity below safe thresholds for disease 
outbreak.  Since the law went into effect in 2020, data from the annual Annie E. Casey 
Foundation Kids Count survey shows that exemptions have decreased from 6.2% in 
2018 to 1.8% in 2021. This means that more children are protected from deadly diseases 
including measles, mumps, rubella, polio, chicken pox, tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis 
(whooping cough.). 
 
It is critically important to understand that the legislature also changed the medical 
exemption language in the law to ensure that a medical exemption is available to a 
health care employee or parent who provides a written statement from a licensed 
 physician, nurse practitioner or physician assistant that, in the physician's, nurse 
practitioner's or physician assistant's professional judgment, immunization against one 
or more diseases may be medically inadvisable.  The legislature clearly intended to 
structure a medical exemption decision based on the professional judgement of the 
practitioner.  This change was strongly supported by Northern Light Health and the 
provider community to ensure that the provider would consider the unique medical 
needs of the individual when making the exemption determination.  
 
Public Law 154 also eliminated non-medical exemptions to vaccines for health care 
personnel working in a licensed nursing facility, residential care facility, intermediate 
care facility for persons with intellectual disabilities, multi-level health care facility, 
hospital or home health agency.  This applies to immunizations required by the Maine 
Centers for Disease Control.  The rule specifically states:   
 
Except as otherwise provided by law, each Designated Healthcare Facility in the State of  
Maine must require for all employees who do not exclusively work remotely a 
Certificate of Immunization, or Proof of Immunity, subject to Section 4(B) of this rule, 
against: 
1. Rubeola (measles); 
2. Mumps; 
3. Rubella (German measles); 
4. Varicella (chicken pox); 
5. Hepatitis B; 
6. Influenza; 
7. COVID-19. 
 
Restoring religious and philosophical exemptions to rules requiring vaccination would 
undermine work done to promote illness prevention practices and protect the most 
vulnerable within our population including the very young, the very old, women who are 
pregnant, and anyone with an underlying chronic health condition.  Over the last few 
years in the United States, we have seen increased cases of measles, mumps, and 
whooping cough within communities with lower vaccination rates.  We have also seen 
cases of polio and polio like illnesses where it was believed polio had been eradicated 
from the United States.  Northern Light Health supported the removal of religious and 
philosophical exemptions within rules requiring vaccination against preventable 
infectious diseases while preserving legitimate medical exemptions.   
 
As a source of both primary and acute medical care for much of the State of Maine we 
stand by our support for vaccine requirements and exemptions limited to medical 
reasons  in order to maintain the health and well-being of the communities and Mainers 
we serve 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to express our opposition to both of the bills before you 
today.   
 
