Testimony is Support of LD 172, LD 601, LD 1547 & LD 1598 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
April 23, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 172
An Act to Allow Health Care Workers to Return to Work by Reinstating Exemptions from
Immunization Requirements
and
LD 601
An Act to Reduce the Shortage of Municipal Emergency Medical Services Personnel by Removing
Certain Vaccination Requirements 
and
LD 1547
An Act to Temporarily Prohibit the State from Mandating COVID-19 Vaccinations  
and
LD 1598
An Act to Allow an Exception to Immunization Requirements for Health Care Workers for Vaccines
Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:
My name is Nathan Gould, and I am writing this testimony in support of LD 172, LD 601, LD 
1547, and LD 1598.
From both the variety of bills protecting the individual’s right to choose what vaccines they 
take and the overwhelming showing of support for those bills heard at the Joint Standing Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affair’s lengthy public hearing held on April 3, 2023, it is clear that this is an 
important issue to many Mainers of disparate backgrounds from all across our State.
Testimony is Support of LD 172, LD 601, LD 1547 & LD 1598 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
One of the great travesties of our government’s handling of the pandemic response was the 
absolute gutting of our healthcare industry. I have no doubt the distinguished members of the 
Committee will hear numerous accounts of medical personnel who, after risking their own health to 
aid COVID patients, were thanked by being kicked to the curb for choosing their personal health and 
convictions over being coerced into receiving an untested gene therapy to maintain their careers. This 
has caused a shortage in hospital staff, and vaccinated yet COVID-positive medical personnel were 
asked to return to work.
Frankly, this is an embarrassing display of shortsightedness from our government. Now 
hospital workers are overworked, beds that could be serving patients lie empty due to lack of staff, 
and perfectly capable nurses and doctors are unable to use their skills to help the People of Maine, 
their neighbors. We desperately need these nurses, EMTs, and other trained individuals to shore up 
our already unstable healthcare system. And we need to protect medical personnel from future 
infringements on their freedom.
Government is meant to secure our inalienable rights. COVID tested this principle, and it is 
disheartening, appalling, and disappointing how quickly and easily the State government devolved 
into authoritarianism in the midst of a crisis, when it is the most important time to protect our 
personal liberties. This grievous wrong can be rectified and we can heal from the past three years, but 
this requires Legislators courageous and sufficiently disciplined to relinquish some of the State’s power
for the sake of advancing the liberty of their constituents—especially for those constituents who have 
sacrificed so much. I believe there are few acts more noble for a lawmaker to undertake. I pray 
earnestly that the Committee would be strengthened to make this choice.
I ask the Committee to listen to the voice of the people and vote Ought to Pass, and I thank 
you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
