1 
20362799.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Opposition to L.D. 1451,  
An Act to Prohibit State and Local Enforcement of Federal Firearms 
Laws
May 8, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
distinguished Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is 
Charles Rumsey. I am the Chief of the Cumberland Police Department, and the 
President of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association. I am submitting testimony 
on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association in opposition to LD 1451.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This  bill  prohibits  all  state  and  local  government  entities,  the  
employees  of  these entities and all other state and local government 
officials from: 
1.Enforcing  or  assisting  federal  agencies  in  the  
enforcement  of  federal  laws  that restrict a person's 
right to own, possess and purchase a firearm or firearm 
ammunition or obtain a related firearms certification 
without prohibiting these state and local government 
officials from enforcing state laws that do the same; 
2.Restricting, revoking, suspending or otherwise 
infringing on a person's right to own, purchase  or  
possess  a  firearm  or  firearm  ammunition  or  to  obtain  
any  related  firearms certification based on the person's 
purchase, possession or use of cannabis; and 
3.  Providing information to a federal agency or official of 
a federal agency relating to a person's ownership, 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 
20362799.1 possession or purchase of a firearm or firearm 
ammunition or the person's obtaining of any related 
firearms certification  based  solely  on  the  person's 
purchase, possession or use of cannabis. 
The Maine Chiefs are in opposition to LD 1451 because it would restrict our ability 
to work with our federal partners. We believe in the importance of information 
sharing with other law enforcement agencies and do not think that this legislation 
is necessary. While most Maine law enforcement officers do not enforce federal 
laws, there are many instances when federal investigations and state-level 
investigation are concurrent, which would make enforcement of this law difficult. 
Also, the language of this law would prohibit officers from – as an example – 
providing perimeter security or other officer-safety related assistance to our federal 
partners. Maine is a scarcely populated state, making it necessary for law 
enforcement officers from municipalities, counties, state agencies and federal 
agencies to cooperate at times to safely bring serious criminal investigations to a 
successful conclusion. To do otherwise would potentially endanger the lives of the 
federal officers we would be prohibited from assisting, and could also endanger 
members of the public. 
We think that there are a number of public safety consequences if this bill is 
enacted. For example, although our law enforcement officers are responsible for 
enforcing state laws, on occasion, our officers are cross deputized to serve on 
interagency task forces that include officers from multiple jurisdictions. We depend 
on those task forces to keep Mainers safe. If this passes, then our officers would be 
restricted from supporting and utilizing the resources of the task force.  
For these reasons, we would ask you to oppose LD 1451 and vote ought not to pass 
on this bill. On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank 
the committee members for your work on this Committee.  
