 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1451 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1451, An Act to Prohibit State and Local Enforcement of Federal Firearms Laws  
 
DA: May 8 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony opposed  to LD 1451 . 
 
 LD 1451 presents similar conflict of laws issues as LD 1103.  First, although Maine’s law 
enforcement officers do not generally have any authority to enforce federal law themselves, 
Maine’s  law enforcement officers are sometimes cross -deputized  to serve on interagency task forces 
that may include a combination of officers from multiple jurisdictions.   The proposed prohibition 
could preclude officers from participating in such efforts, inclu ding those targeting criminal conduct 
other than firearms offenses, as it cannot be anticipated what situations officers will encounter.     
Second, a s part of their duties enforcing State law, Maine’s officers encounter situations that violate 
the laws of  both State and federal law.   The proposed prohibition  against cooperation  is broad 
enough to preclude cooperation such as witness duties and information sharing, potentially putting 
such officers in conflict with requests or demands from the federal cour ts.   Third,  federal laws such 
as the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act of 2022 require information sharing from state, county, 
local, and tribal criminal justice agencies  and state governments  relevant to a person’s eligibility to 
possess firearms.   Fourth, Maine, as do other states, contributes criminal history to federal 
databases that are queried when a federally licensed firearms dealer runs a background check prior 
to purchase, as required by federal law.  These same databases are queried for othe r criminal justice 
purposes.    It is not clear whether the intent of this proposal is to curtail the provision of that 
criminal history record information, which has implications beyond firearms possession . 
(Implications related to  grant funding and state -federal or interstate compacts are beyond CLAC’s 
expertise.)  Overall, t his proposal would appear to put Maine in conflict with federal statutes  and 
requirements , creating potential preemption issues.     
 
 As is LD 1103, the bill is drafted broadly , and would apply to any state or local government 
entity or official  in Maine, thus restricting  public employees and entities outside of law 
enforcement.    
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
 
 retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
