Margaret S. Groban 
South Portland, ME 
May 8, 2023 
Testimony Against: 
L D. 1451 - An Act to Prohibit State and Local Enforcement of Federal Firearms Laws 
L D 1561 —- An Act to Restore Firearms Rights to Persons Convigted of Certain Nonviolent 
Felony Crimes 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee. 
My name is Margaret Groban. I live in South Portland. I recently retired after a 30+ year 
career as a federal prosecutor focusing on firearms and domestic violence and the 
intersection between the two. I also served on Maine’s Domestic Violence Homicide 
Review Panel. 
It is my extensive experience with ﬁrearm statues that leads me to oppose LD I451. 
it is settled law that state legislatures are without authority to iiivaliclate federal 
statutes under the Supremacy Clause of the US Constitution. Yet this statute does 
just that. 
L.D. 1451 would prevent state and local employees from taking “any action to enforce or 
assist in the enforcement of federal ﬁrearms laws.” This bill would prevent state law 
enforcement from serving on federal task forces, from assisting in execution of 
search/arrest warrants and other critical law enforcement roles. In a state with limited 
federal law enforcement officers, this withdrawal of state support would greatly diminish 
the ability of law enforcement to keep our communities safe from gun violence. 
In addition, this bi.ll is unconstitutional because it seeks to nullify federal law. While 
Maine cannot be compelled to assist in the enforcement of federal ﬁrearm laws, it cannot 
interfere or impede with these operations. A federal court recently ruled in Missouri that 
a similar state law that tried to prevent state government agencies from cooperating in 
any enforcement of federal tirearni laws was unconstitutional and awarded costs against 
the state. 
LD. l45l also prevents restriction on ﬁrearm use based on a person’s use/possession of 
cannabis. This suffers from the same unconstitutional defects. Federal law prohibits 
firearm possession by persons who are unlawful users ol’ any controlled substance 
(including Schedule l marijuana). Tliere is no exception for state authorized use. 
Therefore, any person who uses marijuana cannot possess a ﬁrearm.
L.D. l56l would restore lireai'n1 rights. As writteii, it is ill-aalvised. First, it inanclates that 
restoration be granted il’ a person is deemed eligible but no criteria is set l’oi'1h to 
determine eligibility other than the statute of conviction. Sliouldnfl; law enl°orcement have 
an opportunity to review the facts of the convicting offense or any additional conduct 
even if it doesn"t lead to a conviction? Revocation of this restoration is only allowed il 
there is 21 subsequent felony conviction. A violent misclemeanor assault would not be 
grounds for revocation. The statute also does not include 21 mechanism for either victim 
or law enforcement to object to the restoration. 
For all these reasons, l respectﬂilly request 1'ejec'tion ol"‘l>oth LI). 1451 and L.D, L561.
