Maine Sheriffs ’ Association  
“One Team, One Mission”  
 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President  
 
Sheriff Scott Nichols , 1st Vice -President, Sheriff William King , 2nd Vice -President – Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary –  
Sheriff Todd Brackett , Treasurer – Sheriff  Troy Morton, Immediate Past President –  
Sheriff Joel Merry, Past President -at-Large - Mary -Anne LaMarre, Executive Director  
 
 
  
 
  
 
     
 
 
May 8, 2023 
  
L.D. 1 451 –  An Act To  Prohibit State And Local Enforcement of Federal Firearms Laws  
  Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,  
 My name is Dale Lancaster .  I am the Sheriff of Somerset  County and President of the  Maine 
Sheriffs’ Association.   Maine sheriffs met to discuss this bill and th ose present  voted 
unanimously to oppose  L.D. 1451 – An Act To Prohibit State And Local Enforcement of Federal 
Firearms Laws. 
 Maine sheriffs feel this bill goes too far and I’m here today to explain the unintended consequences of L.D. 1451.  Each of Maine’s sixteen sh eriffs work with our federal colleagues 
on a regular basis.  They have proven to be  invaluable partners in our efforts to keep Maine 
people safe.  Right now, each sheriff can decide whether to assist our federal partners.  This bill 
would limit what inform ation we can share with them and prohibit efforts to collaborate when 
federal firearms bills are involved.  
 If L.D. 1451 should pass  as written , Maine law enforcement would be prohibited from informing 
federal law enforcement when a situation occurs involving a known felon  in possession of a 
firearm.  While we understand the objective behind this bill , we cannot endorse an effort that 
could result in innocent people being harmed or killed.  A dditionally, this bill would create 
obstacles in  investigat ions if we’re unable to enforce federal laws pertaining to federal firearms 
laws.    While  we understand and appreciate the sponsor’s intent , Maine sheriffs would never 
intentionally violate a citize n’s second amendment rights . We respectfully ask esteemed 
members of this committee to vote Ought Not To Pass. 
 Thank you for your consideration.  I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have.   
 Sincerely,  
  Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President  
Maine Sheriffs’ Association  
 

