 
 
 
May 2, 202 3 
 
Senator Anne Beebe -Center (Chair)  
Representative Suzanne Sali sbury (Chair)  
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
State House Room 436 
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Support  (with Amendment ) An Act to Protect Maine ’s Transit Employees  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and Honorable Members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety : 
 
On behalf of the Maine Transit Association  (MTA) , we write to express our support  (pending amendments)  
for LD 1796/S P 721, An Act to Pro tect Main e’s Transit Employees.   
 
The MTA represents 20 public and non -profit transit agencies across our state. Our members provide 
mobility to Maine people and visitors in both urban and rural areas from Presque Isle to York County and 
from Downeast to the western mountains.  
 
The MTA recogn izes the imperative to do all we can to protec t our state’s front -line transit workers. Transit 
employe es work  under very  challenging conditions  every day . They are asked to operate heavy equipment  
in chaotic traffic conditions , maintain  schedules  to get passengers to where they need to go on -time , 
manage on -board technology  the grows more comple x every year, and serve passengers with courtesy, 
helpfulness  and professionalism. In the course of performing their duties, fron t-line transit workers must 
occasionally manage difficult engagements with passengers who  may have addi ctions, mental health  
challenges, o r other behavioral problems.  
 
Nationally, ass aults on transit workers are increasing. Maine ’s transit systems are safe  and we do not see 
the same s cale of increase in se curity incidents that are occurring  in major US cities .  However, as we work 
to remain vigilant and minimize the risk of harm to our employees, MTA suppo rts the provision s included 
in LD 1796 which would make assault on a transit employee a Class C crime , alon g with the posting of 
signs notifying the public of the penalties  for assaulting a transit employee.    
 
De-escalation training is key to help make sure employees have the tools  to manage difficult situations  and 
can pre vent harm to employees and passengers. H owever,  the M TA does not support the  inclusion of de -
escalation training as part of the law  for the following reasons: 1) it constitutes an unfunded man date , 2) 
there is no enforcement mechanism, and 3) most , if not all , statewide transit agencies already prov ide this  
training.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this important issue.  
 
  
Respectfully,  
 
Greg Jordan  
MTA Board President  
Executive Director  
Greater Portland Transit District  
Direct Line: 207 -517-3025  
E-mail: gjordan@gpmetro.org  
 
 Thomas Reinauer  
MTA Board Vice President  
Transportation Director  
York County Community Action Agency  
Direct Line:  207.459.2930  
E-mail: Thomas.Reinauer@yccac.org  
 
 
Chad Heid  
MTA Board Treasurer  
Executive Director  
Biddeford -Saco -Old Orchard Beach Transit District  
Direct Line : 207-283-3645  
E-mail: cheid@bsoobtransit.org  
 Erin Binghalib  
MTA Board Secretary  
Transportation Director  
Kennebec Valley  Action Program  
Direct Line: 207-859-1543  
E-mail: ebinghalib@kvcap.org  
 
 
 
