 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1796  (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1796, An Act t o Protect Maine ’s Transit Employees  
 
DA: May 2 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1796.    
 
 CLAC has consistently opposed the proliferation of spe cialty crim es that cover conduct that 
is already  criminalized by other statutes.   CLAC has also historically  oppose d increasing the 
classification  of crimes absent evidence that existing sentencing alternatives  provide insufficient 
options to meet the goals of sentencing articulated in t he Criminal Code .  17-A M.R.S. § 1501.  
(including rehabilitation  of the offender , recognizing severity of conduct, protecting the public , 
encouraging restitution )    This bill falls into both categories —the described  conduct can be 
prosecuted as assault or dis orderly conduct and there is no indic ation that sentencing alternatives are 
inadequate —and CLAC members were unani mously opposed to the creat ion of another such assault 
statute.       
 
 CLAC also notes that t his proposal is inconsistent  with other ass ault statutes in Maine in that 
it would  impose criminal liability for conduct that does not even require contact with the victim  
(“expectorating  or flinging …at…”), thus creating a new and incon gruous  version of assault, and it 
eliminates the element of bodily injury that is a necessary prerequisite  for what the Legislature has 
previously classified as felon ious conduct.   See, e.g., 17 -A M.R.S.  § 207(1)(B) (Class C assault on a 
child under 6); § 752-A (Class C assault on an officer) , § 752-A (Class C assault on an emergency 
medical  care provider); § 752-E (Class C assault on a firefi ghter).    
 
  
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
