TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 831 
“An Act Regarding Low Success Rates for Moose Hunting" 
Presented by Representative WOOD of Greene. 
Cosponsored by Representatives: COSTAIN of Plymouth, DUNPHY of Embden, LANDRY 
of Farmington, MASON of Lisbon, NESS of Fryeburg, THORNE of Carmel, WHITE of 
Guilford. 
DATE OF HEARING: March Z7, Z023 
Good afternoon, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Nate Webb, Wildlife Director for the department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in opposition to LD. 831. 
This bill requires the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, when establishing 
rules that manage moose hunting seasons, to take into consideration the moose hunting 
success rate of each wildlife management district when establishing the beginning date for 
moose hunting in that district. The bill also directs the commissioner to establish 2 
independent moose hunting seasons in wildlife management districts 7 and 8. 
The Legislature granted the Department the authority to set moose hunting season dates and 
permit numbers in 2001. These parameters are established in rule through a process outlined 
by the Administrative Procedures Act and are based on publicly derived goals and objectives for 
the state's moose population, which take hunter success rates into consideration. Maine's 
current moose management plan identifies adding a September hunting season in WMDs 7 and 
8 as a priority, but recognizes that this change would require public support in order to be 
successful in the rulemaking process. To date, the Department has not pursued this change due 
to the potential for conflicts with other user groups during a September season. 
Rather than move forward with this bill, we would suggest that over the next year, the 
Department could undertake public consultation to gauge public support for addinga 
September moose hunting season in WMDs 7 and 8. If favorable, the Department would 
propose a rule change that would open this additional week of hunting starting with the fall 
2024 hunting season. This approach is in alignment with the recommendations in our moose 
management plan, is in compliance with the Administrative Procedures Act, and would allow
the Department to continue to adjust moose hunting season dates based on publicly derived 
goals and objectives for the moose population. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
