139 State House Station,  Augusta, Maine 04330    207 -480 1478 www.maineddc.org   
21 March  2023 
 
Testimony in Neither For Nor Against  of LD 820, Resolve, to Provide Support for an Early Intervention and 
Preschool Child Care Services Program in Kennebec County  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
My name is Nancy Cronin , and I am the Executive Director  of the Maine Developmental Disabilities Council  
(MDDC) .1  Over  the last two decades,  MDDC has watched Maine’s  early childhood system erode and 
fragment  into disconnected silos .  Today there are multiple programs within the Office of Child and Family 
Services, Center for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Department of Education .  All these programs 
aim to pr ovide  various types of early intervention services f or young children who have, or  are at risk for, 
developmental delays.  These  programs are charged to coordinate care for different populations of young 
children, provide childcare , identify children  with different risks , or provide services.  We applaud the end 
goal but are concerned about the means.   
 
These fragmented efforts to fix the early intervention and education system may put a band aid on one or two 
symptoms  and help a few children but without a  systemic redesign that looks at  children through a holistic 
developmental lens I fear that there will be more children who are not able to get their needs met then those 
who can.   We have no doubt that this proposal would meet a need.  But it will only so lve a bigger problem for 
a few  children – and only  temporarily.   
 
This session the HHS Committee will hear about many gaps to the system of care that serves Maine’s  
children.  You will also hear multiple paths to solve the problem.   One such solution will  be proposed through 
LD 545, but that will not be the only idea you hear about .  MDDC believes that a broader, developmental 
pathway  is needed.  One  tha;,4wt thoughtfully seeks to holistically align  our fragmented silos into a more 
overarching system of care to ensure that  all young children in Maine are able to get  their needs met.  
 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify.  
 
 
1 Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  
Maine’s DD Council has been advocating for individuals with developmental disabilities for over 50 years.  The D D Council is a federally funded, 
independent organization with members from across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and represe ntatives of public 
and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for services for ind ividuals with developmental disabilities.  As required in federal law, 
we are involved in advocacy, capacity building and systemic change activities, with the goal that individuals with developmen tal and other 
disabilities of all ages are fully included, i ntegrated, and involved in their communities and the decisions impacting their lives.   
 

