Mme‘ T “ilk gig .\laine Department ofllcnlth and Human Sen nus 
Gm.L_|.n0l. , .,a.—=: _ ? (‘hild and Fmnily Sen lCL\ 
‘l’F~».. K 
. . . , 
ll State House Station 
f._--=».-,-= g, . ,_ 
Jeanne .\l. Lambrew. Ph.l). . i-"$5";-3 ‘5~‘.i 2 Anﬂinm A‘ mm ‘B)1” \§-£5?‘-I Augusta, Maine 04333 0011 (“’"‘"‘i“i""°"V 
'r¢|.= (201)r»24-790, 0: Toll Free: (871) 680-#866 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay); Fax: (207) 287 N782 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
Re: LD 820 — Resolve, to Provide Support for an Early Intervention and Preschool Child Care 
Services Program in Kennebec County 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 820, Resolve, to Provide Support for an Early 
Intervention and Preschool Child Care Services Program in Kennebec County. This bill proposes 
a directive to the Department to establish a child care program for children from birth to age 
three in Kennebec County. 
While we support the expansion of child care options statewide, OCFS is opposed to this bill. 
OCFS is already implementing initiatives that make signiﬁcant investments in child care 
infrastructure. In particular, the Maine Jobs and Recovery Plan allocated $15 million for 
providers to open, renovate, expand, and/or construct new child care programs. Through this 
initiative providers receive grants for projects that will expand child care capacity statewide, not 
just in a single county. The most recent Bipartisan Policy Center (BPC)_gap analysis released at 
the end of last year found that Kennebec County had the smallest child care gap of any county in 
the state. Kennebec County’s gap was found to be 22 slots. Every county in the state has a gap 
between the number of slots needed and the number of slots available which is why OCFS is 
focusing its resources on expanding child care capacity statewide. This support empowers 
current providers and prospective providers to meet the need in their individual communities. To 
date, the Govemor’s Child Care Infrastructure Grant program has made six awards in Kennebec 
County totaling $505,500 and anticipated to create 125 child care slots. Statewide the program 
has awarded $3,776,300 to 49 applicants. This is anticipated to create 1,356 slots statewide. 
OCFS also has concerns that while this bill would establish a child care program, it does not 
specify the required capacity or size of the program, and does not speak to services for children 
when they reach three years of age. Public Pre-K is not yet universal across the state and where it 
does exist, it generally starts at age four. 
Finally, this bill would allocate $650,000 to establish this program but it is not clear whether 
there would be an ongoing ﬁscal or programmatic role for the Department in the ongoing 
operation of this program.
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me. 
Sincerely, 
_\)' 
CW4 
Dr. Todd A. Landry 
Director 
Ofﬁce of Child and Family Sen/ices
