Adam Zemans
Auburn
LD 164
Lake Stewards of Maine
Executive Director, Adam R. Zemans
TESTIMONY RE:  LD 164. An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection 
Fund
January 27, 2023
Honorable Committee Members:
Lake Stewards of Maine (LSM) works to protect the lakes of Maine and to promote 
lake stewardship through widespread citizen participation in the gathering and 
dissemination of credible scientific information pertaining to lake health. LSM trains, 
mentors and equips thousands of volunteers throughout the state to monitor lakes and 
prevent and control invasive aquatic species on approximately 500 lakes. 
Firstly, Lake Stewards would like to thank the sponsors of LD 164. An Act to Fund 
the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund, particularly Representative BRIDGEO of 
Augusta; JACKSON of  Aroostook and Representatives DOUDERA of Camden, 
HASENFUS of Readfield, LaROCHELLE of Augusta, NUTTING of Oakland.We 
would also like to profoundly thank our colleagues at Maine Lakes for their leading 
advocacy efforts around LD 164.
LSM is a nonpartisan organization that normally does not get involved in legislation 
except to provide scientific analysis and neutral viewpoints. However, when it comes 
to funding bills, there are clear reasons to do so that go to the core of our mission. 
LSM supports LD 164 for all the reasons mentioned in Maine Lakes’s presentation of 
the facts, particularly the concept of “investment.” 
Now, more than ever, lake protection and stewardship require the implementation of 
the precautionary principle. Namely, when in doubt, protect our environmental 
resources and population. Preventative measures on lakes and in watersheds not only 
mean that an ounce of prevention leads to a pound of cure. In the case of Maine lakes,
many ounces of prevention among our 6,000 plus lakes and ponds are needed to stop 
the requirement for billions of pounds of cure. 
History will be on the side of those in the state of Maine who step up and beyond their
comfort zones to lead and cooperate in preventative lake stewardship measures before
it is too late to help stop the worst of increasing environmental impacts in a context of
unprecedented environmental threats to the state, especially its precious and, in some 
cases,  most vulnerable lakes and lake populations. 
Thank you so much for your wise leadership on this issue that is so crucial to Maine’s
future.
Best wishes in your noble work.
Adam R. Zemans
Executive Director, Lake Stewards of Maine

