Ann  McGinley
Otis
LD 164
Dear Members of the Environmental and Natural Resources Committee,
     My name is Ann McGinley and I am a permanent resident of Beech Hill Pond in 
Otis Maine. My family has owned this property for over 50 years and in that time; I 
have seen a slow but continuing deterioration in the water quality of the lake. This is 
extremely disheartening since many of the residents try their best to protect the lake, 
but funding is greatly needed to help restore or at least prevent further decline. 
     Last summer I volunteered to assist with the Beech Hill Pond watershed survey 
and spoke with many residents who stated they are aware of septic tank issues or 
runoff on their properties but simply cannot afford to address the problems. In 
addition to this, most of the roads around Beech Hill Pond are private dirt roads and 
contribute greatly to run off.  Each road has individual volunteer road commissions 
with no consistency and a lack of professional knowledge or advice on how to 
properly address runoff issues.  With the addition of winter sanding and summer 
treatments to keep road dust down additional products are being flushed into our 
lakes. Funding to help educate property owners about the hazards of pesticide 
application and harmful chemical cleaners is also needed. 
     I greatly urge you to support LD 164: An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and 
Protection Fund to help address some of the issues facing Maine lakes and preserve 
them for future generations. Restoration is much more costly than prevention. Please 
help to keep Maine a great place to live and vacation in by investing in its natural 
resource of pristine lakes.
     Thank you very much for your time and attention to this matter. 
                                                                      Sincerely,                                                               
                                                                      Ann McGinley                                                        
                                                                                                             

