Anthony  Wilson
Belgrade
LD 164
Dear members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee,
My name is Anthony Wilson and I live in Belgrade. I am writing to urge your support
for LD 164: An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund.
As you know, the effects of climate change, warming waters, longer growing seasons,
larger rain events that create more runoff, and increased development pressure are 
putting our lakes at greater risk with each passing day. Funding for lake protection 
projects, including implementation of erosion-control Best Management Practices, 
replacement of failing septic systems, stronger invasive species management 
programs, and treatment of lakes with chronic algal blooms are desperately needed to 
safeguard lake health in the coming decades.
Funding support is especially important for a community such as Belgrade, whose 
boundaries touch five of the seven lakes in the Belgrade Lakes watershed. Those 
lakes are quite literally the lifeblood -- economically, culturally, recreationally and 
aesthetically -- not only of Belgrade, but of Rome, Mount Vernon, Smithfield, Sidney,
Oakland and Mercer. The importance of preserving Maine's lakes cannot be 
overstated on a statewide basis, as well. If Maine is to remain Vacationland, we must 
invest in the protections that will continue to ensure the lakes are a magnet for visitors
and for folks like my wife Christina and I. When we moved here three years ago, we 
were so taken with the beauty of the lakes that, while visiting a friend's camp, I said to
her, "We've got to get us one of these." Last year, we realized that dream when we 
purchased a Belgrade camp. We hope to leave that as a legacy for our children and 
grandchildren. But the enjoyment of these natural wonders by future generations will 
be possible only if we proactively seek to protect them today. 
Please invest in the healthy future of Maine’s lakes today to protect local economies, 
outdoor tourism, sporting, and recreation businesses, drinking water supplies, wildlife
habitat and so much more for all who use lakes in the future. Thank you for your 
consideration. 
Anthony Wilson
Belgrade, Maine
