District 60: Augusta (part)  
  
William Bridgeo  
100 Fairview Avenue  
Augusta, ME 04330  
William.Bridgeo@legislature.maine.gov  
  
  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 
TESTIMONY OF REPRESENTATIVE WILLIAM BRIDGEO  
IN FAVOR OF LD 164  
“AN ACT TO FUND THE LAKE RESTORATION AND 
PRESERV ATION FUND”  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and  Members of the Environment 
and Natural Resources Committee,  
 
I am Representative Bill Bridgeo and I am speaking in support of my bill, LD 
#164 “An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Preservation Fund.” This 
fund, authorized by the Legislature many years  ago and found in Title  38, 
Section 401N, was created to enable the Department of Environmental 
Protection to provide grant funding to local entities working to address 
serious threats to the water quality of Maine's Great Ponds. A worthy goal 
indeed - except for the fact that there has not been any money appropriated to 
the fund, as far as I can determine, since the 1990's.  
 
LD 164 would be a significant step to addressing this oversight by 
appropriating $9 million in each of the two years of the upcoming  biennium.  
It would enable the DEP to award cost -sharing grants to sponsoring entities 

District 60: Augusta (part)  
 that have state -approved strategies for dealing with severe algae blooms, 
milfoil infestations and related problems. Only those lakes and ponds with 
public access and id entified by the DEP as impaired or on their associated 
watch list would qualify for this particular infusion of funding.  
 
I became acutely aware of the need to fund this program when I was 
campaigning in my district last fall. Within Dist rict 60 ( the east  side of 
Augusta) there is a large and beautiful lake – Togus Pond – that is home to 
many year -round residents as well as a large number of seasonal cottages. 
Hundreds, I would say. In recent years, the lake association has been 
impressively proactive in c ontending with a severe algae bloom that occurs 
annually – some years worse than others. In conjunction with the City of 
Augusta, the association has utilized a dedicated cadre of volunteers to do 
surveys, write grants for funding studies, taken numerous s teps to reduce the 
shedding of phosphorous into the lake from camp roads and abutting 
properties, helped secure funding to install a state of the art fishway to enable 
alewives to return to their native breeding area and, with DEP's guidance, 
identify a re commended $850,000 alum treatment to be applied to sections of 
the lake bed over two summers to neutralize the phosphorous that has 
accumulated over many decades that is the cause of the algae bloom.  
 
With a goal to fund -raise as much as half of the total projected cost of the 
alum treatment, the association has already secured pledged commitments of 
almost $150,000. Were there to be available DEP matching funds, they would 
be a terrific incentive for all of the shore front property owners (and perhaps 
the city government) to raise the rest of what they need.  
 
Of course, the land at the bottom of all Maine's Great Ponds belongs to the 
people of Maine and any State investment in restoring and preserving their 
water quality is, in my mind, enlightened self -interest.  
 
This is not, of course, an issue for Togus Pond alone. It is one of twenty -one 
lakes around the state that the DEP classifies as threatened due to issues like 
District 60: Augusta (part)  
 algae and milfoil and other afflictions. DEP also has another twenty -five or 
so lakes on its related watch list. Given the ever -increasing problems 
associated with climate change, I believe that list is only going to grow.  
 
The beauty and high quality of Maine's rivers, streams and lakes are a vital 
component of what makes our state so special . Whether we make investments 
to protect and restore that quality so as to protect property values, or to 
encourage tourism, or to preserve the legacy of Maine's pristine environment 
for those to come, we have, I think, a moral obligation to leave our 
environment as good or better than we found it. This bill makes a modest 
contribution to that imperative.  
 
To that end, I am hopeful that this committee will be able to unanimously 
report out favorably on LD 164 and also advise the Appropriations 
Committee tha t this funding is a priority for inclusion in its final 
recommended version of the State budget.  
 
Thank you. I'm happy to answer any questions and if I can't I'm sure there are 
advocates here in the room planning to testify who can.  
