Catherine (Katie) Meikle
Smithfield
LD 164
Dear Members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee,
My name is Katie Meikle. I'm a physician and practiced in Waterville from 1991 until
I retired in 2013. My husband Don Schassberger and I have owned nearly 30 acres on 
North Pond in Smithfield since 1993 and have been full time residents of Smithfield 
since 2013. We are both members of the North Pond Association Board and are 
LakeSmart evaluators.
Sadly, North Pond is in serious trouble. Severe algae blooms the past 2 summers have
prevented us and our summer guests from swimming in the lake. We love to kayak 
and paddle board, but one time the green mat was so thick that I couldn't see my 
paddle as it dipped in the water. These blooms not only hamper recreational activities,
but also can create toxins harmful to fish and other wildlife. Sport fisherman flock to 
North Pond known for its bass fishing.
Our NPA membership dues and returnable bottle collection help to fund trained courtesy
boat inspectors (CBI) who check boats and trailers at the public launch for invasive plants 
such as Eurasian Milfoil.  Another invasive, Curly-leaf Pond Weed was discovered in the 
serpentine flowing from East Pond to North Pond in 2021.  East Pond, North Pond, 7 Lakes 
and Maine DEP have partnered to clear this invasive plant by hiring specially trained divers to
collect plant material and by organizing volunteer paddle surveys in which Don and I have 
participated.
As volunteer LakeSmart evaluators we strive to educate our fellow North Pond 
property owners in ways to minimize rainwater runoff which carries phosphates into 
the lake contributing to the blooms.
We are fortunate at NPA to partner with 7 Lakes, Colby College, the communities of 
Mercer, Rome, & Smithfield and others working to establish a comprehensive plan to 
stop these algae blooms, but mitigation is likely to be very expensive. Please support 
LD 164 An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund.
Thank you,
Katie Meikle Vice President North Pond Association 
Smithfield, Maine
