 
      230 Main Street, Bridgton ME 04009         207 -647 -8580         www.mainelakes.org           
 
January 24, 2023  
 
Re: Support for LD 164: "An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund " 
 
Dear Senator Brenner , Representative  Gramlich , and the Distinguished Members of the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources,  
 
My name is Colin Holme and I am the Director of the Lakes Environmental Association.  Our organization is 
headquartered in Bridgton , Maine and we directly work in the upp er Sebago and Saco River watershed s but we 
also partner with organizations and agencies like the Maine Department of Environmental Protection to address 
issues related to lake s and freshwater systems across the State . Our programs include water quality monitoring, 
aquatic invasives control and prevention, in-school and public education , as well as  technical assistance for 
landowners, businesses , and municipalities .  
 
Every January, our organization organizes a summit on recent lake and freshwater research , and folks working on 
lakes and ponds  from across Maine and New England attend. There have been presentations on treating 
cyanobacteria (blue -green algae) blooms in Maine  at each of these events . The good news is that th ese blooms can 
be treated, making the lake clear again and free of noxious and potentially  toxic algae . The bad news is that these 
blooms are becoming more and more common and the treatment is often prohibitively  expensive .  
 
The simple fact is that for most com munities, there is no way that they could undertake the costs of treating a  
whole -lake algal bloom  without financial support and guidance from the Maine Department of Environmental 
Protection.  There are already around ten lakes in the State that are experiencing harmful alga l bloom s and the 
number of blooming lakes is only going to increase as Maine’s climate warms. Without a dedicated funding 
mechanism to deal with alga l blooms, we are going to lose more iconi c waters  that are a part of Maine’s identity 
and economy.  
 
Currently , LD 164 propose s to allocate $9 million in revenue to the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund  in the 
two upcoming fiscal years.  While large  bulk allocations would be very useful, I encourage the Committee to 
consider yearly, and non -lapsing allocation s to this fund to ensure all lakes that experience human -caused algae 
blooms in the future have appropriate resources to bring these waterbodies back to a natural state.  
 
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter.  I encourage you to vote “ought to pass”  on LD 164 . 
  
 
Colin Holme  
Lakes Environmental Association  

