 
 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth,  Maine  04105  • (207)  781-2330  • maineaudubon.org   
 
 
 
 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
℅ Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
January 30, 2023  
 
RE: LD 164, An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund  
 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Committee:  
 
 Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 164, An Act to Fund 
the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund, on behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members 
and supporters.  
 
 Healthy lakes and ponds are essential to Maine wildlife an d Maine’s economy. Clean water 
is essential, for example, for Common Loons, which are visual predators that rely on clear waters 
to see and pursue fish. Unfortunately, the cost of keeping our lakes and ponds clean and healthy is 
growing each year, outpacin g existing funding sources. This bill would infuse the Lake Restoration 
and Protection Fund with funding needed to support strategies to protect this unparalleled resource.  
 
 Funds could be used for a variety of strategies. For example, the LakeSmart prog ram has 
identified hundreds of best management practices (BMPs) on more than 35 lakes across Maine that 
must be implemented to protect lake water quality. BMPs include planting vegetative buffers and 
rain gardens, as well as other simple measures such as “ rubber razors” and infiltration trenches. In 
addition, aging septic systems in poor soils need to be replaced because they pose a threat to lake 
water quality. Furthermore, funding for invasive species prevention programs like the Maine 
Department of Envir onmental Protection’s Courtesy Boat Inspection and Lake and River 
Protection Sticker programs have not kept pace with inflation, rising salaries, and growing demand.  
 
These strategies are crucial to protecting the health of Maine lakes and ponds and the 
wildlife that call them home. We strongly encourage the Committee to support this bill.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Eliza Donoghue, Esq.  
Director of Advocacy  

