Dear members of the Environmental and Natural Resources Committee:
 
My name is Ginger Eliasberg. I’m writing in support of LD 164: An Act to Fund the 
Lake Restoration and Protection Fund. 
 
Five generations of my family have been coming to Maine for over 60 years. We have 
three camps on Georges Pond in Franklin, Maine. My immediate family has lived in 
New York, Florida and California, but the one constant has been going to Maine every 
summer.
 
Our beloved Georges Pond had the worst algal bloom imaginable in 2018! Would you 
want to jump into that water?
 
Georges Pond, Franklin, Maine, 2018.
 
Our lake association was determined to fix Georges Pond and we rallied support within 
the community and amongst volunteers to embark on a 3-year effort to raise funds, to 
do the necessary science (water monitoring), to determine a viable treatment (alum 
treatment) and repair our lake. The alum treatments, applied in 2020 and 2021, produced 
record water clarity levels - almost 25 feet, the best since 1977 when records were first kept. 
However, this success will not last if we do not also address stormwater runoff, which carries 
phosphorus from each of our properties into the pond. If we don't stop adding phosphorus to 
the pond from stormwater runoff from properties, camp roads, and faulty septic 
systems, we will continue to have algal blooms. 
We continue to work hard addressing stormwater runoff through the LakeSmart 
program of Maine Lakes, and with vital help through Maine DEP’s 319 Grant 
programs.
LakeSmart educates property owners on how to use Best Management Practices 
(BMPs) to slow, infiltrate, and divert stormwater, and is essential to communities 
throughout the State of Maine. Georges Pond should be a cautionary tale to all lakes 
and ponds in Maine - take steps NOW to take care of your water or IT WILL TURN 
GREEN ONE DAY.
But LakeSmart is more than just an education program - it is community building. So 
many of us share such wonderful, similar experiences enjoying “Maine -The Way Life 
Should Be” on a quiet, pristine lake with family and friends - fishing, boating, swimming, 

camping, the call of the loons… It has been heart-warming to meet neighbors from 
across the lake that have been coming to the same place for as long as we 
have. Volunteers from other lake associations helped us on Georges Pond and we, in 
turn, have reached out to help other lake associations.
 
Here are the reasons to support LD 164:
 
1.     Property owners, municipalities, and the State of Maine are all stakeholders for 
clean lakes and ponds. Clean lakes and ponds bring higher property values and higher 
tax revenues.
 
2.     The State and municipalities can't afford to clean up the lakes on their 
own. LakeSmart, a community-based, volunteer driven program, has the manpower and 
influence to establish lake-saving norms of behavior. LakeSmart volunteers do the 
heavy lifting but need the support of the State and municipalities to help encourage 
BMPs on all properties within the watershed. No ONE of us is as effective as ALL of 
us together.
 
LakeSmart volunteers will do a lot of heavy lifting, but FUNDING is essential.  
Please vote for LD 164. Thank you!
 
Very sincerely,
Ginger Eliasberg
LakeSmart, Coordinator
Georges Pond Association, Franklin, Maine
"The greatest threat to our Pond is the belief that someone else will save it." 
(Adapted from a quote by Robert Swan, explorer.)
