Testimon y in Support of:  
LD 164, Act  to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund  
Submitted to the Environment and Natural Resources Committee  
January 30, 2023  
Dear Members of the Env ironment  and Nat ural Resources Committee,  
My name is Jennifer Jespersen, and I am the owner of Ecol ogical Instincts , a small , Maine -based, woman -
owned  consulting firm  located in  Manchester . My firm works with  municipalities , lake associations, and state 
agencies including the Maine Depa rtment of En vironmental Pro tection  (DEP)  to help protect and improve 
water quality  in lakes across the state. We currently have projects a s far north as Cross Lake on the 
Maine/Can ada border , south to Crystal Lake  in Gray . Some of o ur current  projects include: Togus Pond  
(Augusta) , China Lake  (China/Vassal boro) , Georg es Pond  (Franklin) , Sabbath day Lake  (New Gl oucester) , North 
Pond (Smithfield ), Qui mby Pond  (Rangeley) , Abrams Pond  (Eastbrook) , Unity Pond  (Unity) , and Varnum Pond  
(Wilton /Temple).  
I am writing to day to urge your  suppor t for LD 164: An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Pro tection Fund . 
Never has there been a better opp ortunity to invest in lake restoration. I began my career  in M aine almost 20 
years ago  assisting the M aine DEP with  asses sment of the 30 most polluted lakes in Maine. Today , there are 
still 21 lakes on the “Impaired Lakes Pr iority List”, and an additional 170 on the “Threatened Lakes Priority 
List”. There are hundreds  more that would bene fit from funding to protect the watersheds around them from 
the effects of development, and climate change . 
Acco rding to the  Maine Climate Council , surface water temperature s in northern New England increased 1.4 
°F per decade from 1984 -2014, which is faster than the worldwide average, with Maine lakes warming on 
average by nearly 5.5 °F during this time . Higher (air and water) temperatures lead to earlier ice -out and later 
ice-in, resulting in longer and strong er stratification periods, which leads to increased algal growth, greater 
oxygen demand due to decomposition on the lake bottom, and lower oxygen near the lake bottom.  Other 
climate -related imp acts including more intense precipitation events and drought , both can have detrimental 
effect s on our lakes.  
Voluntary la ke pro tection and restoration  has been the primary mode  of lake protection in Maine.  
Unfortu nately, th ere are not enough resources to go around to support  only volunt ary efforts. Towns a cross 
the state ar e already struggling  to fix roads and keep their schools running, lake associations volunteers are 
burning out trying to bolster support of lake s on shoestring  budgets , and DEP ’s Lake As sessment Section  is 
grossly  understaffed. Meanwhile, our lakes are showing signs of stress, and others are e xperiencing algal 
blooms . LD 164 will make  Maine a regional leader  for lake pro tection  and provide a mechanism for  restor ing 
our impaired lakes  and providing better protection  for our threate ned and high -quality lakes and po nds.  
As a small business owner  representing Maine t owns and lake assoc iations , a Maine native,  a volunteer water 
quality monitor , and parent  of two young children who spend  time playin g in and on our l ocal lakes , I ask you 
to please support LD 164 - to help ensure clean water for all Maine  people,  and for all future genera tions of 
Maine rs. 
Sincerely,  
 
Jennifer Jespersen  
Ecological Instincts   

