In support of LD 164: An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, , 
Voting to Fund the existing Lake Restoration and Protection Fund now and in the future is the 
only way Maine will stay ahead of the increasing threats to water quality. We understand that the 
Fund is primarily designed to address the needs of Impaired and Threatened Lakes, to restore the 
lakes with worst water quality and to protect others from becoming impaired. But we know that 
the needs for restoration and protection go beyond phosphorus levels. 
This Fund is crucial, but so is adequate support for the Department of Environmental Protection 
so they have the stafﬁng and resources to respond to the growing demand for their services 
across the State. It’s of little beneﬁt to list lakes as “Impaired ” or “Threatened ” and not have the 
funds to take action. _‘
~ 
My husband and I are fortunate to live on the shores of Alamoosook Lake. We are volunteer 
stewards as part of the Alamoosook Lake Association. In 2022 Alamoosook joined 169 other 
lakes on the “Threatened Lakes” list, but we’ve learned that when the lists are updated~ 
Alamoosook will be moved to the “Impaired ” list, primarily because of delayed efforts by the 
Craig Brook National Fish Hatchery to mitigate phosphorus levels in its effluent to meet DEP 
standards. We would be in much worse shape if our shallow lake didn’t flush seven times a year. 
Also in 2022 Alamoosook was placed on the DEP’s list of “Infested Lakes” due to a 2021 
suspicious plant sample testing positive for an invasive milfoil. The DEP Invasive Aquatic 
Species and Dive Team became signiﬁcant members of our Response Team and aided our efforts 
to assess the extent of infestation, evaluate samples, and extract suspicious colonies. We will 
continue to rely on their guidance and expertise as we develop a management plan and pursue 
more testing to resolve the mystery we currently face--a possible hybrid. Our challenging 
situation is multiplied across the State. 
All of us are here today because we understand the importance of being good stewards of our 
environment. Financially, the value of Maine’s lakes and ponds can be viewed through the lens 
of tourism and property taxes, but Nature-ally, we canenvision the mental health value of these 
scenic resources, recognize our obligation.to protect all watersheds as sacred to our existence, 
and understand the necessity of educating future generations in their restoration and protection. 
We urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD "164 for the sake of our treasured Maine lakes now 
and for future generations to come.‘ 
» _ 
Katie and John GreenmanI 
Orland, Maine 
207-735-7552, 207-974-9911 
kgreerm1an@,gwi.net, jgreemnan@gwi.net
