 30 Mile River Watershed Association   Page 1 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
RE: Testimony in SUPPORT  of LD 164 :  
An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund  
January 30, 2023  
Dear Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich  and Distinguished Members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee :  
 
Thank you for the  opportunity to speak  to you today  in support of LD 164 .  
 
My name is Lidie Robbins  and I am  the Executive Director of the 30 Mile River 
Watershed Association . This watershed  encompasses over 20 waterbodies in Central 
Maine.  We are a coalition of seven towns, nine lake associations and two conservation 
organization s. Our missi on is to work as a community for clean and healthy lakes, 
ponds and streams in our watershed.  
 
I am testifying today to strongly support the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund  that 
would  provide much -needed  funding  to protect one of Maine’s most precious 
resources .  
 
In the summer of 2020, an invasive aquatic plant was found for the first time in our 
watershed, in Androscoggin Lake . The following summer, Androscoggin Lake  turned 
pea-soup green with a lakewide algal bloom, the first there in 20 years. The lake was in 
crisis, and those who love  this lake were  heartbro ken and fearful  about the lake’s 
future.   
 
Since 2020 , our organization has devoted as many r esources as we able  to our work on 
Androscoggin Lake in an effort to save it, before it’s too late. For two seasons we have 
been fighting the invasive milfoil with intensive surveying and removal. Last season we  
conducted an in -depth watershed survey to identify threats to water quality and 
collect ed extensive water quality data  to better understand what led to the algal bloom.  
 
Like many lakes in Maine, Androscoggin Lake’s water quality is threatened by 
phosphorus – a nutrient found in soil, septic waste, a nimal waste, and fertilizers. 
Phosphorus is food for algae and other plants . Very small increases in phosphorus  can 
cause lake algae populations to increase and water clarity to decline ; higher  levels can 
cause  alga l blooms .  
 30 Mile River Watershed Association  
P.O. Box 132, Mount Vernon, ME 04352  
(207) 860 -4043     info@30mileriver.org     www.30mileriver.org  
 
 30 Mile River Watershed Association   Page 2 of 2 
 Increased pressure  from dev elopment, along with climate change leading to warming 
lake temperatures and intense storms washing higher levels of polluted runoff into our 
lakes, are putting our lakes at greater risk. Invasive aquatic species are spreading 
throughout  the state. Now is the time to commit more resources to doing t he work 
that is needed  to keep our lakes clean and healthy.   
 
There is no quick fix to improving water quality in  Androscoggin Lake  and preventing 
the lake from turning green again.  It will take years of addressing problems on roads, 
working with landowners to correct runoff issues on their properties, improving septic 
systems, and much more.  As for the  milfoil, o ur best hope of eradicating it is to fight it 
as hard as possible now, before it spreads through out the lake and it’s too late.  
 
All of this work will take more capacity than our organiza tion has currently, the cost s 
are growing every year  and Androscoggin  Lake  is just one of the lakes our organization  
work s to protect.  
 
This fund will provide resources for organizations like ours to do th is vital  work . 
 
The co mmunities in our watershed, and throughout Maine, depend upon the health of 
these lakes  for our local economy, our tax base and our quality of life.  Our lakes are one 
of our most valuable natural resources . Losing them  would truly be devastating  to our 
state .  This fund pro vides an opportunity  to inve st in a better future.  
 
I urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 164.  
 
Thank you ,   
 
Lidie Robbins   
Executive Director  
 
