In Support of:  LD-164:  To Fund Lake Restoration and Protection Fund  
Supplemental Testimony 
I am Lucy Leaf, Vice President of Toddy Pond Association in Hancock County Maine.  I join others 
doing protection work  on my lake and throughout my county, in both a volunteer and paid capacity.  
The following indicates some specifics about the work we do county-wide and some of the challenges 
we face in  meeting today’s needs.
We in Downeast Maine have always hoped that invasive plants would be slow to spread to our region, 
especially if we were diligent in our protective efforts such as Courtesy Boat Inspection, Invasive Plant 
Monitoring and Water Quality Testing, all excellent and effective protective programs initiated over 
twenty years ago by DEP and implemented by lake associations on higher risk lakes, especially those 
that have high boat use, such as my own.  
But then a large infestation was discovered in Washington County to the East of us  in 2019  followed 
by the discovery of  an invasive plant in our own County in 2021, which was clear indication that it is 
just a matter of when, not if, our lakes also become infested.  
These programs involve volunteer participants for the most part, though state grants are available to 
hire boat inspectors, sourced from the “milfoil stickers” boaters are required to purchase every year.   
The problem is that these programs must be implemented through lake associations or groups that can 
organize and receive grant funds.  Hancock County has 270 named lakes and less than ten active lake 
associations or groups with this volunteer capacity.  So not many lakes get this protection.  
The state funding Toddy Pond Association receives for its Boat Inspection Program, which is the 
maximum amount of $2,000, covers less than 20% of its direct costs to rum the program.  Boat use has 
increased substantially over just the past few years.  Today, Toddy inspects over 50 boats on a busy 
day.   While the boat ramp is state built and state owned, the responsibility of implementing the Boat 
Inspection Program is up to property lake owners.
Donnell Pond is the second busiest lake in our county for boat traffic due to its scenic value and most 
of its shoreline being part of a state preserve where camping is allowed on numerous sandy beaches.  
There is no state- funded boat inspection on Donnell Pond, nor any of the other protective measures 
taken because there is no lake association there.   Hancock County Soil & Water Conservation District 
provides weekend boat inspection at Donnell, funded by a private organization not affiliated with the 
lake or the  property owners there.  This helps protect other lakes due to the very transient boating 
community.  The Conservation District also acquires private funding for plant monitoring county-wide.
Another trend that is presenting a challenge is that volunteerism seems to be dwindling.  Hiring 
inspectors, grant writing, fund raising, and organizing  programs that are becoming increasingly 
complex is beyond the scope of  most volunteers, many of whom are seasonal.  
The fund being considered today is targeted for projects versus ongoing protective programs. 
Restoration projects are vitally important, but key to the possibility of restoration is early detection.  
And that won’t happen if no one is looking for changes in water quality to foresee deterioration of lake 
health or for the presence of  invasive plants or species like zebra muscles taking hold.  And restoration 
projects also require lake associations and volunteers- that don’t exist for most lakes.
In the last several years, I have discussed with other local lake groups the possibility of starting a 
regional lake association in our county that could provide professional services to help get lake groups 
started and support them by pooling resources such as coordinating a Boat Inspection Program, 
organizing training, volunteer efforts and remediation if needed.   I have seen the effectiveness of these 
regional groups in other areas of Maine that have faced similar challenges.
We cannot rely on volunteers alone to protect or restore our lakes. Nor should we rely on private 
funders to shoulder much of the financial burden.   Lakes are a valuable natural resource from 
which we all benefit.
Please support this bill and any other measures to protect Maine’s lakes.
Lucy Leaf
Surry, Maine
