MW‘ I A 15 University Drive 
~ 
ae3 
*’ 
MaineW t r Utilities Association Augusta‘ Maine 04330
'
2 
it " 
Organized 1925 207‘623'951 1 
January 30, 2023 
Honorable Stacy Brenner, Senate Chair 
Honorable Lori Gramlich, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 164, An Act T 0 Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection 
Fund 
Dear Senator Brermer, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide 
testimony in support of LD 164, An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund. 
About MWUA. The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonproﬁt association based in 
Augusta that provides support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in 
advocating for safe drinking Water through educational and technical programming as well as 
advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The Association was formed in 1925 and counts 
approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
Discussion. LD 164 proposes to provide $9 million annually for the Department of 
Environmental Protecti0n ’s Lake Restoration and Protection Fund (Fund). A high quality of 
source water supply is the ﬁrst line of defense in protecting public health. The Fund could be 
used to protect or restore water quality in Maine’s public water sources. Every investment made 
in protecting or restoring these supplies greatly aides the ability of water utilities to provide high 
quality water to the people of Maine.' 
Beyond drinking water supplies, Maine lakes provide billions of dollars for Maine’s economy 
annually (Maine Department of Environmental Protection, 2023). The ability to improve the 
quality of lakes that need it and maintain the quality of others is vital for the State of Maine. 
The ongoing funds that this bill provides is an investment in Maine that MWUA strongly 
encourages you to support. 
Yours for safe drinking water, 
V. ,%/(,2/ ttél /f/kg?’/f¥£2S4""T 
Mike Broadbent, 
MWUA Legislative Committee 
Superintendent, Auburn Water and Sewerage DistrictsI
