Testimony in support of LD-164, An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund.
My testimony is respectfully submitted to the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
meeting at 9 am, Jan. 30, 2023.  I am testifying in support of LD-164, an act that will establish 
critically needed funding to protect Maine lakes.  I am a Maine resident and I and my extended 
family have camps on Maine lakes that we enjoy for recreation and relaxation.  However, we 
see all around us lakes threatened by changing climate, harmful algae blooms, and spreading 
invasive species.  
On our pond, Keyes Pond in Sweden, Maine, more frequent and intense storms have increased 
stormwater runoff that I and my neighbors, organized into a pond protection association, are 
working to mitigate through expensive camp road improvements, trail mulching and efforts to 
keep boats with powerful, sediment-damaging motors off the water.  We also contribute to the 
ongoing monitoring of our Pond’s water quality by the Lakes Environmental Association.  Our 
pond is essential to the well-being of many people, both local residents and young campers 
from away.  We are working to keep the water clean in the face of major climate change.  
However, projects needed to improve or maintain the water quality of ours and other lakes and 
ponds have outpaced existing funding sources as threats and damages are increasing. 
Why do I think it is important for the State of Maine to invest in the future of Maine’s lakes?  
Obviously, I want our pond to be safe for generations to come.  But thinking more broadly, 
clean lakes are important for our tourism and outdoor recreation industries.  Local communities 
like Sweden and Lovell, and local businesses, like tackle shops, dock wranglers, and summer 
camps for kids, rely on clean lakes for tax dollars and revenue.  Finally, studies in Minnesota, 
Michigan and Maine have convinced me that decreases in water quality negatively impact real 
estate and associated value.
Finally, investing in the future of Maine’s lakes and ponds is a win-win for those who live in 
Maine or visit from away.  However, since the threats to Maine’s lakes are ongoing, I think long-
term support for their protection is needed.  Therefore, I urge the Committee to add a non-
lapsing funding mechanism to this Act that will insure reliable and sustainable funding for the 
Lake Restoration and Protection Fund beyond the two years mentioned in the current proposed 
legislation.  The long-term climate crisis we are facing, and the ever-increasing degradation of 
Maine lake water quality we are seeing, will require continued steady support for the Lake 
Restoration and Protection Fund well into the future.  Thank you for considering this testimony.
Sincerely,
Orrin C. Shane, III
9 Fieldstone Court
Portland, Maine
17 Libby Lane
Sweden, Maine
Orrin Shane
Retired
LD 164
My testimony is respectfully submitted to the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
meeting at 9 am, Jan. 30, 2023.  I am testifying in support LD-164, an act that will establish 
critically needed funding to protect Maine lakes.   My wife and I are Maine residents; our 
extended family, coming from Maine to California, enjoys our lake camp for recreation and 
relaxation. All around us we see that lakes are threatened by changing climate, harmful algae
blooms, and spreading invasive species. 
 
Our camp is on Keyes Pond in Sweden, Maine. Our pond association, formed in 1971, has 
observed many changes including more frequent and intense storms that increase 
stormwater runoff.  We are working to mitigate runoff damage through expensive camp road 
improvements, trail mulching and efforts to keep boats with powerful, sediment-damaging 
motors off the water.  We also contribute to the ongoing monitoring of our Pond’s water 
quality by the Lakes Environmental Association.  Our pond is essential to the well-being of 
many people, both local residents and young summer-campers from away.  We are working 
to keep the water clean in the face of major climate change.  However, projects needed to 
improve or maintain the water quality of ours and other lakes and ponds have outpaced 
existing funding sources as threats and damages are increasing.
 
Why do I think it is important for the State of Maine to invest in the future of Maine’s lakes?  
Obviously, I want Keyes Pond to be safe for generations to come.  But thinking more broadly, 
clean lakes are important for our tourism, for outdoor recreation industries, and for public 
health.  Local communities like Sweden and Lovell, and local businesses, like tackle shops, 
dock wranglers, and summer camps for kids rely on clean lakes for tax dollars and revenue.  
Studies in Minnesota, Michigan and Maine have convinced me that decreases in water quality
negatively impact real estate and associated value.  Finally, urban drinking water comes from 
lake surface waters; lakes link to wells because lakes are linked to groundwater systems.  
Clean water is a key need for public health.
Ultimately, investing in the future of Maine’s lakes and ponds is a win-win for those who live in
Maine or visit from away.  However, since the threats to Maine’s lakes are ongoing, I think 
long-term support for their protection is needed.  Therefore, I urge the Committee to add a 
non-lapsing funding mechanism to this Act that will insure reliable and sustainable funding for 
the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund beyond the two years mentioned in the current 
proposed legislation.  The long-term climate crisis we are facing, and the ever-increasing 
damage to Maine lake water quality we are seeing, will require continued steady support for 
the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund well into the future. 
Thank you for considering this testimony.
Sincerely,
Orrin C. Shane, III
9 Fieldstone Court
Portland, Maine
17 Libby Lane
Sweden, Maine

