Testimony in Support of LD 164, “An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund" 
Submitted to the Committee On The Environment and Natural Resources 
By: Peter L. Kallin, Ph.D. , Chairman of the Board, 7-Lakes Alliance, January 30, 2023 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Distinguished Members of the Environment and 
Natural Resources Committee, I’m Dr. Peter Kallin. I am a retired professional watershed 
manager, a retired environmental consultant, a retired university water resources extension 
specialist and Past President of the of the Maine Lakes Society.  I am the current Chairman of the 
Board of the 7-Lakes Alliance, a member of the Belgrade Lakes Association, and a certified 
invasive plant and water quality monitor for the Maine Volunteer Lake Monitoring Program 
(VLMP).  I have served on numerous DEP stakeholder groups including the most recent reviews 
of gravel roads, phosphorus control, and shoreland zoning. I strongly recommend that you 
endorse LD 164 with a unanimous “ought to pass.” 
Our forefathers recognized the importance of our lakes. One of the first pieces of legislation passed 
by the Massachusetts Bay Colony was the Great Ponds Act of 1647 that granted citizens the right 
to access Great Ponds, those greater than 10 acres, for fishing, fowling, swimming, boating, cutting 
ice, and navigating. Even in 1647 the leaders of the community recognized the importance of lakes 
as a source of food and economic activity and deserving of special protection.  When Maine 
became a State in 1820, this colonial law was part of the articles of separation and became 
integrated into Maine common law. 
Over time, our lakes and rivers provided not only natural resources like fish and ice, but 
hydropower to power factories, and the ability to bring those resources to market by boat, allowing 
not just Maine but the United States to become a world economic power. We often drew drinking 
water and dumped wastewater into the same waterbodies-not a good idea!  This exploitation of 
our waters took its toll in water quality and in 1969 when the Cuyahoga River in Ohio caught fire 
for the 13th time, Americans recognized we couldn’t continue to abuse our waters and called upon 
the US Congress to act to protect our waters. The Nixon administration created the US 
Environmental Protection Agency in 1970 and, under the leadership Maine’s Senator Ed Muskie 
in the Senate, a bipartisan Congress passed the Clean Air Act (CAA) in 1970 and the Clean Water 
Act (CWA) in 1972, setting a goal of making all our waters fishable and swimmable and free from 
toxic discharges. The CWA contains language that requires States to maintain and protect their 
water quality. The CWA and the CAA have been highly effective in cleaning our air and water but 
the job isn’t done yet. 
According to a recent UMaine study*, Maine’s lakes provide over $12B of Economic Activity 
annually,  to the State of Maine. Unfortunately, many of Maine’s lakes are suffering from degraded 
water quality.  For example, of the 7 major lakes in the Belgrade Lakes Watershed, three are 
considered “impaired” and the other four are considered “threatened” by Maine DEP. In the past 
10 years, the 7-Lakes Alliance has performed well over $3M in active remediation of our lakes 
and shorefronts.  Most of the funding for this work comes from USEPA Clean Water Act Section 
319 funding that we receive from Maine DEP, all of which requires a local match. While that 
sounds like a lot, it is well short of what is needed.  While it is usually possible to get a fairly well 
to do shorefront property owner to come up with funds to match erosion control work that will 
protect the value of their property, it is much mor difficult to raise funds when the property is 
owned by a municipality or property owner with limited means who inherited a century-old dirt 
road through a woodlot or farm that drains straight to the lake.  Often these properties are not right 
on the water but the sediment drains almost directly into the lake.  The resource that is degraded 
is the lake, which belongs to all the citizens of Maine. This affects all the residents in the watershed 
and beyond.  For example, in the Town of Rome, where I reside, 80% of the property tax base 
is shorefront property (over ½ owned by nonresidents), which covers basically the entire 
$16M education budget for our 1000 students in RSU-18.  In Belgrade, nearly 60% of the tax 
base is shorefront property. This bill would enable Maine to help provide a non-Federal match to 
additional Federal funds for lake restoration and protection. 
Healthy lakes and ponds are essential to a thriving Maine economy. But the cost of keeping our 
lakes and ponds healthy is growing each year, outpacing existing sources of funding. That growth 
is expected to continue, perhaps at an even faster pace, in the future. Funding lake health today 
through the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund is a sound investment in the future of Maine’s 
lakes and outdoor economy. This bill would supply much needed funding to Maine’s Lake 
Restoration and Protection Fund. Please support maximum funding for this bill.   Thanks for 
your consideration. 
Peter Kallin, Ph.D. 
Rome, ME 
Chairman, Board of Directors, 7-Lakes Alliance (former Belgrade Regional Conservation Alliance 
-BRCA) 
Past President, Maine Lakes Society 
* A. Daignault and M. Genoter. 2022. Valuing the Economic Benefits of Maine’s Great Ponds in 
the 21st Century 
