In  suppor t of
:
LD 164, An Act t o Fund Lak e Rest oration
and Pr otection
Good morning Chairs and distinguished members of the Envir onment and Natur al 
Resour ces Committee.
My name is Rob yn Silberstein. I  liv e in Surr y. I am Pr esident of the Toddy P ond 
Association. L ucy Leaf, Surr y, Vice-Pr esident of the Toddy P ond Association. 
We suppor t Bill LD 164, A n Act t o Fund the Lak e Rest oration and Pr otection F und.
❖
Our Lak e Association has been pr otecting Toddy P ond in Hancock County since 
we or ganiz ed 25 y ears ago.
❖
As a popular ﬁshing lak e with a conv enient boat launch on Route One, our lak e 
has the highest
boat use
in our County ,
with 5 bass
fishing tournaments last year . 
On a busy da y, we inspect o ver 50 boats. Since boats ar e consider ed the most 
likely wa y that inv asive species ar e intr oduced int o a lak e, and with inf estations 
to the east and immediately west of us, the spr ead of inv asive species is a huge 
concern.
❖
The ﬁrst line of def ense against inv asive species is our boat inspection pr ogram. 
Our second line of def ense is patr olling 31 miles of shor eline hoping that if an 
infestation tak es hold we will catch it early .
❖
But
w
orking as v olunteers, the job of pr otecting our
lakes has become bigger 
than what we can handle in t oday’s world.  And this is BEFORE our lak e is 
infested or BEFORE we ha ve an algae bloom, which is
no longer a matter of if - 
but when
.  Fund r aising, gr ant writing, managing budgets,
payroll, and contr acts 
go be yond our scope.
This is not sustainable.
❖
A tar geted str ategy and one wa y the
state could help
us in Hancock County
, 
wher e we ha ve 270 named lak es but only a f ew activ e lak e groups, would be t o 
help star t a regional lak e association as we see in the southern and centr al 
regions of Maine. P ooling r esour ces,
including paid
coordinators of boat
inspections, plant patrollers, water testers and lake smart educators (teaching
homeowners best lake practices)
would pr ovide county
wide suppor t .
Please support this bill by
investing in our treasured
natural resource
and help 
KEEP  MAINE BEAUTIFUL, including its lakes. 
We would lik e to thank the committee for the oppor tunity t o addr ess y ou today.
