Samuel E. Black  
372 Sam Ingalls Road  
Sweden, Maine 04040 
 
 January 29, 2023  
  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
ENR@legislature.maine.gov   
 
RE: LD 164  An Act To Fund Lake Restoration and Protection Fund  
  
Dear Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and Members of the Committee:  
  
I’m pleased  to hear the Legislature i s considering allocating additional funds for the 
restoration and protection of Maine lakes , and  I enthusiastically encourage this 
committee to endorse the passage of LD 164.  
 
I grew up paddling the lakes of Minnesota and Canada, but when  my wife Sue 
convinced me  to visit the waters she had paddled in Maine , I fell in love .  We bou ght 
an old farmhouse  in Sw eden in Oxford County in 1969 and moved there perman ently 
in 1980 after I retired from  a career in the Uni ted States Mar ine Corps.  Fortunately , 
we were also able to  purcha se some  waterfr ont on Mo ose Pond in Sweden to keep  our 
canoe  and explore the wonders that  clean water  provides.   
 
Like most people in Maine, I value the clean water of our lakes and appreciate the 
hard work that many organiza tions do trying to keep it that way .  In our area , the 
Lakes Envi ronmental Association  (LEA) leads the way  in protecting  our lakes .  They 
partner with landowners , deve lopers,  and mu nicipalit ies to reduce erosion and 
improve storm water  control. And they empl oy dive teams  to aggressively attack 
milfoil infestatio ns.  Like other si milar organizations, LEA  actively ra ises 
contributions for their projects , but they could engage in more projects if they could 
apply for addit ional  funds from the State .  LD 164 seems like an appropriate solution 
for this need . 
 
Sue passed a way a few years ago , and I am ol d and probably won ’t be around to 
apprecia te all the benefits that will flow from the passage of LD 164.  But my child ren 
and grandchil dren will be. For t heir sake an d that of all Mainers, I  certainly  would 
appreciate some of my tax dollars being used to fund  the worthwhile endeavor of 
restoring and protecting the waters of Maine.  
 Sincerely,  
 
/s/ Samuel E. Black  
 
