Testimony of  Scott B. Palmer , 37 Beech Street , Big Lake Twp., ME 04668  
and 
William B. Inglee , 3 Deep Cove Rd., Big Lake Township, ME 04668  
and 
Glenn C. Millner , PhD,  151 Savage Rd., Grand Lake Stream, ME 04668  
Submitted on behalf of H.P. 105 An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, January 30, 2023  
 
We are camp owners on Big Lake in eastern Washington County.  We want to encourage 
members of the Environment and Natural Resources  Committee to support H.P . 105 which 
transfers $9 million dollars in each of the next two years into the Lake Restoration and  
Protection  Fund. 
About five years ago, invasive Milfoil was discovered in our lake.  This discovery shocked us , the 
lake preservation community in Maine and the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.  
Before this discovery, the progression of infes tations  from the southern part of the state had  
been gradual.  Suddenly we discovered that the problem had  “leapt  over the fire line” by 
hundreds of miles, and a vast new part of our State  was threatened.  
The lake preservation community in Maine instincti vely understands that an infestation of 
something like milfoil anywhere in Maine threatens all of Maine.  A boat with dangerous  milfoil 
fragment s can cross our state in less than day.  We were  grateful that groups like the Lake 
Stewards of Maine , whose members reside primarily in central and southern Maine,  came to 
our aid with volunteer surveyors , sacrificing weeks of their valuable time .  At the same time , the 
DEP’s Invasive Species Program, recognizing the threat this discovery represented to a vast new 
portion of our State , stepped in with a grant to help with removal.  You as legislators can be 
proud of the caring , committed and competent professionals in th e DEP who work on the 
invasive sp ecies problem .  We as property owners and l ocal citizens  also underst ood that we 
must do our part and we formed a coalition headed by  The Downeast Lakes Land Trust , with 
strong support and cooperation from  the Passamaquoddy Tribe . 
The stabiliz ation of  our lake is far from over , but what we have learned on our journey thus far 
leads to two key recommendations in the context of your hearing today:  
1. The kind of infest ation we discovered at Big Lake, would be  difficult anywhere in Maine, 
but it is especiall y challenging in the less populated and poorer parts of our state , areas  
which sadly are the new frontier for these infestations  as warming trends move further 
north .  The ability to mobilize local resources , whether they be donations or volunteer 
manpower  is much more limited.   We have benefitted from the Milfoil Boat Tax, which 
along with some modest federal grants to DEP is the revenue stream that allowed DEP to 
give us a grant to fund divers to remove the milfoil .  But in the invasive plant area, those 
revenue sources are not sufficient to keep up with the growing problem  in Maine .  
Hence y our consideration today of a direct appropriation is both justified and welcome  
and w ill give the Commissioner and his staff more too ls to work with.   We recognize 
the reluctance you a s legislators  feel toward  taking on new claims against general 
revenues .  The word  “investment” is sometimes used too casually to justify any new 
spending .  But you have before you evidence from credible economists as to the  
extraordinary twelve billion dollar impact our clean lakes  have on the Maine economy 
which generates those tax revenues.  “Investing” in keeping the lakes clean and free of 
infestations ensure s the  tax revenue stream remains strong  and is an appropriate use of 
the word .   
 
2. When the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund was created in the late 1980s , invasive 
plants w ere not a  big issue in Maine .  While the language of the enacting legislation 
clearly appears to be broad enough to encompass the funding of efforts to control 
invasive plant s, you may wish to consider sharpening up the definitions in that statute  to 
include them more specifically.  Equa lly important, we would recommend that you 
review the 50% match  required to receive help from the fund .  As a practical matter, this 
makes  the Fund inaccessible to the poorer and less populated parts of the state . As a 
matter of equity, you should consider a progressive  formula for the Lake Restoration 
and Protection Fu nd which takes into consider an area’s ability to contribute its match 
based on population density and economic strength .  Big Lake, for exampl e, is one of 
the largest lakes in Maine , covering 10, 444 acres .  Much of it is shallow and thus subject 
to milfoil growth  so maintain ing it is a huge task .  While it is a prime destination for 
thousands of small mouth bass anglers from all over Maine and beyond , a vast amount 
of the shoreline is undeveloped , and in a conservancy , and will never be built upon.   
Thus t he actual population o n the lake is very small  and cannot grow.   Our ability to 
protect this lake for the benefit of all Mainers is limited by our numbers and our location 
in the poorest county in Maine.  This is an all-too-common  problem for the economically 
challenged areas of our state .   
While we are encouraged by the rapid action of the State of Maine and the many dedicated 
volunteers who reacted to our situation  at Big Lake , the experience has forced us to stud y lake 
protection issues .   We now know that the threat to our lakes is increasing and requ ires a n even  
greater degree of attention  than ever before.  The threat is real , and we cannot take it for 
granted .  The consequence  of failure is something for which our children would never forgive 
us.  So, thank you to the members of this important committee and to your fellow  legislators for 
your commitment to Maine lakes and thank you for the opportunity to  provide testimony to 
this hearing.  
