 
CHINA REGION LAKES ALLIANCE  
PO Box 6339, China Village, Maine 04926  
 
  
January 30, 2023  
Dear members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee , please  acce pt this written testimony  
support ing LD 164 , An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund .. 
My name is Scott Pierz, a resident of China, Maine, where I have  lived on China Lake for 41 years.  
For nearly half   that time I served as the China Code Enforcement Officer, and afte r that I was president of the 
China Lake Association and also president of the China Region Lakes Alliance (CRLA), a consortium of lake 
associations in the China Lake region representing China Lake, Three Mile Pond, and Webber Pond.  Currently I 
serve as th e executive director of the CRLA.  
Over my time spent living on China Lake I can attest that I have  seen the results of  climate change  and the adverse 
impact those changes have made on our local lake resources.  It may be that we are approaching or  have already  
reached a critical time where it is imperative to respond to the condition of these water  resources , to not only 
maintain  them  but to restore a nd improve  their water quality.  
Specifically, the severe and inte nse storm events we  have  been experiencing end up transporting  stormwater into 
our lakes which  increases nutrient loads and non -point source pollutants from within their respective watersheds.  
The consequences are waterbodies under duress, subject to algal blooms wh ich tint the water green and are a  
nuisance  to the beholder . The overall result  is poor water quality  and potential health risks.  
The CRLA operate s a summer Youth Conservation Corps (YCC) employing high school students engaged in 
environmental best management practices . These conservation projects help  mitigate these severe stormwater 
events and  lessen the impact on our lakes ' water quality. The Towns of China and Vassalboro help fund the YCC,  
but tax-payer dollars are limited.  With out sufficient funding for lake protection efforts , in the future it  will take 
even m ore to rest ore our lake resources from the chang ing climate's impact . 
In closing, there are two things for certain  about lake water quality. . The first is that the condition of a lake's water 
qual ity is connected to local property values (resulting in municipal taxes), and water qual ity also influences market 
values  and sales . The second fact is that local businesses thrive when lake water quality is good, while visitors  and 
vacationers  from within and from outside Maine  enjoy a variety of summer recreational opportunities .  
I strongly urge the Committee to favorably support LD  164, An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection 
Fund . With this funding , work can be do ne to restore and safeguard our lake resources. Please support LD 164.  
 
Respectfully  submitted,  
 
Scott Pierz 
Scott Pierz , Executive Director  
China Region Lake s Alliance  

