January 202 3 
 
To: The Committee on Environment and Natural Resource  
 
RE: LD 1 64 – An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund  
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and members of the Committee on Environment 
and Natural Resources , my name is Stacey Keefer, Director for the Maine Marine Trades 
Association  (MMTA) .  MMTA represent s over 120 Maine businesses and an industry comprised 
of boatyards, boat builders, marinas, boat dealers, and marine retailers.  Though many of our 
members are coastal, we do have members located on Maine lakes  reaching  as far north as 
Beaver Cove Marina on M oosehead Lake.  
 
On behalf of the members  of MMTA , we would appreciate funding that would support water 
quality protection  on Maine lakes . Our organization has been involved with a stakeholder group 
organized by Maine DEP and IF&W to address  aquatic invasiv e species . It would be helpful if 
funding could be used to help enhance current education efforts regarding the prevention of 
aquatic invasive species . And u nfortunately,  mitigation  and restoration efforts  can be extremely  
costly .  
 
We would also like to  encourag e the funds to be used to help support costs and expand access 
to waste pumpout facilities for boaters.  For many years the Maine DEP has helped fund 
municipal and marina pumpout infrastructure through an existing successful program. Though 
some of our larg er lakes have pumpout facilities, not all of them have the equipment and we 
would encourage some of this fund to be used for those purposes. Lakefront public restrooms 
are also helpful for protect ing water quality  for boaters, beachgoers , campers, and people 
fishing . 
 
Boating and fishing make up the largest percentage of the outdoor recreation economic impact 
relative to all other forms of outdoor activities –both in Maine and on the national level. 
Protecting the quality of Maine lakes i s important for a healthy environment, healthy wildlife, 
and also to maintain the quality of water that boaters and anglers seek in our world -class 
waterways. We hope you will consider supporting LD 164.  
 
 
Respectfully,  
Stacey Keefer  
Maine Marine Trades A ssociation, Executive Director  
 
