 
Testimony in SUPPORT  of: 
LD 164, Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund 
 
Submitted to the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
January 30, 2023 
 
 
 
Good afternoon, Chair Brenner, Chair Gramlich, and Distinguished Members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to 
appear before you today in support of LD 164.  
My name is Susan Gallo, and I am the Executive Director of Maine Lakes. Our 
membership organization includes more than 6,000 supporters and volunteers, 
including individual members as well as members from over 90 Lake Associations. 
We are dedicated to our mission of promoting, protecting, and enhancing lake water 
quality, and of preserving the ecological, economic, recreational, and aesthetic 
benefits of Maine’s lakes for all Maine people.  
We enthusiastically support funding the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund at 
DEP at the proposed level of $9 million dollars for the next two years. Needs for 
projects that improve or maintain the quality of lake waters in Maine are great, and 
are growing with the impacts of climate change.  
Protecting and restoring clean lakes provide immense public benefit.    
Matching 50% of funds for costs incurred in lake restoration and protection projects 
as currently described in the fund language ( 38 §480-N. Lake Restoration and 
Protection Fund ) is a smart investment of public money. Matching ensures that cash 
and in-kind support from local lake communities amplify the public funding and make 
it go further. It also ensures community investment in lake protection, an investment 
that protects and restores valuable public resources that have many benefits for all 
Mainers.  
Lakes are a complicated public resource. Any lake over 10 acres is owned by the 
people of Maine, for our use and for our benefit. Lakes provide endless recreational 
opportunities for the public, from boating to wildlife watching to fishing to swimming. 
They provide scenic views, great picnic spots, and a booming real estate and rental 
market that can greatly benefit local lake economies and municipal budgets.  

 
  Yet this public resource, especially in central and southern Maine, is surrounded by 
highly-developed privately-owned land. Lakeside landowners end up bearing much of 
the responsibility for keeping our public waters clean.  
Stormwater runoff over lakeside properties is one of the primary sources of excess 
phosphorus in many of Maine’s lakes and ponds. Excess phosphorus reduces water 
quality by feeding algae blooms that turn lake waters green, smelly and unsuitable for 
use for people and for wildlife.  
Climate change impacts are rapidly putting lakes at greater risk. Warmer waters grow 
algae more quickly. More intense storms bring a larger volume of water flowing 
across the landscape and into Maine’s lakes. As these impacts grow in the coming 
decades, the risks to lakes will grow exponentially. The clean lakes we enjoy today 
will need active protection to stay that way in the future.  
The timing is right to fund lake restoration and protection, to avoid catastrophic 
impacts in the future. 
We are lucky to have many responsible lakeside landowners who take action on their 
properties to protect our lakes by implementing Best Management Practices  (BMPs) 
that reduce runoff, monitoring water quality throughout the summer, maintaining their 
septic systems to reduce risk of malfunction, and keeping a lookout for new invasive 
plant infestations.  
But more funding to improve or maintain the quality of lake waters in the state of 
Maine is needed.  A few examples of where money from this fund could be invested in 
healthy lakes: 
Alum Treatments:  As others will mention in today’s hearing, when lakes go way 
beyond the “tipping point”, where phosphorus pollution has reached such high levels 
that reducing external sources of phosphorus (for example, by implementing BMPs 
that reduce runoff along shorlines) cannot keep up with internal sources of phosporus 
in the water, then an alum treatment is warranted. Alum treatments are expensive and 
can run more than a million dollars, depending on the area being treated. Using funds 
in the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund to match private and other money that 
communiites must raise for alum treatments would greatly benefit those lakes where 
alum treatments are warranted.  
Pollution Prevention Programs:  Ideally, we want to keep lakes from reaching that 
“tipping point” where phosphorus loading has become too great and alum treatments 
are needed. To do that, DEP supports a number of pollution prevention programs that 
could benefit from this fund. 
 
  LakeSmart:  Maine Lakes supports one such program, LakeSmart, which works 
with homeowners to implement BMPs on their property that reduce stormwater 
runoff into the lake, thus reducing external sources of phosphorus. While each 
homeowner’s contribution of phosphorous may be small, many phosphorus 
reduction efforts over many properties add up to make a big difference. The 
LakeSmat program has built up a database of over 1,000 homeowners who 
need BMPs implemented on their property to reduce erosion and runoff. A small 
grants program from the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund to provide 
matching funds for supplies, technical assistance or contractors to install 
BMPs would be an effective investment in reducing the likelihood of needing 
an alum treatment in the future.  
Watershed Surveys:  DEP supports watershed surveys on threatened and 
impaired lakes, an essential step to documenting non-point source pollution and 
qualifying for federal EPA funds tos support BMPs and other efforts to reduce 
lake pollution. But lake associations and other community groups who are able 
to provide the volunteer people-power for these surveys often need small 
amounts of funding to get the watershed survey process going, whether for 
mailngs or for technical mapping expertise or other needs where volunteer 
teams lack technical skills or experience. While some Maine nonprofits have 
been able to supply these small grants in the past, their ability to do so changes 
with their ability to get funding. As far as we know, there are no small matching 
grants from nonprofits available for jump starting watershed surveys in 2022. A 
small matching grant program from this fund would help secure that much-
needed funding for communities across Maine.  
Septic System Replacements:  Septic systems at older Maine camps are failing 
and that problem will only grow with time. Older camps may have rudimentary 
systems, built well before the 1974 standards were put in place, that are close to 
the lake and not adquately treating sewage before it reaches both ground water 
and the lake. Systems on poor soil and close to the water are jeopardizing lake 
water quality and human health. Another use of funds that proactively protects 
lake health for the public could be a matching program to fund the highest 
priority, worst-performing septic system on impaired and threatened lakes.  
Invasive Species Risk Reduction : There are other very worthy ways to spend 
money to protect Maine’s lakes. We know our risks for new invasive invaders is 
high, being surrounded on all sides by invaders that have not yet made it into our 
waters. We know that costs to control aquatic invasives once they’ve arrived is 
extremely high, and that the negative ecological impacts for our native species 
 
  (dense mats of vegetation that shade and choke out other species, lower quality 
fish spawning and feeding habitat, etc.) can be dire, harming sport fisheries and 
reducing recreational opportunities. More proactive invasive species 
monitoring, more work to remove recent invaders, and more tools for boaters 
to learn about and comply with existing laws are all worthy ways to spend lake 
protection funding.   
While we support all of the work mentioned above, and more that you will hear about 
during today’s testimony, we also realize that needs must be prioritized. We urge the 
committee to discuss the highest priorities for lake protection with DEP staff and bill 
sponsors. We understand that focusing lake protection efforts on lakes on either the 
impaired or threatened lists that DEP maintains may be essential to prioritizing the 
spending of limited funds. But we urge the committee to remember that keeping lakes 
clean is a much less costly option than managing lakes with excess algae, polluted 
water, and invasive plant and animal infestations. 
We also urget the committee to consider what funding today could do for lakes in the 
coming decades. Finding additional sources for the fund outside of general surplus 
funds is a real possibility, especially if federal 314 funds are reinstated for lake 
protection work. Efforts to reinstate those funds are underway by several national non-
profit organizations. 
Finally, in terms of capacity at DEP to manage this program, there are several statewide 
nonprofits who could contract with DEP to assist with adminstering these funds. I 
believe there are other models in state government that go this route when internal 
capacity is a challenge, and Maine Lakes would be happy to look for some examples of 
public/private collaborations for this purpose.  
In closing, I thank you for your time and attention today, and urge you to support LD 
164 as a smart investment in the future of clean lakes in Maine and all who use them.  
 Please feel free to email me any time with questions at sgallo@lakes.me .  
