Members of the Hogan Whitney Pond Association (HWPA) are str ongly in favor of LD 164 to 
provide funding to improve and maintain the quality of lake waters in the S tate. 
 
Hogan and Whitney Ponds are situated in the western foothills of Oxford, Maine.  The  two ponds 
of nearly 345 acres , separated by a small narrow ridge (an “esker”) of gravel and sediment with 
an outflow into the Little Androscoggin River , provide a dive rse environment for macrophytes, 
fish, amphibians, and waterfowl.  While both ponds appear to be almost identical, these two 
ponds are distinctly unique and require a range of strategies to keep them healthy.  
 
Our HWPA has benefit ed from Maine DEP funding for the following water quality activities:  
 
Watershed Improvements:  
In 2017 the HWPA, in collaboration with DEP, conducted a watershed survey of the combined 
ponds and identified 95 non- point source pollution sites.  The resulting report became the basi s 
for a successful, two -year (2019 and 2020) DEP -funded, $94,000 grant to remediate some of the 
more challenging municipal and private property owner sites.   This work was done in 
collaboration with DEP, the local Soil and Water Conservation District, the Town of Oxford, and 
residents in the watershed. That project helped reduce soil sediment entering the two ponds by an 
estimated 131 tons per year.   We also provided education, technical assistance and grants to 
follow best management practices for homeowne rs.  This January we have just begun a second, 
two year round of DEP funding for $133,000 to extend our education and best management 
practices to keep our two fragile ponds from further degradation.   
 
Milfoil Mitigation:  
For the past 10+ years, members of the HWPA have been  battling the milfoil invasive species 
infestation in Hogan Pond and the inflow/outflow channels. Luckily, W hitney Pond has not been 
affected so far. We have received annual grants from the DE P (upwards of $10,000) that the  
association  matches with our own funding and in -kind labor. Over  the years, we have hired 
certified milfoil divers who used a Diver Assisted Suction Harvest er (DASH) boa t for extracting 
and bagging the milfoil  plants, used our owned trained divers for similar activities, and placed 
benthic mats on highly infested areas to kill off the milfoil. Many tons of milfoil have been 
removed from the po nd and channels. The association has made  great strides in reducing the 
amount of milfoil but the re is still much more work  to do. We must continue to remove milfoil 
each year to prevent it from spreading and overtaking Hogan P ond and the channels.  
  
Please pass L D 164 so HWPA can continue  to do our good work in improving and maintaining 
the water quality of our va luable ponds and surrounding watershed.  
 
Regards,  
Tom Donovan (HWPA Pr esident) 
Oxford, M aine 04270 
617-281-8204 (cell)  
 
 
 
