 
 
 January 30, 2023  
 
Dear Chair Brenner, Chair Gramlich, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources, 
 
My name is Toni Pied, Director of Conservation for Friends of the Cobbossee 
Watershed.  The Friends of the Cobbossee Watershed  supports LD 164: "An Act to 
Fund the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund”. 
 
The Friends of the Cobbossee Watershed works to protect the 28 lakes, ponds, and 
streams of the Cobbossee Watershed, in Central Maine. The Friends’ Conservation 
Programs help prevent, detect, and manage invasive aquatic species, as well as 
prevent and mitigate non-point source pollution (runoff) in our lakes, ponds, and 
streams.  
 
85% of The Friends’ budget is derived from private funds, and supports maintaining and 
improving public waters in the state.  $9m (for each of the next two years) , allocated 
to the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, Lake Restoration and 
Protection Fund, to provide payments to help fund costs related to eligible projects in 
the State that improve or maintain the quality of lake waters in the State, is a sound 
investment in protecting Maine’s natural heritage and economy.  
 
Now is the time to take care of our lakes, ponds, and streams.  Impacts from 
climate change are threatening the health of our lakes. More intense storms drive 
polluted runoff into our lakes. Erosion, warmer waters, increased algae blooms, and 
the spread of invasive aquatic species, are impacts rapidly being driven by a changing 
climate. The beautiful, clean lakes we enjoy today need protection to stay that 
way for the future. 
The Friends of the Cobbossee Watershed urges you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 
164. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Toni B. Pied 
 
Friends of the Cobbossee Watershed 
toni@watershedfriends.com  
(207) 395-5239 
“Protecting the lakes, ponds, and streams of the Cobbossee Watershed 
through community engagement, conservation, and education.” 
 
PO Box 206 ∙ East Winthrop, ME 04343 ∙ www.watershedfriends.com  
mail@watershedfriends.com               (207) 395-5239 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Elizabeth Neale, 
President 
  
Todd Snider, 
President-elect 
 
Wayde Rankin, 
Treasurer 
 
Donna Davis-Rankin 
Secretary/Clerk 
 
Jim Adams 
Kathy Boggan 
Rob Brown 
Michael Goebel-Bain 
Tavis Hasenfus 
Marc Lacasse 
Scott Lanpher 
Peter Mendall 
Sandy Small-Hughes 
Brian Tarbuck 
Peter Washburn 
 
Staff 
  
Tamara Whitmore 
Executive Director 
 
Cami Wilbert 
Education and 
Outreach Director 
 
Jay Lindsey 
Slow the Flow 
Technical Adviser 
 
Toni B. Pied 
Director of 
Conservation 
 
Alex Dyer 
Conservation 
Programs Manager 
 
Mercedes Arnold 
Administrative & 
Marketing 
 
