Testimony in Support of LD 164: An Act to Fund the Lake Restoration and
Protection Fund
Written by Tristan Taber, Water Quality Program Director; Lake Stewards of
Maine
Jan 20, 2023
To the members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee,
Good day, and thank you for this opportunity to comment on this important
bill. My name is Tristan Taber and I am the Water Quality Program Director
for Lake Stewards of Maine. Lake Stewards of Maine is a statewide
nonprofit and our mission is to protect Maine lakes and to promote lake
stewardship through widespread citizen participation in the gathering and
dissemination of credible scientific information pertaining to lake health.
Our perspective on various lake-related issues is based on information
provided by our network of over 1,200 trained and certified volunteers and
the best science and management practices available for lakes and
watersheds.
Today, I wish to share our sincere hope that the committee will support LD
164 and dedicate funding to the Lake Restoration and Protection Fund.
This bill offers the chance to provide funding for an important need that is
only partially being met in Maine right now. In addition, I would encourage
the committee to consider a dedicated funding stream to support this fund
in the future.
There are many projects throughout the state that could benefit from the
Lake Restoration and Protection Fund. Lake Stewards of Maine’s efforts
focus on training and supporting volunteer water quality monitors and
invasive aquatic species surveyors, however we have offered grant funding
to community groups to defray the costs of watershed assessment surveys.
This is a critical community engagement and lake protection activity. The
work that derives from these surveys directly improves the health of a lake
by limiting excessive nutrient additions and fostering stewardship in the
watershed.
Our experience has shown us that there are many communities who are
invested in their lake and interested in pursuing environmental stabilization
and restoration projects. Although we assist these communities by
supporting them with technical and logistical resources, many need
financial assistance beyond our capabilities for projects such as culvert
repairs, bank stabilization, and nutrient mitigation.
Funding this bill is also an issue of equity. This fund could provide a means
of equitable disbursement to communities that may not be able to raise the
funds they need from their immediate community. There are many
unfunded and underfunded projects in the state that have firm technical
support and ecological reasoning. Generally, wealthy and more populated
communities are able to leverage local support. Rural, and less affluent,
communities may not have the financial means to support these types of
stabilization and improvement projects.
Our 1,200+ volunteers collect data from lakes to better understand what is
taking place, but without greater financial support, many cannot address
the negative trends they are seeing. I recognize there are limited funds
available in the budget. However, efforts to mitigate the worst of
cyanobacteria blooms, warming waters, invasive aquatic species, larger
volumes of stormwater runoff, and development pressure is only going to
become increasingly important in the foreseeable future. Supporting this bill
will help to protect one of Maine’s most valuable and cherished natural
resources, our lakes.
Most respectfully,
Tristan Taber
Water Quality and Technical Program Director, Aquatic Scientist
Lake Stewards of Maine
Tristan@lakestewardsme.org
www.lakestewardsofmaine.org
