Vivienne Lenk
Beaver Cove
LD 164
Gentlepeople:
My name is Vivienne Lenk and I am a homeowner/summer resident at 1008 Black Pt. Rd. in 
Beaver Cove on Moosehead Lake, and I am urging you to vote to Fund the Lake Restoration 
Protection Fund.
I have been fortunate indeed to have been on Moosehead for five decades.  I've 
experienced the early cold waters and the more recent warming waters as climate 
change advances.   I've skied the beautiful Squaw Mt. when there was fabulous snow 
and I've been at Moosehead when there was no winter snow and a very delinquent 
owner of the ski resort which meant there'd be no real skiing even if there was snow.
I am one of the many "citizen scientists" of Maine who participate in deer counts, 
moose counts, loon counts, etc.   You don't need to be a rocket scientist to see the 
effects of climate change all around Moosehead and other lakes.   Whether you call it 
a "pond" (like the West Branch ,First Roach ,or  Prong Pond) these waters need 
protection and there are able scientists who should be employed to do water testing, 
invasives finding, and where human activity should be strictly limited/regulated to 
prevent further degradation of the water and surrounding land.
I do believe that one of the most important aspects of funding this needs to be to 
educate "the masses" --at every opportunity -- of how human activities affect 
everything from the water and land species that are in or use the lake, to how it affects
other humans in and around the lake.   
Oil corporations knew long ago that climate change was starting and is real, now we 
need to make sure Maine's residents and visitors know what they can and should be 
doing to ensure Maine's lakes (and ponds*) can be fruitful and clean and beautiful for 
the next more than five decades as climate change affects us all.  
I applaud the recent steps taken by the Maine State Legislature in the form of 
Extended Producer Liability laws , and hope that Funding the Lake Restoration and 
Protection Fund will be another step in making us all aware of how we are responsible
for the health of our lakes.
*Ponds is a funny word.   When my niece from Michigan - the Great Lakes State - 
visited us at Moosehead and we took her to see many of the surrounding areas, we 
went to West Branch Pond Camps for dinner and canoing.   "This is a pond?," she 
said in disbelief.  "it's so big and long.   Some of the inland lakes in Michigan are 
smaller than this!"  What she didn't say, but which I can attest to as a Michigan 
ex-pat, is that those inland Michigan lakes are overdeveloped, cramped, and the water
is not too inviting.    Something I hope your actions/your vote will help prevent 
happening for Moosehead.
