Jeffrey Willey
Portland
LD 1069
Good Afternoon Chairman Nangle and the Members of the Committee,
My name is Jeffrey Willey and I am against LD 1069, a proposal for a referendum to 
restore the original Maine State Flag. The last time that a proposal to readopt the 
former State Flag came before this committee, the Republicans and Democrats on this
committee decided to instruct former Secretary of State Matthew Dunlap to design a 
flag similar to the former State Flag in celebration of Maine's bicentennial. The 
committee deferred taking any decisive action and left the design and implementation 
process to someone else.
Secretary Dunlap did design a flag, and it was created to celebrate the bicentennial. 
However, the only flag that flew anywhere around the state was our former State 
Flag. The flag designed by Secretary Dunlap has been largely forgotten and I doubt 
many are aware it exists. That is because it was unnecessary and failed at almost all 
the rules of flag design. This committee deferred judgment and left the design of our 
state's symbol to others, rather than taking action on their own as they were elected to 
do.
Very rarely do I see our current flag flying anywhere besides above state office 
buildings. Our current flag looks like nearly every other state flag in this country. It's 
a seal on a blue bedsheet. Vermont, New Hampshire, Connecticut, New  York, and 
countless others use the same exact design, and it is impossible to distinguish. Our 
current flag is unrecognizable, it is ugly, and it is a bad flag.
The people are already adopting this flag as their own. Our senators, both Collins and 
King, wore the flag as a mask in Congress during the pandemic. Our citizens wear the
symbol proudly on hats, shirts, sweaters, coffee cups, and more. They fly it outside 
their offices and hang it in store windows. The people have already widely adopted 
the flag. I struggle to recall seeing anyone do the same with our current seal on a 
bedsheet despite the objections of some before this committee.
There is no reason for this committee to further delay its decision and spend 
thousands of dollars on a needless referendum. You were elected to make decisions 
on behalf of the people you represent, not to defer to Secretaries and to committees 
where they will no doubt design another bad flag. I urge you to vote no on LD 1069 
and please vote to support restoring the Pine Tree State's original flag.
