Department of the Secretary of State .>* 
l _,
§ 
_ Shenna Bellows 
. Secretary of State 
,-r' 
»¢-121;. 2‘ 
i.q.\. _,. 
__-, 
77 ,,qal.. 
RYAIXRW‘ ' 
Kate McBrien 
Maine State Archivist 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
TESTIMONY OF SHENNA BELLOWS, MAINE SECRETARY OF STATE 
and KATE MCBRIEN, MAINE STATE ARCHIVIST 
Neither For, Nor Against 
L.D. 1069, “An Act Requiring a Referendum to Restore the Former Maine Flag” 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State and Local Govermnent; We are Shenna Bellows, Maine’s Secretary of State, and Kate 
McBrien, Maine’s State Archivist. Neither the Department of Secretary of State nor Maine State 
Archives, which falls under the Department ’s jurisdiction, have a formal position on L.D. 1069. But 
we believe we have useful information that may assist the committee in its deliberations on this 
important legislation. 
Maine’s history shows we have officially designated two different ﬂags as our ofﬁcial state ﬂag. In 
1901, chapter 233 designated that “The state ﬂag is hereby declared to be buff, charged with the 
emblem of the state, a pine tree proper, in the center, and the polar star, a mullet of ﬁve points, in 
blue in the upper corner; the star to be equidistant from the hoist and the upper border of the ﬂag, 
the distance from the two borders to the center of the star being equal to about one-fourth of the 
hoist, this instance and the size of the star being proportionate to the size of the ﬂag.” The act took 
effect immediately upon approval of the 70”‘ state legislature, on March 21, 1901. We have the 
original legislation here for you to see. 
As you can see from the original legislation, the emblem of the State of Maine in 1901 was the pine 
tree, hence our reference as the “Pine Tree State” . The pine tree was an early symbol of New 
England, Colonists used the pine tree symbol commonly on coins and ﬂags throughout the 17"‘ and 
18th centuries. Leading up to the Revolutionary War, the pine tree became a symbol of colonial 
unrest and resistance. This common symbol became associated with Maine’s identity, as identified 
in the 1901 ﬂag design and is now proposed as the new license plate design for the State. 
For reasons undocumented, the Maine State Legislature changed the design of the official Maine 
State Flag in 1909. The 74”‘ legislature designed “The ﬂag to be known as the ofﬁcial ﬂag of the 
state of Maine shall be of blue, same color as the blue ﬁeld in the ﬂag of the United States, and of 
the following dimensions and designs; to wit, the length, or height, of the staff to be nine feet, 
including brass spear-head and ferule; the ﬂy of said ﬂag to be five feet six inches, and to be four 
feet four inches on the staff; in the center of the flag there shall be embroidered in silk the same on 
both sides of the ﬂag the coat of arms of the state of Maine, in proportionate size; the edges to be 
trimmed With knotted fringe of yellow silk, two and one half inches Wide, a cord, with tassels, to be 
attached to the staff at the spear-head, to be eight feet six inches long and composed of white and’ 
blue silk strands. ”
They further assigned that “the adjutant general of the state of Maine is hereby directed to provide a 
ﬂag, in accordance with the description given in the ﬁrst section of this act, and keep the same 
deposited in the office of the adjutant general, as a model.” The legislation appropriated $200 for 
this purpose. 
The 1909 legislation also explicitly repealed the 1901 “Act to establish a Maine State Flag.” Again, 
we have brought this original legislation to share with you. 
As you consider LD 1069, We believe this historical information will provide helpful in your 
consideration. 
We are happy to answer any questions you may have.
