Jill Goldthwait
Town of Bar Harbor
LD 166
PUBLIC HEARING JANUARY 31, 2023
MAINE LEGISLATURE - COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
From the Town of Bar Harbor
Contact: Jill Goldthwait, Town Councilor, 207-460-5461; jill@barharbormaine.gov
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT
AN ACT TO PROVIDE REVENUE FOR PROPERTY TAX RELIEF AND CAPITAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
SPONSOR: REPRESENTATIVE WILLIAMS
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the committee: 
The Town of Bar Harbor is grateful to Bar Harbor Representative Lynne Williams for 
sponsoring this bill.
Bar Harbor is a community of about 5,300 residents, putting us 59th in population 
size in the state of Maine. However, on any day in tourist season, which now runs 
from May through October, we are one of Maine’s ten largest communities. At the 
height of the tourist season, adding in “day trippers,” we are quite possibly Maine’s 
second largest city. 
We need seasonal police, EMS personnel, firefighters, and public works crew. In the 
night our village parks and recreation areas must be restored to order, trash cans 
emptied and streets cleaned. Public restrooms demand frequent cleaning. 
Some municipalities might say: “I wish I had their problems!” Be careful what you 
wish for. Our valued tourism economy provides jobs and revenue but brings costs as 
well. And though the state certainly encourages visitors to come to Bar Harbor and 
Acadia National Park, they leave it to our much smaller resident community to pay 
for the municipal services used by as many as 4 million visitors during the season.
Bar Harbor is a “minimum receiver” through the school funding formula, so most of 
our education costs fall on the taxpayer. We receive $625,000—about 7 ½% of total 
K-8 education expenditures. With housing costs beyond the reach of most 
middle-class families, this means more and more community members are moving 
out of our community.
The two buildings comprising our K-8 school are 60 and 70 years old, with all the 
attendant leaks, boiler failures, and physical layout challenges, and the programming 
shortcomings of a school built for education in the 1950’s. The need for mental health
services, sadly highest among the K-3 population, demands entirely different spaces 
to help behaviorally challenged students succeed at school and become responsible, 
productive adults. Yet Bar Harbor will be forever at the bottom of the list for state 
assistance for school construction.
In addition, we are currently undertaking rehabilitation of our sewer, water and 
stormwater infrastructure as required by the state. It has reached the point where our 
town would be subject to fines if we do not accomplish this. Renovations to our 
island-wide high school are anticipated to cost $26 million, the largest portion to be 
paid by Bar Harbor. We are outgrowing our police department.
2019 saw the introduction of parking meters to our downtown streets. It was a 
controversial decision but they have brought in more revenue than we anticipated. To 
our surprise, state government tells us how we may use that revenue. Those uses are 
to “purchase, maintain and police the meters,” to “construct and maintain public 
ways,” to “acquire, construct, maintain and operate public parking areas,” and “for no 
other purpose” (emphasis mine). (MRSA 3009, Sec 1.C.)
It would be an enormous help to our taxpayers if we could use that revenue for capital
infrastructure at our town’s discretion, particularly at a time when infrastructure needs
are looming large and the costs are staggering. That is why we have brought this bill 
forward. We appreciate your attention and hope you will support it. 
