Moine Credit Union Leogue
A 2 Ledgevlew Drive - 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 1236 - 
Portland, ME 04104 
207-773-5671 - 
1-800-442-6715 
www.mainecul.org 
In Opposition to LD 1386 
An Act to Require That a Completed Form for the Homestead Property Tax Exemption Be 
Provided to a Person Purchasing a Home 
Committee on Taxation 
April 13,2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Taxation 
Committee, 
My name is Krista Simonis, and I am the Director of Governmental Affairs at the Maine Credit Union 
League. The Maine Credit Union League is the trade association for Maine's 50 credit unions and over 
725,000 members statewide. We respectfully submit the following testimony in opposition to LD 1386. 
Credit unions are member-owned financial cooperatives that have a vested interest in the financial 
well-being of our members. Many of our credit unions proactively inform their members about the 
homestead exemption, sending out reminder emails to let members know they should apply for it. 
Often, the settlement agent for property conveyances, or sales, would be the title company, however 
on those instances where the settlement agent is a credit union, we feel the burden for completion and 
submission of this form should fall on the individual and not the institution. This is for several reasons. 
1) The information requested in the form is information that only the homeowner would know. 
The credit union or other settlement agent is unlikely to know all the information requested. 
2) Individuals may own multiple properties; it should be up to them to determine which is their 
permanent residence and would qualify for the tax reduction. 
3) Forms must be returned to the individual municipalities. Each municipality may have a different 
process for acceptance. 
4) To receive the exemption, individuals must have owned a homestead for the preceding 12 
months, depending on the time of year and if the individual previously owned property, they 
may not be eligible for the exemption for several months. 
5) Adding the form to a closing packet would cost our credit unions money and time to map the 
form fields. Additionally, each change to the form would require new updates and additional 
costs. 
In general, we are in favor of legislation that makes it easier for Maine's permanent residents to qualify 
for a reduction in their taxes. We would support an amendment to this legislation to remove the 
burden on settlement agents to complete and return the form and simply require that it be provided 
to homeowners at the time of closing. This would allow the individual homebuyer to make the best 
decision for them. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony, we hope to be able to serve as a resource for the 
committee during deliberations on this bill.
