 
1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
   
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.org 
April 13, 2023, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of  L.D. 1386 An Act to Require That a Completed Form for the 
Homestead Property Tax Exemption Be Provided to a Person Purchasing a 
Home before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Taxation 
 
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer some brief 
comments in support of LD 1386.  Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a 
nonprofit legal services organization and our mission is to provide free legal 
assistance to Maine’s older adults when their basic human needs are 
threatened. 
 
We support the goal of this bill which is to ensure that every new eligible  
homeowner files an application for a “Homestead Property Tax Exemption”  
with their municipal assessor as soon as possible after the closing on their 
new home. 
 
We anticipate that this bill may be completed prior to closing except for the 
signature line. We are also mindful that it may be necessary to populate the 
form with information at the closing. The bill also requires the closing agent 
to provide a Homestead Property Tax Exemption form (completed except 
for the buyer’s signature) to the buyer at closing and accept responsibility to 
file the form. We anticipate that the buyer will be charged for these services. 
 
While we strongly support the idea, we also believe that the buyer should 
have a choice of accepting or declining these services. We suggest that the 
buyer should be informed prior to closing that this service is available and 
that there is a charge for completing and filing the form. If the buyer chooses 
 
2 
 not to agree to having the closing agent perform these services, the closing 
agent should simply provide the buyer with a blank Homestead Property Tax 
Exemption form. This is a link to the form for your information. 
https://www.maine.gov/revenue/sites/maine.gov.revenue/files/inline-
files/homesteadapp2022.pdf  
 
 
We hope that you will consider our suggestion and amend the language 
accordingly. Thank you for letting us share our thoughts with you.          
