1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 4/13/23 
  
LD 1386 – An Act to Require That a Completed Form for the Homestead Property 
Tax Exemption Be Provided to a Person Purchasing a Home 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
providing testimony at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1386, An Act to Require That a Completed Form for the Homestead Property 
Tax Exemption Be Provided to a Person Purchasing a Home. 
Maine Revenue Services would like to raise a few technical concerns regarding 
this bill. 
First, the bill should include an exception for buyers who do not qualify for the 
homestead exemption, such as buyers purchasing vacation or rental property or 
first-time homebuyers who have not maintained a homestead in Maine for the 
previous 12 months. 
Second, the bill requires the settlement agent to provide the buyer with a 
completed homestead application, but the settlement agent may not have 
knowledge to answer the residency and other questions required on the application.   
Finally, as currently drafted, the settlement agent is responsible for both filling out 
the form and delivering it to the municipality.  This leaves open the possibility of 
2 
 messy disputes between the assessor, the taxpayer, and the settlement agent if there 
is any breakdown in the process.   
Rather than providing an application for the Homestead Exemption program, we 
suggest that realtors be required to provide a pamphlet/fact sheet that provides a 
list of state and local property tax relief programs available to homestead 
properties. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
