 
 
 
Testimony of Angela Westhoff , President & CEO  
Maine Health Care Association  
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
 
April  6, 2023  at 1:00 pm 
 
Against LD 1190 , An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules  
 
Good afternoon  Senator Tipping , Representative  Roeder , and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Labor and Housing . My name is Angela Westhoff , and I serve as the  
President/CEO of  the Maine Health Care Association . We represent approximately 200 nursing 
homes , assisted living , and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non -Medical 
Institutions or PNMIs) across the state. Our mission is to empower members to ensure the 
integrity, quality, and sustainability of long ter m care in Maine.   
 
I am here to testify against LD 1190, An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of 
Work Schedules . This bill , as drafted , requires employers who employ 250 or more employees 
worldwide to provide hourly employees at least two weeks  prior notice of the employees' work 
schedules, with compensation owed for schedule changes under certain circumstances.  It also 
requires businesses  to keep certain records for three  years and creates  a $50 -a-day fine for 
non-compliance .  
 
We appreciate the value of employers communicating a clear work schedule  to their 
employees . However, LD 1190’s work notice standards are impractical  for long term care. Many  
other industries have a type of flexibility that is entirely unavailable  to nursing facilities . For 
example, if an employee for a restaurant calls out of work, that business can still  provide its 
services. In more severe cases , like when  particularly short -staffed, the restaurant can  respond 
by limit ing its services or temporarily clos ing.  
 
 
2 
 Conversely, nursing facilities have  none of those options. R egulations require specific  staffing -
to-patient ratios. If an employee doesn’t come to their shift, the facility risks  being fined for 
dropping below the staffing ratio. Medicare’s Care Compare rating system also weighs staffing 
ratios  as a key component of its nursing home star rating. More over, a nursing home must 
provide care to its residents 24 hours, seven days a week. Long term care facilities cannot 
temporarily close their doors when short -staffed. No matter what, we must  provide quality care 
to our residents.  Adjusting workers’ schedu les within two weeks is not our first choice; we’d 
prefer to provide clear, consistent schedules well in advance. But our facilities must respond to 
an employee shift cancelation by adjusting others’ schedules.   
 
It is no secret that Maine’s nursing homes and assisted living facilities are already struggling.  
Fifteen facilities have closed  within the past three years, and t he cost of providing long term 
care already exceeds the reimbursement facilities receive. The latest estimates from BerryDunn 
suggest Maine’s nursing homes will have a $ 59,763,003  shortfall in funding for 2023. This bill’s 
financial penalties would undoubtedly increase the shortfall and further strain  our industry.  
 
If the committee passes this b ill, I request it includes  an exception for long term care 
employers.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments today , and I recommend the committee 
vote against LD 1190.  
