Maine Center for 
1 Economic Policy “".:::.;ii; 
Testimony in support of LD 1190, "An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring 
Notice of Work Schedules" 
Arthur Phillips, Analyst, Maine Center for Economic Policy 
April 6, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of thejoint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Arthur Phillips, and l am an analyst at the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. I am here to testify in support of LD 1190, ”An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek 
by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules." 
This bill would require employers with at least 250 employees to provide hourly workers witha 
schedule at least two weeks in advance, and to provide workers an estimate of a typical weekly 
schedule upon hiring. Employers could make changes to workers’ schedules but would have to 
provide compensation for changes made within one week of the shift, with higher payments for 
changes with less than 24 hours’ notice. The bill would continue to allow employees to trade 
shifts with one another and request shift changes, regardless of notice. 
Currently, Mainers who work in hourlyjobs often have little or no control over their schedule, 
and regularly face last-minute changes to the shifts they're scheduled to work. These 
disruptions make it difficult for workers to manage their budgets and child care or other 
personal needs, and it takes a toll on their physical and mental health. Unpredictable schedules 
are especially common in lower-wagejobs, particularly the hospitality and retail sectors. ‘ 
just under half (44 percent) of hourly workers in Maine — 154,000 people — have varying 
schedules. In many of these cases, the employer has sole or primary say over the schedule. Half 
of workers whose employer plays a role in setting the schedule get less than a week's notice, 
including almost one in five (‘l9 percent) who get a day's notice or less. 
Consider this hypothetical scenario: You work at a national retail chain and on any given week, 
your employer may change your schedule. Last week, you worked the closing shift on Sunday, 
the opening shift on Monday, a half-shift from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. on Wednesday, and a double 
on Friday. The week before, you were only given two shifts — one Saturday and one 
Wednesday, and neither one a full eight hours. Today, you're waiting to see what your schedule 
is going to be for the next week, but your boss has told you that you need to be available even 
on the days you're not scheduled, just in case you're needed. 
In this situation, it would be extremely difficult to juggle your responsibilities outside of work, 
let alone seek anotherjob or enroll in school to improve your prospects. But far too many 
workers are subject to this sort of "just-in-time" scheduling. 
Board of Directors 
Barbara Burt, Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice~Chair l\/laulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica l\./laurer
Studies have shown that workers facing this kind of scheduling volatility have serious difficulties 
balancing work and home life, and that it is children who often pay the price." Unpredictable 
schedules put stress on parents and are linked to behavioral problems and worse performance 
in school for their kids. Toddlers whose mothers’ work irregular hours have developmental 
delays and preschoolers are more likely to show negative behavior. Finding affordable child 
care is difficult enough under the best of circumstances; but it is almost impossible to do so at 
the last minute. This bill will make it easier for parents to take care of their kids and improve 
their children's outcomes in the near and long term. 
It would also improve Mainers' economic well-being, as irregular schedules often mean 
irregular incomes. Unpredictable schedules are most common in low-wage work. Surveys of 
workers with unpredictable schedules find that large numbers experience financial hardship — 
includingfood insecurity, trouble making rent, missing a utility payment, and skipping medical 
care because they can’t afford it. While one full-timejob should be enough for any worker to get 
by, predictable schedules make it easier for workers with low income to take anotherjob, if 
necessary, to make ends meet. 
Fair scheduling doesn'tjust benefit employees; it's good for employers ’ bottom line, too. 
ln a study of employees at The Gap, greater scheduling predictability improved productivity, 
sales, and revenue?" Other research has shown that improving scheduling predictability 
reduces employee turnover, a major cost for businesses. ” 
To summarize, LD 1190 would make a real difference for working families. Reliable, predictable 
schedules would make it easier for workers to balance their commitments in and out of the 
workplace, care for their families, and create and stick to a budget. it would incentivize large 
employers to proactively plan their schedules in ways that could improve productivity and 
reduce turnover. We urge you to vote ought to pass. 
'”lrregular Work Scheduling and its Consequences, ” Lonnie Golden, Economic Policy institute, April 2015, available 
at https://www.epi.org/publication/irregular-work-scheduling-and-its-consequencesl 
ll 
"Why Fair Schedules Are Critical for Working Parents and their Children's Well-Being, ” National Women's Law 
Center, April 2017, available at https://nwlc.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/O4/New-Set-Up-For~Success~Why-Fair- 
Schedules-Are-Critical-for-Working-Parents-and-Their-Childrens-Well-Being.pdf 
l" "Stable Scheduling Study: Health Outcomes Report," Worklife Law, University of California, Hastings College of 
the Law, 2019, available at https://worklifelaw.org/projects/stable-scheduIing-study/stable-schedu|ing-health- 
outcomes/ 
“’”Unpredictable Work Timing in Retail Jobs: Implications for Employee Work-Life Conflict, ” Julia R. Henly and 
Susan Lambert, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol 63, No 3, available at 
https://wwwxesearchgate.net/publication/286204478_Unpredictable_Work_Timing_in_Retail __Jobs __lmplications 
_for_Employee_Work-Life_Conflict
