0 
“" 
‘ 125 Melville Street Suitei 
;§5E;.|l,:TQ§,! l¥'iugusta,NlE [M330 
as 
M AHQE Pltone:20T. €-23.11421 
Voice nf Mali“! Retail ‘M-wv.rctail main rsorg 
- / 
April 6, 2023 
Senator Mike Tipping, Chair V
_ 
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair 
Members of the Labor and Housing Committee 
RE: Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 1190, An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of 
Work Schedules 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing Committee: 
lVly name is Curtis Picard and I am the President and CEO of the Retail Association of Maine. I ama 
resident of Topsham. We have more than 350 members statewide and represent retailers of all sizes. 
l\/laine ’s retailers employ more than 85,000 Mainers. We are here today to testify in strong opposition to 
LD 1190. 
This bill has certainly touched a nerve with not only retailers but all business sectors. l have heard from 
so many small business owners and employees asking why this bill was even introduced and are 
dismayed that the supporters feel this is an issue that needs draconian regulation. lt shows a complete 
lack of understanding of how the work place works and how scheduling happens. It also presumes that 
the employer / employee relationship is contentious and a one-way street. The reality is that the 
employer] employee relationship is one of respect, open communication and flexibility. in fact, in the 
post-COVID world, workplaces have only gotten more flexible than the last time this bill was introduced 
in 2019 as LD 1345. Lastly, it prescribes ridiculously large costs on employers for schedule changes that 
are usually out oftheir control. LD 1190 would have an immediate chilling effect on Maine businesses. 
Let's be clear about this bill. The language in these bills is model language that started in San Francisco 
and has only spread to a few municipalities and the state of Oregon. More than a dozen states have 
considered it and summarily rejected the concept. in fact, both CO and MD have rejected similar 
proposals this year. 
LD 1190 amends the laws regarding employment practices by mandating that all businesses with 250 
or more employees worldwide: 
0 Provide new employees with a written estimate of the minimum number of days, hours and 
shifts per month.V 
¢ Provide two weeks’ notice of work schedules. 
~ For notice of schedule changes, the employer "shall provide notice by in—pers0n conversation or 
by telephone call and shall provide notice in writing, including e~moil, text message or other 
electronic communication."
0 Compensate the employee with one hour of pay when there is a schedule change with less than 
7 days’ notice. 
0 Compensate the employee with 2 hours of pay with less than 24 hours’ notice on shifts of4 
hours or less. 
¢ Compensate the employee with 4 hours of pay with less than 24 hours’ notice on shifts of more 
than 4 hours. 
0 Employers would need to keep schedules on file for three years and subject to inspection. 
There are some exemptions to the bill: 
0 lf there are threats to employees or property. 
0 lf civil authorities recommend that work not begin or continue. 
0 if utilities like electric, water or gas. 
0 An act of God or state of emergency declared by the governor. 
Q if the employee trades shifts or requests a change in shifts. 
Let’s focus on that last exemption for a moment. How exactly is an employer supposed to keep a record 
of shift changes? The bill requires three years of schedules kept on file and charting the minutia of 
schedule changes would be impossible. Beyond that, there are at least three people involved when an 
employee requests a change in shifts. There's the employee making the request; there's the employer 
or manager setting the schedule; and there's the other employee who would cover the change in 
schedule. Under this bill, there would be no penalty pay for the employee requesting the change, but 
there would be for the person covering the shift. Why would an employee agree to trade shifts if they 
can cash in on penalty pay for not agreeing to the shift swap? 
Additionally, it is worth noting that since this proposal was last made in 2019, Maine passed the earned 
paid leave law to provide employees with additional paid time off. Under this proposal, an employer 
would compensate the person who called out for 8 hours of earned paid leave plus an additional 12 
hours for the substitute employee. 20 hours of pay for an 8 hour shift! 
Here's the reality: Scheduling is a complex process involving constantly changing variables. Businesses 
rely on employees to provide an unparalleled customer service experience for their clients and 
customers. Employees rely on their employers to provide jobs with schedules that fit their needs, which 
are as varied as the people who work in the many businesses. The fact is many employees choose 
certain industries specifically because the field allows them to work a flexible schedule and many businesses employ workers on a seasonal basis depending on the particular needs of that business. 
Employees are drawn to these employers to pick up flexible hours in order to supplement their income. 
Employers must consider the business needs of each facility when developing employee schedules. A variety of data points that may be used include: sales forecasts, productivity of the location, historic 
payroll and hour reports, workload, weather, marketing or other events, transportation (truck delivery), 
and guest/customer/client traffic patterns. Any mandated changes to scheduling disrupt each of these 
factors. 
Given Maine's weather, it is easy to imagine a situation where work schedules can fluctuate at the last 
minute. One must look no further than this past winter to understand how a large snowstorm can bring 
the business community to a halt but also how a missed forecast can have just as big of an impact. And 
weather is notjust bad weather. In the summer, a sunny, summer day can do half as much business for
a retailer as a rainy day that brings the tourists inside, or a restaurant may decide to open up the 
outdoor deck if the weather ends up being nice. 
Here are some other examples: A delivery gets delayed because of traffic; a cruise ship cancels because 
of inclement weather at sea; a tour bus full of visitors rolls in right at closing time; an employee is 
scheduled to take a 30-minute lunch break at noon, but, due to business demands, the employee does 
not have the opportunity to take the lunch break until 12:30. An employee plays school sports, but the 
tournament schedule is not known until the day before the tournament. In each of these situations, the 
employer would be required to compensate the employee up to four hours of additional pay. 
Businesses consider a broad range of factors when scheduling, including employee preferences and 
availability. Many employers ask employees to provide them with information on the employee's level 
of availability and interest in working more or less hours. That information is retained and employers 
routinely ask employees to update their files so that employee preference and availability can be 
factored in to scheduling development. 
Many businesses utilize considerable resources to predict staffing needs. However, the farther in 
advance those predictions are made, the less accurate the forecasting model becomes. inaccurate 
forecasting creates inefficiencies and disruption for both employees and employers. 
Unintended consequences of "one size fits all" proposal: Despite an employer's best efforts to predict 
scheduling needs accurately, the need for employees in any given location is subject to external factors 
that may change frequently, unpredictably, and for reasons beyond the employer's control. 
Businesses need flexibility to respond efficiently to the rapidly changing business environment in order 
to meet the needs of their clients, consumers, employees and the business. Restrictive constraints on 
flexible scheduling reduce the ability of employers to flex into different shifts depending upon changing 
business needs. The result may be fewer hours available for all team members. 
Every business has unique business processes and every employee has unique needs. A "one size ﬁts all 
statute fails to recognize the unique needs of businesses and their employees as well as the negative 
impact that they will impose on employee opportunities. 
The legislative schedule is notoriously ever-changing and unpredictable. Just last week, the Labor and 
Housing Committee canceled the remaining public hearings because of a lack of quorum during the 
budget discussions. 
We have assembled a coalition of 30 business associations and chambers of commerce who are 
opposed to LD 1190. The list includes:                       
. Retaii Association of Maine 
. Maine Grocers and Food Producers Association 
. Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
NFIB Maine 
. Maine Tourism Association 
Maine Golf 
. Maine Motor Transport Association 
Skilvlaine
9. International Franchise Association 
10. Maine Campground Owners Association 
11. HospitaIityMaine 
12. Mid-Maine Chamber of Commerce 
13. Associated General Contractors 
14. Maine Energy Marketers Association 
15. Maine Auto Dealers Association 
16. Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce 
17. Professional Logging Contractors of Maine 
18. Maine Jobs Council 
19. Manufacturers Association of Maine 
20. Kennebec Valley Chamber of Commerce 
21. Maine Hospital Association 
22. Maine Association of Broadcasters 
23. Maine Forest Products Council 
24. Associated Builders and Contractors of Maine 
25. Maine Sporting Camp Association 
26. Maine Insurance Agents Association 
27. Maine Farm Bureau 
28. /Viaine Beer and Wine Wholesalers 
29. NE Retail Lumber Dealers Association 
30. Maine Pellet Fuel Dealers Association 
31. Maine Wild Blueberry Commission 
At the end of the day, LD 1190 sends the message to Maine's businesses that government knows better 
than they do about how to run their business. lt would create a confrontational, litigious environment 
between employers and employees and we strongly urge the committee to unanimously vote LD 1190 
Ought Not to Pass. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our thoughts. 
Sincerely, 
Curtis Plcard, CAE 
President and CEO
How Retailers Generate a Schedule 
A “‘ »»$'*" 
Eh?‘ lg-/":7 »>,%;;(A._- “X , ..
1 
We e ue' 
'l’/‘llli§‘ l(,§.Z-M ’, l v it _/ é;~l-5 “» ,;_>.~ *>‘ /4 ~ -, 
‘ “ll ~r ‘ 
Q “l"‘ _ ~"‘-»‘-1%». i 1&1:-5". <3? 1*, I".'»“’i;‘~-1. =
S                   
. 
rt. M» Y~.- \~.'~>lmrlw-yy:u.,~ 
1» .< 
@ Trailer Traffic 
@ Events, Forecast 
Holidays, 
other Promotions 
Workload . j as* 
S_ 
Breaks Mmor 
Rules 
Employee Inputs 
Forecast &. 
Workload Inputs ‘lm‘1l‘»1"ll¢M=yl"rl"rl1~l\l. lu»“~“‘»=Il~ l"\x:'J,~<1li4~>r-;>7.<£r>'l._;,zw::¢§~,-,a;¢»=';,e 
I-
_
i 
_5 3.. -1r_.;:,. Q-v',l / 
,,; .. __5_\, _L._\ I. 
Schedu‘linig M 
r . _ 
V~ S 
V 
Meals,
t 
»./ 
O timized Schedule System inputs a S
I 
lTuesday wednesaay Thursday 
L 
S 1 then the weekly process beg|ns;;.. y ,-» 1“:- 
=
< 
y A\~’Elll8bl|lty 
Time Off 
Requests 
‘ e@ Prlmarv 
Q Job
S 
§@ 
Shift 
Lengthsl 
Day of 
Rest/l\/lin 
Shifts per 
Week 
Time Gil Overnight V 
Soheclu;le§ __ _.;. itS 
Courtesy of Retail Association of l\/laine  
How Retailers Generate a Schedule 
Employees Provide Input Throughout Scheduling Process - 
Employees provide availability and maintain current requests for 
additional hours or time off 
- Employees can pick up additional shifts 
- 
Employees can trade or switch shifts 
- Employees can request changes to their posted schedule 
Forecast & Workload Data ls Only Available a Set Number 
of Days in Advance 
Workload Data: 
- Customer traffic patterns 
- Truck and transportation timing 
- Forecasting potential customer traffic 
- Special events, promotions, holidays, sales or discounts 
- In-store space, displays or other needs 
Forecast Data: 
- Historical sales data & sales forecasts 
- Historic payroll and hours data 
- 
Daily/weekly allocation reviews 
~ individual store and regional adjustments 
- New store analysis 
- Hours based on productivity goals, sales plans, and 
competitive impacts 
‘ 
Why does a schedule change? - Employee requests 
- Weather 
' Truck delays 
' Port Strikes 
- Unexpected events (parades, World Series) 
- Illness 
- Unexpected resignations 
Courtesy of Retail Association of Maine
