JLMEMO  OF OPPOSITION  
CONTACT:  DAN  RILEY,  ESQ.  
NORMAN,  HANSON  & DETROY  EEC  
driley@nhdlaw.com , (207)  774-7000
www.nrla.org
April  6, 2023
Senator  Tipping
Members,  Committee  on Labor  and Housing  
100 State  House  Station  
Augusta,  ME 04333-0100
Re: Testimony  of the Retail  Lumber  Dealers  Association  of Maine  in 
Opposition  to LD 1190:  An Act  to Ensure  a Fair  Workweek  by Requiring  Notice  
of Work  Schedules
Dear  Senator  Tipping,  Representative  Roeder  and Members  of the Committee  on Labor  and Housing,
My name  is Dan Riley,  an attorney  with the firm of Norman,  Hanson  & DeTroy  in Portland,  and I serve  as 
counsel  to the Retail  Lumber  Dealers  Association  of Maine  (RLDAM),  which  represents  independent  lumber  
and building  material  dealers,  manufacturers,  wholesalers,  distributors,  and other  associated  businesses  in the 
state  of Maine  and an industry  that employs  more  than 20,000  Maine  residents,  The Retail  Lumber  Dealers  are 
opposed  to LD 1190.
The requirements  for scheduling  in this bill will would  harm  RLDAM  and other  industry  employers  who need  
flexibility  in scheduling.  Their  businesses  function  as a service  to the construction  industry,  which  is a schedule  
sensitive  business.  While  the members  do their  best to schedule  deliveries,  supply  chain  shortages,  which  make  
it difficult  to know  when  products  will come  in, and last-minute  orders  from  customers,  make  it difficult  to 
schedule  deliveries  two weeks  out.
To keep  projects  on schedule,  last-minute  changes  are the rule-not  the exception.  It would  be impossible  for any 
lumber  and material  dealers  to run their  businesses  on a firm 2-week  schedule.  We must  have  the flexibility  to 
meet  our customer ’s and supplier ’s needs.  Additionally,  the costs  associated  with paying  workers  extra  if they  
are called  in or a shift is changed  would  only drive  up the cost of homes  in Maine  as our members  could  not 
possibly  absorb  that sort of increase  in wages  given  the fluidity  of our delivery  needs.
According  to the National  Low  Income  Housing  Coalition,  Maine 1 has a shortage  of about  22,500  rental  homes  
that are affordable  and available.  Bills  such as LD1 190 will only make  this shortage  worse  by driving  up the 
cost of materials  and delaying  building  by preventing  our members  from  delivering  materials  when  they arrive  
at the yard and a contractor  needs  them  on site because  we could  not foresee  the need and did not schedule  
enough  drivers  for a specific  shift.
Housing  Needs  by State  - Maine  https://nlihc.oni/housiim-needs-bv-state/maine
Finally,  many  companies  in our industry,  and others,  are currently  struggling  to find help. We are unable  to fill 
all open  positions,  especially  for CDL  drivers,  a license  which  requires  a lot of expensive  training  to obtain.  Our 
members  don’t know  from  one day to the next who might  call out sick and/or  not show  up, so consequently  
when  employees  do, this creates  more  work  for others  who need  to be called  in to cover  shifts.  Not all shift  
changes  are due to employer  (i.e. if we have a CDL  driver  call out sick,  those  deliveries  that he/she  was going  to 
make  now have  to be taken  by someone  else; hence  more  work  and potentially  longer  hours  for the ones  that are 
here.)
For all of these  reasons,  the RLDAM  and its members  are opposed  to this unreasonable  and unworkable  
legislation.
\-----Daniefdliley
