20311917.1 221 East Main Street
Suite 203 
Milford, MA 01757
 Theatre Owners of New England                      (508) 478 – 8663 
Opposition to LD 1190 
“An Act To Ensure A Fair Work Week By Requiring Notice of Work Schedules” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Committee on Labor and Housing, on 
behalf of Theatre Owners of New England (TONE), an association representing Movie Theatres 
throughout Maine, we respectfully submit these written comments in opposition of LD 1190. Our 
concern is that the bill requires a work schedule be provided to all employees “at least 7 calendar 
days before the first day of the work schedule”.  Our opposition is based on the following 
concerns:  
• The motion picture business is unique and unpredictable. Film bookings can vary drastically from 
week to week, and attendance can fluctuate based on public reaction and news. We respectfully 
submit that movie theatres should be exempt from this proposed legislation.  
• Movie theatre work schedules are dependent on film availability, film running times, and 
attendance. Theatre managers do not have a 7 day advance notice on what will be playing in their 
theatres. Final booking of films to hold-over or open on a Friday, are only confirmed on a Monday 
or Tuesday following the prior weekend, and even then it is unknown how much attendance a new 
film may generate.  
• Even if analysts predict huge attendance at some “blockbusters”, or low attendance at “sleepers”, 
they are often way off the mark and staffing levels may need to be adjusted to handle the crowds or 
lack thereof. Either way, the schedule for the following week would have to be adjusted in order to 
staff appropriately. 
• The majority of theatre employees are not head of household employees working to support a 
household.   Rather they are part-time employees, working to earn discretionary funds.  
• Theatre employees are primarily students in their first jobs or senior citizens that have actually 
sought to work in a business with flexibility, and work between 12-20 hours per week. For students 
in particular, working in a motion picture theatre is attractive because of the flexibility allowed in 
scheduling to accommodate their changing coursework, school and social activities. While theatre 
managers work with employees to accommodate their schedules, employees also understand the 
need to work flexible schedules to accommodate varying attendance levels once the films are 
booked in the theatres.  
• The 7 day advance scheduling window would also make it impossible to offer expanded work 
shifts for unanticipated events, such as when the theatre is requested to add a last minute showing 
for a community or school group. This is a frequent occurrence for theatres that accommodate 
special events and birthday parties outside their normal operating hours.  
20311917.1 • With schedule changes inevitable in an unpredictable business, record keeping complying with 
this regulation would be cumbersome and time-consuming, taking employees away from serving 
our guests.  
• Because theatres pay the lion’s share of their box office income to film distributors, theatres 
already operate on slim margins. Adding the unavoidable penalty of “predictability pay” created in 
this proposed legislation may force some marginal theatres to close.  
It is for these reasons that we urge you to consider not only the impact this legislation would have 
on Maine movie theatres, but also the negative impact to their employees who desire and may need 
a flexible schedule. Please vote no on LD 1190.  
Respectfully Submitted,  
Daniel Vieira 
Executive Director 
Theater Owners of New England 
221 East Main Street 
Suite 203  
Milford, MA 01757 
