Mains 
April 6, 2023 
Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 1190, An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by 
Requiring Notice of Work Schedules 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee, my name is Dirk Gouwens and I am the Executive Director of the Ski Maine 
Association. l live in New Portland, ME. 
Maine’s ski areas employ over 5000 employees in mostly rural pants of the state that are in 
desperate need of the jobs they provide. Two of our ski areas are the second largest 
employers in their county. The only larger employers are county hospitals. We work hard 
to establish a good relationship with our employees and work closely together to establish 
a work schedule that meets the needs of our employees yet still allows for the flexibility 
required by a business that depends largely upon our fickle weather in Maine. 
This bill is simply unworkable for ski areas. Skiing depends on cold, snowy weather. 
Increasingly, our climate is becoming more unpredictable and our ski areas need flexibility 
to survive. imagine trying to predict what the customer load will be two weeks in advance 
when even the best weather forecasters don’t seem to be able to get it right just a couple 
of days ahead of time. 
For example, consider trying to schedule employees for Martin Luther King weekend 
(typically one of our busiest weekends) two weeks in advance. initially a ski area might 
need to have all hands on deck to handle the number of customers. But, with just a couple 
of days notice, we ﬁnd out that a January thaw is predicted. Having more employees at 
the ski area than customers is not something a ski area can support. 
Also imagine a last minute snow storm. While some businesses might need to close 
down, skiers flock to ski areas to take advantage of new snow. A ski area needs to call in 
extra workers to handle the clean up and the operation of additional facilities to support the 
larger than anticipated number of customers. 
Finally, one needs only to look at the schedules for the various committees that meet in 
this building to see how unworkable this bill is. One committee that l follow closely 
changed its schedule four times in just a few days recently! 
I strongly urge you to vote Ought Not To Pass on this bill. 
Dirk Gouwens — Executive Director 
Ski Maine Association, PO Box 689, Farmington, ME 04938 
www.skimaine.com (207) 773-SNOW (7669 (0) (207) 653-5590 (mobile)
