 
 
 
 
  
April 6th, 2023  
Senator Michael Tipping  
Representative Amy Roader  
Members of the Committee on Labor and Housing  
RE: Testimony in Opposition to LD 1190 , An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of 
Work Schedules  
My name is Eric Venturini , and I am the Executive Director of the Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine . 
In this role, I strive to represent the diverse voices of Maine’s 485 wild blueberry producers. I am 
testifying before you today in strong opposition to this legislation.  
I thank Senator Tipping fo r taking the time to meet with stakeholders last week, to discuss this and other 
bills before the  Committee.  I also thank the sponsor for raising the emp loyment threshold to 250 
workers, up from the version introduced in the 129th Legislature.  
Impact  
While there are only a few wild blueberry businesses in Maine that employ over 250 workers, we 
estimate that this bill could increas e the labor costs to those businesses by 20% during peak harvest 
season. The wild blueberry operations impacted by this bill  account for a significant proportion of 
Maine ’s annual wild blueberry harvest and purchase wild blueberries grown by a significant proportion 
of Maine ’s wild blueberry farms. Increases in the cost of doi ng business at these operations  will have 
knock -on effec ts within those businesses, but also on the income s of the farms that supply blueberries 
to them . This bill could reduce profitability across the entire wild blueberry industry, at a time when my 
farmers  identify  the l ack of profitability  as one of the ir biggest challenges.  
Farm schedules shift for a number of reasons that can include:  
 Weather - a week of rain means no harvesting. However, a sudden break in the clouds  and a 
short spell of moderate weather require s all hands on deck while the good whet her lasts . 
 Absent employee  in the processing plant  – cleaning, sorting, and packing wild blueberries 
requires a precise number of people to maintain efficiency. I f someone is mis sing in that chain, 
we will experience a lo ss of pro duct and decreases in quality.  
 Absent worker  on a harvest crew – The harvest season is  a race against the clock. An absent 
harvest worker will have a direc t impact on crop yield.  
In all of these cases, businesses that ask employees to work additional hours  will trigger penalties 
imposed under this law. 
 
 
 
5784  York  Complex  Suite  52  Orono,  ME 04469 -5784   207-581-1475   wbcm@maine.edu  Exacerbating Existing Labor Challenges  
The Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine has identified, over the past two year s, labor challenges as the 
number one concern facin g this industry. Agriculture, alon g with other sectors in the State and 
nationally are struggling to find a reliable workforce. Seasonal farm workers in Maine today typically  
receive  $15 to $20 per hour. Despite this, many producers simply cannot find people willing to work a 
seasonal job, yet agriculture in Maine is unalterably seasonal.   
In our industry , this regulation feels unnecessary  in an already challenging and costly labor market, and 
it would  force more automation.  
Addressing a Problem  
Versions of this bill have  passed in:  
 San Francisco ( 2016 ), affect ing chain retail establishments with at least 40 locations  worldwide ;1 
 Emeryville, C A, Seattle, W A, New York City , NY, and Oregon (2017 ) where bills target very large 
retail trade, fast food , and in one case,  also hospitality.1 
Perhaps in these places and times , the bill  was addressing a problem. Here, in Maine,  in a post -COVID  
labor market , every sector is facing shorta ges. Maine ’s labor for ce participation rate remains at the 
pandemi c low of 58%, even as it rises elsewhere in the US.2 Farms have fields that go unharvested. I 
spoke to  two small producers  last week who a re edging ever closer to shutting their doors , because they 
cannot do all the work that a farm requires without reliable help.  
I respectfully ask this  Commi ttee to seek solutions to Maine ’s massive labor shortages and not waste 
time debating  bills created to resolve problems in other states, in cities that we do not have.  
Thank you for yo ur time. I would be happy to try to answer any questions that you may have.
                                       
1 Economic  Policy Institute. 2018. https://www.epi.org/publication/fair -workweek -laws -help -more -than -1-8-
million -workers/  
2 In Feb. o f 2023, Maine ’s labor force pa rticipation rate remains at 58% according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, Labor Force Participation Rate for Maine [LBSSA23], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. 
Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/LBSSA23 , April 6, 2023 .  
Graph (at left) from the 
Maine Economic Growth 
Council (MEGC) Measures 
of Growth 2022 report. 
Available online at 
http://www.mdf.org/eco
nomic -policy -
research/measures -of-
growth -report  
 
