Erika Christie
York
LD 1190
April 6, 2023 
Dear Honorable Members of the Labor and Housing Committee: 
My name is Erika Christie and I am from York ,ME. I am the HR Manager at  The 
Anchorage Inn & Sun'n Surf Restaurant  in York Beach, ME.  I am part of the tourism
industry, an important sector to the economic health of the state.  I am here today to 
oppose LD 1190 as written, which would require restrictive scheduling in Maine. The 
proposed legislation would create an unreasonable burden and cost to my small 
business community and the tourism industry.  
There are several concerns: 
·         My business has a unique process and every employee has unique needs. It is 
not on-size fit-all. The flexibility to adapt to changing conditions, especially with 
weather and in shoulder seasons, would cause irreparable harm to my operations. A 
perfect example of this when a large group calls only 1 day before coming to our 
restaurant and Inn. Am I really to turn away that business – those hours of income to 
my team and tax dollars to Maine because I am no longer allowed to staff?
·         These restrictions would also have an impact on customer service — resulting 
in not enough employees being scheduled, longer wait times, lost reservations and 
therefore lost shifts. My industry is not based on making it up tomorrow. I have to 
seat and serve meals when the customers come – then it is lost forever. And not just to
me, but to the employees and in tax revenue to the state.
·         The tourism industry is competitive and fast-paced and revolves around a 
number of variables, from weather to that last minute call. Currently, if an employee 
wants to attend an event, needs extra time for a school paper, or any other host of 
circumstances, I am able to accommodate those often last minute requests by offering 
those shifts to other employees without incurring a government penalty. These 
circumstances cannot be predicted in advance and an employer should not be 
punished with a fine for accommodating an employee’s schedule or other 
circumstances beyond the hotel’s control.
·         Southern Maine’s unique geographic location makes it extremely vulnerable to 
competition from surrounding NH businesses that are not subject to the same laws. If 
I am no longer able to offer flexibility, what is to stop someone from working in NH? 
This unnecessary and burdensome bill would make me unable to offer extra shifts at a
moment’s notice, which means fewer available shifts for workers and loss of income. 
I am already competing for team members and am struggling to fill open jobs before 
restrictive scheduling piles on another competitive disadvantage.
·         This bill requires that schedules are transmitted by electronic means.  Have you
considered that there are those in the workforce who do not use electronic means?  
We have current team members who require a paper schedule; requiring electronic 
means of delivery would have a disparate impact on those who can't utilize electronic 
means.  
Because of the unreasonable costs, concerning impact on reducing jobs and disturbing
effects that this may have on my business and Maine’s hospitality businesses, I urge 
the committee to vote LD 1190 out as ought not to pass. Thank you for listening and 
for remembering how important the hospitality industry is to Maine. 
Sincerely,
Erika Christie
