 
4/5/23  
In Opposition to LD 1190, An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee:   
My Name is Jason Clay, and I am a citizen of Brewer, ME . I work fo r Governor ’s Restaurant as the 
Director of Operations and serve as the Polic y Liaison  for the Bangor Region Chamber of C ommerce. I 
oppose LD 1190 as it would have a sever e effect of many different t ypes of businesses in Maine.  
My industry in particular,  is affected by seasonal  ups and downs of business, not to mention weather. 
This past winter alone our ability  to do business was affected by over a dozen weather events. My 
company already offers Pai d time off as required by law, along with vacation time above and beyond 
that. Our industry and many others o ffer employees to pick up extra work to make up for the any down 
time . We also have just added a 401k plan with a match, and short term disability insurance for our 
team members. Inve sting in our employees is the right thing to do. However I ’m very concer ned that we 
may be able to do less of that with more burdensome  and costly regulations from the state.  
Our industry is recovering from the Covid pandemic , however there are still lingering effects. The ability 
to hire in some market s is still a huge challenge, even with wages offer ed far abo ve the minimum wage. 
We have seen record expenses with ingredients, energy, labor, insurance, equi pment, and more. Eggs 
used to be $15 dollars a case, they ’re now $45. Our vendors a re predicting ingredient costs to rise again 
this summer into the fall.  
There are multiple bills in the legislature now that w ould add even more cost to doing b usiness. F or 
example, Family Medical Leave. Adding yet another cost to doing business make s it a huge cha llenge to 
invest more in our employees and facilities. For some companies it may be the  tipping poin t to their 
failure. I would rather inve st mon ey into a Family Medi cal Leave program that works for everyone 
versus being forced to pay a penalty when a snowstorm pops up that misses  the prediction  and causes a 
lost day of revenue. The potential cost i s in the thousands  to my business . Would the state collect taxes 
on this penalty?  Would I as a bu siness o wner ha ve to pay state and federal taxes on these additional 
hour penalties?   The additional recordkeeping would add more work for our management team as well , 
along with  costing more money for record storage.  
One more issue  – the way this bill reads, the Government isn ’t held to the same standard in case of a 
government  shutdown. How is that fair to bu siness?  
This is a bad bill for our sta te. Let’s focus on better wa ys to pro tect and reward our workers.  
Respectfully Su bmitte d, 
Jason Clay  
 
