Jeremy Dougherty
Bar Harbor Inn & Spa
LD 1190
Good Afternoon,
My name is Jeremy Dougherty and I am the General Manager of the Bar Harbor Inn 
& Spa in Bar Harbor, Maine.  I employ about 160 employees and our parent 
company, Witham Family Hotels, has about 450 employees.  As we are one legal 
entity, we would collectively fall under the 250 employee baseline for LD 1190.
I oppose the legislation as written, but do not entirely oppose with the assumed 
purpose behind it.  Employees deserve to have a work schedule in advance of their 
actual work week and as an employee, a two-week notice would be helpful in 
organizing their life.  However, that only works well in more structured business 
models that allow for that consistency.  In the hospitality industry we have huge 
fluctuations in business and short-term cancellations and additions to business that 
can rapidly change by something as urgent and untimely as a weekend forecast of rain
that creates a rash of sudden hotel room cancellations.  In this scenario with 1190 we 
would incur costs for the last-minute cancellations 1-2 days out for a cancelled event 
and reduced business due to weather forecasts.  This 1190 would also create an 
unreasonable about of reconciliation and compliance to ensure we are paying for the 
right amounts of penalties in these last-minute changes to schedules.  Call off's the 
night off in restaurants service happens NIGHTLY in most restaurants.  In fact, there 
is almost always a willing volunteer for a server to be the first to "be cut" from the 
shift if they arrive and there is not enough covers on the books to need as many staff.  
Would this legislation force employers to do better on advance scheduling?  Yes.  
Would it force them to overschedule, or under schedule two weeks out?  Yes.  
Ultimately, two weeks out too much time for most hospitality positions even if well 
intentioned and valuable in several other ways.  But the record keeping of schedules, 
reconciliation for penalties that certainly will happen when we have to adjust 
schedules for a number of reasons not mentioned in the exceptions...those are 
additional processes that I respectively find to be really a big overreach.  This feels a 
lot like a solution to a problem that didn't need to be solved and, in the process, it's 
just going to make it even more difficult to run a hospitality business in Maine.  
I worry far less about locations like Bar Harbor and some of our coastal properties 
that generally run a very high occupancy and therefore, every day is really busy.  We 
don't have the same dips and lulls in business a traditional market would have, which 
makes consistent scheduling much easier.  For most departments, we already have 
mostly set schedules and this LD 1190 isn't an issue.  For restaurants, of which we 
have three, this creates so many challenges as there are 100 people shuffling around in
different restaurants to adjust to everyone's' personal issues that alter their ability to 
complete their assigned schedule.  It's the restaurants where I can see this being 
extremely cumbersome, I submit my feedback as one that supports the general need 
for anyone to have some predictability to their work and life.  And one that knows 
even the best planned operation has so many unpredictable issues that are not caused 
by the employer, and in these cases, we would be financially penalized for such a bill.
I'm sure in a more global sense for all the various businesses in Maine this makes a lot
of sense, but for the restaurants this would be quite challenging as written.  
