t 
i 5. 
‘\l\\‘l/’/' //g 
../.., at 
MAINE TOURISM 
ASSOCIATION 
JoshTardy 
On Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
In Opposition To 
LD 1190, An Act To Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules 
April 6, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing: 
I am Josh Tardy of Mitchell Tardy Jackson Government Affairs appearing on behalf of the Maine Tourism 
Association. MTA is the state’s largest tourism advocate with nearly 1500 members in every type of 
tourism business such as lodging, restaurants, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour 
operators, amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates the seven State Visitor 
Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, 
Maine Invites You. I offer this testimony in opposition to LD 1190. 
In the tourism industry, ﬂexibility is critical to any business capacity to function. Large parties may show 
up at restaurants with little advanced notice, or weather may cause a great increase or decrease in 
attendance at amusement parks, museums, or theaters. Bus tours may change their schedule requiring 
different accommodations, stops at a restaurant, or attendance at a historic attraction or other venue. Ina 
small town, a ﬁmeral or other unexpected event may cause a hotel to ﬁll up at the last minute. Delivery 
trucks may arrive at a warehouse at an unexpected day or time due to any number of factors beyond the 
warehouse employer ’s control. Some short notice changes are an expected and unavoidable part of most 
tourism businesses. 
Workers value ﬂexibility as an important factor when choosing the tourism industry, and this ﬂexibility is 
a two-way street. Employees want time off for vacation, sick days, doctor appointments, children ’s school 
events, sports schedules, and other family activities. Employers, who are facing severe workforce 
shortages, want to do everything they can do accommodate their employees and keep those workers 
happy and employed with them for the long-term--both year-round employees and those seasonal workers 
who return year after year. 
For younger workers, seasonal workers, and retirees working part-time, the availability of additional 
shifts and the ability to make last minute changes to accommodate otherjobs, school, or family 
obligations are critically important to them. Employers balance that with ensuring their customers and 
guests receive the top-quality hospitality for which Maine is known. 
This bill assumes a contentious relationship between employers and employees and that the solution to 
this is government micromanagement of businesses ’ schedules. This is compounded by the additional pay 
requirements for schedule changes that are a normal part of many tourism businesses and most often out 
of the control of the employer —changes that any employee would know is part of the job. These 
additional pay requirements mandated by the bill are: 
A. With less than 7 days’ notice but 24 hours‘ or more notice to the employee, one hour of pay at the 
employee's regular hourly rate; 
B. With less than 24 hours’ notice to the employee, 2 hours of pay at the employee's regular hourly
rate for each shift of 4 hours or less; and 
C. With less than 24 hours’ notice to the employee, 4 hours of pay at the employee's regular hourly 
rate for each shiﬂ: of more than 4 hours. 
This bill also requires employers to keep the schedules on ﬁle for three years with the presumption that if 
there is an unintentional error or missing document that the employer" did not comply with the substance 
of this proposed law. So the employer is presumed guilty of noncompliance with the entire underlying law 
should there be a paperwork error in maintaining three years’ worth of schedules and shift changes. 
Swapping shifts is extremely common in tourism jobs, particularly in the restaurant business. Under this 
bill, there would be no penalty pay for the employee requesting the change, but there would be for the 
person covering the shift. This encourages employees to request shiﬁ changes and not work it out among 
themselves but force the employer to pay them up to an additional four hours for every change. 
This bill is an unnecessary law that would greatly burden the tourism industry. I encourage you to vote 
Ought Not To Pass. Thank you for your consideration.
