188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
 
Testimony of Matthew Marks in Opposition  to LD  1190 
“An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules ” 
Joint Committee on Labor and Housing 
April 6, 2023 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing my name  is Matthew Marks,  I am a Principal at Cornerstone  Government  Affairs,  and 
here  today  to speak  on behalf of my client  The Associated  General Contractors  of Maine.  AGC  Maine  is a 
statewide  commercial  construction  trade  association  and a Chapter  of AGC  America . 
 
Project  scheduling in the construction  industry  has several factors  we would  like the Committee  to 
consider  asso ciated  with  this bill including weather,  envir onment,  permitting,  contractual,  and safety.   
 
Construction  work  activity  is directly  impacted  by Maine ’s weather.  Snow,  rain,  wind,  cold,  and heat  
impact  operation  schedules.  For safety  and by contract  snowfall requires  the industry  to service  
contracts  for snow  removal including active  construction  sites.  Rain  can delay  or extend  activity during a 
day(s ) and preve nt the installation  or placement  of products.  State and private  contracts  or 
specifications  typically  include  lang uage  on the placement  of asphalt  in those  conditi ons.  Every  year  the 
industry  rushes  to meet  cold weather  specifications  for paving.  That  means  crews  will work  extended  
hours  in advance  of plant  shutdown  dates  or owner  requirements.  If they  have  to adhere  to the 
restrictions  placed  in this bill it will add significant  costs  and risks  for both  public  and private  projects.   
 
 In addition to  regulations  for working in certain heat conditions, work  in some areas, for instance , in-
stream activity  is dictated by permit dates and condi tions  known as a work window. B ecause the 
industry is reliant on the supply chain, and the compressed work window, it is  difficult to determine 
what hours would be required during the peak se ason to meet the requirements. The purpose of the in -
stream work window is to avoid fish and aquatic spawning seasons.  
 
Paving operations have faced increasing regulations that are determined by the project owner and 
regulations. Both can accelerate or decelerate operations that require flexibility by the company and workers. Right now, companies , workers,  and agen cies are feeling the impacts of work that must be 
conducted at night . Generally , bidding that i s happening now will dictate the conditions that vary 
between projects that will start shortly after. That pressur e must be addressed in the field to meet 
deadlines for the opening of roads, bridges, schools, and other public facilities.  
 Safety is a concern with this model, and I want to share a few examples. If construction activity on a site discovers an issue wit hin an open trench it’s imperative that the hazard is prepared for safe passage 
before leaving for the day. That activity and other end -of-day site safety practices take time, and that is 
all a condition of the individual site. Additionally, construction firms are essential across the state in response to emergency -related situations and to complete those tasks it’s imperative the workforce be 
prepared and expected to respond.  
188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
Contracts in the industry have specific dates for completion  and it ’s our belief that this bill would c reate 
a logistics challenge , add tremendous cost, and fails to re cognize the many conditions that are related to 
working in our natural environment. While they generally know the time for v arious activities, any given  
site expects conditions that present various challenges to completing tasks. It ’s important  for both 
safety and q uality the process isn ’t rushed to meet the scheduling conditions in this bill.  
 
While the workf orce has made significant  strides building the workforce in recent years th e volume of 
construction a ctivity and the continued pace of retiring skilled workers means the industry doe sn’t have 
the f lexibility to add the staffing required to schedule as prescribed  in this bill. It will reduce bidders on 
complicated projects and certainly those with night work conditions . For exa mple, Maine DOT has 
reported more than 50 projects rejected in recent years because of the increases in material prices. 
Adding a complicated layer of new emp loyee schedul ing conditions  as outlin ed will result in fewer 
bidders willing to take risks  associated with the existing complicated schedules, timelines , and 
regulations .  
 
Supply chain logistics  and costs  regularly impact the schedule. Crews often shift their work plan  as 
products are d elayed and as costs rise,  they must  adapt . Those decisions are not predictable, like  the 
weather conditions. In a recent project, the materials specified  in the plans were  not readily available 
and h ad a mu ch higher cost than projected. The contractor quickly adjusted and used a fabrication 
process , with more work by their team,  to solve the issue. Th ose t ypes of innovative solutions would 
have to consider th e work schedule  and could prevent the timely delivery of the product .  
 We welcome direct conversation by any member of this Committee with companies that will be 
impacted directly by this law. I urge the Committee to vote against this bill.  
