 
 
TESTIMONY of Megan Diver                        
Vice President 
Maine Energy Marketers Association 
 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
In Opposition to LD 1190 
An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing Committee, my name is 
Megan Diver, I am the Vice President of the Maine Energy Marketers Association (MEMA). 
 
MEMA is a trade association composed of approximately 300-member companies and over 5,000 direct 
and 5,000 indirect people working in energy delivery and servicing businesses delivering heating oil, 
biofuels, motor fuels, propane, pellets and kerosene and offering service and installations on the 
equipment that operates these fuels. In addition, our members own and operate 70% of Maine's 1,300 
convenience stores, throughout Maine and employ approximately 10,000 Maine people and sell more 
than one billion gallons of gasoline and diesel fuel each year. Our members also sell more than 90% of 
all the propane sold in our state every year. We provide education and training to the heating, 
ventilation, air conditioning, weatherization, and energy auditing trades for hundreds of Maine citizens 
annually through our courses at our own state of the art training facility MEMA Technical Education 
Center (MTEC) in Brunswick. 
 
I submit testimony in opposition to LD 1190. 
 
There are several ways in which LD 1190 will be problematic to implement for many businesses in 
Maine, but specifically the businesses of our members. For more than a century our industry has kept 
Mainers safe and warm by delivering reliable, efficient, and cost-effective liquid fuels.  Indeed, 7 in 10 
Maine homes rely on our members to deliver these crucial products.   
 
For so many reasons the employees of these businesses are often called upon in an emergency situation 
or are asked to work longer hours if deliveries take longer than expected due to things such as weather 
or a person calling out sick. If there is impending weather, these companies will work longer hours one 
day to ensure the warmth and safety of their customers for the bad weather and or cold temperatures. 
 
There are many more reasons why this legislation would be problematic for the industry MEMA 
represents, but considering the warmth and safety at Mainers could be at risk I think is enough 
information. 
 
Please vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 1190.  

Megan Diver
Bowdoin
LD 1190
/Users/megdiver/Desktop/Meg/LD 1190 Testimony.docx
