g STATE or MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ‘ 
"“-‘t_§,_-5“: 54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA MAINE 04333 0054 \UG| ,‘ 
Laura A. Fortman Janet T. Mills 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Mike Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards 
Maine Department of Labor 
Neither For nor Against LD 1190 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, April 6, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Laborand Housing. l'm Mike Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards at the 
Maine Department of Labor. l'm here today to testify neither for nor against LD 1190 An Act to Ensure 
a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules. 
LD 1190 creates a new subchapter of Maine employment law. The Department recognizes the 
importance to workers of having predictable schedules that are reasonably adapted to their lives. 
However, we are concerned that LD 1190 as written may prove difficult to implement. 
Several terms within the bill are of particular concern: 
I The definition of employer as an entity with "250 or more employees worldwide." 
0 The definition of employee excluding any not paid at an hourly rate. 
0 Numerous other terms are not defined, including ”good faith estimate," "frequently visited," 
,”appropriate notice," ”reasonable access,” ”appropriate purposes" and "on-call shifts.” 
We also note that proposed section 620-C regarding records retention and access is redundant with 
existing statute (section 622), which already provides such access without prior notice. 
Were the bill to be enacted, we would prefer that the associated report be required somewhat later 
than January 1st, ideally in February when other reports are due to the Legislature. 
Implementation and enforcement ofthe new Chapter 1-D would certainly require additional resources 
for the Bureau. 
Thank you for your time and attention. l would be happy to answer any questions you may have now 
or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to sewing Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to support job growth. 
PHONE: (207) 623-7900 TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-5292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
