l-*i@SPlTALlTY 
MAINE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
April 6, 2023 
In Opposition to LD 1190, '54n Act to Ensure a Fair War/(week by Requiring Notice of Work 
Schedules ” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine representing more 
than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the state. HospitalityMaine opposes LD 
1190, “A/2 Act Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules." 
Restrictive scheduling legislation is not new to this Committee. It was defeated for numerous reasons, 
including putting Maine on the map as an outlier regionally and nationally, potentially being the second 
state to implement this. Both employers and employees have strongly opposed it in the past because it is 
an unworkable bill. If this legislation were to become successful it would have a detrimental impact on 
the industry by handcufﬁng employers to untenable scheduling parameters established by state 
government. These parameters will certainly not consider any individual circumstances when schedule 
changes are needed. When life happens (and it does) and adjustments are necessary, the bill proposes to 
ﬁnancially penalize employers. The approach lined out in this bill will do nothing to support existing 
businesses nor will it attract business opportunity to the state. 
Please remember the state is in a workforce crisis and our operators run on thin margins. If this were to 
become law employers will have even more difﬁculty stafﬁng, some employees will work less hours, 
and/or employers will incur penalties because they have no other option to keep their doors open. 
Please consider the following circumstances: 
- Weather. Weather alone makes accurately predicting business levels impossible. Attempting to 
lock in a tvvo-week schedule in a four-season state without any changes is not an easy task. 
. Decrease in extra shiﬁs. Employees likely won't be offered a chance to work a rainy-day lunch 
crowd and make a few extra hundred dollars because of the broad protections against retaliation 
that would be established under the bill. 
- The unexpected and the inevitable. For example, emergency appointments or getting the sad 
phone call about a memorial service next week cannot be anticipated. Just recently Southwest 
Airlines experienced massive national cancellations that caused local hotels to reach maximum 
occupancy in a matter of hours. 
The hospitality industry is successful in part because of the ﬂexibility that employers are able to offer
their employees. We can't legislate our way out of the next rainstorm or power outage sending half ofa 
town to an establishment for dinner or an overnight stay. Scheduling arrangements should stay between 
employers and employees where it currently works best. 
Please vote ought not to pass on LD 1190. There is no public outcry for this legislation and would have 
serious negative impacts to the industry. Thank you for your attention and the opportunity to provide 
comment. I would be happy to answer any questions.
