Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Opposition to  LD 1190 
 
“An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of 
Work Schedules ” 
 
April  6, 2023 
 
Patrick Strauch , Executive  Director  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder  and members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing, the following is  testimony submitted on behalf of the Maine forest Products 
Council in opposition to LD 1190, “ An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring 
Notice of Work Schedules .”  
 Maine’s forest supports an $8.1 billion industry that sustains 33,000 jobs, which works out to roughly one out of every 24 jobs in Maine. The Maine Forest Products Council 
represents  more than 300 members from all facets of the forest products industry. 
Members include landowners, paper mills, sawmills, loggers, truckers, foresters, panel manufacturers, biomass and pellet facilities and secondary manufacturers.  
 We are testifying today in strong opposition to this bill  for a number of reasons. 
Workforce shortages are a real problem in our sector . It is predicted that by 2030, our 
industry will be short 5,000 workers. Even today, the effects o f labor shortages have  
rippl ing effects throughout the industry that require employers  and employees to work 
together  and be flexible  to keep pace with demand. If passed, LD 1190 would severely 
limit their ability to work together  to address unforeseen  circumstances and  meet shift 
needs.  
 As drafted, LD 1190 makes a number of unreasonable demands on employers with five  
employees or more that include : 
 
• Providing shift schedules two weeks in advance . 
• Compensation to the employee s ranging between one hour of pay to four hours  of 
pay for necessary schedul ing changes . 
• A requirement to keep a record  of schedules on file for three years , subject  to 
inspection. 
Under this bill, t here are few circumstances short of a literal act of God that allow an 
employer to change schedules to address unforeseen circumstances and meet needs. 
Also of note is the fact that the bill allows an employee to request a shift change  without 
penalty to the employer, but the employer would have to pay a penalty to the employee 
who voluntarily picks up or switches shifts.   
2 
 In 2019, Maine passed a paid leave law  that guarantees  employees  time off. S hould this bil l pass, in addition to 
paying the employee who isn’t ab le, for whatever reason, to cover th eir shift, the employer would also have to 
pay an additional employee to cover t hat shift, plus a penalty. Under this scenario, employers could be forced to 
pay 20 hours in payroll to cover an eight -hour shift , even though they had planned accordingl y.  
 
The bottom line is that LD 1190 sets a very negative tone for the relationship between employers and 
employees , and it will result in less flexibility for both employers and employees . And for what reason? Th e 
labor shortage that is felt in the forest products industry is being felt across all industries in Maine. Competition between employers for capable, hardworking and reliable workers is strong.  Opp ortunities are  everywhere for 
employees to consider if their needs aren’t  being  met by a n employer , and many employe es in this industry are 
already covered by collective bargaining agreements.  For these reasons, the Maine Forest Products Council strongly urges you to vote  ‘ought not to pass ’ on LD 
1190.   Thank you for your consideration.  
 
