 
Manufacturers Association of Maine 
 
6 April 2023 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and 
honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing, we offer this testimony in 
opposition to LD 1190, An Act to Ensure a Fair 
Workweek by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules. 
The Manufacturers Association of Maine (MAME) is a 
non-partisan 501(c)6 non-profit grounded in service to 
its membership, providing a network of resources 
designed to support the strategic business growth 
needs of Maine manufacturing entrepreneurs.  
Maine’s manufacturing businesses are diverse, 
employing almost 60,000 individuals in military and 
defense, aerospace, metal fabrication, paper, boat 
building, semi-conductor, wood products, aquaculture 
and biotech, medical device, composites, and 
bioplastics, as well as the food and beverage 
industries.  These businesses represent almost 10% of 
Maine’s annual GDP and 14.5% of all the wages paid 
in the state on a weekly basis.  MAME’s mission is to 
help manufacturing grow and succeed and supports 
Maine’s development of future manufacturing assets 
through a variety of programs. 
I think the first place to start is recognition by the 
committee that the larger majority of Maine’s 
manufacturers are small. . . with almost 1,700 of our 
manufacturers (out of 1,880) having fewer than 20 
employees.  However, we do have several members 
who would be impacted by this proposal. The  
 
 2023 Executive BOARD
Chair of the Board 
Judith Borelli
Texas Instruments
Vice Chair of the Board, &
Legislative Chair
Dave Fortin 
Kennebec Technologies
Treasurer & Investment Chair
Samantha Pedersen
Albin, Randall & Bennett
Secretary & Business Svcs. Chair
Neal Prescott
Prescott Associates
Past-Chair & Energy Program Chair
Alan LaPoint
The Strainrite Companies
Executive Director
Mike Roughton
MAME_LD 1190 testimony 040423
 
administrative burden imposed by the proposed bill is onerous, at a 
time when resources are already stretched supremely thin. 
Additionally, the language in the proposed bill contemplates a 
“dance” of sorts will occur wherein an individual requesting a shift 
change “expects” that there will be an accommodating peer within a 
system that penalizes the person agreeing to a shift change, when 
there would be no penalty pay for the employee requesting the 
change, but there would be for the person covering the shift.  Why 
would an employee agree to trade shifts if they can cash in on 
penalty pay for not agreeing to the shift swap?   
In manufacturing, just as in many other businesses, there is one 
fundamental truism. . . “the only thing you know about a forecast is 
that it will be wrong”.  That adage holds double when you are talking 
about schedules, and you inject the variables associated with 
people’s home issues (often compounded by child or elder care 
challenges), as well as the variability that comes with Maine’s 
climate.  One can no doubt find operations that have stable 
schedules over some extended period of time, but in most 
operations, it’s not the case, which is why planning and scheduling as 
a departmental function is a critical component of any process, and 
often the hinge pin between customer satisfaction and profitability 
of the business. 
The fact is that every business is unique, as are the individuals they 
employ.  The truth is that the intersection of the business’ and 
employee’s needs are actively adjusted, flexed, massaged and 
otherwise negotiated regularly, sometimes even with the shift of the 
day as priorities change.  Legislation cannot remove this variation, 
nor influence the realities that exist when it comes to a company’s 
desire to build a culture that fosters retention of its employees for 
the long term.  The Manufacturers Association and its membership 
joins with others across the state in opposing this bill, and 
respectfully request the committee vote Ought Not To Pass. 
