 
 
1250   EYE STREET,  N.W. SUITE  1100   |   WASHINGTON,  D.C. 20005   |  202  289  3100   |  WWW.AHLA.COM  April 6, 2023  
 
Committee on Labor and Housing  
Burton M. Cross Office Building  
111 Sewall St , Room 202  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
Re: L.D. 1190  - An Act to Ensure a Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules  
Dear Committee Members:  
 
On behalf of the American Hotel & Lodging Association, I write to express my concerns with L.D. 1190 , 
which would implement a restrictive scheduling mandate on Maine  hospitality businesses.  
 
If enacted, Maine will be only one of two  states with a state -wide scheduling mandate  and only join a 
small number  of othe r municipal  jurisdictions  that implemented similar  measures.  Not only will Maine be 
a national and regional outlier on this issue , implementing any costly mandate on the hotel industry will 
only slow its ability to recover from the dramatic impacts of the COVID pand emic.  
   
While many businesses do attempt to provide schedules in advance for their employees, the staffing needs 
of a hotel can change radically – and quickly – due to factors beyond the control of the hotel.  
For example, hotels located near airports are frequen tly impacted by changes in the airline schedules. 
During widespread flight cancellations – such as the recent Southwest Airlines outage that caused 
nationwide cancellations – can cause local hotels to reach 100% occupancy in less than an hour. Although 
the bill grants narrow exemptions for , the event reference d above would not fall under any such 
exemptions  – it just created an emergency demand.  
 
During the height of the COVID pandemic, this bill would have further decimated Maine  hotels. The 
emergency declarations issued in Maine  and nationwi de didn’t prevent hotels from operating, but 
essentially  prohibited people from travelling and cut -off business overnight.   Under the language of this 
bill, the employer would have not only lost all the revenue from that cancelled business, but it would al so 
be required to shoulder additional labor expenses.  
 
This would heavily impact banquets and events. Hotels will often have large meetings or events that are 
scheduled or cancelled with very short notice . These events have major staffing needs associated  with 
their execution – the language of this bill would require hotels to turn away that needed much -needed 
business if it fell within the two week  time period . This not only hurts the business – it takes away 
opportunities for the employees themselves .  
 
The flexible scheduling in our industry is often what appeals to our employees. Managers and owners can 
sit down with their employees to develop a work schedule that accommodates their daily lives - class 
schedules, taking care of family, or whatever t heir individual situation calls for.   Mandating a scheduling 
policy not only takes away the flexibility from the business – it also impacts our employees.   
 
   
Overall, this legislation would place an immense administrative burden on businesses. As written the 
legislation would require businesses to chang e their entire scheduling process to ensure that they’re in 
 
 
1250   EYE STREET,  N.W. SUITE  1100   |   WASHINGTON,  D.C. 20005   |  202  289  3100   |  WWW.AHLA.COM  compliance. We know from the small number of jurisdictions that have implemented similar laws that the 
administration and additional paperwork  generated from this law is substantial. As one  hotel  General 
Manager said:  
Any clock in mistake or lateness by more than a few  minutes requires multiple pieces of 
paper … It is quite challenging reviewing punches vs. a schedule for any discrepancies.  
Sometimes a change is made to an employee's arrival tim e due to the employee’s own 
scheduling needs and this needs to be notated in multiple ways.  
While the intent of this l egislation is admirable, it is so complex, with so many different 
exceptions and requirements, that it would almost be impossible for a business owner to correctly 
implement.   
If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contac t me at sbratko@ahla.com  or 508 -783-2094.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Sarah R. Bratko, Esq.  
American Hotel & Lodging Association  
