 
 
Response to Maine LD 1190 – Act to Ensure Fair Workweek by Requiring Notice of Work Schedules  
 
Overall, this legislation is burdensome to the employer, both from a payroll and supervisory perspective.  
It would require changes to both systems and processes, as well as pulling already stretched supervisors 
from their primary responsibility of overseeing employees and ensuring operations are running 
smoothly.  
 
Stonewall Kitchen is diligent and fair about chang ing schedule s and we provide as much noti ce as 
possible in all circumstances.    In this changing economic environment where we may have a temporary 
downturn in our business , we have been able to offer employees the chance to work in another facility 
and or take advantage of the DOL’s programs suc h as Workshare to minimize the impact of schedule 
reductions .  In one operation , we have offer ed optional Fridays , and on some occasions , Fridays are off 
for the whole team. Decisions that are made during the week , based on production  needs, or  
weather /safety, and are announced as soon as possible, often 1-2 days before.    The employees 
appreciate the option , based on their own personal situations , to either take  time off or work  when 
possible . 
 
We provide the expected weekly hours in a new hire’s offer let ter, which is based on the business needs 
of the company as well as the employee’s availability , as communicated in the application process .  If 
this availability changes, we do what we can to accommodate the se changes, within the  parameters  of 
the company ’s needs.    
 
The Notice of Work Schedule  requirement  could become  administratively burdensome.    Our schedules 
vary in each of our business units, and this could impact  resources in Payroll , if there is a need to add 
pay to employees due to short notice of schedule change .   We currently prepare and communicate a 
schedule within the timeframe suggested  by the legislation,  and this is  based on our knowledge of what 
is ahead at the time , but there are circumstances where changes have to be made.    
   
Notification in -person /by phone call and in writing would adversely impact the management team, HR 
and Payroll.   For any manager with more than a handful of employees to notify , the volume could be 
prohibitive.   In some operations in Maine , we have 100+ p eople that work 3 shifts in one facility with six 
supervisors.   Maintaining and communicating schedules will take a significant amount of time, especially 
when schedules and shifts change.   This additional requirement takes managers  away from paying 
attent ion to the business and people we put in their charge . 
 
In the retail division , weekly schedules are prepared and posted at each location and sometimes online  
and employees know when the schedules are published.   Our managers already have a lot to balance 
maintaining revenue and staffing costs and are focused on giving employees the hours they need , while 
also providing  excellent customer service.   The administrative and financial cost of this legislation will 
take away from having a viable business in the state by focusing on a written schedule that is 
communicated in multiple ways rather than a healthy, competitive, employee -centric workplace.  
 
 
Ensuring a fair workweek by providing notice of initial work schedules is incumbent upon all 
employers.    For t hose times when adjustments are required to the work schedule, due to business or 
production situations, it isn’t always  possible to notify employees 2 weeks in advance.   This requirement 
takes away our flexibility to effectively staff our departments and run our business, and potentially 

increases our costs.   Rather than subjecting all employers to these rules and increased 
administrative/management burden  and cost , it may  be more effective to have guidelines and monitor 
employers for fair treatment of the ir employees .  Employers that are taking advantage of employee s by 
unfairly modifying their schedules so the employee doesn’t make a week’s wage  can and should b e 
addressed  but this is not the solution .  
 
Our company prides itself on being employee centric  and affording accommodations as needed as long 
as the business isn’t materially burdened.   We have employees that need accommodations for 
caregiving to elderly parents, doctor appointments, sick children, day care closures, broken down 
vehicles, loss of h ousing, legal issues to name a few and we work with each one to accommodate their 
needs.    Most of these things are last minute so what you are asking is rather than work individually to 
do the best for both the employee and the employer we burden the empl oyer to revise schedules each 
time a schedule changes.      
 
This administratively burdensome option should not be approved.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Sharon Decato  
Chief Human Resources Officer  
Stonewall Kitchen  
 
