No its ~ Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Opposition 
LD 1297: An Act to Notify School Boards and Select Boards That Lobbying Associations Are 
not Governmental Agencies 
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association 
Before the State and Local Government Committee 
April 21, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and other esteemed members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, _ 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA). The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems. 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in opposition to LD 1297, An Act to Notijjw School Boards 
and Select Boards That Lobbying Associations Are Not Governmental Agencies. 
We are unsure what problem this bill attempts to solve, but we feel it is a solution in search ofa 
problem. This bill is govemment overreach and appears to be a blatant attempt to interfere with the First 
Amendment rights of individuals. 
I can only assume the Maine Education Association would be deemed a “private entity that has as its 
mission or purpose or as part of its activities the inﬂuencing of a school board” as speciﬁed under this 
proposal. The MEA clearly advocates before school boards. In fact, we actively encourage our 
members and local associations to engage with school boards about challenges and successes in our 
public schools. We believe strongly educators and school boards and administrators must have open and 
on-going communication — in fact, our schools work best when all three are rowing in the same 
direction. Any effort to impede the communication between local associations of the MEA and the 
educators they represent is nothing less than a disservice to the students we are attempting to educate. 
We believe this bill will only serve to stiﬂe communication with school boards and municipal ofﬁcers, 
and for this reason we oppose LD 1297. 
Thank you for your time and your service to the people of Maine. l willd 
questions you may have. o my best to answer any 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
