'§'@l;'$i,i 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330S 
BOAHD5 T elephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBUC EDUCAHON ADVOCATES Websltel wwyv'n1Smaweb'c0m Ii 
MaineSchoolSuperi|uenilenls.~\§socluli0n 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 1297 
AN ACT TO NOTIFY SCHOOL BOARDS AND SELECT BOARDS THAT LOBBYING 
ASSOCIATIONS ARE NOT GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the State and Local Government Committee. I am 
Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to L.D. l297. 
This would be a new section of statute for both 20-A and 30-A. 
MS SA and MSBA are both opposed to L.D. 1297. Both associations are member service organizations that 
advocate for their members through the legislative process. The associations are not lobbying associations. 
MSSA serves superintendents who choose to join the association. MSBA serves 98% of all school boards in 
the state who choose to join to provide legislative advocacy and to support school boards as requested through 
information, school board training, and policy assistance for establishing the foundation for school district 
gOV61'1'13l ’lC€. 
Pursuant to 30-A, §5724, sub-§9, Maine School Management Association and Maine School Boards 
Association are nonproﬁt advisory organizations and as such are instrumentalities of their member school 
administrative units, municipalities and quasi-municipal corporations. As such, and as an advisory 
organization of its members, they serve speciﬁcally to provide assistance to its members. 
By statute 20-A, §1055, Superintendent, Powers and Duties, the superintendent is the secretary ex ofﬁcio of 
the school district. 
MSSA and MSBA see L.D. 1297 as unneeded legislation. School boards reach out when assistance is sought 
from these associations. Training to school boards is provided on an as-needed, voluntary basis. Work is done 
with school boards to assist in helping school board members remember and uphold the oath they took when 
they were sworn into ofﬁce. These services are those sought by school boards and superintendents. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
