CORNERSTONE ~_—~‘ AN EI\/lPLC)YEE —O\/\/NED c<;>MPAi\1Y** 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Chair 
Representative Paige Ziegler, Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in opposition to LD 43, “An Act To Reduce the Cost of Electricity by 
Removing the 100-megawatt Limit on Renewable Resources of Energy” and LD 622, “An 
Act to Create Equal Opportunity Access to Clean Energy by Removing the 100-megawatt 
Limit on Clean Energy Sources” 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee: 
My name is Jeremy Payne and I am a principal with Cornerstone Government Affairs Group 
here to testify in opposition to LDs 43 and 622 on behalf of our client the Maine Renewable 
Energy Association (“MREA”). 
For many years the idea of removing the so-called “100 megawatt cap” has come before this 
committee and has been repeatedly rejected primarily for four reasons: 
l) It would mn counter to the long-standing intent of Maine’s Renewable Portfolio Standard 
(“RPS”), which is to incent as much in-state (or at least in-region) clean energy 
development as possible to help diversity our energy mix, reduce environmental impacts, 
and to encourage investment and the creation of new jobs; 
2) Today’s RPS in Maine — in combination with those of other New England states — has led 
to signiﬁcant investment by MREA member companies, totaling well over $2 billion in 
the last two decades, paying more than $25 million amiually in property taxes and 
employing over 2,500 Mainers; 
3) Existing statute places very reasonable geographic limitations on those resotu'ces that are 
eligible, and speciﬁcally allows renewable energy that is delivered into the New England 
bulk power system, regardless of where it is generated, to qualify for the RPS. This 
includes resources owned and operated by the Canadian government, including Hydro 
Quebec (“HQ”) and New Brunswick Power. Notably, according to page 115 of their 
2022 annual report, HQ currently has l6 hydro generating stations rated less than 100 
MW totaling 680 MW, for which they have not sought Maine RPS certiﬁcation. One has 
to wonder why they have never pursued certiﬁcation for the RPS; and 
\/VVVVV.CGr\GROUP.COM | é:'T;r@CGAGROLll ’
4) Lastly, it is important to understand why the cap exists at all — when restructuring 
occurred in the last 1990s the largest in-state renewable generator was Wyman hydro, 
followed by Harris. This is still true today for Maine-based hydropower assets, with 
Wyman at 85MW and Harris at 82MW. In years past, this committee saw ﬁt to adjust 
the eligibility standards to make room for Maine-based clean energy projects in excess of 
IOOMW (e.g. Kibby Wind at l32MW, and 152MW Three Corners solar project under 
construction in Benton, Clinton and Unity Township). 
This change may also lead to drastically oversupplying the RPS market with thousands of 
megawatts of Canadian-government owned hydropower, which would crash the price of 
Renewable Energy Certiﬁcates (“RECS”). Despite claims to the contrary, if large-scale 
hydropower was made eligible for Maine’s RPS there is no evidence it would supply Maine with 
lower cost power — and it would certainly discourage investment in Maine-based renewables if 
private companies are asked to compete with government-owned generation. 
Ultimately, the question is whether state incentive programs are meant to help grow Maine’s 
homegrown clean energy economy, or to send ratepayer dollars to corporations owned and 
operated by the Canadian government? 
We respectfully urge you to vote ought not to pass. 
Thank you. 
VV\/V\V.CGAGROUl ’.COM l 1;':@CGAGROUP
