Testimony is Support of LD 43 & LD 622 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
March 13, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 43
An Act to Reduce the Cost of Electricity by Removing the 100-megawatt Limit on Renewable
Resources of Energy 
and
LD 622
An Act to Create Equal Opportunity Access to Clean Energy by Removing the 100-megawatt Limit on
Clean Energy Sources 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology:
My name is Nathan Gould, and I am writing this testimony in support of LD 43, “An Act to 
Reduce the Cost of Electricity by Removing the 100-megawatt Limit on Renewable Resources of 
Energy,” as well as LD 622, “An Act to Create Equal Opportunity Access to Clean Energy by Removing 
the 100-megawatt Limit on Clean Energy Sources.”
I claim no expertise in the subject, but what I would like to add to the conversation is that 
simple wisdom that has been passed down to me: the merits of diversification. Most everyone is 
familiar with the old adage “don’t put all of your eggs in one basket.” When I see our state invest so 
heavily in only a few forms of renewable energy while artificially limiting others, I question the 
prudence of such policy. It conjures up images of those late 19th century monopolies, but instead of oil
and steel it is solar and wind.
We live in a state abounding in streams and rivers; whether it’s that nearby, familiar little 
watercourse that formerly hosted a dam or the steady, swift Penobscot, there are multifarious 
opportunities to harness hydroelectric power. Yet the emphasis and favoritism of our legislators has 
often been placed squarely on expensive wind and solar power. I call the merits of such partiality into 
question. I have less confidence in the promise of the sun to shine and the wind to blow every day, but
it doesn’t take an expert to appreciate the reliability of rivers to flow. Why put all our trust in 
Testimony is Support of LD 43 & LD 622 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
windmills that need to be turned with motors when the air is still, or solar panels made from toxic 
materials?
Hand-in-hand with diversification is the discerning hand of the free market, which is much 
more suitable for finding effective, sustainable solutions than propping up a favored industry that 
can’t stand on its own with the crutch of subsidies. The Legislature should not pick winners and losers;
handicapping efforts to utilize hydroelectric power handicaps the People of Maine’s ability to endure 
electricity prices in the current energy crisis in which we have been placed. Let’s put all options on the 
table and allow the free market to show us what will flourish.
I believe it is time for the Legislature to remove the 100-megawatt limit on hydroelectric power
and those other sources of clean energy. I believe it is time to lift these artificial limits on worthwhile 
solutions, lowering the cost of energy. Let us stop putting all our eggs in the same basket.
I humbly ask the Committee to vote Ought to Pass. Thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
