 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org  March 1 6, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and di stinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services , my name is Joe Anderson.  I am a 
resident of Portland, a hospital -based pediatrician, and I sit on the Board of the 
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  I am writing today to 
express our support for LD 200 , An Act to Require Medicaid Coverage for Certain 
Children Under 7 Years of Age .  We ask that you vote Ought  to Pass on th is piece 
of legislation.  
As a Pediatric Hospitalist, I care for newborn infants as well as children of all ages 
who are admitted to the hospital or brought in through the emergency 
department for care.  On a regular basis, I see the heartbreaking toll of inadequate 
policy on the h ealth of our youngest and most vulnerable citizens.  Whether it’s 
the three -year -old who is being brought in for care through the emergency room 
for something that would be better managed in an outpatient office, or the 
kindergarten student being rushed in  by ambulance  with a life-threatening  asthma 
attack because their family couldn’t afford their asthma -controlling medications, 
the underlying reason is often a lack of  adequate  health insurance coverage.   
As anyone with children knows, the first few years of their lives are filled with 
frequent doctor’s visits to monitor their growth and development, a schedule of 
routine immunizations designed to protect them against many dangerous 
communicable diseases, and often an onslaught of illnesses once they start school 
or daycare while their immune systems strengthen and mature.  Insurance  
coverage during this period is essential  to promoting a future of health and 
wellness.   
As the COVID public health emergency comes to an end and our state begins the 
process of  or unenrolling ineligible individuals from MaineCare in April, we fear 
that the number of children without health insurance coverage will continue to 
grow, and situations like the ones I mention above will only become more 
common.  Loss of coverage will b e even more likely in families dealing with a 
language barrier or without easy access to computers, compounding the issue.  
The Maine American Academy of Pediatrics believes that all children must have 
high quality health care to lay the foundation for succ ess throughout their 
lifespan.  We urge  you to support LD 200 to ensure all Maine children  under 7  
have health insurance coverage to help construct the underpinnings  of health 
that they will build on for the rest of their lives . 
Respectfully,  
 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Co-Chair, Advocacy Committee  
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics  
  

