The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people
TO: Joint Committee on Health and Human Services
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate 
DATE:
SUPPORT – LD 200; An Act to Require Medicaid Coverage for Certain Children Under 7 
Years of Age
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the members of the Health and 
Humans Services Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, I am the Public Health and 
Government Affairs Associate for the Maine Medical Association and I live in Windham. The 
Maine Medical Association appreciates the chance to submit the following comments 
supporting LD 200. This bill would establish continuous health coverage for those under 7 by 
requiring the Department of Health and Human Services to provide Medicaid coverage 
regardless of the child’s nonfarm income official poverty line if the child is not covered by an 
employer-sponsored or private health plan.  
 
Access to comprehensive, quality health care is one of MMA’s foundational pillars as it is 
essential for promoting and maintaining health. Health insurance access for children is critical 
to their development and success. Children without health insurance coverage are less likely 
to receive appropriate treatment for conditions like asthma or critical preventive services such 
as dental care, immunizations, and well-child visits that track developmental milestones. ￼  
 
The Families First Coronavirus Response Act’s (FFCRA) Medicaid continuous coverage 
provision has preserved coverage and averted insurance disruption for millions of Americans 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, enrollment in Medicaid and CHIP (Children’s 
Health Insurance Program) has grown, with over 34 million children (about twice the population 
of New York) newly enrolled.1 With the end of the continuous coverage of Medicaid in April, 
Medicaid will resume terminations and eligibility applications. Eligible individuals and families – 
particularly children – are at risk of losing coverage during this “unwinding process” despite 
remaining eligible due to the administrative hurdles they must overcome to maintain their 
coverage.2  
 
Many families may experience short-term changes in income or circumstances that make them 
temporarily ineligible for Medicaid coverage. For example, an individual who has irregular 
hours or works overtime, multiple part-time jobs, may experience monthly changes in income. 
Also, some people who remain eligible may face barriers to maintaining coverage like the 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. renewal processes and periodic eligibility checks. The temporary loss of Medicaid coverage in 
which enrollees disenroll and then re-enroll within a brief period (“churn”) can result in limited 
access to care and lead to delays in getting care. Enrollees who experience fluctuations in 
coverage are more likely to report difficulties in getting medical care and are more likely to end 
up in the hospital in a preventable condition – contributing to high administrative costs. 
 
In response to the end of continuous coverage, many states have or plan to implement 
continuous coverage legislation for children like what this bill proposes. Oregon will become 
the first state to allow children who qualify for Medicaid to enroll at birth and stay enrolled until 
they turn 6, regardless of changes in their household's income and without having to reapply. 
Washington, New Mexico, and California are proposing measures to provide continuous 
coverage to children as well.  
 
Once enrolled in Medicaid or CHIP, it is critical that children stay covered without gaps. Even a 
short gap can result in a child missing needed care. The MMA thanks Representative Madigan 
for introducing this bill and thanks the committee for considering our comments. Please reach 
out with any questions. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mikenzie Dwyer 
 
Contact: 
mdwyer@mainemed.com 
 
 
 
 
 
Helpful Resources 
 
https://ccf.georgetown.edu/2022/05/24/more-states-move-to-expand-continuous-eligibility-for-
children-and-adults-in-medicaid/ 
 
https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/Section-1115-
Demonstration-Budget-Neutrality.pdf 
 
https://oregoncapitalchronicle.com/2022/09/29/under-federal-1-billion-agreement-
oregon-will-expand-medicaid-coverage/ 
 
 
 
 
