' 
Mailing PO Box 437 
M a I n € E ® n F Street: 1Weston Court Suite 103
5 
I I Augusta ME 04332 
¢ Y mecep org E onomrc olrc 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Grohoski and Perry, and all members of the Taxation Committee: 
My name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am 
testifying in opposition to LD 971, “An Act to Establish the Income Tax Relief Fund for Maine 
Residents, ” because it would make Maine’s tax code less fair, fail to provide meaningful 
financial support to the people who need it, and potentially imperil the state government ’s ability 
to maintain the services upon which all Mainers rely. 
The personal income tax is one of the most progressive elements of Maine’s otherwise 
regressive tax code.‘ Across-the-board personal income tax cuts such as the ones laid out in LD 
971 would oven/vhelmingly benefit wealthy taxpayers while shifting more of the costs of 
operating the state government on Mainers with low and moderate incomes. 
Income tax cuts also threaten the state’s ability to provide the services upon which we all rely 
while failing to significantly benefit Mainers with low and moderate incomes. By limiting the 
state’s ability to raise revenue, LD 971 would make it more difficult to make the kinds of 
investments we have seen in the past few years, such as expanding MaineCare, providing free 
community college, or supporting the child care industry. It would also make it more difficult to 
meet the pressing needs of Mainers as they arise, like addressing the affordable housing crisis 
that threatens the wellbeing of Maine families and the entire economy? 
These kinds of investments in public health and prosperity make our economy stronger and 
fairer, especially because of the stability they provide to Mainers with low incomes. These same 
Mainers would receive little to no benefit from the income tax cuts included in LD 971. For 
example, older Mainers living on small, fixed incomes in retirement and Mainers who do not file 
income taxes would likely not receive any tax reductions from cuts to the personal income tax. 
Because of LD 971's failure to financially support Mainers or make the state economy stronger, 
I urge this committee to vote no on LD 971. 
1 
Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, "Maine: Who Pays? 6"‘ Edition." https1//itep.org/whopays/maine/ 
2 
Courier-Gazette, "State Economist sees challenges from inflation, housing crisis, work force shortage." 
https://knox.vilIagesoup.com/news/state-economist-sees-challenges~from-inflation-housing-crisis-work-force- 
§h.Qrtes@/sr!i.¢l.@J943§799-2355-591¢<b39%:7,d23a1?%s4§¢ihctmlc 77 . . ' 7 , ' 
Board of Directors 
7 7 7 1 
Lee l/l7e'bb,7f>l1'.l§.,'tZh ’a’ ir if if V " 7 H” Ti gm‘ .-7.; s1i£i1§r ’ 7 
’SthacyW l\/lifchiellr W T 
Barbara Burt, Vice-chair l\/laulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lucy Van Hook 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica l\/laurel"
