' Mailing PO Box 437 
M a I n € Q e n r fQ|" Street: 1Weston Court Suite 103 
I I Augusta ME 04332 
I 
y mecep Ofg Economic Pollc 
Testimony Regarding income Tax Bills Before the Committee on Taxation 
l\/larch 23, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
l\/iaura Pillsbury and i am an analyst at the Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am here today 
to testify: 
o in support of LD 667, An Act to impose a Tax Surcharge on Certain Incomes, sponsored 
by Rep. Benjamin Collings 
o in support of LD 843, An Act to improve income Tax Progressivity by Establishing a New 
Top Individual income Tax Rate, sponsored by Rep. Laurie Osher 
o in opposition to LD 835, An Act to Phase Out the income Tax, sponsored by Rep. David 
Boyer 
o in opposition to LD 971, An Act to Establish the income Tax Relief Fund for l\/laine 
Residents, sponsored by Rep. Micky Carmichael 
income taxes allow the state to provide important programs and services that Mainers depend 
on, including education, health care, and infrastructure. The income tax is also the fairest way 
to raise revenue to pay for the things we all need because those with greater ability to pay are 
responsible for paying more. The income tax also helps to balance out the sales and property 
tax which asks more of those with the least ability to pay. Both Rep. Osher and Rep. Collings ’ 
bills would help make our income tax structure fairer by increasing the share of income taxes 
paid by those with the ability to pay. 
Rep. Collings ’ bill would create a surcharge of 3 percent on income over $1 million and6 
percent on income over $10 million, putting the funds toward k-12 education and rural 
economic development. According to analysis we obtained from the institute on Taxation and 
Education Policy, this would increase taxes for the top .2 percent of income earners in l\/laine, 
those with more than $1 million in income, by an average of about $60,000. ITEP estimated 
this surcharge would bring in an additional $99 million in revenue each year. 
Rep. Osher's bill would create a new top income tax rate of i l .15 percent on income over 
$1 25,000 for individuals and $250,000 for married couples. This new rate raises the existing 
top tax rate by 4 percentage points, up from 7.15 percent. 
Rep. Boyer’s bill would phase out the individual and corporate income tax over a period of5 
years, beginning in 2024, decreasing taxes by 20 percent each year, and requires the state 
budget to be reduced by an equivalent amount to this tax loss. This would cause a huge 
general fund loss, cutting available revenue approximately in half. In 2024 and 2025, state 
individual and corporate income tax revenue is estimated to total over $5.6 billion (December 
. .. . .. ....’_..-. .. . . . .. . 
Béééd 6% Dikegtorsh. .. .- . . W . 7'/\> . . . . , . 
1a1r,..+*;*;;.i;;,"&iaa+ ”Santii'a ’l5utler Z Z E ' H 
sYa’E§/Mivilikrielii 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair Maulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica lvlaurer
I 
2022 Revenue Forecast). This loss of this tax revenue would be devastating to Maines ability to 
pay for priorities like funding 55 percent of education, municipal revenue sharing, and 
MaineCare expansion. 
l am also sharing testimony on Rep. Carmichael ’s bill from my colleaguejosie Phillips. This bill 
would automatically put revenue that exceeds the funding cap into a new fund to lower 
income tax rates, using one-time revenues to make permanent cuts to state revenues. Under 
current Maine law, if there is revenue over the funding cap it would go into the stabilization 
fund and the highway fund. This bill would divert valuable funds from state programs. A similar 
law in Colorado has had devastating impacts on the state's ability to fund sen/ices and 
education. ‘ 
l\/laine has huge unmet needs for affordable housing, opioid treatment, behavioral health 
services, and the list goes on. Cutting income taxes will harm the well-being of Maine’s people 
and the ability to address these crises and fulfill the commitments the legislature has made to 
the people of Maine. Cutting or eliminating income taxes would shift more taxes to Mainers 
with lower incomes and homeowners. Further, past income tax cuts in Maine have not led to 
the economic impacts and growth that were hoped for. Following income tax cuts under the 
LePage administration, l\/laine had slower growth in private sector GDP and slower private 
sector job growth than the US as a whole.“ 
Conversely, raising top income tax rates will allow us to fund important needs and priorities. 
Under our current tax code, millionaires pay the same income tax rates as middle-class 
families. We urge you to make |\/laine ’s tax code fairer by increasing taxes on top earners and 
rejecting proposals to remove or decrease income taxes on individuals and corporations. 
Thank you for your time. l would be happy to answer any questions. 
Contact information: mauia_@_iE@p.org 
' 
Lav, Iris J. and Erica Williams. ”A Formula for Decline: Lessons from Colorado for States Considering TABOR." 
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. 15 March 2010. 
ll 
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Big Cuts in State Income Taxes Not Yielding Promised Benefits. 18 Feb 
2021; and Maine Center for Economic Policy, "State tax and budget cuts don't boost economic activity and can 
cause harm." 18 Aug 2020.
2
