1TESTIMONY OF
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
Hearing Date: March 23, 2023
LD 971 – “An Act to Establish the Income Tax Relief Fund for Maine Residents”
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 971, “An Act to 
Establish the Income Tax Relief Fund for Maine Residents.”
This bill establishes the Income Tax Relief Fund for Maine Residents to be 
used to reduce individual income tax rates.  Previously the State had the Tax Relief 
Fund for Maine Residents to provide income tax relief by gradually reducing 
Maine individual income tax rates to 4% as funds were available to pay for the 
reduction.  However, the required funding was never achieved and, in 2019, the 
fund was converted to the Property Tax Relief Fund for Maine residents to instead 
provide property tax relief payments to Maine residents.  In 2021, the fund was 
repealed.
A key criticism of both this proposal and the previous Tax Relief Fund for 
Maine Residents is that the funds could trigger ongoing tax reductions based on 
one-time revenue events.  The Administration instead recommends that tax rate 
reductions be decided in a context where revenue reductions can be balanced 
against the revenue needs of the State.  
2The Administration notes the following technical concerns:
The bill should be coordinated with the annual inflation adjustment 
required by 36 M.R.S. § 5403(1).
The bill should provide a rounding convention to be applied in 
calculating the rate reduction. 
The bill does not specify a minimum individual income tax rate.   
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is not available at this time.  The 
estimated administrative costs are nominal and can be absorbed by the Bureau.
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.
