mepca.org  State of Maine | 13 1st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association 
February 15, 202 3 
Supporting:  
LD 223, “Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Amend Its Rules 
Regarding Pharmacy Services ” 
Sponsored by Representative Zager  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services, I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at Maine Primary 
Care Association (MPCA). 
MPCA is a membership organization that inclu des all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers 
(CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the 
largest  independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary 
and preventive med ical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  
Mainers ) at more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
MPCA is supportive of this legislation  because  providing access to pharmacy services and affordable 
medications is a key component in Community H ealth Centers’ comprehensive care model. We 
encourage the Committee to ensure that these services are available to CHCs  in the final legislation . 
Our team would be happy to work with Committee and staff prior to and during the work 
session.  
As our health system continues to be impacted  by provider shortages , making pharmacist 
telehealth appointments and home visits reimbursable will have an immediate benefit. As an 
example,  Penobscot Community Health C are, a larger CHC with an  in-house pharmacy, currently 
utilizes a collaborative care model that  brings pharmaci sts and clinicians together to directly benefit 
patients. In this model, pharmacists frequently communicate with the full care team, meet daily 
with patients to provide education, and regularly review medication plans. 
Unfortunately, l ack of reimbursement  has been an inhibiting factor for  CHCs  that want to fully 
utilize the potential of pharmacists in their care team approach.1 This bill would help alleviate that 
barrier and allow for more patients to access the care they deserve. 
On behalf of Maine’s Co mmunity Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please 
do not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager, MPCA  
1 Pharmacists in Federally Qualified Health Centers: Models of Care to Improve Chronic Disease  
