ﬁil? ‘£DRi@$€@5GEN 
Heme Heaitlftcare 
Z g + Hospice 
Testimony in Support of 
LD 223, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Amend its Rules Regarding Pharmacy Services 
February 15, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Sen/ices, my name is Kenneth Albert, and l am a resident of Lewiston. I serve as the President 
and Chief Executive Officer of Androscoggin Home Healthcare & Hospice. We navigate health care at 
home and in the community for nearly 4000 patients per day across Maine. We do so with a team of 
physicians, nurse practitioner, registered nurses, physical and occupational therapists, speech language 
pathologists, social workers and certified nursing assistants. l also have the privilege of serving as the 
Chairman of the Board of Directors for the National Association for Home Care & Hospice located in 
Washington D.C., which represents America's thirty-three thousand home health and hospice providers. 
I'm here today to testify in support of LD 223, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human 
Services to Amend Its Rules Regarding Pharmacy Services. l wish to thank Rep. Zager for sponsoring this 
important bill.' 
Home health care is absolutely integral to the health care delivery system in Maine and the United 
States. Since the inception of the home health benefit under Medicare in 1965 (Social Security Act), the 
partnerships have expanded to a point of undeniable integration and symbiosis between the home 
health sector and others, including primary and specialty medical care, acute hospital care, and facility 
based care. Health care at home provides safe transitions to home from hospital and skilled nursing 
facility admission. Further, we partner with every primary care provider in Maine to help manage our 
collective patients in the community. 
What i want to make dear today is that our experience as providers of Etealitit care at heme and 
research on integration of pharmacist consultation in the pians of care are aligned. ‘ 
1. Primary outcome: Medication reconciliation programs have a direct impact on reducing itaspirai 
readmission rates within the 30-days post-discharge. 
2. Secondary outcomes: 
a. Reducing overali heaithcare costs; 
b. Reducing the number of hospital and ED visits; 
c. Reducing medication errors and adverse drug event; and 
d. improving patients ’ quaiity of Ede. 
Being discharged from the hospital can be dangerous. A classic study found that nearly 20% of patients 
experience adverse events within 3 weeks of discharge, nearly three-quarters of which could have been 
1 
http://www.ichpnet.org/keeposted/article/44/O8/educational_affairs_lmpact __of
y = 
+ Hospice 
prevented or ameliorated? Adverse drug events are the most common post-discharge complication. 
Nearly 20% of Medicare patients are rehospitalized within 30 days of discharge? ‘ Sixteen percent (16%) 
of readmissions are medication-related, of which 40% are potentially preventable. “ Minimizing post- 
discharge adverse events has become a priority for the US health care system - and for very good 
reason. Anonoscoeein 
Z Home Healthcare 
Research is also clear that medication review by a pharmacist in combination with medication 
reconciliation, patient education, professional education and transitional care, is associated with a lower 
risk of hospital readmissions compared to usual care.5 This is especially true for patients with 
polypharmacy. 
l am privileged to conduct home health appointments with members of my team periodically. 
Medication reconciliation is always part of the initial appointment. Doing so involves visualizing every 
single medication prescribed for the patient from multiple prescribing providers over months if not 
years. Then we compare and contrast with the medications the patient believes they should be taking. 
To do this we gather all the medications kept underneath beds; kitchen cabinets; bathroom closets; 
living room end-tables and other favorite storage places. You can imagine that all too frequently there is 
lack of alignment between what has been prescribed and what is being taken. Worse yet, and by no 
fault of anyone in particular, there is lack of comprehensive awareness among and between the 
prescribing providers regarding the accuracy of medication regimens.i 
We do this far more effectively within the hospice benefit, where hospice providers have professional 
relationships with consulting pharmacists. Pharmacist are employed by hospice providers in some 
situations, but Androscoggin, as an example, contracts with a large pharmacy provider to work with our 
medical and nursing teams. This service is employed for all of our patients, including MaineCare 
beneficiaries. The result is a well-managed pharmaceutical plan to address illnesses and symptoms that 
are both related and unrelated to the terminal diagnosis. My point: we know it works. 
This bill directs the Department to provide reimbursement for the services ofa Maine-licensed 
pharmacist to provide medication evaluation or consultation. As l have described for you today, the 
research and the clinical evidence is clear: This is a prudent investment on many levels. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of this important legislation. I welcome any questions 
that you have.
0 
Kenneth Albert R.N., Esq. Androscoggin Home Healthcare & Hospice 
President & Chief Executive Officer ken.albert@androscoggin.org 
2 
https://psnet.ahrq.gov/issue/incidence-and-severity-adverse~events-affecting-patients-after-discharge-hospitaI 
3 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19339721 
4 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8077030/ 
5 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8247962/
