//"I W
D Home Care 
t§tHospice 
ALLIANCE OF MAINE 
Testimony in Supportof 
LD 223, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Board of Directors 
President 
Colleen Hilton 
Northern Light Home Care 
Vice President 
Daryl Cady 
Hospice of Southern Maine 
Treasurer 
RJ Gagnon 
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice 
Secretary 
Laurie Bourgoin 
Home Hope & Healing 
Members 
Ken Albert 
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice 
Patricia Aprile 
MaineHealth Care at Home 
Kyra Chamberlain 
Hospice of Southern Maine 
Elaine Collins 
Mainel-lealth Care at Home 
Chris Costello 
CHANS Home Health& Hospice 
Zetta Fogg 
McKesson Medical-Surgical 
Lisa Harvey-McPherson 
Northern Light Home Care & Hospice 
Adam Lalvlonica 
Maxim i-lealthcare Services 
Amy Mcvety 
Mount Desert Nursing Association 
Greg Pizzo 
MaineGeneral l~lomeCare & Hospice 
Amy Shawley 
St. Joseph Homecare and Hospice Amend its Rules Regarding Pharmacy Services 
February 15, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Laurie Belden, I ama 
resident of Durham and the Executive Director of the Home Care & Hospice 
Alliance of Maine (Alliance). The Alliance is a network of home health care, 
hospice, home care and personal care providers across our State delivering in- 
home care to older adults and disabled individuals of all ages, allowing them to 
stay in their home and community. 
l’m here today to testify in support of LD 223, Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Health and Human Services to Amend its Rules Regarding 
Pharmacy Services. l wish to thank Rep. Zager for sponsoring this important 
bill. 
This legislation will allow home care providers that provide services under 
MaineCare Sections 19, 40, and 96, and the State-funded Section 63 program, 
to contract with pharmacists for consultations and medication evaluations, 
either via telehealth or in person in the patient's home. 
Home care nurses often face a problem when they enter a patient's home to 
provide care — a medicine cabinet or basket on the counter filled with pill 
bottles, and an unclear picture of where all the medications come from, which 
ones are really needed, and which ones might be counter-indicated. Many 
patients would benefit from a pharmacist as part of their care team, and would 
experience better health outcomes if that pharmacist were allowed to conduct 
patient visits, either in the home or via telehealth. 
During the 130"‘ Legislature, this Committee unanimously supported a bill to 
make several improvements to home care services in Maine, including this 
home care pharmacy benefit. Unfortunately, the other portions of that bill led 
to a fiscal note that went unfunded, and therefore that bill ultimately died on 
adjournment in May 2022. 
(continued on other side) 
30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester, Maine O435l»0227 
Phi 207~213»6l25 I Fax: 207'213/6127 
WWw.HomeCareA]1iance.org
Members of our Alliance continue to report on the importance of having routine pharmacist 
consultations and medication evaluations —particularly for patients with complex 
polypharmacy -- to enhance the quality of care and safety for those receiving care in the home. 
So, we worked with Rep. Zager to reintroduce similar legislation this year, but with a singular 
focus — to direct the Department to provide reimbursement for the services of a Maine-licensed 
pharmacist to provide medication evaluation or consultation within home care sections of 
MaineCare. This bill allows the flexibility to provide this life-saving benefit by telehealth (when 
appropriate and effective) or otherwise during an in-home visit. 
We have had positive, transparent discussions with the Department regarding the intent of this 
bill and the relationship between high levels of polypharmacy and hospitalizations. Our 
understanding is that it would be possible to add this pharmacy consultation and evaluation 
service as a reimbursable service within the above-mentioned home care sections of 
MaineCare. 
Hospitals, nursing homes, and home-based care are like a 3-legged stool in the state's 
healthcare landscape. Caring for Mainers in the home is essential to relieving the stress on 
facilities by keeping patients out of acute and long-term care settings. One way to significantly 
reduce hospitalizations is to implement an effective pharmacist consultation and medicine 
evaluation as part of the patient's care plan for those receiving care in the home. 
We need your support in passing this legislation to help us serve Mainers who choose to 
receive care in the home. By properly managing their medications, we have a better chance of 
keeping them safe and out of the hospital or acute care facility. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of this important legislation to keep home 
care patients safe. 
Laurie Belden 
Executive Director 
Home Care & Hospice Alliance of Maine 
laurie@homecarealliance.org 
207/213-6125 (office) 
207/522-3743 (cell) 
30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester, Maine 04351~O227 
Ph: 207»213»6125 I Fax: 207/2l3»6127 
WwW.HomeCareA1]iance.org
