 
P.O. Box 261 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207-204-8800
February 15, 2023
Senator Joe Baldacci, Chair
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair
Members of the Health and Human Services Committee
RE: Testimony, LD 223 Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Amend Its Rules Regarding Pharmacy Services
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee:
My name is Matthew Marston, I am a resident of Hampden and the Legislative Liaison on the Maine 
Society of Health System Pharmacists Board of Directors. Today I am submitting testimony on 
behalf of the Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists, an organization that has more than 300 
members statewide and primarily represents individual Pharmacists, Technicians and students who 
practice in a health-system setting. I am testifying today in support of LD 223.
Pharmacists have long served as the medication experts in multidisciplinary care teams supporting 
the overall health and wellbeing of our communities in Maine.  Maine currently holds the ranking of 
having the eldest population in the nation as well having 61% of our population residing in rural 
areas.  Home Health providers enable our Maine residents to receive care for their complex medical 
conditions within their home when otherwise unable to travel to receive that care.  When provided 
with the time to spend with patients, pharmacists have repeatedly demonstrated their ability to 
provide targeted recommendations to patient’s physicians in how to eliminate unnecessary 
medications, combine medications into combination products, recommend less costly alternatives, 
and connect patients with resources to help them be more successful in managing their 
medications.  Blue Cross / Blue Shield of Minnesota realized a $12 savings in medication cost for 
every $1 spent on pharmacy telehealth services and we can do the same with our State Medicaid 
program by leveraging pharmacists as a resource.  
As we have learned throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, telehealth provides an effective 
framework to extend healthcare services beyond brick and mortar traditional settings of care to 
surround the needs of our patients.  LD 223 provides pharmacists with the ability to extend their 
expertise in medication management to our most vulnerable patient populations in the State and 
support our Home Health providers that are caring for patients within their home when obtaining 
this care in a pharmacy or in a medical practice is no longer practical.  We ask the committee to 
consider approving this important bill to help bring this needed support to those in our 
communities that are otherwise unable to travel to receive this level of care.
The Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists would be happy to work with the committee in 
any way we can on LD 223. Please reach out if we can be of service.
 
P.O. Box 261 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207-204-8800
Kind Regards,
Matthew Marston, PharmD, MBA, BCPS, BCOP
Legislative Liaison| Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists
Reference
Isetts, B. J., Schondelmeyer, S. W., Artz, M. B., Lenarz, L. A., Heaton, A. H., Wadd, W. B., Brown, L. M., et 
al. (2008). Clinical and economic outcomes of medication therapy management services: The Minnesota 
experience. Journal of the American Pharmacists Association, 48(2), 203-211. 
doi:10.1331/JAPhA.2008.07108
