1\/Iainel-Iealtla 
Testimony in Support of 
LD 223, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Amend Its Rules Regarding Pharmacy Services 
February 15, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is Sarah Sawyer and I serve as a Clinical Pharmacist, board certified in 
ambulatory care, for MaineHealth. I practice in the primary care setting and collaborate with providers and 
clinical teams in the Farmington and Livermore Falls area. I utilize telehealth modalities to conduct patient 
visits for complete medication reviews and reconciliation and chronic disease state management witha 
focus on diabetes and hypertension. 
l'm here today to testify in support of LD 223, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human 
Services to Amend Its Rules Regarding Pharmacy Services. I wish to thank Rep. Zager for sponsoring this 
important bill. 
0 MaineHealth Care at Home offers a full range of skilled healthcare sen/ices in a home setting. They 
integrate telehealth technology with expert clinical care to improve the health and independence 
of their patients. Their home health providers currently include nurses, rehabilitation therapists, 
social workers, nutritional counselors, and home health aides. This bill would allow reimbursement 
to expand this interdisciplinary team to include pharmacists, like myself. 
0 MaineHealth does have pharmacists as part of embedded and virtual care teams in multiple 
ambulatory settings including Primary Care, Oncology, Cardiology, Infectious Disease and 
Neurology. 
1 As a pharmacist in one of these settings, I review patient's health histories and perform medication 
reviews with the patient and caregiver to evaluate their regimen for appropriateness, safety, 
benefits, and risks. I then work with their primary care provider and specialists to make 
recommendations for medication optimization, which may include discontinuing a medication due 
to side-effects and offering medication alternatives that may be more effective, better tolerated or 
more cost-effective for the patient. 
0 During my time practicing as a pharmacist, I have seen that medication management can bea 
major health challenge for older patients and their families. Polypharmacy, defined as the 
simultaneous use of multiple drugs by a single patient, for one or more conditions, increases the 
risk of adverse drug reactions. Research has shown that patients taking five to nine medications 
have a 50% chance of an adverse drug interaction, increasing to 100% when they are taking 20 or 
more medications ‘ . In 2013 and 2014, it was estimated that the prevalence of emergency 
department visits for adverse drug events in the United States was 4 per 1000 individualsz . Pilot 
models have shown that patients with complex medication regimens, often taking 9 or more 
medications, are the most likely to benefit from pharmacist involvement in medication review and 
reconciliation to help avert these events. 
0 The Joint Commission, an independent, not-for-profit group in the United Sates that administers 
voluntary accreditation programs for hospitals and other healthcare organizations, even goes so far 
as to recommend involving pharmacists in medication reconciliation whenever possible. They note 
that pharmacist can play a major roll on interdisciplinary teams conducting medication 
interventions, especially during transitions of care, which improve medication safety and have 
positive impacts on hospital readmission rates3. 
I want to take a moment to share one recent patient interaction from my practice in rural Maine that 
highlights the benefit of having pharmacists as part of the healthcare team.
I recently met with a 57 year old patient, referred to me by her Primary Care Provider (PCP), for a full 
medication review and reconciliation after a hospitalization for a respiratory illness. During this video visit,I 
was able to assess her current treatments for DM, HTN, Hyper/ipidemia, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease (COPD) and behavioral health for drug interactions and timing of her medications. In reviewing her 
new antibiotic therapy, I was able to provide guidance and clarification surrounding confusing medication 
directions and the timing of her new antibiotic with an interacting medication she was taking at home. 
During our discussion, I learned that the inhaler she was prescribed at discharge was not covered by her 
insurance and she did not have the S 600 to purchase it. I was able to determine the insurance-covered, 
clinically appropriate alternative for this patient, coordinate a new inhaler prescription with her Primary 
Care Provider and review use of this new device with the patient. After this initial visit, the patient was 
excited to continue to meet with me to optimize her diabetes therapy. Under a pre-established collaborative 
practice agreement with her PCP, I was able to continue periodic follow-up with the patient though 
teleheaith visits and remote patient monitoring. We used shared decision making to titrate her diabetes 
medications and work toward her blood glucose goals. 
Scenarios like this underscore the important role pharmacists play to help resolve medication related 
problems that could lead to hospitalizations or readmissions. Without access to this necessary inhaler, 
this patient may have returned to the emergency department due to worsening symptoms and possibly 
been readmitted. 
Passing this legislation will help support work pharmacists are currently doing to provide these important 
services. Providing reimbursement for these services would support effo rts to expand pharmacist 
medication review and consultation to more patients in Maine, especially in rural, underserved areas. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support ofthis important legislation to keep patients safe. 
Name: Sarah Sawyer, PharmD, BCACP 
Title: Clinical Pharmacist- Primary Care Telehealth 
Organization: MaineHealth 
Email: Sarah.Sawyer@mainehealth.org 
Telephone: 207-661-2250 
1. Maher RL, Hanlon J, Hajjar ER. Clinical consequences of polypharmacy in elderly. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2014 
Jan;13(1):57-65. doi: 10.1517/14740338.2013.827660. Epub 2013 Sep 27. PMID: 24073682; PMCID: 
PMC3864987. . 
2. Shehab N, Lovegrove MC, Geller Al, Rose KO, Weidle NJ, Budnitz DS. US Emergency Department Visits for 
Outpatient Adverse Drug Events, 2013-2014. JAMA. 2016;316(20):2115 —2125.‘cloi:10.1001/jama.2016.16201. 
3. The Joint Commission, Division of Health Care Improvement. Quick Safety Issue 26: Transitions of Care: 
Managing medications (Updated April 2022).
