AMANDA E. BEAL 
COMMISSIONER  JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR  
STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRIC ULTURE , CONSERVATION & FORESTRY  
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER  
22 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE 04333  
 
 
 
 
 
 
HARLOW  BUILDING  PHONE : (207)  287-3200 
18 ELKINS LANE FAX: (207)  287-2400  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  WEB: WWW .MAINE .GOV/DACF  
  
     
March 2 8, 2023  
 
Senator Donna Bailey and Representative Anne Perry  
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 132, An Act to Require Health Insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for Blood 
Testing for Perfluoroal kyl and Polyfluor oalkyl Substances  
 
Dear  Senator Bailey and Representative Perry:  
 
My name is Beth Valentine and I am the Director of the Fund to Address PFAS Contamination.  I 
am writing on behalf of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry neither for nor 
against LD 132, An Act to Require Health Insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for Blood 
Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Subst ances . 
 
This bill requires carriers offering health plans in Maine to provide coverage for blood testing for 
perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances.  
 
The Fund to Address PFAS Contamination (“PFAS Fund”) was established in April 2022 (7 
MRSA chapter 10 -D). The permitted uses of the PFAS Fund include but are not limited to  
“[m]onitoring the health of a person, and member of that person’s household, whose agricultural 
land is found to be contaminated by PFAS ” and “[ p]roviding medical care to a p erson found to 
have blood levels of PFAS greater than the general populatio n or health effects associated with 
exposure to PFAS.”  
 
The law establishing the PFAS Fund created an Advisory Committee to make recommendations 
to the Department regarding the adm inistration of the PFAS Fund  to assist farmers impac ted by 
PFAS contamination . In turn, the Advisory Committee has established working groups to 
examine  core priority areas. Beginning in January 2023, t he Health Subcommittee has been 
working to develop, analyze, and recommend strategies for the provision of blood testing, 
medical monitoring, and mental health support in the short - and long -term for individuals whose 
drinking water or agricultural land is found to be contaminat ed by PFAS.   
 
The Maine Department of Environmental Protection is in the process of sampling water and soil 
at over 1,000 sites around the State where records indicate that biosolids were spread  over the 
 
 
past four decades . As of December 2022, DEP had samp led approximately 214 sites and taken 
groundwater samples at 1,525 residences.1 Of those residences, 23 percent had results exceeding 
Maine’s interim drinking water standard of 20 ppt of a sum of six PFAS compounds. That is, the 
water serving about 350 ho mes is not considered safe to drink.  DEP provides these homes with 
water filtration systems.   
 
Additionally, all community public water systems and non -transient, non -community schools 
and daycares in Maine are required to sam ple finished drinking water for PFAS. Sampling data is 
available on the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention’s website: Maine DWP - 
PFAS in Pub lic Water Systems . Analysis by a member of the PFAS Fund’s Health 
Subcommittee indicates that there are 6,000 students enrolled in schools with water systems that 
exceed the 20 ppt threshold .2  
 
In sum, ongoing sampling  may reveal a sign ificant number of people for whom it would be 
advisable to have their blood serum levels of PFAS checked. The PFAS Fund is working with 
Maine CDC to establish a system  to provide blood testing primarily to impacted farmers .  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
Beth Valentine, Director  
Fund to Address PF AS Contamination  
 
1 Each site  typically  includes multiple fields (i.e., agricultural land, pasture, or other land) and may also cross 
district, town, and county boundaries. DEP, Status of Maine’s PFAS Soil and Groundwater Investigation at Sludge 
and Septage Land and Application Sites ( Jan. 15, 2023 ), at 5, 24.  
2 Furthermore, other segments of the population, including firefighters and  current and former  members of the 
military, may be subject to PFAS through their occupations.  

