Testimony of Abby Fleisch, MD, MPH
In Support of LD132—
An Act to Require Health Insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for Blood 
Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances
March 28, 2023
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services. My name is Abby Fleisch –I am a pediatric 
endocrinologist. I live and practice in Portland, Maine, and I lead research on health effects of 
PFAS. I currently hold a grant from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences to 
study the role of PFAS exposure on fat and bone accumulation. I also follow patients in my 
clinic for high PFAS exposure.
I am here to testify “in support of” LD132. You have already heard about the many residents in 
central Maine exposed to PFAS and that many of these residents cannot afford a PFAS blood 
test. During this testimony, I want to tell you more about the research on PFAS-related health 
effects and why a blood PFAS test is important to guide long-term medical monitoring of 
Mainers exposed to PFAS.
Health Effects of PFAS Exposure 
In my research, we have used data from the Diabetes Prevention Program. This was a large study 
of about 1000 adults at risk for diabetes who were followed over 15 years. Adults with higher 
PFAS levels at the beginning of the study had greater weight gain,1 risk of diabetes,2 and risk 
of high cholesterol. 3
I also study health effects of PFAS exposures in the longitudinal Project Viva study of 1000 
mother/child pairs. Mothers in Project Viva with higher PFAS concentrations during pregnancy 
had infants with lower birth weight.4 Children in Project Viva with higher PFAS concentrations 
had adverse changes in body composition.5,6
Other researchers have consistently found higher PFAS concentrations to be associated 
with higher cholesterol, elevated liver markers, abnormal thyroid function, and increased 
risk for testicular and kidney cancer.7,8 
Long-term Medical Monitoring
Exposed Mainers need a PFAS blood test to guide medical monitoring. 
Evidence-based guidance from the National Academies of Sciences recommends8: 
--Extra testing for high cholesterol, thyroid dysfunction, and kidney cancer if the PFAS level is 
above a certain threshold. 
--Following PFAS levels over time to ensure adequate exposure reduction.
Also, knowing the pattern of PFAS elevation and comparing the pattern of PFAS in the blood to 
the pattern in the well water can help to identify sources of PFAS exposure to guide exposure 
reduction advice. 
Summary
I am in support of LD132 because research suggests that exposures to PFAS have potential to 
impact human health, and a PFAS blood test is critical to ensure appropriate medical monitoring 
of exposed individuals. I believe that all Mainers exposed to PFAS, even those who cannot 
afford it, deserve the option to monitor their blood PFAS levels.
1. Cardenas A, Hauser R, Gold DR, Kleinman KP, Hivert M-F, Fleisch AF, Lin PD, Calafat AM, Webster TF, Horton ES, 
Oken E. Association of perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances with adiposity. JAMA Netw Open 2018; 
1(4):e181493. 
2. Cardenas A, Hivert MF, Gold DR, Hauser R, Kleinman KP, Lin PD, Fleisch AF, Calafat AM, Ye X, Webster TF, Horton 
ES, Oken E. Associations of Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances With Incident Diabetes and Microvascular 
Disease. Diabetes Care. 2019; 42(9):1824-1832.
3. Lin Pi-I D, Cardenas A, Hauser R, Gold DR, Kleinman KP, Hivert M-F, Fleisch AF, Calafat AM, Webster TF, Horton ES, 
Oken E. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and blood lipid levels in pre-diabetic adults—longitudinal analysis of the 
diabetes prevention program outcomes study. Environ Int 2019; 129: 343-353. 
4. Sagiv SK, Rifas-Shiman SL, Fleisch AF, Webster TF, Calafat AM, Ye X, Gillman MW, Oken E. Pregnancy 
pharmacokinetics do not confound associations of early pregnancy perfluoroalkyl substance concentrations with fetal and 
infant growth in Project Viva. Am J Epidemiology 2018; 187(4):793-802. PMCID: 5884712. 
5. Janis J, Rifas-Shiman S, Seshasayee S, Sagiv S, Calafat A, Rosen C, Oken E, Fleisch AF. Plasma concentrations of per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances and body composition from mid-childhood to early adolescence. Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology and Metabolism. 2021; 106(9):e3760-e3770.
6. Cluett R, Seshasayee SM, Rokoff LB, Rifas-Shiman SL, Ye X, Calafat AM, Gold DR, Coull B, Gordon CM, Rosen CJ, 
Oken E, Sagiv SK, Fleisch AF. Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substance Plasma Concentrations and Bone Mineral Density in 
Mid-Childhood: A Cross-Sectional Study (Project Viva, USA). Environ Health Perspect 2019; 127(8):87006. 
7. US Department of Health and Human Services; Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Toxicological Profile 
for Perfluoroalkyls. Published online May 2021. Accessed 3/2023. https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp200.pdf
8. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-
Up [Internet]. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2022. Accessed 3/2023. https://doi.org/10.17226/26156.
