Good Morning Members of the Judiciary Committee,
My name is Ashley Reny and I live at 25 Howe Rd in Fairfield with my husband Troy 
Reny. We are members of the community group Fairfield Water Concerned Citizens, and I am 
writing this to testify in support of LD 132. We bought our first home on six beautiful acres of 
open fields with breathtaking views, just a little over 3 years ago. When we bought our home 
we thought it was the dream home we had been longing for our entire lives. This was going to 
be the property that we get married on, grow luscious gardens on, host lots of family gatherings 
at, and maybe even start a family. All that quickly started to change when we got a call in 
November 2020, just about a year after we bought our home stating that the DEP needed to 
come out and test our water for what is known as the “forever chemicals”. After the call, we 
tried to stay positive and hopeful that this was not happening to us. We just didn’t want this to 
be true about our new home. A few weeks after our well was tested we got the call from Molly 
from the DEP stating that she wanted to personally call us to tell us to stop drinking our water, 
that combined our numbers were over 20,000ppt. Keep in mind that the state says the “safe” 
limit at the time was 70ppt but is now 20ppt. This was the most devastating news that we could 
get as first time homeowners. We should be enjoying our beautiful new home, not worrying 
about how bad our water is contaminated, if it is actually hurting us health wise to live in this 
home, and if our property is now worth what it was when we bought it. The whole first year 
that we were using this contaminated water to prepare our food, cook with, drink, give our 
animals, shower/soak in our hot tub in, water our gardens with, our little loved ones running 
through the sprinklers, and we were unknowingly poisoning ourselves. That is just 
contamination through the water; that is not including the contamination that is in our soil, 
dust, and air due to the spreading of this sludge as well. Let me tell you, it’s hard to enjoy a hot 
shower, or a cold cup of water or even my new beautiful house knowing it could be killing us.
We are asking you to pass the bill LD 132 out of committee with a recommendation that 
it be passed by the legislature. The bill would be helpful to the people who have been exposed 
to these forever chemicals and help give us a piece of mind knowing that we have an affordable 
way to keep an eye on our health. The cost burden to get our blood levels checked is worrisome 
to many. The test costs $600 dollars out of pocket for anyone who wants to get their levels 
checked. People should not have to worry that they cannot pay their bills or put food on their 
tables for their families in order to pay to have their health checked, especially ones living on 
land that is contaminated or that have well water with over 20,000ppt. Living on this land is 
scary enough for the people, let alone not knowing how they can afford to live plus try to take 
care of their health. This blood work should be done every year and to know that we have to 
pay this out of pocket is very stressful. It is also very stressful living with the worry of health 
issues due to this. I get my blood drawn every year for PFAS plus routine blood work and have 
recently found out that my cholesterol levels are high and that my kidney functions are low. 
These are new diagnosis for me since I have lived on this land. The scare of these diagnosis is 
enough but then to know that they are going to require more money to keep testing to make 
sure it is not getting worse adds so much more stress. To know that my insurance will cover the 
cost of these tests would be a huge relief not only financially but mentally as well. It would ease 
my mind to know that I have help from my insurance company to watch my health and not feel 
like I have to choose to pay bills over being able to keep an eye on my health.  
Ashley Reny
Fairfield
LD 132
Good Morning Members of the Judiciary Committee,
My name is Ashley Reny and I live at 25 Howe Rd in Fairfield with my husband Troy Reny. 
We are members of the community group Fairfield Water Concerned Citizens, and I am 
writing this to testify in support of LD 132. We bought our first home on six beautiful acres of 
open fields with breathtaking views, just a little over 3 years ago. When we bought our home, 
we thought it was the dream home we had been longing for our entire lives. This was going to
be the property that we get married on, grow luscious gardens on, host lots of family 
gatherings at, and maybe even start a family. All that quickly started to change when we got a
call in November 2020, just about a year after we bought our home stating that the DEP 
needed to come out and test our water for what is known as the “forever chemicals”. After the
call, we tried to stay positive and hopeful that this was not happening to us. We just didn’t 
want this to be true about our new home. A few weeks after our well was tested, we got the 
call from Molly from the DEP stating that she wanted to personally call us to tell us to stop 
drinking our water, that combined our numbers were over 20,000ppt. Keep in mind that the 
state says the “safe” limit at the time was 70ppt but is now 20ppt. This was the most 
devastating news that we could get as first-time homeowners. We should be enjoying our 
beautiful new home, not worrying about how bad our water is contaminated, if it is actually 
hurting us health wise to live in this home, and if our property is now worth what it was when 
we bought it. The whole first year that we were using this contaminated water to prepare our 
food, cook with, drink, give our animals, shower/soak in our hot tub in, water our gardens 
with, our little loved ones running through the sprinklers, and we were unknowingly poisoning 
ourselves. That is just contamination through the water; that is not including the 
contamination that is in our soil, dust, and air due to the spreading of this sludge as well. Let 
me tell you, it’s hard to enjoy a hot shower, or a cold cup of water or even my new beautiful 
house knowing it could be killing us.
We are asking you to pass the bill LD 132 out of committee with a recommendation that it be 
passed by the legislature. The bill would be helpful to the people who have been exposed to 
these forever chemicals and help give us a piece of mind knowing that we have an affordable 
way to keep an eye on our health. The cost burden to get our blood levels checked is 
worrisome to many. The test costs $600 dollars out of pocket for anyone who wants to get 
their levels checked. People should not have to worry that they cannot pay their bills or put 
food on their tables for their families in order to pay to have their health checked, especially 
ones living on land that is contaminated or that have well water with over 20,000ppt. Living on
this land is scary enough for the people, let alone not knowing how they can afford to live plus
try to take care of their health. This blood work should be done every year and to know that 
we have to pay this out of pocket is very stressful. It is also very stressful living with the worry 
of health issues due to this. I get my blood drawn every year for PFAS plus routine blood 
work and have recently found out that my cholesterol levels are high and that my kidney 
functions are low. These are new diagnosis for me since I have lived on this land. The scare 
of these diagnosis is enough but then to know that they are going to require more money to 
keep testing to make sure it is not getting worse adds so much more stress. To know that my 
insurance will cover the cost of these tests would be a huge relief not only financially but 
mentally as well. It would ease my mind to know that I have help from my insurance company
to watch my health and not feel like I have to choose to pay bills over being able to keep an 
eye on my health.  

