March 28"‘ , 2023. Testimony from Christina Heiniger, resident of 
Trenton, Maine and spokesperson for PFAS Free Trenton on LD 
132 - An Act to Require Health Insurance Carriers to 
Provide Coverage for Blood Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
Sponsored by Senator Stacy Brenner 
My name is Christina Heiniger and l live in Trenton, Maine. 
In preparing this testimony, l was a bit overwhelmed- where to start? 
This pfas crisis brings up so many societal issues (our very broken 
healthcare and health insurance system, the dysfunction of our 
consumer culture and how we deal with our solid waste and sewage, 
the fact that the EPA and Maine DEP turned a blind eye to these 
chemicals for decades. . .), and this bill is just a drop in the bucket. But 
many drops can fill the bucket with solutions that work and we need 
to work together on this. ln case you live under a rock and haven’t 
heard about pfas... 
~ Toxic per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) or “forever chemicals ” 
are used in thousands of everyday products and manufacturing 
processes. PFAS accumulate in our wastewater and can contaminate the 
land and groundwater when sludge is applied to farmland. 
For over two years, l have been involved with a few other residents in 
Trenton working to address the pfas issue in our town. We created a 
group called Pfas Free Trenton. Pfas Free Trenton (PFT) isa 
group of Trenton residents who want to ensure clean PFAS-free 
water in our town now and for future generations. Before l talk about 
that, I want to say that my heart goes out to the folks in Fairiield, 
Thorndike and all the other communities in our State that have been 
severely contaminated with pfas chemicals through the spreading of 
sludge on agricultural fields. 
Through no fault of their own, following practices and guidelines 
endorsed by the Dept of Environmental Protection, these people are 
now having to deal with the harsh reality that they have been 
poisoned, perhaps for decades, by these chemicals linked to low 
birthweight, cholesterol issues, kidney cancer, decreased immune 
(Page1)
response, breast cancer, hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, 
elevated liver enzymes, testicular cancer, thyroid dysfunction, and 
ulcerative colitis. These chemicals are called “Forever chemicals “ 
because they are difficult to detox (at best) and they don’t break 
down. They can linger in people’s bodies for decades. These 
Mainer’s livelihoods, health and peace of mind have been severely 
affected by this. ls it too much to ask that they can count on havinga 
basic blood test paid for by their health insurance to monitor these 
chemicals in their bodies and help them make health choices and get 
treatments they may need down the road?! $450 - $600 for this test is 
a lot to come up with when your farm has been ruined and your 
livelihood taken away. 
' Treatment for PFAS exposure is centered around assessing the patient's level 
of exposure. High level exposure triggers regular screening to allow for early 
detection of linked diseases. There is no approved procedure to remove the 
chemicals from an exposed person's body, and the chemicals linger in the blood 
and organs for decades. The assessment of personal exposure can help impacted 
families understand the risks and prevent additional future exposure. (source: 
Defend Our Health) 
That being said pfas are being found all over our State. Where l live 
in Trenton- between Bar Harbor and Ellsworth- the levels of 6 types 
of pfas in the Trenton Elementary School’s water measured at 33.9 
ppt in 2017. This wasn’t remediated until 2021, when the new 
legislation here in Maine was passed creating interim standards for 
pfas in drinking water of 20 ppt for 6 types of PFAS. This means the 
Pre-K through grade 8 students there were drinking contaminated 
water for years... we don't really know how long, but we do know 
there was a gap of about 4 years between finding these chemicals 
and the school addressing the problem. 
Since then, Pfas Free Trenton has worked with the Town of Trenton 
and residents to offer free testing for pfas. We found (so far, but data 
is still coming in) of those 79 tests we have results for, 2 wells tested 
over the State of Maine “safe levels” of 20 ppt for a combined 6 types 
of PFAS. One tested at 21ppt and another tested at 38ppt. Another 
(Page2)
11 wells tested with some detectable levels of PFAS. These ranged 
from 2.06 ppt to 16.2 ppt. Thus, 13 wells total so far have show some 
PFAS contamination. That means 2.5% of the wells tested so far 
were over 2Oppt.16.5% of the wells tested showed PFAS 
contamination of any kind. Meanwhile, over on Mt.Desert Island, MDl 
High School found that their water is also contaminated with pfas. As 
a matter fo fact, Mount Desert island High School, Brooklin 
Elementary School and Deer isle-Stonington High School all had 
water test results showing PFAS chemicals much higher than the 
state of Maine drinking water standard of 20 pans per trillion. MDIHS 
had results of 85 parts per trillion. (Source: Mt Desert Islander, July 
20,2022) 
' At least 25 Maine schools and daycare facilities have water supplies above 
Maine's interim drinking water standard of 20 parts per trillion, suggesting that 
6,650 children and young adults currently enrolled at those schools have been 
exposed to high levels of PFAS while at school. There are 43 impacted schools 
and a total of 9550 children exposed above EPA's draft drinking water standards, 
which are lower than Maine's regulation. Maine DHHS is awaiting data on an 
additional 99 schools, and the number of exposed students is likely much higher. 
The total number of previously exposed alumni from these impacted schools 
would be hard to calculate. (source: Defend Our Health) 
l believe any parent in this State who knows their children were 
exposed to pfas on a regular basis has a right to have that blood test 
paid for by their health insurance. imagine a family with two or3 
children at one of these schools. 3 children at $600/test = $1800. We 
all know what it’s like out there economically right now. Mainers are 
reeling from the hit of Covid and massive inflation on groceries, rents 
and electricity (to name a few... my electric bill went up 35% last 
year). it’s crucial that health insurances cover this test, because the 
reality is that many of us just cannot afford to pay out of pocket for 
medical expenses like this. 
Lastly, Greg Askins, a physician who is a member fo PFAS Free 
Trenton, asked me to share this from an article ln the public health 
section of OctlNov/Dec 2022 issue of the quarterly newsletter from 
(Page3)
the Maine Medical Association. This is what doctors in Maine are 
being advised to recommend regarding serum testing for pfas: 
“ln July 2022, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
(NASEM) produced a report reviewing current evidence of health outcomes 
associated with PFAS and setting new standards for who to test for PFAS, when 
to discuss exposure reduction, and how to monitor those exposed. 
Serum testing for PFAS 
...The NASEM report recommends testing individuals who are “likely to havea 
history of elevated exposure." This includes individuals working with 
fluorochemicals, firefighters, or military personnel; those living in an area with 
elevated PFAS water levels; those consuming fish or game from an area with 
elevated PFAS levels; or those living in an area where PFAS contamination may 
have occurred, including near “facilities that use or have used fluorochemicals, 
commercial airports, military bases, wastewater treatment plants, farms where 
sewage sludge may have been used, or landfills or incinerators that have 
received PFAS-containing waste.” While MaineCare covers the cost of PFAS 
serum testing, not all insurances do, and for those paying out of pocket the cost 
is close to $600.” 
lf doctors are recommending this testing to their patients, then Health 
insurances should pay for it. The burden of this pfas crisis should not 
be borne by the public, from whom these chemicals were hidden for 
decades, with no government regulation. 
(Page4)
