Can exposure to PFAS cause 
health problems? 
~ Some scientific studies suggest that certain 
PFAS may affect different systems in the 
body. NCEH/ATSDR is working with various 
partners to better understand how exposure 
to PFAS might affect people’s health— 
especially how exposure to PFAS in water 
and food may be harmful. 
Q Some (but not all) PFAS build up in the body. 
The levels of some PFAS go down slowly 
over time once exposure stops. Scientists are 
studying how different amounts of PFAS in 
the body over time may affect health. l 
- Research involving humans suggests that 
high levels of certain PFAS may lead to 
the following: 
» Increased cholesterol levels 
» Changes in liver enzymes 
» Decreased vaccine response in children 
» Increased risk of high blood pressure 
or pre-eclampsia in pregnant women 
» Small decreases in infant birth weights 
» increased risk of kidney or testicular cancer 
If you have any of these conditions and 
have been exposed to PFAS, you can 
talk to your doctor. 
National Center 
for Environmental Health 
and Disease Registry Agency for Toxic Substances Should my family and I be tested for any of 
the health conditions possibly linked 
to PFAS exposure? 
~ Laboratory test results can't tell you if PFAS exposure 
has caused your health condition. 
~ Some of the health effects possibly linked to PFAS 
exposure, like high cholesterol, can be checked as 
part of your annual physical. lt is important to have 
regular check~ups and screenings. 
~ You can talk to your doctor about any exposure to 
PFAS and any symptoms you have. 
Should my family and I get a blood test for 
PFAS if we have been exposed to PFAS? 
~ PFAS blood test results can tell you the amount of PFAS 
in your blood. However, test results won't tell you how 
PFAS will affect your health now or in the future. 
~ Blood testing for PFAS is not a regular test offered by 
doctors or health departments. 
~ lf you want or need to know your PFAS blood levels, you 
can talk to 
» Your doctor or health care provider 
» Other health professionals (for example, for concerns 
about babies and children contact your regional 
Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit 
(PEHSU), http://wwwpehsu.net/findhelp.html 
' Remember that test results will only tell you and your 
health care provider if you have been exposed to PFAS. 
~ Keep in mind that most people in the United States have 
one or more specific PFAS in their blood, especially 
PFOS and PFOA. 
CS 325258~A 01/07/2022
Could exposure to PFAS in drinking water 
harm my health in the future? 
We don’t know if exposure to PFAS may cause health 
problems in the future. You can talk to your doctor if you 
have been exposed to PFAS and ask if you need to be 
monitored for symptoms or conditions that may be caused 
by PFAS exposure (see list in question #1) in the future. 
How will exposure to PFAS in drinking water 
affect my pregnancy? 
Exposure to PFAS in drinking water at levels above the 
EPA Lifetime Health Advisory has been associated with 
pregnancy-induced high blood pressure. This complication 
can include not only high blood pressure, but also signs of 
damage to other organ systems, most often the liver 
and kidneys. 
Talk to your doctor if you have been exposed to PFAS 
so that he/she can provide appropriate medical care. 
Checking for high blood pressure should be part of your 
routine prenatal care. it is important to go to all of your 
prenatal checkups and discuss with the doctor or nurse 
any health concerns. 
Can I breastfeed my baby if l’ve been exposed 
to PFAS in drinking water? 
Nursing mothers should continue to breastfeed. 
~ While we do not know a lot about the health effects of 
exposure to PFAS in breast milk, we do know that the 
benefits of breastfeeding are well documented. 
~ PFAS in a mother's body can move from her blood 
into her unborn child and from her breastmilk into her 
breastfed baby. However, based on current science, the 
benefits of breastfeeding appear to outweigh the risks for 
infants exposed to PFAS in breast milk. 
Breastfeeding is good for the health of both infants 
and mothers. 
Scientists continue to do research in this area. 
If you have concerns, talk to your doctor. 
For more information about PFAS and breastfeeding, 
please visit https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/pfas/health- 
effects/pfas-breastfeeding.html. 
For more information about the benefits of breastfeeding, 
please visit https://wwwwomenshealth.gov/ 
breastfeedinq/makinq —decision —breastfeed.7
