122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
        
Testimony of Maine Public Health A ssociation in Support of:  
LD 132: An Act to Require Health Insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for Blood Testing for 
Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Room 220, Cross State Office Building  
Tuesday , March 28, 2023 
 Good afternoon, Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services . My name is Denise Tepler . I am a resident of 
Topsham  and board member  of Maine Public Health Association. MPHA is  in support of LD 132: “An Act to 
Require Health Insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for Blood Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances.”  
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in M aine. We are not tied 
to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously.  The proposed bill would require all private health insurance carriers providing coverage in the state  of Maine to 
cover the costs of blood testing for perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) for their enrollees, 
starting January 1, 2024.  
 According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
1 PFAS are found in air, soil, surface water, and 
groundwater (including drinking water); food and food packaging; commercial household products; and some living organisms (where PFAS have accumulated over time). PFAS remain in the body for long periods of t ime 
(anywhere from months to years) after they have entered it. PFAS contamination has been identified in well -
water sources and farm fields across the state of Maine, putting those who rely on those resources at risk of 
hazardous chemical exposures .
2 
 
There is evidence from human and animal studies that PFAS exposure may reduce antibody responses to 
vaccines3,4 and infectious disease resistance,5 alter metabolism6 and fertility,7 reduce fetal growth and increase 
the risk of being overweight or obese.8 PFAS exposure has been associated with several chronic health 
problems , including increased cholesterol levels, liver  dysfunction, and increased risk of testicular and kidney 
cancer s.9 A recent review of the research literature explored the relationship between PFAS exposure and 
children’s health. Six associations with health were identified: early puberty onset, immunity/infection/asthma, thyroid and renal function, cardio- metaboli c measures, and neurodevelopmental/attention.
10 
 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  The National Academy of Sciences , Engineering, and Medicine recommends  PFAS blood serum tests for 
people who are likely to have a history of elevated exposure to PFAS , including communities with documented 
exposure, people living near farms where sludge may have been spread, people with an occupational exposure 
risk, including firefighters , and people living near landfills, incinerators, airports, and military bases.  
 Treatment for PFAS exposure starts with assessing patients ’ level of exposure , and if patients have elevated 
serum levels, th en continued health monitoring. There is no approved procedure to remove PFAS  chemicals 
from an exposed person’s body. However, t he assessment of personal exposure can help impacted patients  
understand the ir health  risks and take steps to prevent, or mitigate, future  adverse health effects , including 
dyslipidemia, thyroid dysfunction, and testicular cancer . 
 Currently, m any private Maine insurers leave patients to cover the full cost of the serum test unless the ir 
deductible has been reached. The approximately $600 per person cost of the serum test is currently preventing 
PFAS -impacted Mainers from assessing their exposure  and monitoring their  risk for other negative health 
impacts.  
  It is clear  PFAS exposure poses a risk to public health. As such, we support efforts to improve our 
understanding of  our own exposure and ability to minimize potential health risk s. We support the intention of 
this bill and believe it is  protective of public health. We respectfully request you vote  LD 132 “Ought to Pass.” 
Thank you.  
 
 
1U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2018. Basic information on PFAS . 
2Maine Department of Environmental Protection. 2019. Per - and Polyfluoroa lkyl Substances (PFAS) . 
3Grandjean P, Heilmann C, Weihe P, et al. 2017. Estimated exposures to perfluorinated compounds in infancy predict attenuated 
vaccine antibody concentrations at age 5 -years. J Immunotoxicol ,14(1):188‐195.  
4Looker C, Luster MI, Calafat AM, et al. 2014. Influ enza vaccine response in adults exposed to perfluorooctanoate and 
perfluorooctanesulfonate. Toxicol Sci .,138(1):76‐88.  
5National Toxicology Program. 2016. Monograph on im munotoxicity associated with exposure to perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and 
perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) . Research Triangle Park, NC: National Toxicology Program.  
6Liu G, Dhana K, Furtado JD, Rood J, Zong G, Liang L, Qi L, Bray GA, DeJonge L, Coull B, Grandjean P, Sun Q. 2018. 
Perfluoroalkyl substances and changes in body weight and resting metabolic rate in response to weight -loss diets: A prospective study. 
PLoS Med ,15(2):e1002502.  
7Bach CC, Vested A, Jorgensen K, Bo nde JP, Henriksen TB, Toft G. 2016. Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances and 
measures of human fertility: A systematic review. Crit Rev Toxicol ,46(9):735- 55. 
8Braun J. 2017. Early- life exposure to EDCs: Role in childhood obesity and neurodevelopme nt. Nat Rev Endocrinol ,13(3):161 –173. 
9Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. 2022. What are the health effects of PFAS?  
10Rappazzo KM, Coffman E & Hines EP. 2017. Exposure to perfluorinated alkyl substances and health outcomes in children: A 
systematic review of the epidemiologic literature. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(7):691.  
