1 
  
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT  
LD 132  
 
An Act to Require Health Insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage  
for Blood Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances  
Public Hearing  
March 28, 2023  
Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
Honorable Senator Bailey, Chair; Honorable Representative Perry, Chair; and Honorable 
Committee Members:  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony IN SUPPORT of LD 132 . My 
name is Jacquelyn Elliott and I live in Waterboro . I am a long -time environmental health 
and justice advocate  and a member of DWME (Don ’t Waste ME) a citizens’ group working 
for waste poli cy that gives communities local control, incorporates Zero Waste goals, 
and protects the health and environment of communities most impacted by waste 
facilities . That work began in my native New Hampshire as a response  to my  lived 
experience with  health challenges associated with toxic environmental impacts . 
DWME has  been following the evolving revelation of and response to PFAS 
conta mination of Maine ’s lands, waters, wildlife and human bodies . We have watched 
with heartbreak as families have faced the loss of farms, crops, livestock and livelihoods 
and are now confronting uncertain futures as they grapple with the knowledge their 
bodies an d the bodies of their children are likely poisoned with elevated blood serum 
levels of PFAS - forever toxic chemicals already linked to known adverse health outcomes. 
The future health effects are unknown and we must be honest about that. But we do 
know en ough to assume long -term adverse outcomes will present.  
The proper context for framing this discussion around LD 132 is to recognize that 
people are facing the prospect they could be fighting for their lives.  People affected by 
2 
 these excessive toxic PFAS exposures need the assurance they can seek the health 
monitoring and care that will be required  confident that the costs of that care will be met 
by insurance. Those without insurance must  also have ready entry into a system that 
provides the appropriate  monitoring and care and alleviates the associated costs. All 
those affected particularly merit this care as their precarious situation is not of their own 
making or culpability. Beyond what LD 132 initiates, we need to establish an on -going 
public health respons e for long -term monitoring and care that undertakes the needs of 
the people damaged by these exposures. Compensation should ultimately be sought from 
those who have knowingly produced and marketed these toxics to an unsuspecting 
public. Overall, we must meet the future with  a precau tionary and preventative approach 
and turn off the tap for introducing PFAS into the environment.  
We now realize these forever toxic chemicals are ubiquitous1 in our environment, 
our food supply, and our bodies. Some people have been extremely exposed to these 
chemicals. In many instances, already overburdened communities are bearing 
disproportionate impacts. Of noteworthy  concern are the many PFAS contaminated 
water supplies in our children’s schools knowing children are impacted at levels exceeding 
adults.  Like lead2, we now have knowledge there is likely no safe level of exposure for 
toxic PFAS chemicals. EPA’s3 recent proposed regulation for levels of six PFAS in drinking 
water represents a few of the thousands PFAS chemicals currently in use and underlines 
the seriousness of what we are facing. The dangers posed by PFAS have been known4 for 
 
1 Environmental Working Group, PFAS Chemicals the ‘forever chemicals in 99% of 
Americans , https://www.ewg.org/what -are-pfas -chemicals    
2 USEPA Basic Information About Lead in Drinking Water ,  https://www.epa.gov/ ground -
water -and-drinking -water/basic -information -about -lead -drinking -
water#:~:text=The%20MCLG%20for%20lead%20is%20zero.%20EPA%20has,exposures%
20can%20have%20impacts%20on%20lives%20and%20livelihoods  
3 USEPA, Biden -Harris Administration Proposes First -Ever National Standard to Protect 
Communities , https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/biden -harris -administration -
proposes -first-ever -national -standard -protect -communities  
4 Richter, Lauren, Cordner, Alissa, Brown, Phil; Producing Ignorance Through Regulatory 
Structure: The Case of Per - and Polyfl uoroalkyl Substances ( PFAS) , 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0731121420964827?icid=int.sj -
abstract.citing -articles.2  
3 
 decades by the producers of and profiteers from these toxics. Maine5 was warned more 
than two decades ago about the dangers from State -sanctioned sludge spreading on 
farmland. The emphasis then was on heavy metals and pathogens.  
LD 13 2 seeks to address harm and require that insurance companies cover the 
costs of testing to determine  the blood serum levels of PFAS in people who may have 
been significantly exposed. Health pra ctitioners6 are beginning to establish protocols for 
monitoring and treating patients whose blood serum levels indicate considerable 
exposure.  People at this increased risk need these tests to be included and compensate d 
as preventive health care so they can be appropriately observed and treated. This is 
critical information for health care providers and patients. LD 132 represents a small but 
vital accommodation for those so severely impacted.  
Thank you for considering  these  comments. DWME  asks the Committee vote 
OUGHT TO PASS  on LD 132.  
Jacquelyn Elliott , member DWME  
148 West Road  
Waterboro, ME 04087  
(207) 247 -0103  
j.c.elliott@roadtunner.com   
 
 
 
5 Parn ell, Harris K., October 2001, Toxic Sludge In Our Communities: Threatening Public 
Health and Our Farmlands,  https://communityactionworks.org/wp -
content/uploads/toxic -sludge -in-our-communities.pdf  
6 Raponiand, Isabella, Brownand,  Phil, Cordner, Alissa, June 29, 2021, Environmental 
Health News, Improved medical screening in PFAS -impacted communities to identify early 
disease,  https://www.ehn.org/pfas -testing -2653577444. html  
