 
 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against  
LD 132, An Act to Require Health Insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for Blood Testing for 
Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances  
Kimberly Cook, Esq.  
March 2 8, 2023  
 
Community Health Options is Maine’s  only nonprofit CO -OP health insurance company  and we 
are focused on providing affordable, high -quality  benefits that promote health and wellbeing.   
We appreciate the concerns behind this bill and recognize the serious impacts that PFAS 
contamination is having on our farmland, drinking water, and Maine people across our state.  
Community Health Options is following along as scientific and medical recommendations are 
evolving quickly regarding testing and screening for PFAS .   
As you have heard, The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine  issued a 
Consensus Study Report in 2022 entitled “ Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical 
Follow -Up”1 which  advised the Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry (ATSDR)  “to 
update its guidance to say, clinicians should offer PFAS blood testing to patients who are likely 
to have a history of elevated exposure to PFAS. ”   As you may also be aware, The Legislature 
established a PFAS Fund Advisory Committee last year which is co -chaired by Senator Brenner 
and Representative Fay and is currently  working hard to make a range of recommendations 
addressing PFAS contamination in our state.   Part of this work is being considered by the PFAS 
Fund Advisory Committee’s Health Subcommittee.  The Health Subcommittee will be making its 
recommendations, including recommendations about payments for PFAS blood testing, this 
spring and the full Adviso ry Committee will issue a report and plan likely this summer.   
Community Health Options already provides coverage for blood testing for PFAS .  This testing is 
covered in the same way that other diagnos tic lab services are provided and we do not subject 
this lab test to prior authorization or other clinical review.  The ICD -10 code for the PFAS blood 
test is the same as that used for screening for lead .  The code is Z13.88 (encounter for screening 
for disorder due to exposure to contaminants).  
 
Thank you fo r the opportunity to provide our comments.  
 
1 NASEM Consensus Study Report Highlights, 
https://nap.nationalacademies.org/resource/26156/PFAS%20Guidance%20Highlights.pdf   
