./\;\.»»\m/. pi 2 I < HEALTHCARE 
PURCHASER 
ALLIANCE 
OF MAINE 
Testimony of Peter Hayes 
to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
In Opposition to 
LD 132, An Act to Require Health Insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for Blood Testing for 
Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
March 28, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Hatch, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. 
My name is Peter Hayes and I'm the President and CEO of the Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine. 
The HPA is a nonprofit that represents the purchasers of healthcare in Maine. Our mission is to advance 
healthcare value and to support and incentivize high-quality, affordable care. We have over 60 
members, including some of the largest public and private employers and health trusts in Maine. 
Collectively, our members spend over a billion dollars annually providing health care for nearly one 
quarter of the commercially insured population in the state. 
I'm here today to testify in opposition to LD 132. I appreciate Senator Brenner's attention to the issue of 
PFAS in our communities, but I have some concerns with requiring commercial health plans to pay for 
such testing. PFAS testing is currently conducted as part of environment public health surveillance by 
the Centers for Disease Control and other health agencies. For the more than halfa million people in 
Maine covered by commercial insurance, this bill would supplement that community testing with 
individual testing to be paid for by Maine businesses and taxpayers. 
As I've previously testified before this committee, Maine employers are already struggling to afford 
healthcare coverage for their employees and families. In fact, Maine already has the highest individual 
deductibles in the country.1 This mandate would generate more costs that employers will have to 
absorb, whether through higher employee premium contributions, less generous plans, higher 
deductibles, additional employee cost sharing, or other cost-saving strategies —including fewer or 
smaller wage increases. 
I would also point out that while a 2022 study by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine recommended testing for PFAS, it concluded that such testing should be offered to those 
patients who are "|ikeIy to have a history of elevated exposure" —including those with occupational 
exposure, those who have lived in communities with documented contamination, and those who have 
‘Kaiser Family Foundation, Average Annual Deductible per Enrolled Employee in Employer-Based Health Insurance for Single 
and Family Coverage, 2021. Available at: https://www.l<ff.org/other/state-indicator/average~annuaI-deductible-per-enrolled- 
emplovee —in-employer —based—health-insurance-for-single-and-familt 
coveragg/?currentTimeframe=O&sortl\/Iodel=%7B%22colld%22:%22Average%2OSingle%2ODeductible%22,%22sort%22:%22des 
c%22%7D. 
ill<if$(:?l ’;illi»3lT4T €‘.Oi'g ass us Route 1, Suite 3, Falmouth, Maine 04105 phone: 207.844.8106
1 HEALTHCARE 
PURCHASER 
fl ALLIANCE 
OF MAINE 
lived where contamination may have occurred/'2 The study also concluded that ”retesting is of no or 
limited value if initial serum levels are low and exposure does not change.“ if the committee does 
decide to move forward with LD 132, I would urge you to limit eligibility for testing and retesting to 
those at high risk, consistent with the National Academies ’ recent recommendation. As currently 
drafted, it appears that the test would be available to anyone requesting it. 
Finally, if the committee is interested in pursuing this LD, l would urge that you send it to the Bureau of 
insurance for a mandate study, so that you can get a better understanding of its cost and benefits, and 
can consider it within the context of the other mandated benefits you are considering this session. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share HPA’s feedback on LD 132.V 
l'd be happy to answer any questions and will be available for the work session. 
2 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2022. Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and 
Clinical Follow—Up. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doiorg/10.17226/26156. 
3 Ibid. 
ii 
;i ii £,'i‘a§:i§'~'E-El (till;/Bin; J‘ 2 366 US Route 1, Suite 3, Falmouth, Maine 04105 phone: 207.844.8106
