Testimony in support of LD 132 An act to require health insurance carriers to provide 
coverage for blood testing for perﬂuoroalkyl and polyﬂuoroalkyl susbstances 
Dr. Rachel Criswell, MD, MS 
Attending Physician, Skowhegan Family Medicine 
Principal Investigator, MaineGeneral Medical Center PFAS Study 
Senator Baily, Congresswoman Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Service Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 132 
today. 
My name is Dr. Rachel Criswell, and I am a full spectrum family medicine physician at 
Redington-Fairview General Hospital in Skowhegan. I currently care for 10-20 patients who are 
affected by PFAS-contaminated biosolids, and I consult with patients from all over the state who 
have been affected by PFAS. 
I received my medical degree and my Masters in biomedical research from Columbia University, 
where I conducted research on PFAS in human milk and associated health outcomes. Since then, 
I have published multiple papers on PF AS in human milk, and I am the Principle Investigator 
collaborating with the Maine CDC on the ﬁrst study quantifying serum PF AS levels among the 
affected residents in the Fairﬁeld area. 
Exposure to high levels of PFAS is associated with a number of health conditions, including high 
cholesterol, kidney cancer, thyroid disease, testicular cancer, pre-eclampsia, and low birth weight 
in infants. Research shows that these effects are a risk with levels of PFAS greater than 20 ng/ml 
in a person’s blood, and many of my patients have levels in the 100s and 1000s of ng/ml. 
Thankﬁilly, PFAS-associated health conditions are things that we know how to monitor for, 
prevent, and treat with common, easily available health tests and medications, but only if we 
know a person’s risk. Because of the nature of PFAS exposure here in central Maine, estimates 
of a person’s blood levels cannot be made based on water levels alone. People who are affected 
by PFAS-associated biosolids may have exposure from eating contaminated game, working in 
contaminated gardens, or consuming vegetables grown on contaminated land. 
For this reason, all Mainers need access to the PFAS serum test, regardless of their insurance or 
ﬁnancial status. For the uninsured, this test can cost up to $600, and even those with health 
insurance sometimes pay that much before meeting their deductible. I can tell you ﬁrsthand that 
some patients who qualify for PFAS screening decide not to get tested because they cannot 
afford it. LD 132 is essential, so that all PFAS-affected Mainers can access and use the PFAS 
blood test to decide with their doctors what sort of health screening is needed in the future and 
how to mitigate their exposure.
