Solutions foro 
Toxic-Free Tomorrow 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbuiy, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
In Support of LD 132, “An Act to Require Health insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for 
Blood Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances" 
Before the Joint Committee on Health Coverage, insurance, and Financial Services 
March 28, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Sen/ices. My name is Sarah Woodbuly. l am the 
director of advocacy for Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health's mission is to make sure that 
everyone has equal access to safe food and drinking water, healthy homes, and products that 
are toxic-free and climate friendly. l am here to testify in support of LD 132, “An Act to Require 
Health insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for Blood Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances ” . PFAS contamination is a serious issue in Maine and those affected 
must have access to testing so they can work with their health care provider to mitigate its 
impacts. 
What are PFAS? Per and poly fluorolalkyl substances or PFAS are a class of man-made toxic 
“forever chemicals ” that are in every day products including food packaging, cookware, 
cosmetics, outerwear, and even dental ﬂoss. Depending on who you talk to, there are anywhere 
from 9,000 to 12,000 PFAS. PFAS are highly mobile and take a long time to break down in our 
bodies and in the environment. Hence the nickname “forever chemicals" . 
Maine is currently in the midst of a PFAS contamination crisis. You have all heard the stories of 
impacted farmers and well owners across the state. Both the Department of Environmental 
Protection and Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry recently testiﬁed in front 
of ENR and ACF and stated that there are currently over 50 contaminated farms and over 300 
contaminated wells. These numbers will continue to grow as the state does more testing of 
farmland. And these numbers don't include contamination from sources other than land 
application of sludge such as contamination from firefighting foam. 
PFAS have been around for decades but it's just in the past several years that we’ve really 
started to get a handle on the health impacts of these toxic chemicals. And the health impacts 
are startling. The CDC’s Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease registry lists some of the 
health impacts as increased cholesterol level, decreased vaccine response in children, 
increased risk of high blood pressure or pre-eclampsia in pregnant women, and increases in 
testicular and kidney cancer‘ . A study by Dr. Phillipe Grandjean from Harvard University talks 
‘ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, November 1). Potential health eﬂecrs of Efas Chemicals. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Retrieved March 26, 2023, from hﬂps1//www.atsdr.cdc.gov/pfas/healtl1-effects/index.l1tml 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204. Portland. ME 04101 l (207) 699-5795 l info@defendourhealth.org l defendourhealthorg
1 *5
§ 
about the immunotoxicity from PFAS exposure and that environmental health research over the 
past ten years has “revealed important human health risks, e.g., to the immune system”? 
Additionally, a recent study from Mount Sinai shows that exposure to PFAS leads to reduced 
fertility for women? These health impacts are not just dangerous for adults but for children as 
well. The American Academy of Pediatrics released clinical guidance to help reduce exposure 
due to health impacts such as high cholesterol and low birth weight.‘ 
These health impacts have led the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine 
to release a report that calls for testing for those with elevated PFAS exposure. The report finds 
“evidence of association between PFAS exposure and increased risk of decreased antibody 
response, dyslipidemia (abnormally high cholesterol), decreased infant and fetal growth, and 
increased risk of kidney cancer. Intended to inform CDC clinical guidance, the report says if 
testing reveals PFAS levels associated with an increased risk of adverse effects, patients 
should receive regular screenings and monitoring for these and other health impacts"? 
While the health impacts of PFAS are serious, they can be mitigated by early detection and 
monitoring by a health care professional. Much like a mammogram or other preventative 
healthcare measures, access to PFAS blood serum testing will provide PFAS impacted Mainers 
and their doctors with the necessary information to help them to set up monitoring, and if 
necessary, treatment plans. Prevention is the best medicine. But much like other preventative 
care, these tests aren’t cheap. The cost for a test can run from $450-600 dollars, a not 
insignificant cost for many in our communities. insurance companies should be required to pay 
for these costs to help Mainers monitor their health and give their doctors vital information. The 
burden of this cost should not land on the shoulders of our farmers, ﬁreﬁghters, and other PFAS 
impacted individuals. Therefore, we at Defend urge the committee to unanimously vote “ought 
to pass” on LD 132. Thank you. 
2 Grandjean, P. (2018, July 31). Deiaved discovery, disse/nination, and decisions on intervention in environmental health: A case 
stuafv on immunotoxicily of petﬂuorinated alkylate substances - environmental health. BioMed Central. Retrieved March 
26, 2023, ﬁom https://ehjournal.biomedcentral.c0m/articles/10.1 1 86/s12940-O1 8-0405-y 
3 Mount Sinai Health System. (2023, March 17). Exposure to chemicals found in everyday products is linked to signiﬁcantly 
reduced fertility. Mount Sinai Health System. Retrieved March 26, 2023, from 
https:/'/www.mountsinai.0rg/about/newsroom/2023/exposure-to-chemicals-foundin-everyday-productsis-linked-to- 
signiﬁcantly-reduced-fertility 
4 Pezﬂuoroalkyi and Poly/Iuoroalkyi Substances (PFAS). American Academy of Pediatrics. (2023, Februaiy 2). Retrieved March 
26, 2023, ﬁ"om https://www.aap.org/en/patientcare/environmental-health/promoting-healthy-environments-tbie 
childrenfper ﬂuoroalkyl-and-po1y ﬂuo1"oalkyl-substances/ 
5 
Nationalacademiescrg. (2022, July 28). New Report Calls for Expanded PFAS Testing for People With History 0fE1eva!ed 
Exposttre, Oﬁers Advice for Clinical Treatment. National Academies of Science Engineering Medicine. Retrieved March 
26, 2023, from https://www.nationalacademies.org/news/2O22/07/new~repo1't-calls-for-expanded-pfas-testing-for-people 
with-histony-otlelevated-exposure-0ffers-advice-for-clinical-treatment 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 l (207) 699-5795 i inf0@defenclourhealth.org I defendourhealthcrg
