 
 
 
David LaFountain 
Senator, District 16 THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 3 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333
 
Testimony of Senator Dave LaFountain in support of  
LD 132, An Act to Require Health Insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for 
Blood Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances  
before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
March 28, 2023 at 1:00 pm  
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Dave LaFountain. I have the honor of representing 
the good people in Senate District 16, including Albion, Fairfield, Oakland, Waterville, and my hometown of 
Winslow. Today, I am here to testify in support of Senator Brenner’s bill, LD 132, An Act to Require Health 
Insurance Carriers to Provide Coverage for Blood Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
Fairfield, Maine is unfortunately a hotspot of high levels of PFAS contaminants, threatening the quality of 
food, water, and life in an otherwise peaceful community. I’ve had constituents from Fairfield reach out, 
wondering what can be done to mitigate the effects from the hazardous practice of spreading contaminated 
sludge and waste on our farmlands.  
In addition to working with the state to identify and execute clean-up efforts, this move to require insurance 
companies to cover the cost of blood testing for PFAS is key to a holistic cleanup effort. The cost barrier is 
great, with price tags ranging from $400-600, is simply not affordable for most families in the area. The need 
for private insurance policies to cover this testing is great, and it crosses party lines.  
In addition to the spreading of contaminated sludge, there is grave concern that our firefighters have been 
performing their duties in contaminated gear. The chemicals are used in the gear to withstand very high 
temperatures. According to the International Association of Fire Fighting, PFAS “forever chemicals” are 
found in firefighter protective gear and have been linked to cancer, the leading cause of fire fighter death. 
Requiring these tests to be covered by insurance for our brave first responders is a step we must take since we 
can never repay their sacrifice. 
Showing our ranks that we have their back, and ensuring adequate staffing as we face a decline in hiring and 
retention is essential to the critical services Fire Departments across Maine provide. This test is necessary for 
effective medical care. I have dedicated my career to public safety, and this is a matter of public safety. These 
tests will allow families, seniors, and first responders to get answers they deserve.  
I am grateful for Senator Brenner sponsoring this bill, and I look forward to working with my colleagues to get 
this bill across the finish line. I’m happy to answer any questions the committee may have, to the best of my 
ability. 
 
Chair, Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee * Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
State House (207) 287-1515 *  Fax (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
David.LaFountain@legislature.maine.gov  * legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
