The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from Agnieszka Carpenter, Executive Director, BioME 
 
In Support Of 
 
L.D. 1389 
An Act to Establish a Mobile Learning Lab 
 
11 April 2023 
 
Chair Rafferty, Chair Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs: 
 
My name is Agnieszka Carpenter, I am the Executive Director of the Bioscience Association of 
Maine (BioME) and a resident of Gorham. I am here today to present testimony on behalf of 
BioME in support of LD 1389. 
 
Bioscience Association of Maine (BioME) is a trade organization representing over 230 
bioscience companies in Maine. BioME’s mission is to advance economic growth and 
opportunities within the life sciences community in Maine by allocation equal involvement in 
the life sciences advocacy, education, economic development, workforce development, and 
attracting out-of-business.  
 
Life sciences is one of the fastest growing industries in Maine. There are over 480 bioscience 
establishments currently employing 9,500 professionals in the state. The average salary for a 
life science employee in Maine is $108,000 which is much higher than all other industries. 
Moreover, life science jobs in Maine have been growing faster than in all other New England 
states. In the past 5 years alone, the high paying bioscience jobs have grown by 42% (compared 
to 5% job growth for all other industries). 
 
With such substantial growth, the Maine life science industry needs workforce for all sorts of 
positions, from manufacturing jobs to post-doctoral scientists. Maine has a unique opportunity 
to become a thriving biotech hub but what the industry currently lacks is appropriate career 
pathways for Maine students, especially in rural areas.  
 
As the only life science industry group in the State, BioME works closely with its members and 
the number one issue for bioscience companies in Maine is difficulty with recruiting skilled 
professionals.  
 
We believe that technically proficient talent starts with investing in students in the K-12 system. 
Most public schools in Maine do not have access to labs or lab equipment. This is especially true 
in rural areas of the State where opportunities are limited. We strongly believe that a mobile 
learning lab traveling from school to school would make a substantial impact on exposing young 
Maine learners to real life science.  
 
Since sophisticated bio lab equipment can be expensive, outfitting every K-12 school in Maine 
with a science lab would pose a significant financial burden. The mobile learning lab would be a 
great solution as it would allow for sharing high dollar equipment across the state, bringing 
hands on science directly to students in the most cost-effective way.  
 
The intention behind the Mobile Learning Bus it to have life science professionals work directly 
with educators to make sure that the program aligns with the current curriculum.  
 
Our industry needs skilled workforce and we strongly believe that training workforce should 
begin at the K-12 level. This program would allow many students in all areas of Maine to 
consider life sciences as a possible career path. 
 
For those reasons, we urge you to support LD 1389.  
 
 
Sincerely, 
Agnieszka Carpenter 
BioME Executive Director 
