 
 The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Testimony from Aileen Huang -Saad, PhD, MBA, The Roux Institute, Northeaster n University  
 
In Support Of  
 
L.D. 1389  
An Act to Establish a Mobile Learning Lab  
 
11 April 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Aileen Huang -Saad  and I am  the Director of Life 
Sciences, Health, and Engineering  and an Associate Professor of Bioengineering  at Northeastern 
University’s Roux Institute . I am also a member of the Maine State Workforce B oard , which, as 
you know, was created to  help Maine people and businesses compete successfully in the global 
economy.  Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 1389, An Act to Establish a 
Mobile Learning Lab.  
 Founded in 2020, the Roux Institute ’s primary mission is to help grow  Maine ’s ec onomy by 
cultivating the  development  of advanced technologies and building a pipeline of life sciences 
talent.  Unique to our institution, we focus on higher education from the perspective of 
teaching, research, and entrepreneurship in collaboration with industry, non- profits, 
governmental agencies , and other partners .  In doing so, we seek to decrease the gap between 
education and professional practice, ensuring that we develop  the important talent needed to 
address the global societal challenges of today and the future.   While the Roux ’s degree 
programs  are at the graduate level, we recognize the importance of cultivating a  robust K to 
Gray science, technology, engineering, and math  (STEM) pipeline to grow talent.  It is for this 
reason;  I am here to express my strong support for this initiative.  
 In today’s knowledge economy, it is critical to support the education of STEM talent across the nation. More importantly, it is important for students —at all levels —to  understand that STEM 
is for all. There are multiple opportunities for everyone to e ngage in STEM  careers , whether or 
not they  are a high school graduate entering the workforce tomorrow  or a graduate  student 
completing their doctorate.   
 Today , the pipeline into STEM opportunities in Maine is very narrow.  If we want to encourage 
more students to explore STEM careers, we as a community need to seek out new and 
innovative ways to reach those students  without overburdening our K- 12 system. This is also an 
equity  and fairness  issue. We need to make sure that hands -on STEM learning reaches students  
in every corner of our state —not just our urban school districts or our better -resourced 
suburban districts.  It is for these reasons that I  am most inspired by this proposal.  
 Science is a team sport. The complexity of today’s global challenges requires  individuals of all 
types of training and disciplines to solve our problems. But the team cannot just be across 
 
 disciplines, we also need to work as a team across the educational continuum.  This proposal  is 
the ideal demonstration of collaboration  across  the state  while being fiscally responsible .  
Leveraging the experts and talent across the educational system, from K- 12 educators, to non-
profit education advocates, to universities, and research centers, this  request supports the 
most important individuals in the equation, the learners.  Each group brings their expertise to 
the project to widen Maine’s STEM pipeline. The mobile lab will bring critical training and 
exposure  in state -of-the-art equipment to the most rural parts of the state —and will do so 
without adding a cost burden to each individual school  and educator.  The proposal seeks to 
work in collaboration with communities, meeting the students , their families , and communities 
where  they  work and live . 
 
We are at an exciting time in history.  Biotechnology develop ment has offered incredible 
opportunities across all sectors, from human health to agriculture. The most impactful 
innovations  often come  from problems looking for solutions. But to be able to cultivate tho se 
solutions , we need to make sure our future talent knows  how to engage in the new tools being 
developed. This starts by engaging  our young Mainers —and particularly rural Mainers —in 
STEM.  It is initiatives like the mobile learning lab by which we will also  ensure that the promise 
of jobs and prosperity offered by careers in the life sciences and other STEM fields are  more 
equitably shared beyond Portland so that these opportunities  reach  every  corner and 
communit y of our state.  
 
The Roux  Institute believes that advances in the life sciences is a high growth area, as 
demonstrated by the growth of the international bioeconomy. It is critical that we  make sure 
ALL Mainers will be  a part of this growth and this starts with our students. At the Roux , we are 
committed to working in partnership with community members all across the State to continue 
to grow the STEM pipeline.  
 Thank you a gain for the opportunity to  testify today . I urge the Committee to favorably 
response to LD1389.  
 Sincerely,  
 
Aileen Huang -Saad, PhD, MBA 
Director of Life Sciences, Health, and Engineering  
Associate Professor of Bioengineering  
The Roux Institute  
Northeastern University
 
 
