The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from Andrea Cianchette Maker, Co-Chair of FocusMaine 
In Support Of 
L.D. 1389 
An Act to Establish a Mobile Learning Lab 
11 April 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Andrea Cianchette Maker, Co-founder and Co-Chair of 
FocusMaine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 1389, An Act to 
Establish a Mobile Learning Lab. 
FocusMaine is a statewide economic development organization that works to create quality 
jobs in Maine's food economy and bioeconomy. We work collaboratively with other non- 
profits, and industry, government and academic leaders to develop and deliver programs, 
business tools and the skilled workforce needed to accelerate the growth of these sectors. 
Maine is poised for a breakthrough in developing a strong biotech and life sciences ecosystem. 
We have growing activity in some of the elements needed to do so: 
1. A growing cohort of entrepreneurs and businesses 
2. Proximity to the robust bioscience research and development hub in Boston 
3. A growing workforce in life sciences of 42% in the last 5 years, a pace that exceeds 
all other New England states (from the most recent Bioscience Association of Maine 
industry report) 
4. New higher education opportunities in biotech and life sciences at Maine's leading 
academic institutions 
5. New investment and venture capital in Maine's growing bioeconomy 
Strengthening Maine's K-12 education in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) will 
help to strengthen this ecosystem, and also to prepare Maine's youth for professional 
opportunities in the emerging bioeconomy here in Maine. These careers provide opportunities 
for life-long learning and career growth, and good wages and benefits. 
The Mobile Learning Lab described in LD 1389 will enhance hands-on STEM learning for Maine 
students, efficiently and cost-effectively. It will share expensive equipment and cutting-edge
technology with students across the state without burdening local districts with duplicative 
costs. 
It will create a unique opportunity for Maine students to become inspired in STEM ﬁelds, 
prepare them for deeper STEM learning and introduce them to greater career opportunities, in 
Maine, and beyond, if they so choose. 
FocusMaine is excited to work with Educate Maine and other statewide partners on the 
implementation of the Mobile Learning Lab. 
FocusMaine asks for your support for this innovative and forward-looking program. 
Sincerely, 
Q». CHM» 
Andrea Cianchette Maker 
Co-Chair, FocusMaine
