 
 The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from James A. Coffman, Program Director, Maine IDeA Network of Biomedical 
Research Excellence (INBRE) 
 
In Support Of 
 
L.D. 1389 
An Act to Establish a Mobile Learning Lab 
 
11 April 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is James Coffman, Associate Professor at MDI Biological 
Laboratory and Program Director of the Maine INBRE. Thank you for the opportunity to testify 
in support of L.D. 1389, An Act to Establish a Mobile Learning Lab. 
 
General background: 
The Maine IDeA Network of Biomedical Research Excellence (INBRE), which I direct, is a 
collaborative network of Maine educational and research institutions led by the MDI Biological 
Laboratory and funded by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) of the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH). 
Maine INBRE members also include Bates College, Bowdoin College, Colby College, College of 
the Atlantic, The Jackson Laboratory, Southern Maine Community College, the University of 
Maine, the Universities of Maine at Farmington, Fort Kent, Machias, and Presque Isle, and the 
University of New England. 
Maine INBRE’s mission is to grow and develop the capacity for cutting-edge biomedical 
research in Maine, by: 
1. Creating a technically skilled workforce in Maine by engaging undergraduate students in 
biomedical research. 
2. Providing research support to young faculty at Maine colleges and universities to 
increase their competitiveness for federal (NIH) biomedical research grants. 
3. Improving the research infrastructure available to INBRE institutions through a 
collaborative network of core facilities with state-of-the-art equipment. 
A long term goal of the Maine INBRE is to develop the human and physical infrastructure 
needed for a robust biomedical/biotech economy, and provide a pipeline into that economy for 
Maine students. The proposed Mobile Learning lab will significantly enhance those efforts, by 
providing an important teaching resource that engages underserved communities that have 
historically been excluded from participating in biomedical science, affording them with an 
entry portal to learning about scientific research that is an important steppingstone to the 
research opportunities provided by Maine INBRE institutions.  The Mobile Learning Lab will 
create a state-of-the-art mobile life sciences lab that can meet students where they live and 
 
 learn, especially in rural and underserved communities, engaging them in the life sciences and 
offering hands-on learning in their own environments. 
Importantly, investing in our students in the K-12 system engages and exposes them to career 
pathways as future bioscience talent, attracting and retaining a continuous flow of technically 
proficient talent. This innovative and collaborative program will leverage the strengths of 
Maine’s life sciences institutions and organizations to create a unique opportunity for Maine 
students to learn about on-ramps to meaningful, in-demand careers that allow them to live, 
study, and work in Maine. The project will enable public school learners across Maine 
(especially in the most rural and underserved communities) to access valuable high-quality 
instruction, hands-on learning, and experiential learning opportunities in the life sciences which 
would otherwise not be available to them. In that way the proposed Act to Establish a Mobile 
Learning Lab will synergize and enhance the efforts of the Maine INBRE to develop the 
biomedical science economy of Maine. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
James A. Coffman 
Program Director, Maine INBRE 
 
 
