 
 The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Testimony from  Kate Dickerson, Executive Director, M aine Discovery Museum, Bangor.  
 
In Support Of  
 
L.D. 1389  
An Act to Establish a Mobile Learning Lab  
 
11 April 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is  Kate Dickerson, and I ’m the Executiv e Director of the 
Main e Discove ry Museum. I ’m writing with regards to L.D. 1389, An Act to Establish a Mobile 
Learning Lab, and my support of this Bill.  
 
The Maine Discovery Museum (MDM) helps people of all ages to discover the world around 
them through creative exploration and science.  We are a critical player in helping Mainers from 
all over the state  learn, especially in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). With 
our three floors of interactive exhibits and robust science programming within and outside the 
museum  (example inclu de the Maine Science Festival and the Science Teacher Academy) , 
MDM uses both paths  to introduce Mainers to the value and importance of discovery and 
exploration.  The Mobile Lea rning Lab is another asset to help Mainers learn about life science in 
particular . 
 
We hav e seen firs t-hand th e critical imp ortance of science education outreach, both through o ur 
own work  and with our partners. It is vital to meet students where they live and learn , and  this is 
even more necessary in Maine where we have  significant  rural and underserved communities . 
The Mobile Le arning Lab is a n outstanding opportunity  to introduce and exp and Maine  students’ 
understan ding of life science in general, and in Main e in particular. We believe  the Mobile 
Learning Lab will help expand student and teacher underst anding of life s cience, and will help 
foster interest and curiosity  of those who experience it , and we look forward to partnering with 
the Mobile Lea rning Lab a s we continue to meet our mission as well.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Kate Dicker son 
Executiv e Director  
 
