EDUCATE 
MAINE 
The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from Katherine Howell, Director, Workforce Partnerships, Educate Maine 
In Support Of 
L.D. 1389 
An Act to Establish a Mobile Learning Lab 
11 April 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Katherine Howell, Director of Workforce Partnerships at 
Educate Maine, a business-led education advocacy organization. Thank you for the opportunity 
to testify in support of L.D. 1389, An Act to Establish a Mobile Learning Lab. 
Educate Maine is focused on increasing college and career readiness and advancing educational 
attainment for Maine people. Founded in 2011, we believe all students and adults should have 
the skills necessary to thrive in postsecondary education and in the workforce. Our strength lies 
in our ability to work with K-12 schools, higher education institutions, and employers to help 
solve education and workforce development challenges. 
Since 2020, the global pandemic has demonstrated the value of the bioscience industry. Not 
only has it been at the forefront of addressing the pandemic, but US bioscience has been 
growing, generating high paying and high-quality jobs for individuals at all levels —- from non- 
degree holders to the most specialized life sciences degrees. Recognizing that Maine is at an 
economic crossroads, the Maine Economic Development Strategy (2020-2029) calls for 
diversification of Maine’s heritage industries. Maine has an opportunity to create a robust life 
sciences industry but to do so, we need to deliberately cultivate a bioscience network and 
develop career pathways for future talent. This starts with investing in our students in the Pre- 
K-12 system. 
Maine's educators and schools have a limited number of resources and tools available to them 
to make this happen. For rural schools this can be especially true. A mobile learning lab, like the 
one proposed in this bill would allow for cutting edge-technology to be delivered to the 
doorstep of rural and under-resourced schools allowing students to access experiences beyond 
what many schools can provide on their own. This capital investment would reach dozens of 
schools a year and allow thousands of students to engage with new equipment, hands-on 
learning, and innovative lessons. 
The concept of a mobile learning lab is new to Maine but not the United States. in July 2022l 
had the opportunity to attend the Mobile Laboratory Coalition Conference which brought 
together educators, businesses, and mobile lab leaders to discuss the impact and future 
482 Congress Street, Suite 303, Portland, ME 04101 - 207-34-7-8638 - info@educatemaine.org
innovations of mobile labs. l left there knowing that Maine needed to bring this unique 
opportunity to our schools. ln recent years, states from Maryland to Texas have invested in 
mobile learning labs that have driven high student engagement, support from teachers, and 
community excitement. 
Educate Maine is already working toward making this a reality in our state in collaboration with 
Learning Undefeated, a leader in Mobile STEM education, Northeastern ’s Roux Institute and 
Bioscience Association of Maine. We have recently been awarded congressionally delegated 
funds through Maine's federal delegation to begin designing and building a mobile lab set to 
deploy to schools in early 2024. Should this bill be passed, Educate Maine would be well 
positioned to respond to an RFP with the Maine Department of Education to partner on this 
lab. Available funds would accelerate deployment and enable collaboration with the 
Department to ensure learning opportunities will be supplemental and complementary to what 
is currently offered to learners in our public schools. Focus groups of Maine's teachers, 
alongside local industry employers and scientists, will co-create curriculum that aligns with the 
Science and Technology standards and the Life and Career Ready standards in the Maine 
Learning Results. 
This type of innovative and collaborative program will leverage the strengths of Maine's life 
science industry to create a unique opportunity for Maine students to learn about on-ramps to 
meaningful, in-demand careers that allow them to live, study, and work in Maine. This bill will 
efficiently invest in our future workforce, maximizing the student experience by sharing high 
dollar equipment across the state. l encourage you to pass this bill in support of Maine's 
students. 
Resources: 
2022 Mobile Laboratory Coalition Conference Report: 
https:1/wwwmobilelabcoalition.com/ files/ugd/77ed8a a2e68eaa4la549S5a12e803b61fOO48 
il.pdf 
Sincerely, 
W” Katherine Howell 
Director, Workforce Development 
Educate Maine
