‘ﬁt? 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 1389 
An Act to Establish a Mobile Learning Lab 
Presented to the joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Tuesday, April 11, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Troylackson. I serve as President of the Maine 
Senate and proudly represent Aroostook County in the Legislature. l am pleased to present to 
you LD 1389, ”An Act to Establish a Mobile Learning Lab." 
lwant to begin by thanking Educate Maine for bringing this bill to my attention. As the title of 
the bill suggests, the learning lab is mobile and will bring hands-on learning to rural and 
underserved communities throughout the state. The purpose and motivation driving this 
project is equity and service. Many small and isolated towns do not have the funds to provide 
state of the art technology, nor do they have the resources to bring their students to programs 
offered by universities, museums, and philanthropic organizations. LD 1389 will bring 
enrichment directly to their door. 
The bill supports an ongoing project spearheaded by Educate Maine, Northeastern's Roux 
lnstitute. Learning Undefeated and the Bioscience Association of Maine. The project has 
received federal funds to cover the purchase of the bus, the lab equipment, and a portion of 
the staff. The additional expenditure offered in LD 1389 will get the bus up and running. It will 
supply the funds to complete the planning phase and to develop a challenging curriculum. 
The objective is to have traveling educators partner with local teachers to offer high quality, 
experiential learning to supplement what is currently offered in middle and high school classes. 
The curriculum focus is on science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). The mobile lab 
will be furnished with cutting edge equipment. This will give students the opportunity to work 
with technology that many schools cannot afford due to its high capital cost and its upkeep. 
Another advantage of engaging more students in these emerging fields is the experience they 
will gain. lt is an investment in the lives of our youth. 
Stare House (207) 287-1500 * Cell (207) 436-0763 * Fax (207) 287-5862 * Toll Free I-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Selmtor./' acks0nl@gmail.c0m * Web Site." leg1'slarure.maine. gov/senate
This project makes sense. Our students deserve the opportunity to grow and learn no matter 
what part of the state they live in. So I ask you to join me in supporting this Mobile Learning 
Lab. l am happy to answer any questions you may have, but there are others who will follow 
that can give you more speciﬁcs with regard to travel plans, curriculum, and schedules.
