   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
1 
 
TESTIMONY OF  
 
RANDALL A. LIBERTY, COMMISSIONER  
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
 
In Opposition to  
 
LD 823 An Act to Reimburse the Town of Charleston for Expenses Related to the Mountain View 
Correctional Facility  
 
Before the  
Criminal Justice Public Safety Committee  
May 2, 2023  
 
 
Senator Beebe -Center and Representative Salisbury and other distinguished members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections 
providing testimony in opposition to LD 823. 
 
While Representative  Foster did let us know about th is bill,  and sent the language last Friday, r espectfully, we 
are unclear ab out what this bill is hoping to achieve.  
 
Based on the title we can guess the bill is about the town wanting funds from the MDOC. But based on the 
language  in the bill we wonder if it’s more about  seeking ways to increase commerce  to the town  itself, not 
related to the Mountain View Correctional  facility .  
 
If the goal of the bill is to utilize a 17-person , OPLA staff assisted commission to identify ways to generate 
revenue, we appreciate the inclusion, but we don’t support the need,  or the level of work required of such a 
large group. It seems like the duties written in the bill for the commission are actually  topics already addressed  
during  local government  meetings , or perhaps in conversations with the State’s Department of Economic and 
Community Development.   
 
Going back to the title, if the impetus for this bill is financial, we are also confused. I’ll provide some facts t hat 
illustrate the positive financial impact of the Mountain View Correctional Facility to the town.  
 
▪ In 2022 community restitution crews from the facility provided the town 1,471 hours of work, at no cost.  
▪ In fact, the work provided by residents, with supervision from MDOC staff, would have cost the town of 
Charleston roughly $18,755.25 (@ 12.75 an hour for 1,471 hours)  
▪ This work included:  
o Mowing town cemeteries  
o Mowing town office  
o Mowing at the local ball fields  
o Cleaning  all headstones at the cemeteries  
o General improvements needed as directed by the town office  
o Clearing out overgrown foliage, debris  on Route 15  
   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
2 
 
o Chipping brush  
o Cutting and removal of tresses and pulping of wood and brush  
o Rehabb ing buildings  
o Installing  structures on the recreational fields and playground  
o Install ing a new roof on the fire station  
  
The town of Charleston, population 1,400, has limited infrastructure. There is no ambulance service, no 
wastewater, or water service, no transfer station. So there is very little burden  to the town  by the facility . The 
facility must go outside the town for these services.  
 
The only service the M ountain View Correc tional Facility  utilizes i s that of the fire department . Our calls are 
infrequent, less than a handful any given year.  
 
Additionally, 15 of the 163 state  position working at this facility  reside in the town of Charleston. Mountain 
View’s Personal Services line is nearly $16 million dollars , that ’s an awful  lot of funds going back into 
Charleston , supporting many of  the two-dozen  local business : post office, day care, automotive,  golf cours e, 
home  and farm services, to name a few.    
 
We believe the  influx from salaries, and the  contribution of resident labor is a significant boo n to the town. 
Each year the contribution of residents, who are not paid for their efforts to support the town , amounts to more 
than $18,000 dollars  of town savings.  
 
We hope to continue a healthy relationship  with town officials and members of the community,  but we cannot 
support the use of state resources  for this 17-member  commission staffed by OPLA . 
 
We hope yo u will vote ONTP.  
 
 
 
 
 
Thank You,  
 
Randall A. Liberty, Commissioner  
Maine Department of Corrections  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
