LR#(item):  
Sponsor: Rep. Foster 
Drafter: JG 
Date: April 27, 2023 
 
LD 823 
Proposed amendment, Representative Foster 
 
Amend the bill by striking the title and inserting the following in its place: 
 
“Resolve, To Establish the Commission to Increase the Municipal Value of the Town of 
Charleston in Recognition of the Costs of Hosting a Department of Corrections Facility” 
 
Amend the bill by striking everything after the enacting clause and before the summary and 
inserting the following in its place: 
 
 Sec. 1.  Commission established.  Resolved:  That the Commission to Increase the 
Municipal Value of the Town of Charleston in Recognition of the Costs of Hosting a Department 
of Corrections Facility, referred to in this resolve as “the commission,” is established. 
 
 Sec. 2.  Membership.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the commission 
consists of 17 members appointed as follows: 
 
 1.  Two members of the Senate, appointed by the President of the Senate, who serve on 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, including one member of 
the party holding the largest number of seats in the Legislature, and one member of the party 
holding the 2nd largest number of seats on the Legislature; 
 
 2.  Two members of the House of Representatives, appointed by the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives, who serve on the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, including one member of the party holding the largest number of seats in the 
Legislature, and one member of the party holding the 2nd largest number of seats on the 
Legislature; 
 
 3.  The Commissioner of Corrections or the commissioner’s designee; 
 
 4.  The warden of the Mountain View Correctional Facility or the warden’s designee; 
 
 5.  The director of the Maine Rural Development Authority or the director’s designee; 
 
 6.  The director of the Municipal Planning Assistance Program within the Department of 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of Resource Information and Land Use 
Planning, or the director’s designee;   
 
 7.  The following 4 members, appointed by the Governor: 
 
 A.  One member representing a statewide association of municipalities; 
 
 B.  One member representing a regional economic planning and development entity; 
 
 C.  One member representing statewide agricultural interests; and 
 
 D.  One member with expertise and experience in the building trades; 
 
 8.  The following 3 members, appointed by the President of the Senate upon the 
recommendation of the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Charleston, who must be registered 
voters in the Town of Charleston at the time of the appointment: 
 
 A.  One member representing the Town of Charleston’s planning committee; 
 
 B.  One member representing the Town of Charleston’s executive committee; and 
 
 C.  One member with expertise and experience in the field of construction; and 
 
 9.  The following 2 members, appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives 
upon the recommendation of the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Charleston, who must be 
registered voters in the Town of Charleston at the time of the appointment: 
 
A.  One member representing the historical and cultural interests of the Town of 
Charleston; and 
 
B.  One member representing the board of visitors of the Mountain View Correctional 
Facility. 
 
Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That, the first-named Senate member is the Senate chair and 
the first-named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the commission. 
 
Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of commission.  Resolved:  That all appointments 
must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this resolve.  The appointing 
authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative Council once all appointments 
have been completed.  After appointment of all members, the chair shall call and convene the 
first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more after the effective date of this resolve, a 
majority of but not all appointments have been made, the chair may request authority and the 
Legislative Council may grant authority for the commission to meet and conduct its business. 
 
Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the commission shall develop a collaborative 
comprehensive plan for the Town of Charleston to support private and public investments in the 
economic development of the town, taking into consideration the needs and cultural values of the 
surrounding region, the residents of the town and the incarcerated individuals at the Mountain 
View Correctional Facility.  In developing the plan, the commission, at a minimum, shall review 
and consider the “Maine Economic Development Strategy 2020-2029” published by the 
Department of Economic and Community Development, the “Maine Model of Corrections” 
developed by the Department of Corrections and recent proposals considered by and actions of 
the Legislature concerning reentry and reintegration of incarcerated individuals.   
 
Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Legislative Council shall provide 
necessary staffing services to the commission, except that the legislative staff support is not 
authorized when the Legislature is in regular or special session.   
 
Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, or before December 6, 2023, the commission shall 
submit a report to the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety that 
includes its findings and recommendations, including any suggested legislation.  The 
commission shall include in the report a description of any activities of or efforts made by the 
committee to identify, acquire or implement any funding or actions consistent with its duties. 
The joint standing committee may report out a bill related to the report to the Second Regular 
Session of the 131st Legislature.  
 
Sec. 8.  Outside funding.  Resolved:  That the commission shall seek funding 
contributions to fully fund the costs of the study.  All funding is subject to approval by the 
Legislative Council in accordance with its policies.  If sufficient contributions to fund the study 
have not been received within 30 days after the effective date of this resolve, no meetings are 
authorized and no expenses of any kind may be incurred. 
 
 
SUMMARY 
 
 This amendment changes the title of and replaces the bill, which is a concept draft.  The 
amendment establishes the Commission to Increase the Municipal Value of the Town of 
Charleston in Recognition of the Costs of Hosting a Department of Corrections Facility.  The 
commission is charged with developing a collaborative comprehensive plan for the Town of 
Charleston to support private and public investments in the economic development of the town, 
taking into consideration the needs and cultural values of the surrounding region, the residents of 
the town and the incarcerated individuals at the Mountain View Correctional Facility.  On or 
before December 6, 2023, the commission must submit a report to the Joint Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety that includes its findings and recommendations, including 
any suggested legislation. The committee may report out legislation based on the report to the 
Second Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.  
