Testimony in Support of LD 1837, An Act to Improve Oral Health & Access to Dental Care among 
Maine Children 
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Friday, May 12, 2023 
 
 Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments in support 
of LD 1837.    
 
 My name is Carolyn Wollen and I am a resident of Brunswick, Maine.  My support for this 
bill comes from my experience in Maine’s philanthropic community.  I am a trustee of the 
Betterment Fund, a private foundation devoted to the people of the State of Maine.  We have 
been a member of the Maine Oral Health Funders Group since its founding over almost 20 years 
ago and I have also been a Council member of the Children’s Oral Health Network.   
 
 Philanthropy has in some ways a responsibility and an opportunity akin to the one facing 
Maine’s legislature.  We collectively have funds that are dedicated to a wide swath of Maine issues 
but our resources are extremely smaller than the legislature’s and also insufficient for the totality 
of the needs.  In many cases we are restricted by the expressed intent of our particular donors.  
This means we have to make hard decisions in choosing how to spend our grant funds. 
 
 So why have a number of Maine foundations chosen to support oral health projects for 20 
years?  Because we feel that it is one health area in which a relatively smaller investment will pay 
large dividends in the long run.  It is possible to have good oral health for all Maine residents and if 
we start with our children, it is a relatively inexpensive and painless achievable goal.  But our 
children need access to preventative treatments, attention by dental professionals and education 
on the importance of good oral health.  If we can help them to access these basic services, they 
can avoid years of pain and expensive restorations.  And from the State’s point of view, we get 
children more ready to learn in the classroom, a decrease in expensive and futile emergency room 
visits from children and adults, less expensive services needed for adults and more workers able to 
obtain good jobs without the sometimes disqualifying factor of bad teeth.  Finally, we are now 
learning the medical connections between bad oral health and life threatening diseases such as 
heart disease.   Oral health is far more than a pretty smile. 
 
 Maine’s philanthropic organizations cannot do more than fund a relatively few scattered 
school programs for Maine’s children and we have been doing so over many years.  In the funded 
programs we see significant reduction in children’s cavities, so we know that it works to make the 
investment.   New treatment modalities are increasing prevention opportunities.  We need the 
leadership of the State to bring these opportunities for prevention and improved oral health care 
to children and adults statewide. The hit and miss of philanthropy funding is simply not 
acceptable.   
 
    Our children need your help to achieve good oral health and all the educational, financial and 
personal benefits that flow from having a healthy mouth. 
 
Thank you.   
