Emilie Knight
Fairfield, Maine
LD 1837
Testimony of Emilie Knight in support of LD 1837: An Act to Increase Oral Health 
Services
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Emilie Knight. I live in southern Somerset County 
and I do program management consulting work for Maine nonprofit organizations, 
one of which is the Children’s Oral Health Network. My work with the Network 
focuses on supporting partners throughout the state in the implementation of the 
Virtual Dental Home model, an innovative approach to bringing comprehensive oral 
health care to facilities where people spend their days - childcare, schools, community
centers, and beyond. I’m testifying today in support of LD 1837.
While our state has a network of dedicated and skilled dental professionals, it is well 
documented that the current workforce is not adequate to meet the needs of all Maine 
people. LD 1837 tackles two key aspects of what it will take to remedy issues 
surrounding equitable access to oral health care in Maine:
1) Bolstering support of school-based services keeps kids’ teeth healthy in the 
community, catching issues early and providing more consistent preventive care. 
This, in turn, reduces the burden on dental offices of both routine preventive care as 
well as helps to reduce intensive restorative care needs over time. 
2) Investing in a data-driven understanding and approach to developing Maine’s oral 
health care infrastructure will allow the state and all partners, such as the Network, to 
focus on efforts that will truly change lives because oral health is overall health.
My work with the Virtual Dental Home initiative has introduced me to the passion 
and wisdom of so many dental health and public health professionals dedicating their 
lives to helping Maine improve oral health outcomes for all residents. LD 1837 is a 
foundational investment in this critical system's change work.
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony on this important issue.

