 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Hannah Hudson  on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
May 12, 2023  
 
Supporting:  
LD 1837 , “An Act to Increase Oral Health Services ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative Lori Gramlich  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Health and Human Services , I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at  
Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA).  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers 
(CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the 
largest  independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable 
primary and preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people 
(1 in 6  Mainers ). 
 
MPCA supports LD 1837 , and we thank Representative Gramlich and the other cosponsors for 
bringing this legislation forward. Maine’s CHCs  are located in rural or underserved areas  and 
operate  more than 70 service delivery sites across all 16 Maine counties . Ensuring oral health 
care access for the communities we serve remains a priority for MPCA and the Community 
Health Center Network. As an organization, we are focused on supporting CHCs with the 
expansion of MaineCare’s comprehensive adult dental benefit. This includes dental a ssistant 
training, addressing health equity needs, and ensuring that CHC voices are included at relevant 
state -level meetings.  
 
This legislation would provide additional support for the execution of legislative oral health 
priorities, including the expans ion of the Maine CDC School Oral Health Program to all public 
schools and addressing the needs identified in the implementation of the MaineCare adult 
dental benefit.  
 
LD 1837  also directs MaineCare to develop an alternative payment pilot for financing sch ool-
based oral health services. MPCA has also been focused on building the future infrastructure for 
Maine’s CHC network and looking at alternative payment models that fully support their unique 
and critical role in the care delivery system. Value -based pr ograms reward providers with 
incentive payments for the quality of care they give to people. It is a potential replacement for 
traditional fee -for-service reimbursement, which rewards quantity over quality.  
 
Additionally, t his legislation would help Maine CDC by making permanent the Oral Health 
Educator and Data and Research Assistant positions. This will increase the  State’s  capacity for 
 
 
 
 mepca.org  data collection and analysis, research on oral health disparities, oral health education efforts, 
and procurement of fed eral funding to support oral health work statewide.  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. 
Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up 
questions.  
 
Hannah Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
