 
                                                   
105 2nd St Suite 2A  
Hallowell, ME 04347  
MOHC@mcdph.org  
www.maineoralhealthcoal ition.org  
 
 Testimony of the Maine Oral  Health Coalition  
Submitted by Judith Feinstein, Coordinator  
In Support of LD 1837,  
An Act To Increase Oral Health Services  
May 12, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee, this tes timony is submitted on behalf of the Maine Oral Health 
Coalition (MOHC) in support of LD 1837. Founded 25 years ago as the Maine Dental Access 
Coalition, we continue to function as a broad network, and maintain a close interest in policy 
and systems change s that can improve access to services and oral health status in Maine.  
 
LD 1837 proposes to take significant steps to bolster the Maine CDC’s Oral Health Program 
within the Office of Rural Health and Primary Care in the Maine CDC. It makes permanent 
two k ey positions adding to efforts already underway to rebuild the capacity the program 
had, eight to ten years ago and more.  
 
LD 1837 proposes a modest investment by adding key infrastructure to strengthen our 
state’s oral health program and create a backbon e for the capacity needed to develop and 
implement interventions that will improve the oral health of all Maine residents, across the 
lifespan. Oral health is integral to overall health, and a state level program should be 
adequately funded and staffed. An  oral health educator and a data & research assistant will 
expand the program’s capacity to coordinate with other health promotion efforts, evaluate 
and enhance the state’s long -standing and effective school -based oral health program, 
enhance its ability  to collect and analyze reliable data and to evaluate program effectiveness, 
and last but not least,  to compete successfully to bring federal dollars to Maine. I know this, 
based on my 18 years of experience as the State Oral Health Program Manager; during that 
time, we obtai ned over $4 million to help improve the oral health of all people in Maine .  
 
National guidelines assert  that state oral health programs with adequate infrastructure and 
capacity are integral to the mission of state health agencies. O ther provisions of LD 1837 
support increasing sustainability , by directing MaineCare to develop an alternative payment 
pilot for financing school -based oral health services; and accountability  by authorizing this 
Committee to consider and if appropriate, r eport out legislation in the 2024 Legislative 
session based on the recommendations of the next oral health report from DHHS. 
Sustainability and accountability are guardrails for an effective program that can make a real 
difference in the lives of Maine peo ple.  
 
Thank you for your support for LD 1837 and your continued support of the Maine CDC’s Oral 
Health Program.  
 
 
   /ss/ Judith Fei nstein   
Judith Feinstein, MSPH, Coordinator  
  MOHC Steering 
Committee  
 
Wendy Alpaugh, DMD  
General Practice 
Dentist, Stonington  
 
Kalie Hess, MPH  
Children’s Oral Health 
Network of Maine  
 
Beth Pearce  
Maine Primary Care 
Association  
 
Bonnie Vaughan,  
IPDH, MEd, MBA  
Kennebec Valley 
Family Dentistry 
Center and Maine 
Dental Hygienists’ 
Association  
 
Judith Feinstein, MSPH  
Coordinator  
 
 
The Maine Oral Health 
Coalition  represents a 
statewide group of 
organizations and 
individuals who work 
together as a network 
to support each other 
in raising awareness 
and promoting oral 
health and dental 
disease prevention 
activities, through 
community education 
and advocacy, with 
the vision that oral 
health is valued as a 
vital element of 
wellness for all Maine 
residents.  
 
