 
May 12, 2023  
Testimony of Rep. Lori K. Gramlich presenting  
LD 1837, An Act to Increase Oral Health Services  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and my distinguished colleagu es of the Joint Standing  
Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Lori Gramlich, and I represent House  
District 131, which is the lovely seaside community of Old Orchard Beach. I am ho nored to 
present to you LD 1837,  An Act to Increase Oral Health Serv ices. I am grateful to so many of 
you on this committee who have supported these imp ortant policy initiatives, both in previous 
legislation  and this bill before you today.  
 
As some of you may know, in addition to my work in state government with the Department of  
Health and Human Services, I also worked for a number of years with the City of Portland Public  
Health Division, directing the Family Health Program. One of my responsibilities was oversight 
of the Children’s Oral Health Program and the School Based Health  Centers. I saw firsthand the 
incredible work done for kids in need of oral health care, and again, I am grateful for the support 
of this committee for my bill last session to expand the Maine CDC’s School Oral Health 
Program to serve all schools in Maine.  While we are still working on ensuring that the funding is 
included in the final iteration of the next biennial budget to ensure this expansion (and I thank 
you for your efforts to keep that on the priority list for the budget process), this bill before y ou 
today - LD 1837 - helps to tie up a few other loose ends that we also need to address.  
 
Unfortunately, over the last decade, we have seen many of our effective prevention -based  
programs endure a multitude of cuts. Maine CDC’s Oral Health Program is but  one of these 
impacted programs. Last session, the 130th Legislature made an unprecedented investment in 
improving dental access for the people of our state. As you know, in addition to the expansion of 
the School Oral Health Program, we enacted a comprehe nsive dental benefit for adults on 
MaineCare and we raised the MaineCare fees for the first time in decades. We also restored an 
essential staff position in Maine CDC, the Oral Health Program manager - a single position in a 
program that used to have 8 sta ff.    
Lori K. Gramlich  
154 Temple Ave.  
Old Orchard Beach, ME  04064 
 Phone: (207) 232-1067  
lori.gramlich @legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: Maine Relay 711  
 

 
LD 1837 includes a few small provisions to help clarify what we are expecting of the 
Department. We, of course, need to make sure that they have the capacity to meet these 
expectations, and we need to hold both the Department and ourselves accounta ble for 
implementing the changes we’ve already decided are necessary. These provisions are:  
 
1. Clarifying that the expansion of the School Oral Health Program was only intended to 
apply to all public  schools, as the word public had been inadvertently left o ut of the bill 
last session.  
 
2. Scaling back the expectation that the Department launch a value -based payment pilot - it 
has become clear that this piece of last year’s bill was overly ambitious. Instead, we are 
adjusting that expectation to ask the Departm ent to work with the MaineCare Advisory 
Council to come up with a plan for what an “alternative payment” model (which, as I 
understand it, is less complex and potentially more helpful in our current situation than a 
“value -based purchasing” model) could lo ok like. The goal is to help public health dental 
providers delivering services in schools and child care settings to maximize their reach 
and minimize the administrative billing barriers that currently limit their capacity to reach 
more children. This pla n would be reported back to this Committee in the report that is 
due from the Department in December so that appropriate next steps can be determined.   
 
3. This bill also continues two positions that were created as temporary positions during the 
public heal th emergency to restore badly needed capacity in the Maine CDC. The 
pandemic has had a lasting impact on the dental field, which already suffered from 
workforce shortages, fragmented services, and huge gaps in access even before Covid hit. 
The system conti nues to bleed - we lost several safety net dental clinics this year, and 
there are numerous non -profit dental centers and federally qualified health centers who 
cannot fully staff their dental operations, and these workforce challenges are impacting 
privat e dental practices, too.    
 
Depending on where you live and what insurance you have, waitlists for a routine new 
patient appointment are generally 6 -12 months or longer; if you have MaineCare, an 
appointment for a child who needs sedation or an adult who needs oral surgery is 
routinely booking out 1 -2 years. Someone who needs oral surgery cannot wait two years, 
and it’s even more tragic when you think about how they never should have reached the 
point of needing their teeth extracted in the first place, if  they had had access to 
preventive oral health care. We need more capacity in our state health department to 
begin addressing this or we are going to continue dealing with it in our urgent care clinics 
and hospital emergency departments, which is a horribl y expensive and ineffective way 
to address a preventable disease.    
 
4. Lastly, as we witnessed with the funding for the expansion of the School Oral Health 
Program, we can’t simply pass a bill and cross our fingers that it will be implemented as 
expected. I t is critical that the Legislature play an active role in monitoring how things 
are going as we work to dig ourselves out of the dental disease hole we have allowed 
ourselves to sink into.    
 
Thanks to the work in the last session, we will now have a report from the Department 
each December to provide an update on the progress that is being made on 
implementation and to help us understand whether things are improving. These reports 
will also pr ovide an opportunity for the Department to ask for assistance or make 
recommendations if there are barriers or resources they need to accomplish the goals.   
 
Importantly, LD 1837 authorizes legislation in response to what we leave from these 
reports, so t hat any identified recommendations can be immediately addressed.   
 
These changes may seem less exciting than some of the major successes of last session. As I 
understand it, there is a minor fiscal note to implement this legislation.   I would argue that t ying 
up these loose ends is a critical next step to make sure that we do the job right and get our 
money’s worth from the investments we’ve already made toward solving this longstanding 
dental access problem.  
 
I strongly urge you to support LD 1837 and ap preciate your consideration of this important  
legislation. Thank you, and I would be happy to try to answer any questions for you.  
 
