  
 
29 Association Drive, Manchester, ME 04351 * Phone: 207- 622- 7900 * Fax: 207 -622- 6210  * www.medental.org  
 
Testimony of the Maine Dental Association  
Before the Health and Human Services  Committee  
 
Testimony in Support  
 
LD 1837 An Act to Increase Oral Health Services  
 
Public Hearing: Friday , May 12, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and Distinguished Members of the Health and Human 
Services  Committee:   
 My name is Therese Cahill  and I serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Dental 
Association. The MDA is a statewide association dedicated to advancing excellence in dentistry.  
 I apologize for being unable to personally present the MDA’s testimony today  but family 
obligations  prevent me from doing so . 
 The MDA represents 85% of the dentists in Maine; there  are approximately  775 practicing and 
retired dentists who are active members of the association.   And on a  genuinely  positive note, 
the states where the dentists per 100,000  population increased the most between 2010 and 2020 were 
North Carolina (14.4 percent), Texas (13.9 percent) and Maine (12.5 percent ).1 
 
On behalf of the Maine Dental Association, I am  respectfully provid ing testimony  in support of 
LD 1837,  An Act to Increase Oral Health Services .   
 
The MDA supported LD 1501 An Act to Protect Oral Health for Children in Maine  sponsored by 
Representative Gramlich  in the 130th Legislature  with a similar goal of expanding dental services 
to school children throughout Maine .  LD 1501 received a unanimous ought to pass as amended 
vote .  The Committee went even  furthe r, voting to add  LD 1501 to the short list of bills 
requiring  funding sent to the Appropriations Committee during budget negotiations .  And while 
some of the language was incorporated , the program was never adequately funded.  
 
 
1 ADA.org: HPI Infographics | The Dentist Workforce – Key Facts  

In order to ensure that ALL children, regardless of family economic status, receive at least one 
preventive dental visit annually  it’s absolutely essential that LD 1837 is passed  and that the 
necessary funding is appropriated.  
 
We are all aware that Maine , despite passage of an adult MaineCare  dental benefit and a 
significant increase in MaineCare dental fees , continues to struggle with sufficient access to  
dental care.  The MDA continues to work with the Department on issues that have stymied 
access.   
 
It’s also critical to note that dental practices across the state have struggled to find sufficient 
staff.  On average , for at least the  last two year s, it’s taken approximately six months to fill a 
dental hygienist  position.  And we have practices across Maine  where dentists are the provider s 
of hygiene  services to  their  patients.   Dental assisting positions pose a  challenge as well.  
 Following is an excerpt from a  2022 publication co -authored by the  ADA ’s Health Policy 
Institute, the American Dental Hygienists Association,  and the American Dental Assistants 
Association :   
 
IMPACT OF WORKFORCE SHORTAGES ON DENTAL PRACTICE Staffing issues were cited as the 
most significant concern among dentists in January 2022 and remained the top concern in July 
2022. This is consistent with other industries predominantly structured as small businesses, where – despite recent record -breaking inflation –  workforce shortages remain the most 
significant problem. The shortages have caused an estimated 11% reduction in dental practice capacity. In July 2022, 4 in 10 dental practices indicated they were recruiting or had recently recruited dental assistants (DA), and nearly the same share indicated they were recruiting dental 
hygienists (DH). Among dentists recruiting for these positions, the vast majority – 9 in 10 –  
indicated it was “extremely” or “very” challenging. Additionally  in July 2022, about 1 in 3 
dentists who did not have full schedules indicated that vacant staff positions were at least part 
of the problem. Recruitment activity in dental offices and its associated level of difficulty have 
gradually increased over the tw o years that HPI has polled dentists on these topics.
2 
 
The shortage of dental professionals is not endemic to Maine and certainly all the more reason 
for us to work together to solve these problems.  
 
Thank you for your time and attention.   
 
 
2 Dental workforce shortages: Data to Navigate Today’s Labor Market (ada.org)    
