Testimony of Dr. Wendy Alpaugh in Support of LD 1837: An Act to Increase Oral 
Health Services 
May 11, 2023 
Honorable Joe Baldacci and the honorable Michele Meyer and members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee, this testimony is to express my support for 
LD 1837 
I am reaching out to you as an oral health provider in rural Maine who depended on 
the Oral Health Program for years. 
When I began my dental practice in Maine over forty years ago, I immediately 
reached out to the Maine Oral Health Program where I found amazing resources to 
help me educate my community and patients. There were “tubs” that had printed 
materials (written in understandable terms), hands on supplies (eg models of teeth, 
large toothbrushes; models of lungs of smokers and non-smokers – for smoking 
cessation education) that students and their families could explore and would 
stimulate them to ask questions, and there were ideas to help me get health 
messages across. 
I used these tubs and their contents at health fairs and in the schools. People were 
fascinated by the contents! These resources were wonderful, but it took dedicated, 
creative state employees who listened to and heard what oral health care providers 
needed to develop these resources. The people that staffed the oral health program 
provided a wealth of knowledge re: oral health education, data regarding the state of 
oral health in Maine, and facilitated collaboration among stakeholders for improving 
oral health in Maine.  
I also appreciated the School Oral Health component that my community benefited 
from. The under 40 year old members of my community have few cavities, for the 
most part. I attribute much of this to the school fluoride program and the education 
that happened in collaboration with the Oral Health Program.  
When I wanted to provide dental screenings in the schools and preventive services 
at the local nursing facility, who did I turn to? The Oral Health Program staff who 
helped me with portable equipment that I could borrow. Without those tools, I may 
not have been able to provide those services.   
I have missed having access to the program over the past eight years. Those state 
employees were dedicated, hard working, and advocated for good oral health for our 
residents. They were an essential piece in the incomplete, but improved, state of 
oral health of Maine residents due, I believe, to their diligence and caring.  
I would like to see a fully supported Oral Health Program reinstated in Maine. I hope 
you will support LD 1837 for the wellbeing of all of us! Good Oral Health is the start 
toward good overall Health! 
 
Wendy Alpaugh 
218 Sand Beach Road 
Stonington, ME  04681 
wlawjm@myfairpoint.net 
