TESTIMONY OF 
JOHN SAGASER, TAX POLICY COUNSEL 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April 26, 2023, at 9:30 A.M. 
L.D. 1504 — “An Act to Exempt Broadband Equipment from the Sales and Use Tax” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good morning, my name is John Sagaser, Tax Policy Counsel in the 
Office of Tax policy at Maine Revenue Services. I am here today at the request of 
the Administration to testify Neither For Nor Against L.D. 1504, “An Act to 
Exempt Broadband Equipment from the Sales and Use Tax.” 
My comments are directed to recommended clariﬁcation of certain language 
in the bill, and to points the Committee should consider with respect to the 
intended scope of the bill. This bill would exempt certain sales of machinery and 
equipment used to provide broadband communications service. In evaluating this 
proposed exemption, the Committee should keep in mind that sales taxes are 
usually but not always a tax imposed on retail sales at the end-consumer level. 
Sales taxes are at their most efficient when imposed at the retail end-sale toa 
consumer, rather than on business-to-business intermediate transactions. 
I would also like to note for the Committee aspects of the bill that relate to 
use tax and the Service Provider Tax (“SPT”). First, the language of this bill is 
ambiguous as to whether it would grant the exemption only for sales of qualifying 
machinery and equipment to “broadband communications service providers, ” or 
instead more broadly to any person who purchases machinery and equipment that 
is used to provide broadband communications services. Contractors, for example,
1
often purchase such equipment as tangible personal property and then install the 
equipment into realty; under current law they must pay the sales tax (or impute use 
tax) on these items intended for installation. 
Next, the Committee should note that many items that fall under this bill’s 
deﬁnition of “machinery and equipment used to provide broadband 
communications service” would also be considered “telecommunications 
equipment ” deﬁned under the Service Provider Tax law. A 6% Service Provider 
Tax (“SPT”) is imposed on the provider of installation, maintenance or repair 
services of telecommunications equipment. As L.D. 1504 does not affect the SPT, 
even if the sale of broadband equipment becomes exempt from sales tax, its 
installation may still be taxable under the SPT. 
In addition, the language in lines 4-5 should be simpliﬁed since the 
deﬁnition section provides sufﬁcient limitation on qualifying machinery and 
equipment. The deﬁnition of qualifying “machinery and equipment ” should also 
be narrowed; the phrase “other infrastructure that is used in whole or in part to 
provide broadband communications service” is very broad and could arguably 
include any networkable device, software, or equipment. The term “affiliate ” on 
line 10 should be deﬁned, as the existing deﬁnition in § l752(6-F) applies to that 
subsection only. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
2
