Charter 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Testimony of Charter Communications 
LD1504 An Act to Exempt Broadband Equipment from the Sales and Use Tax 
4/26/2023 
Chairwoman Grohoski, Chairman Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is Melinda 
Kinney, Sr. Director of State Government Affairs in Maine for Charter Communications. I am here today 
to testify in favor of LD 1504 An Act to Exempt Broadband Equipment from the Sales and Use Tax. 
Charter has been an active partner with Maine in providing broadband services to 295 communities in 
the state serving 466,000 customers and we employ over 750 Maine residents. We are committed to 
expanding broadband services in Maine. ln 2022 the company invested more than $73 million dollars in 
technology and infrastructure and expanded the reach of our network to over 10,000 homes and 
businesses. Just last month Charter announced an additional $82 million dollar investment which will 
build on an already established and robust network across the state. 
Governor Mills set an aggressive goal that will ensure all Mainers have access to high-speed internet 
regardless of their zip code. Charter is proud to support that goal and we are working to expand to 
unserved homes in the most rural and hard-to~reach areas in Maine, which are often the most expensive. 
LD 1504 provides an opportunity for the state to leverage the private investment that all internet service 
providers are making in Maine to bring broadband to all residents. Eliminating the sales and use tax on 
purchases of machinery and equipment used to provide broadband and other communications services 
will increase network investment, broadband penetration, employment, and economic growth. 
Maine has several programs to incentivize businesses to invest in Maine, and this bill is another 
opportunity to stimulate continued growth in a sector that has far reaching economic implications. This 
program also has the benefit of accountability for companies who wish to take advantage of the tax 
credit. To qualify for the incentive, you must be expanding broadband. This is just one more tool Maine 
has to maximize infrastructure investment. 
In 2019 Governor Mills released a 10-year Strategic Plan for Maine which was meant to serve as a road 
map to growing Maine's economy. This plan refers to broadband as one of the "lifelines of Maine's 
economy" and indicates that it is necessary infrastructure that will allow communities to thrive. 
LD 1504 will enhance the value of federal and private investment in the state, providing an even greater 
impact on Maine communities. 
Thank you and I am happy to answer any questions.
