,. 
ea 
-=", 
-. e' ..'*'-““ ;j 
Peter Lyford l3 ls‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 10 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Peter Lyford 
Presenting L.D. 583, An Act to Provide for Municipalities to Allow Grocery Stores 
up to 10,000 Square Feet to Open on Easter, Thanksgiving and Christmas 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business 
February 28, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and member of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: I am Peter Lyford and I have 
the honor of representing the people of Senate District 10, which includes 3 municipalities in 
Hancock County and 9 in Penobscot County. I am before you today to present L.D. 583, An Act 
to Provide for Municipalities to Allow Grocery Stores up to 10,000 Square Feet to Open on 
Easter, Thanksgiving and Christmas. 
Easter, Thanksgiving, and Christmas are all holidays where families often gather for a large meal 
— each attendee bringing some type of dish or item to be shared. It’s not uncommon for an 
individual to ﬁnd themselves in a pinch for an ingredient or a last minute item to pick up as they 
make their way to ‘said gathering ’ . Yet in many rural communities, the only grocery store nearby 
is usually smaller in size and locally owned. With stores under 10,000 square feet having to be 
closed on these holidays, residents living in rural Maine are at a disadvantage as they have to 
drive out of their way to a large box store. 
Additionally, the owners and employees of small locally owned grocery stores, like the 
constituent I submitted this legislation for, are at a disadvantage. First, the owners are unable to 
meet the needs of their constituents while at the same time losing revenue to larger stores that are 
able to remain open on these holidays. Second, employees who would like to receive extra hours 
and pay around the holidays are unable to do so. 
I would like to offer an amendment, which you should have all received, that would increase the 
square footage for grocery stores we are discussing up to 12,000 square feet. This legislation 
Would help to remedy both of the problems previously mentioned as it allows for a municipality
to pass an ordinance to let grocery stores with less than 12,000 square feet of interior selling 
space to be open on Easter, Thanksgiving, and Christmas. 
I believe this legislation is a Win-win as it would open up opportunities for constituents to shop 
locally on these three days and it would allow for owners to keep their stores open and 
competitive. The constituent I submitted this for has a small grocery store that serves six 
surrounding communities — the individuals living in those communities rely on this particular 
store to be open. My constituent also shared with me that if the legislation passed, it would be 
voluntary for his employees. Meaning if someone wanted to work that day they could, but he 
would not require it. For those who wanted to work, he would provide them with a bonus in 
addition to time and a half pay. 
While large grocery stores, movie theatres, restaurants, and bowling alleys are all permitted to be 
open on these holidays, our small locally owned grocery stores are not. I believe it’s Well past 
time that we extend the same level of support to these grocers, open up opportunities for our 
constituents, and pass this legislation. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
