.1- 
7% ~'|=\ i -/,... 
»-9-j-\< __'_-_" . ~_;-1;; 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Traffic Safety Unit 
State House Station 20 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS COL. WILLIAM ROSS 
GOVERNOR CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT 
COMNIISSIONER DEPUTY CHIEF 
Testimony of Lt. Bruce Scott 
AGAINST LD 736 
An Act to Remove the Requirement That Certain Motor Vehicles Be 
Equipped with a Front License Plate. 
Senator Chipman, Rep. Williams, and distinguished Members of the 
]oint Standing Committee on Transportation, my name is Lt. Bruce 
Scott, and I am the Commanding Officer of the State Police Traffic 
Safety Unit. I am here today to testify on behalf of the Department of 
Public Safety and the Maine State Police in Opposition of LD 736. 
This bill would remove the requirement for all vehicles, except truck 
tractors, to have a front registration plate. Having a front plate 
increases the visibility for proper identiﬁcation. Many times, the rear 
plate of a vehicle is damaged or obstructed by trailer hitches, trailers, 
bicycle hitches, protruding loads, cargo carriers, etc. Also, due to the 
age of some registration plates, they are delaminating, making them 
very difficult to read. Having two plates increases the chances that at 
least one of them is legible. Requiring a plate on the front of a vehicle 
greatly increases the chances that the vehicle is properly identiﬁed if 
the vehicle is used to commit any number of crimes to include toll
I 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
evasion or any traffic violation. Imagine a vehicle with no front plate 
drives up to a convenience store. The operator enters the store, 
commits an armed robbery, returns to their vehicle, backs away from 
the store and all the way out into the road then drives away, making it 
impossible for the clerk, witnesses or surveillance cameras to obtaina 
plate number. The reality is, capturing the front license plate can help 
solve a crime immediately. 
In addition to the concerns already stated, every second counts during 
an “Amber Alert,” “Silver Alert,” “Missing Person File,” “Attempt to 
Locate,” etc., and a missing front plate may cause a vehicle being 
sought after to get overlooked by law enforcement through both 
traditional means and through newer automated license plate readers 
located throughout the country. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote “Ought Not to Pass” on LD 736 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State 
Police, I thank you for your time and would be happy to try and 
answer any questions that you might have. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
