20160175.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Opposition to L.D. 736,  
An Act to Remove the Requirement That Certain Motor Vehicles Be 
Equipped with a Front License Plate 
Submitted by Chief Charles Rumsey  
March 13, 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished Members of the 
Committee on Transportation. My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the Chief of 
the Cumberland Police Department. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the 
Maine Chiefs of Police Association in Opposition to LD 736.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and personal 
relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in law 
enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police training 
and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for equality of law 
enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the prevention and detection 
of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics; and to promote the 
profession of law enforcement as an integral and dedicated force in today's society 
sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill removes the requirement that certain motor vehicles must display 
a registration plate on the front of those motor vehicles. 
We are in opposition to LD 736 because one of our core missions is to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime - having two opportunities to view a vehicle’s 
license plate goes directly to that purpose for two main reasons.  
First, it makes it easier for the public to report crimes to law enforcement. For 
example, an AMBER Alert often issues license plate numbers associated with the 
case. If the license plate is only on one part of the car, then it lessens the likelihood 
that the person will see it and call in to report that it has been seen.  Time is of the 
essence in those cases, and we want to make it as easy as possible for the public to 
help bring a child home.  
Second, it makes it easier for law enforcement to keep the public safe. For example, 
our detectives work cases where we receive video surveillance, and we are only 
able to see part of a car from videos.  It is much easier when we are able to get at 
least partial plates from the vehicles - removing the front plate would restrict the 
detective’s ability to solve the case and bring peace to the victim.  
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
20160175.1 We hope that you will vote ought not to pass to LD 736. And, on behalf of the 
Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank you for your work on this 
Committee.  
