 
 
 
 
 
March 16, 2023  
 
Senator Ben Chipman , Chair  
Representative Lynne W illiams , Chair  
Members of the Transportation  Committee  
 
RE: Testimony  in OPPOSITION to LD  736,  An Act to Remove the Requirement That Certain Motor Vehicles Be 
Equipped with a Front License Plate  
 
Dear Senator C hipman , Representative Williams  and members of the Transportation  Committee:  
 
My name is Curtis Picard and I am the Executive Director of the Retail Association of Maine. I am a resident o f 
Topsham.  We have more than  350 members statewide and represent retailers of all sizes. Maine’s retailers employ 
more than 85 ,000 Mainers. We are here today to testify in  opposition to LD 736. 
 
Retailers of all sizes deploy sophisticated systems to help prevent theft and strategically placed cameras are a key 
component.  Stores  are quite often the targets of theft and t he safety of our employees, the public, and the 
facilities are a top priority for business owners. In a state like Maine, the majority of the thefts involve a motor 
vehicle, and the usage of two license plates increases the opportunity of catching perpetrators faster. If LD 736 
were to pass, t here is an increased chance that vehicles displaying only one license plate would limit law 
enforce ment’s ability  to identify the perpetrator.  
 
Loss  prevent ion professionals maintain strong  communication with  law enforcement professionals. Many of these 
communications include photos of a vehicle with the front or back license plate. Often, law enforcement officials 
contact  retailers  to obtain access to their surveillance footage to help identify a car that may  have been identified 
as they flee a store after a theft , or worse, for other crimes like a child abdu ction .  
 
In summation, retailers have concern that eliminating the requirement that vehicles display a front and rear 
license plate will hinder their efforts in reducing theft , organized retail crime  or other crim es. We urge the 
committee to vote LD 736 Ought Not to Pass.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Curtis Picard, CAE  
President  and CEO  

