March 16, 2023 
Testimony of Erin Courtney, Maine Turnpike Authority 
Before the 131$‘ Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
In Opposition of LD 736 
An Act to Remove the Requirement That Certain Motor Vehicles 
Be Equipped with a Front License Plate 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and distinguished members of Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Erin Courtney and l am the Public Outreach Manager and 
Legislative Liaison for the Maine Turnpike Authority (MTA). MTA respectfully opposes LD 736 
because it would allow more toll violators and negatively impact our ability-to collect tolls. 
MTA uses license plate images and data when transactions are not processed on-the-spot by 
an MTA toll collector or electronically through an E-ZPass transponder. ln such cases, a Toll image 
Reviewer will use the photos taken of the license plate to determine whether the vehicle is associated 
with an E-ZPass account. lf there is a match, the image reviewer automatically posts the toll the 
corresponding account. If there is no match, it is considered a violation, and enforcement protocols 
are initiated. The front plate is an increasingly important part of this process. In 2016, we relied on 
front license plates on passenger vehicles to process over 114,000 transactions. In 2022, we used the 
front plate images to process over 754,000 transactions totaling over $4.5 million in revenue. 
A 2012 study by Texas A&M Transportation Institute found that the lack of front plates has 
significant impact on the generation of photographic evidence related to fining toll violators. It stated 
that, “without front license plates, the E-470 in Colorado would lose at least $23.1 M in toll revenue or 
43.5% of their tolls on annual basis.” It also noted that Pennsylvania, which is a one plate state, has 
to discard sixteen percent of the transactions passing through its facilities because the plates were 
not able to be read. 
A front plate is currently required in 29 out of the 50 states. Our neighboring states of New 
Hampshire and Vermont are two plate states. Other nearby states of Massachusetts, Rhode island, 
New York and New Jersey are all two plate states as well — and many of these states collect tolls 
using plate reading technology. 
Simply stated, removing front plates will increase the number of Turnpike travelers that do not 
pay their fair share, reduce toll revenue, and undermine the integrity of our toll collection system. 
We therefore urge you to vote ought not to pass. l would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have. 
Sale Reliable Sustainable 
hllaxnci T irnnilzn A1 lthrxrihl .. '7'-mrx Pnnnraac Qtroal .. Dm-Hand MC r\n1n'>
