STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL & FINANCIAL REGULATION 
BUREAU OF INSURANCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office Location: 76 Northern Avenue, Gardiner, Maine 04345 
Mailing Address: 34 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
www.maine.gov/insurance 
Phone: (207) 624-8475  TTY: Please Call Maine Relay 711 Consumer Assistance: 1-800-300-5000 Fax: (207) 624-8599 
 
Janet T. Mills
Governor
Anne L. Head
DPFR Commissioner
Timothy N. Schott
Acting Superintendent
 
May 4, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Senate Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333-0100 
Re: L.D. 1766, An Act to Require Insurance Carriers to Compensate Providers for Costs of Providing 
Medical Records for Utilization Review 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee: 
The Bureau of Insurance takes no position on L.D. 1766.  The purpose of this letter is to provide you with 
background information. This bill would add a new subsection to the Health Plan Improvement Act1 to 
require carriers requesting medical records or documents for utilization review to compensate providers 
for “reasonable expenses” to provide the requested records and documents.  
This bill requires providers to make “every reasonable effort” to provide the requested records and 
documents at no cost; to give the carrier the estimated cost of reasonable expenses to provide the records 
when the carrier makes the request; and permits providers to require the carrier to submit reimbursement 
for the reasonable costs within a reasonable time.  We note that the bill does not define the term “every 
reasonable effort” or “reasonable time” for reimbursement. 
This bill defines “reasonable expenses” as the actual costs attributable to the gathering of the requested 
medical records and documents, making and providing copies or transmitting the records or documents.  
The Bureau believes that any compensation determinations for costs associated with 
gathering/transmitting records should be articulated within the contract between a carrier and provider. 
We would also note that since many records are now electronic, costs for their transmission should be 
much lower than when providers routinely had to make and send photocopies to the carriers.  It is likely 
that the additional costs to insurers of making payments for obtaining these records will be passed on to 
consumers through higher premiums. 
I hope this information is useful to the Committee.  Please let me know if I can provide any further 
assistance. 
Sincerely, 
 
Timothy N. Schott 
Acting Superintendent 
cc: Representative Anne-Marie Mastraccio 
 
1 24-A M.R.S. Chapter 56-A. 
