 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health of all Maine 
people 
 
TO:   Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director, Communications and Government Affairs  
 
DATE:  May 4, 2023  
 
RE:  SUPPORT – LD 1766, An Act to Require Insurance Carriers to Compensate 
Providers for Costs of Providing Medical Records for Utilization Review 
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings.  
 
Utilization Review background 
 
Most medical decisions were once made between a patient and their physicians but are 
examined by an external reviewer by an entity responsible for paying all or most of the cost of 
the care (e.g., insurer, health maintenance organization (HMO), preferred provider organization 
(PPO), etc.) These are called utilization management efforts (UR).  
 
There have been a number of bills this session concerning utilization review, more specifically 
on prior authorizations. It is important to note that all prior authorizations can be considered 
utilization review, however, not all utilization reviews are prior authorizations.  
 
There has been a clear demonstration of the rise in administrative costs contributing to the 
overall cost of care. With the increase in utilization review, the administrative burden on 
physicians increases. Is this increase justified? Has utilization management had the intended 
impact to justify the means? Numerous MMA members express concerns that carrier decisions 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 are too focused on limiting their financial liability. 
 
Why LD 1766? What are the reasons for records requests? For what are they used? 
 
One particular independent physician practice supporting the bill informed us they too frequently 
get batch requests for the medical records of up to 600 patients. The medical records for some 
individual patients can total in the thousands.  
 
Example: Hypothetical records request for 300 patients. Hypothetical average of 200 pages of 
records for each patient. = 60,000 pages. 
 
We present one practice interaction with MMA staff:  
 
They ask us for hundreds of charts from hundreds of patients at one request. It's basically 
every patient we treated. What’s worse is we don’t know why. There’s never an explanation 
and we don't hear back from them. We just wait for the next request. 
 
It takes a lot of time and effort to deal with these requests and get them out the door. We 
have to hire staff and spread it among other staff which takes them away from doing more 
critical work and/or taking care of patients. 
 
Accessing information once it has been requested can be an expensive process. Some requests 
are vastly more complicated than simply downloading some information from a records 
database. Accessing and producing records often involves collecting and combining documents 
that fall under one request’s umbrella but aren’t necessarily together, redacting certain 
information, and/or duplicating pages. 
 
How are the records requests which prompted LD 1766 improving care? We don’t know. Are 
they used for approvals? We don’t know. Denials? We don’t know. Clawbacks? We don’t know. 
Engaging with practices to discuss evidence-based care? We don’t know. What are the reasons 
for requesting a voluminous number of medical records? We don’t know. 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
  
 
Health Care Spending Data 
 
 in 1987, total spending on health care reached an estimated $500 billion, up from $234 billion 
just 5 years earlier. The gross national product (GDP) attributed to health services was 11.1 
percent in 1987. 
 
Widespread use of utilization review in managing health care rose considerably in the 1980s. 
The cause was rapidly rising health care costs. (emphasis ours) 
 
National health care expenditures totaled $4.3 trillion in 2021 , or $12,914 per person, and 
accounted for 18.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Private Health Insurance accounts for 
a 28 percent share ($1.2 trillion). 
 
Data references 
 Waste in the US Health Care System-Estimated Costs and Potential Savings , Journal of the 
American Medical Association, October 15, 2019 
 
On pricing failures & administrative complexity: “The estimated total annual cost of waste in 
this category was $265.6 billion.”  
 
Administrative complexity is the greatest source of waste (emphasis ours) in the United 
States today and can be a result of payers’ efforts (emphasis ours) to reduce waste by 
reducing overtreatment and low value care. 
 
Physician Practice Administrative Burden & Utilization Review 
 
According to a 2021 Health Affairs review : 
 
We estimate that physician practices spend $26.7 billion per year interacting with payers 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 on behalf of their patients, especially in navigating prior authorization requirements. This 
estimate is based on the weekly time spent per physician practice combined with 
information on physician and staff hourly earnings.  
 
For every interaction that a physician has with a payer over prior authorization, there is 
often a corresponding conversation with the patient whose prescription is in question. 
 
The Maine Medical Association respectfully requests the Committee and the Legislature vote 
Ought to Pass on LD 1766. Independent physician practices are in the end small businesses 
with a duty to provide the best care possible to their patients. This responsibility requires a strict 
focus on directing resources to that care rather than crushing amounts of paperwork for which 
they know no reason why it is needed. 
 
Thank you for your attention to our comments. 
 
