HEALTHCARE 
PURCHASER 
ALLIANCE 
OF MAINE 
Testimony of Peter Hayes 
to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, insurance and Financial Services 
In Opposition to 
LD 1766, An Act Concerning Prior Authorizations for Health Care Provider Services 
May 4, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. 
My name is Peter Hayes. I'm the President and CEO of the Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine and l’m 
here today to testify in opposition to LD 1766. The HPA is a nonproﬁt that represents the purchasers of 
healthcare in Maine. Our mission is to advance healthcare value and to support and incentivize high- 
quality, affordable care. We have over 60 members, including some of the largest public and private 
employers and health trusts in Maine. Collectively, our members spend over a billion dollars annually 
providing health care for nearly one quarter of the commercially insured population in the state. 
We understand the concerns of bill supporters that providers incur costs when complying with 
administrative requirements, including carriers ’ utilization review requests. But rather than mandate in 
Maine statute that carriers cover those costs, we think that carrier reimbursement for any utilization review 
expenses should be incorporated into the reimbursement rates that providers negotiate as part of their 
carrier contracts. Reimbursement rates already are designed to cover providers ’ costs to deliver services to 
carriers ‘ members, including reasonable administrative costs. If providers believe that their negotiated 
rates don't sufficiently cover the costs of existing or new administrative requirements, we believe they 
should work with carriers to increase those rates during contract negotiations. 
If the committee opts to move forward with LD 1766, we would suggest that the bill be amended to include 
a dispute resolution or arbitration process in the event that the carrier does not agree with the reasonable 
expense amount that the provider submits for reimbursement. As currently drafted, it appears that carriers 
would have no recourse if such a disagreement arose. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide HPA's feedback on LD 1766. I'd be happy to answer any questions 
and will be available for the work session. 
1‘ ~">f' 
f 366 US ROUIG l, SUlf€ 3 Falmouth, ME Q4105 
W: wwwpurchaseralliance.org |E: info@purchaseral|ianceorg I P: 207.844.8106
