May 4, 2023  
Maine Legislative Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Service Committee 
  
RE: LD 1766 An Act to Require Insurance Carriers to Compensate Providers for Cost of Providing  
                      Medical Records for Utilization Review.  
 
 
 
Dear Senate Chair Donna  Bailey and House of Representative Chair and other members of the  
          Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Service Committee,  
I  am  testifying on behalf of the Maine Nurse Practitioner Association to provide support of LD 
1766 for the following reasons:  
First because of the  
Time it takes to:   
1. Locate the requested information by the insurance company 
             2.Write a brief reply letter and  
3.Organize the information in order of request 
4.Attach the material to an encrypted email or prepare the  
     material to send via US postal service and transport it to the US post office.  
 Second, requested information usually includes a fair amount of information which can  
                consist of the following:   
1. An Initial Assessment of the patient’s status, which is 1-3 pages 
2. Progress Notes which may be 1 or 2 pages for each patient visit and  
                may include many visits.  
3. Lab reports, usually at least the last and sometimes previous ones, 3-4 pages 
4. Any consults, or other studies as sleep studies, EKGs etc, 0-3 pages 
5. Treatment Plans, 1-3 pages 
6. Discharge, 1-2 pages 
7. Written information provided to the patient, 1-5 pages for different treatments.  
                    Total number approximately 15 to 20 pages for an uncomplicated Case.  
    Third, Costs for the provider that include:   
1. For an email encryption service to send information confidentially via or  
       a fax phone service.  
2. If  mailed the costs of postage if sent via US postal service or Fed ex or UPS  
3. Cost of gas to take it to the Post Office, Fed EX or UPS office .  
4. Cost of time away from seeing patients and loss of making from seeing patients.  
 
Please consider voting yes to LD 1766 to compensate Providers for the cost of Providing 
Insurance Carriers Medical Records for their Utilization Review.    
 
Sincerely,  
Sylvia Ingerson, PMHCNS-NP, LADC 
Sylvia Ingerson, PMHCNS-NP, LADC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sylvia  Ingerson
Farmington, ME 
LD 1766
Please see letter in file above. Thank you, Sylvia Ingerson, PMHCNS-NP, LADC
