Nicholas Faulkingham
Jonesport
LD 951
  I am advocating for LD951 to benefit our students, faculty, and citizens of the 
Moosabec Community. When I see that Governor Mills claimed to be funding all 
school systems at 55%, I was confused. Just recently, I attended a school board 
meeting, and it was mentioned to only be at 6-10% state funding for our district in 
Jonesport. After doing some research and quickly realizing there was a formula 
involved, it was very clear to me how flawed this system is. Living in a community 
with its' beautiful coastline attracts wealthy retirees who develop new homes or 
rebuild existing homes, thus driving up the tax evaluation. This is where the 
inequitable school funding formula fails our community. The tax payers in this 
community are proudly paying the majority of the schools' funding. With many on 
fixed incomes, and inflation at an all time high, the citizens are over-extended.
  Serving on a school bard was something I never pictured myself doing. It is 
completely out of my element. After realizing how the state funding formula worked 
and how flawed it was, I decided to run for a seat. If I won this position, my plan was 
to contact state representatives who served areas that were affected by the formula in 
the same way our area is. In contacting the representatives, I was hoping to have a fair
funding bill submitted. When achieving a seat on the board, I started emailing these 
representatives about my idea. I quickly learned that a bill had already been submitted
that was similar to my idea. I was very happy to read about LD951. There is hope. 
Districts who are in the similar funding position like ours will greatly benefit from 
fair funding. Our students are just as important as those in higher funded schools. If 
this bill passes, it will help struggling school districts compete with neighboring 
schools, who receive more state funding, to provide adequate, competitive teacher 
salaries.  Wages for other industries, like the medical field, have increased over the 
last few years, drawing more attention than teaching positions. Passing this bill will 
allow programs that may have been cut, to be implemented back into the schools.
  I spent many years working on marine systems - mechanical, electrical, and 
hydraulic. The definition of a system is as follows: 
Parts brought together to make something complex work properly. When inadequate 
parts are put in place, the system will eventually fail. Inadequate funding of our 
school system will do the same. You are only as strong as your weakest link.
  I ask that you put serious thought into this bill. Investing in our youth today, will 
only benefit our state and country tomorrow. Thank you.
