Renee Jordan-Chandler
Jonesport 
LD 951
Testimony in Support of LD 951
Renee Jordan-Chandler
Jonesport Elementary School Board 
Beautiful coastal views, waking up to the smell of the salty air and the sound of 
lobster boats in the summer, is that what we’re valuing a childs education with? This 
coastal community isn’t your ritzy cliche. It’s full of hard-working men and women 
who have built their homegrown businesses up from the very bottom with every 
penny they have. You don’t see yachts moored in the harbors, you see working class 
fishing vessels paid for with blood sweat and tears. This community is generations of 
back-breaking labor to provide for families working around the very tides of the 
“oceanfront” that is the valuation we have been penalized for in the funding for our 
small school system. 
The Essential Programs and Services funding formula uses a model that doesn’t 
pertain to school systems the size of Moosabec Community School District/Union 
103, which is comprised of Beals Elementary School, Jonesport Elementary School 
and Jonesport-Beals High School. Together, within these three school there are 
around 200 students. Of these three schools the average income of families in 
Jonesport and Beals is about $50,000. People in our towns don’t live extravagantly, 
they live affordably and sometimes we struggle to meet that need. Evaluating our 
community based solely on our location is discriminatory at best, unless you’ve been 
here and lived as we do for a time. Given the current state of our precious lobster 
fishing industry and the uncertainty surrounding it, people are wondering how we will
continue to afford land taxes as they rise each year. 
Tax relief is not a new concept. Low-income families in school districts receiving 
minimal funding makes for all the more reason to consider the approval of the LD 951
bill a "must" for Maine. In MSBA Resolutions 4.10 Enhanced Circuit Breaker- “In 
light of evidence that there is a correlation between the amount districts can spend on 
education and student achievements, the Maine School Board Association supports 
the use of additional state funding for an enhanced circuit breaker program in Maine 
that would give tax relief to low-income homeowners, while maintaining appropriate 
levels of local property tax support for schools.” (Adopted 2013) 
Balancing the high valuation of property taxes in Jonesport and Beals Island with 
the low-income of households would allow for the school system to receive the 
appropriate amount of funding from the Essential Programs and Services and take the 
burden off the taxpayers who are barely staying above water. Revising the formulary 
the model is created from would ensure a fair and non-biased approach to funding all 
Maine schools adequately as their needs are and not as a broken model sees it fit. 
Recalculating the number of students in brackets would be helpful, as many Maine 
schools do not have 1000+ students, living on the ocean/oceanfront property does 
NOT mean that you have money (proven fact, come to Washington County), 
household income is a huge factor in a child’s education from the day they walk 
through the doors of a school building until they graduate high school. I ask that you 
pass LD 951. 
Thank you, Renee’ 
