E HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
at 
1,35‘; 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Va“, Geiger TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
l Green Way 
Rockland, ME 04841 
Phone: (207) 956-1565 
Valli Geiger@legiSlature.mainegov 
April 12, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Valli Geiger introducing 
LD 951, An Act to Amend the State Education Funding Formula to Create Equity Between 
Municipalities by Adding Medical Income to the Formula 
Before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
Good Aftemoon Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and honorable members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. My Name is Valli Geiger and I represent House 
District 42 which includes Rockland, most of Owls Head and the islands of North Haven, 
Matinicus, Crie Haven and the Muscle Ridge. 
What is fair school funding? 
The Education Law Center (ELC)1 has released a report “Making the Grade 2019” which looks 
at education funding and equity across the country by state. The ELC was fotmded in 1973 and is 
the nation’s legal defense fund for public education rights. It conducts research to advance policy 
and advocacy for fair school funding in the states with the support of the Kellogg Foundation and 
the Educational Testing Service. 
It deﬁnes “fair school funding as the funding needed in each state to provide qualiﬁed teachers, 
support staff, programs, sen/ices and other resources essential for all students to havea 
meaningful opportunity to achieve the state’s academic standards and graduate high school 
prepared for citizenship, postsecondary education and the workforce. A fair school funding 
system is the basic foundational building block for high-performing, effective K-12 public 
school systems. Fair funding has two basic components: a sufﬁcient level of funding for all 
students and increased funding to high-poverty districts to address the additional cost of 
educating students in those districts. ” 
“The United States has no national system of public education. However, the states, under their 
constitutions, are obligated to support and maintain systems of free public schools for all resident 
children. States, not school districts, are the units of government in the U.S. legally 
responsible for operating our nation’s public school systems and providing the funding 
necessary to support and maintain those systems. ” 
‘ Home l Education Law Center (edlawcenter.org)_ 
District 42: Rockland, Owls Head, North Haven and part of Matinicus Isle
“The states ﬁtnd local school districts through a statewide method or “formula” enacted by the 
state legislature into law. These “school funding formulas ” or “school ﬁnance systems” 
determine the amount of revenue school districts are permitted to raise from local property and 
other taxes, and the amount of funding or “aid” the state is expected to contribute from state 
taxes. State budgets set the actual amount of funding provided by the state to local school 
districts. Some states in their budgets fail to provide the amount of state revenue or “aid” 
required by the state’s own funding formula, a condition called “formula underfunding. ”2 
When Maine, under the 130th legislature and this Governor, moved to 55% funding of 
education, we no longer met the condition of formula underfunding. 
State and local revenue account for, on average, approximately 92% of total funding for public 
education. The federal govermnent, primarily through programs targeted for low-income 
students and students with disabilities, contributes the remaining 8%. 
The ELC looked at three functions in determining the adequacy of the funding formula in Maine: 
1. Funding Level - the cost-adjusted per pupil revenue ﬁom state and local sources. 
2. Funding Distribution - additional state funds to school districts with high levels of student 
poverty. 
3. Funding Effort - the levels of investment in K-12 public education as a % of the state’s 
wealth (as measured by a percentage of the state’s GDP).~ 
Maine was given a grade of “A” on Funding Level and Funding Effort. It was given an “F” 
on Funding Distribution. In other words, Maine is spending an amount per pupil and investing 
in its children as measured by percentage of GDP in amounts above the national average but is 
failing to direct state funding to districts with high levels of student poverty. 
The ELC states “the hallmark of fair school funding is the provision of higher levels of funding, 
and therefore resources, to high-poverty districts to address concentrated student poverty. ” 
“Students from impoverished communities — urban, rural or otherwise — often come to school 
academically behind their peers from more affluent towns. To level the playing ﬁeld, high- 
poverty districts require additional funding to implement effective strategies and programs to 
remediate early learning deﬁcits, meet grade-level benchmarks, and enable students to make 
year-to-year sustained progress toward graduation. Research-proven supports and interventions 
include high-quality preschool, extended learning time, smaller class sizes, in- and out-of-class 
tutoring, s3ufﬁcient guidance counselors and nurses, and access to social and mental health 
services. ” 
2 ** Above taken from the Education Law Center Report “Making the Grade 2019” on school funding fairness in 
each state. 
3 
https://edlawcenter.org/assets/Making-the-Grade/Making%20the%20Grade%202019.pdf 
District 42: Rockland, Owls Head, North Haven and part of Matinicus Isle
Maine does not have a funding formula weighted for student poverty. Median income, poverty 
rates per school district or municipality are not part of the funding formula. Land valuation is 
instead used as a proxy for equity in funding by assuming property valuation is associated with 
community wealth. But as can be seen by Maine’s grade of “F” in funding distribution according 
to the Education Law Center’s study, it is a poor measure and leaves high needs students without 
the resources necessary to catch up and remediate early learning deﬁcits. 
It is especially seen in communities like mine that are on the coast, or in popular tourist 
destinations. The land valuations are very high but the communities median incomes are not and 
their poverty levels can be high. The poverty level in the state of Maine is 10.9%, while 
Rockland ’s is 13.7%. Rockland ’s median income is $48,871 while Maine’s median income is 
$63,182. This leaves the community struggling to fund education and RSU 13 struggling to 
provide the services students need to successfully meet education and health goals. 
It is for this reason that I have sponsored LD 951, which would amend the calculation used to 
determine a municipality ’s contribution to the cost of K-12 public education to Weight land 
valuation and median income of the municipality equally. The addition of “weighting ” for 
student poverty through the addition of school district or municipality median income added to 
the school formula and either replacing or given equal weight in the formula to land valuation 
Will ensure all students in Maine receive the resources they need to overcome the deﬁcits they 
arrive with. 
Thank you and I am happy to take questions. 
District 42: Rockland, Owls Head, North Haven and part of Matinicus Isle
