Dan Davis
Porter
LD 826
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and Members of the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources,
I represent no entity or interest other than that I am a resident, land-owner, and 
taxpayer in this State.
I support the passing of this legislative document, if only to prevent what we've 
experienced in the past with PFAS poisoning major sections of our state and 
economies.
Many of the molecular structures and chemical compositions for solar panel designs 
are changing rapidly and deep in the R&D stages throughout the country. These new 
designs lack long-term degradation testing of material safety data.
https://www.mackinac.org/blog/2022/bright-panels-dark-secrets-the-problem-of-solar
-waste
Ironically, there are now ideas to utilize biomass waste to create solar panels, akin to 
bulk shipping sludge waste across the state and spreading it over our fields, 
contaminating our waters, our soils, our animals, and the people who live here with 
''innovative'' chemicals that last forever and have health hazards. Instead, they'll line 
vast fields for decades that wash into watersheds and are grazed by farmers animals 
that provide food for their families and yours.
Other ideas are leveraging unstable perovskites, which once exposed to UV and acid 
rain begin to rapidly and exponentially decay (autocatalysis), unless a ''protective 
coating'' is applied.
In the past, the incredible cutting-edge innovative ''protective coatings'' were PFAS 
and it's 5,000+ related compounds and molecular structures. Other fascinating 
''protective coverings'' of the past were BPH, Asbestos, and even glyphosate. 
Maybe the poison of tomorrow is TMD's, transition metal dichalcogenides, but who 
knows, there's no MSDS or long-term decay and environmental studies established, as
products like these, perovskites, reconstituted plastics, and biomass tailings are rushed
to market to spread solar across the nation at a breakneck pace and have not been 
subjected to years of weather, wind, and sun exposure.
I would respectfully urge the ENR Committee and the State policy-makers to serve 
pause and consider how the sprawl of materials we know nothing about may come 
back to haunt future generations in the same way that PFAS is doing to Mainers right 
now. Please support moving LD826 forward, to help educate the legislative 
community and to protect Mainers.
Thank you.
Dan
