CORNERSTONE Z AN EMPLOYEE-OWN ED COlvlPANY,i — 
March 15, 2023 
Senator Stacey Brenner, Chair 
Representative Lori Gramlich, Chair 
Committee on Enviromnent and Natural Resources 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in opposition to LD 826, “An Act To Prohibit the Disposal of Certain Solar 
Panels in the State and to Require Bonds to Cover Disposal Costs” 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, members of the Enviromnent and Natural Resources 
Committee: 
My name is Jeremy Payne and I am a principal with Cornerstone Govermnent Affairs Group 
here to testify in opposition to LD 826 on behalf of our client the Maine Renewable Energy 
Association (“MREA”). - 
MREA is opposed to this legislation because it unfairly singles out one industry ﬂirough the 
eventual end-of-life treatment of solar panels — are there other non-renewable energy materials 
that must bond for their disposal fees? 
In recent years, the solar industry has been responsibly providing a cleaner energy future, 
creating jobs, delivering new taxable value to their host communities, and offering new pathways 
for recent high school and college graduates, or retrained Mainers. LD 826 would senda 
damaging signal to one sector of the clean energy marketplace we are encouraging to invest here 
over the next few decades. 
As this committee knows, there is already a state-mandated decommissioning plan required of 
solar owners/operators and this bill would introduce an additional and costly layer to the existing 
requirements. Overall, at the end of their approximate 30-year lifespans, these panels will 
largely be recycled and reused to manufacture the next generation of solar panels. The raw 
materials do and will have considerable value; however, the solar recycling industry is relatively 
new because the number of panels needed to support that industry is still quite modest. 
It may also be challenging to secure bonds to accurately predict future disposal/recycling costs at 
a time when there really is not much of a market for them in Maine given the newness of our 
burgeoning solar industry. Further, any additional requirements will likely wind up in our future 
electricity prices — increased costs associated with regulatory red tape will not just disappear, but 
will almost certainly rear their ugly head the next time we decide to contract for Maine-made 
renewable resources. 
WWW.CGAGROUP.COM| j@CGAGROUP
We ought to be looking for ways to reduce red tape, speed along our cost-effective clean energy 
transition, and improve our utility interconnection process so that Maine-made solar can help 
serve our homes and businesses for years to come. 
We respectfully urge you to vote ought not to pass. 
Thank you. 
WWW.CGAGROUP.COM| §@CGAGROUP
