 
 
 
March 22, 2023  
Senator Stac y Brenner, Chair  
Representative Lori Gramlich, Chair  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: Comments for consideration during Working Session on LD 826, “An Act To Prohi bit the 
Disposal of Certain Solar Panels in the State and to Require Bonds to Cover Disposal Costs”  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee:  
 
ReVision Energy wishes to s hare feedback in oppo sition to LD 826 for your work session. 
Founded  right here in Maine  in 2003, ReVision Energy is a local, employee owned , certified B 
Corp oratio n with over 385 employee s across our five branches in  New England  (with 220 staff 
in Maine at our Montville and S outh Portland locations) . Our mission is to lead our community in 
solving the environmental problems caused by fossil fuels while alleviating social injustice. Our 
vision is to s ee New England as thriving pla ce where our children, grandchildren, and future  
generations can enjoy a clean environment and just society . In 2022 alone, we installed 10,000  
kilowatts of residential solar and nearly 24 megawatts of commercial solar.  
 
Environmental sustainability and stewardship are at the core of ReVision’s mission and values , 
so we believe it is critical ly important to be thoughtful about the environmental implications of 
the entire lifecycle  of our energy choices , and responsible treatment  of equipment at the end of 
its useful life is an important part of that cons ideration. We are generally in favor of legislative 
and regulatory efforts which support such those efforts,  but we believe  that LD 826, as 
proposed, isn’t the right approach . We oppose  the legislation for four straightforward reasons:  
 
First,  we are holis tically concerned with the creation of  obstacles , and ultimately costs , for solar -
specific development  and decommissioning . If parties agree, as we do, that a life -cycle 
approach to all development is important, we should implement policies and protocols a cross 
the board, not in a piecemeal  manner  that targets only one type of development. While well 
intentioned, the patchwork  approach of adding  solar specific rules and regulations to existing 
policy is inefficient, complicated , expensive, and ultimately does a disservice to our state’s goals 
regarding  a clean energy transition. We respectfully encourage legislators to apply the same 
standards to all development , industries, and/or energy sources.   
 
Second, the proposed legislation seems to confuse and conf late a number of different solar 
technologies and, perhaps inadvertently, lumps them together under a one size fits all solut ion 
that we think i s inappropriate for the  vast majority of solar projects being built in Maine . While  
we should  minimize  the possi bility that solar equipment of any kind ends up in a landfill or 
incinerat or (just as we do  with waste of all kinds ), the specific  concern about toxic material  
pollution  is typically associated with so called ‘thin film’ solar technologies, such as cadmium  
telluride (CdTe ) or copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS)  panels. Those are not what is being 
installed in either residential, commercial or community scale solar projects  in Maine  or around 
New England.  
 
Solar panels installed across New England are almost exclusively  crystalline  silicon modules, 
which  do not constitute toxic waste . It appears the intention is for this legislation to apply to thin 
 
 
film solar panels, not to crystalline silicon solar panels.  There is an argument to be made, then, 
that thi s bill does not address an actual issue within Maine’s solar industry as there are currently 
no hazardous  solar panels being utilized, and therefore there will be no potentially toxic waste 
requiring disposal.  This bill attempt s to provide solutions  to an issue that does not exist.  
 
Should Section 3 of LD 8 26 remain, this language must be clarified to be clear regarding panel 
type. As discussed , this could include utility -scale thin film solar panels and should not 
crystalline silicon panels, which are not toxic and even more, should not make their way to 
landfills based on raw material  value. Additiona lly, the legislation should clarify what a ‘de 
minimus amount’ of trace toxins is within panels  (for example, crystalline silicon  solar panels do 
include trace amounts of silver solder as part of their electrical circuits , as do nearly all other  
electronics ; the legislation should make clear that these amounts of  silver content  are de 
minimus and  not intended to be regulated by this section) . 
 
Third, as you are  aware, effective October 2021, Maine law already requires  solar energy 
developers to have an approved decommissioning plan inclusive of financial assurance in the 
form of a performance or surety bond or letter of credit for the total deco mmissioning cost (35-A 
M.R.S. Subsection 3491 through 3496) . Our standard decommissioning plan, which we provide 
financial assurance for, already includes disposal and recycling . Additionally, if any material 
used constitutes  hazardous waste,  the Maine Hazardous Waste Mana gement Regulations  must 
be followed.  Therefore, the added language in Section 1 and Section 2 is ultimately 
unnecessary  as these provisions propose an additional layer to existing law s which a) does not 
make sense because Mai ne’s current decommissioning la w already includes responsibly 
disposing of equipment  and Maine’s hazardous waste rules  direct  disposal of hazardous waste , 
and b) could be confusing and potentially costly as it could imply that there are additional 
stipulat ions, confusing investors and r esulting in increased bond pricing without adding 
additional value. Even more, in a time when our state is prioritizing the development of further 
clean energy resources, let’s ensure a level playing field and not add barrier s to the solar 
industry when ot her non -renewable energy sources do not have bonding requirements.  
 
Fourth and finally , the solar panels in our region are 95% recyclable with technology readily 
available on the market today  as crystalline silicon panels con tain valuable raw materials  and 
should be reused, not put in landfills . We anticipate that this percentage will continue to improve 
while costs drops in the multi -decade timeframe between today and when these solar arrays 
approach decommissioning . There is  a growing recycling industry w ith robust vendors ,1 and as 
with so man y nascent technologies, we anticipate exponential growth in this sector. At ReVision, 
if a panel is broken and cannot be repaired, we work directly with local electronics recycler  
Aurum Recovery Group, based in Goffst own, NH . This service is free to us as the value of scrap 
material covers all recycling costs, and we in fact receive compensation for the additional value. 
Recycling then, even at its nascent  stage , is free and even revenue producing, which provides 
assur ance that panels will not be sent to la ndfills when developers could be paid to recycle them 
instead.  Section 3 of LB 826 should not include crystalline silicon panels , then, as they should 
never be sent to landfills in the first place  given their recyclin g value. Lastly,  it is important to 
note that thin film modules that do contain toxic materials have their own recycling ecosystem 
and have a cradle -to-grave recycling plan in place managed by the manufacturers  themselves , 
which is wor th investigating for compatibility with this bill.2 
 
 
1 Solar Recycling | SolarRecycle.org  
2 http s://www.firstsolar.com/en/Solutions/Recycling  
 
 
Responsible planning and end of life recycling are absolutely real issues and need to be 
considered. But LD 826 will not achieve that goal, and instead harms solar adoption and the 
potential for job cre ation today . The good news is there are a variety of local, national and 
international initiatives in place and developing rapidly to turn end of life solar modules into a 
valuable revenue stream instead of cost liability. This is a particularly urgent foc us from the US 
Departm ent of Energy, specifically the Solar Energy Technologies Office (SETO). SETO 
recently released a report  which is exclusively focused on the research, recent advancements, 
and meaningful revenue opportunity in future decades directly related to the decommi ssioning, 
recycling and re -integration of raw materials into new manufacturing creating a circular energy 
economy.3 Point being, there are plenty of motivated and well -funded, efforts underway to solve 
this same issue.  
   
To be 100% clear, ReVision Energy is a staunch supporter of end -of-life solar system planning 
and recycling. The intent of this legislation is good and responsible design, procurement, 
construction and decommissioning activities is something we support and champ ion. However, 
this bill is a n attempted  solution a problem that does not exist in our state and is already being 
solved elsewhere. We urge you to find this bill unnecessary at this time  and instead allow the 
solar industry the free -market opportunity to co ntinue to resolve the issue in a way in which it 
creates financial value for solar system owners and additional investment and jobs instead of 
the current language, which ultimately c ould impede growth and harm job creation.  
 
Thank you for your considerat ion of our perspective . We welcome further discussion, and we 
are available to address any questions you may have.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Fortunat Mueller  
President, Co -Founder  
ReVision Energy  
207.221.6342  
 
3 Solar Energy Technologies Office Photovoltaics End -of-Life Action Plan  

