- 
1 e STATE HOUSE STATION 
= AUGUSTA, MAINE 04»;-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
Michael H. Lemelin MAINE RELAY 711 
3l3 Hallo\\’ell Road 
Chelsea. ME (H330 .‘ HQUSE GP REPRESENTATIVES 
M |c|1ael.Le1nelin(z:: legislature.mainelgo\ 
Residence: (207) 708-0399 
Sen. BI‘6l1I16I‘ , Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Enviromnent and 
Natural Resources Committee, I am Rep. Michael Lemelin of House District 53 
representing Chelsea, Randolph, Pittston, and Dresden. I am here to present LD 
826. “ An Act to Prohibit the Disposal of Certain Solar Panels in the State and to 
Require Bonds to Cover Disposal Costs“ 
As the Chair of the Planning Board in Chelsea, I approved the Chelsea’s ﬁrst solar 
farm. I knew there was going to be a disposal problem so we had the company 
put up a $2 million dollar bond for proper disposal. The current solar-energy_ 
boom will trigger a landslide of toxic waste in Maine. In 20-25 years we will have 
an enormous amount of solar panel waste and no game plan to dispose of the 
complicated and toxic waste. 
According to cancer biologist David H. Nguyen, PhD, toxic chemicals in solar 
panels include cadmium telluride, copper indium selenide, cadmium gallium 
(di)selenide, copper. indium gallium (di)selenide, hexaﬂuoroethane, lead, and 
polyvinyl ﬂuoride. Silicon tetrachloride, a byproduct of producing crystalline 
silicon, is also highly toxic. 
Maine leadership has decided blindly that we are going to clean energy, although it 
is 100% impossible to be free of fossil fuels and it would be ignorant to even 
attempt it. Then regardless of any scientiﬁc proof that may surface, this body turns 
their backs on Mainers and says we do not care. We want clean energy even if it 
kills all Mainers and Wildlife in the meantime. We have a goal set by activist and 
brought forward by our Governor and so we will move forward all cost. 
Maine does not have a solar waste plan. So, I am asking to make it illegal to place 
toxic waste in our landfill tmtil the State creates a proper toxic waste disposal plan 
for solar panels. I am also asking us to require the solar companies to cover the 
cost of disposal. Every solar panel must be tested for toxicity before being 
disposed of. 
Typically in the United States, solar panels are recycled at general-purpose glass 
recycling facilities, where their glass — and sometimes their metal frames — are 
recycled, and the remaining components are tested then thrown away or burned. 
Unfortunately, they also sometimes end up in landfills -—— and many recommend that 
when they must be discarded, they should be disposed of as hazardous waste. South 
Carolina, Ohio, Minnesota and Michigan, have a recycle plant for solar panels. Maine 
does not. Please consider protecting Maine's environment from toxic waste. 
District 53 Chelsea, Dresden, Pittston and Randolph 
Printed on lec\ cled paper
