Testimony in Support of LD 826,
“An Act to Prohibit
the Disposal of Certain Solar
Panels in the State and to Require Bonds to Cover Disposal Costs”
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Nick Murray and I
serve as director of policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a
nonpartisan, non-profit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic
freedom in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 826.
A missing piece in the debate over the future of the economy as it relates to clean
energy is a fully transparent way to perceive the differences in costs to produce
electricity from various sources. This bill is necessary because, too often, the costs of
certain energy projects are obfuscated by subsidies from all levels of government.
Lawmakers will often claim the price for solar (or wind) power is much cheaper
than it actually costs, because the costs of construction and decommissioning of a
project are hidden, yet assume that the inordinately cheap rate for nuclear power is one
borne of distortion, even though this cost is
before
subsidies are applied.
1
Across the pond, British power customers are facing the specter of a grid more
heavily reliant on wind and solar energy. Just last year, the grid operator there spent
more than $5.1 billion (£4.2 billion) in emergency payments in the times when the grid
did not produce enough power that its customers demanded. Britons rely on renewables
like wind and solar to generate electricity at the exact moment they require it. If not, the
grid operator must act quickly, shelling out large fees to meet demand.
2
Since it is costly and physically very difficult to store energy for long periods of
time, electricity produced from wind and solar panels when it is not needed will be
wasted.
This is just another example of the high cost to ratepayers from relying on
sources of energy which are simply not reliable. Mainers should be aware of the full
price tag before they are sold another “grid-scale” solar project that will be producing
power for only 20-30% of the time. Compare this with base load generation sources like
hydroelectric or nuclear plants which run nearly all the time.
2
The Real Price of Wind and Solar
| Wall Street Journal
| March 12, 2023
1
https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/electricity_generation.pdf
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

In 2020,
Discover
magazine wrote, “As solar panels sit in dumps, the toxic metals
they contain can leach out into the environment and possibly pose a public health
hazard if they get into the groundwater supply.”
3
Solar panels require very particular
rare earth metals and minerals to function properly, which also make them difficult to
recycle.
Why don’t policymakers think of these costs when pushing larger,
publicly-funded and subsidized solar arrays? It can be a resource-intensive process to
simply extract rare metals like nickel and cadmium needed to build solar panels.
Shouldn’t market actors see the real price of this technology, since these rare minerals
could be used in other cutting-edge technologies which may make more progress against
environmental degradation and cleaner energy production?
As the 2020
Discover
piece explained, while China
and the US are the biggest
producers of solar panels, “
only Europe has taken
measures to hold manufacturers
responsible for their waste. The European Union requires solar companies to collect and
recycle their panels, with the cost of recycling built into the selling price.
4
This way, the
panels’ waste and impact on the environment is minimized with only a marginal
increase in solar panel price for consumers.”
Please deem LD 826 “Ought To Pass” and provide Maine people the most
information possible when determining the proper course of energy policy. Thank you
for your time and consideration.
4
https://naturalgasnow.org/solar-panel-waste-solar-energy-not-so-green-after-all/
3
Solar Panel Waste: The Dark Side of Clean Energy
| Discover Magazine
