LD 631 
Carly Wiggin Testimony 
March 9, 2023 
I am the Reintegration Specialist at Cony Middle and High School. I also served as a Police 
Officer with the Augusta Police Department for 10 years and four of those years were spent in 
our schools a School Resource Ofﬁcer. I am passionate about the education of our youth. Good 
school attendance sets the stage for students to fully beneﬁt from the many learning resources 
our schools offer. Our goal in changing this law is to increase the efficiency of the process to 
positively impact more families to engage in school. 
The Augusta School Department works with our families and students to encourage them to 
attend school. We call the families, create intervention plans, send letters, make connections 
with supports and visit the home when possible. All of the effort we do helps in some cases and 
other times it does not. When the process doesn’t work, after all of our attempts, the law 
requires we hand deliver or send by registered mail written notice to the parent or guardian. This 
notice must be delivered before we can send the truancy case to law enforcement and the 
Kennebec District Court. This is a barrier. Delivery of the letter is successful some of the time 
and other times we spend months trying to get the letter into the parent or guardian ’s hands. 
During this time the student(s) are often continuing to be absent from school and are missing out 
on their educational opportunities. We have been working with the Kennebec District Attorney ’s 
office to clarify when they will take a case of habitual truancy. Currently, unless the family is 
served the written notice, hand delivered or registered mail, they will deny the case. 
I have gone to student’s homes several times and at different times of day, in attempt to serve the 
notice. After several attempts to serve the notice, we then send it registered mail which incursa 
cost to the school department. At this point the family can still refuse to accept the letter and it is 
returned to the school. To send it again we must incur an additional cost. We have then turned 
to the Augusta Police Department to make contact by going to the home at various times, and 
occasional visiting a parent or guardian at their workplace if all other attempts have failed. 
Changing LD 631 by adding limits in the number of attempts to deliver the written notice will 
give schools the additional support in moving the process forward to hold parents accountable 
for providing their children their federally protected right to an education. Under the current 
guidelines we are spending endless time in this process, with every lost day, that student is losing 
pieces of their education. Help us, help kids.
