scuoui 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
ON Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBLIC EDUCATION ADVOCATES Website: wwVV'mSmaWeb'c0n1 MaineSdioolSuperinremlr:msAssucialion 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 631 
AN ACT TO CHANGE THE NOTIFICATION LAW FOR SCHOOL TRUANCY 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Eileen King, deputy executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to L.D. 631. 
Superintendents and School Boards oppose this bill because it is redundant. Title 20-A section 5051 outlines 
the processes a school district must follow to address truant students. 
Schools are required to implement multiple interventions to address truancy. Teachers, student assistant teams 
and administrators dedicate signiﬁcant time and energy in keeping our students in schools. Educators can 
identify a pattern that may lead to truancy and many of the recommended interventions listed in 5051 are 
implemented long before a student is identiﬁed as being truant. If the intervention plan outlined in 5051 is 
unable to correct the truancy of a child, two more documented attempts will not make a difference. 
The steps outlined in 5051 have been included below for your review. 
0 A student who is detennined truant must be referred to the school’s student assistance team or the school 
personnel designated by the superintendent in accordance with the school administrative unit’s intervention 
system to determine the cause of the truancy and assess the effect of the student’s absences, as well as any 
future absences for the student. 
0 Ifit is detennined that a negative effect exists, the student assistance team or the school personnel designated by 
the superintendent in accordance with the school administrative unit’s intervention system shall develop an 
intervention plan to address the student’s absences and the negative effect of these absences. An intervention 
plan may include, but is not limited to: 
(1) Frequent communication between the teacher and the family; 
(2) Changes in the learning enviromnent; 
(3) Mentoring; 
(4) Student counseling; 
(5) Tutoring, including peer tutoring; 
(6) Placement into different classes; 
(7) Consideration of multiple pathways; 
(8) Attendance contracts; 
(9) Referral to other agencies for family services; and 
(10) Other interventions, including, but not limited to, referral to the school attendance coordinator, student 
assistance team or dropout prevention committee. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
