 
 
Sen. David LaFountain 
Rep. Scott Landry 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
100 State House Station 
Augusta ME 04333 
February 6, 2023 
 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the IF&W Committee, 
 
The Appalachian Mountain Club supports LD 57 An Act to Amend Maine's Endangered and Threatened 
Species List. 
 
AMC is the nation’s oldest conservation, recreation, and education organization, with the mission to 
foster the protection, enjoyment, and understanding of the outdoors. We have 6,600 members in Maine 
and own 100,000 acres of forestland in the 100-Mile Wilderness region of Piscataquis County, managed 
for multiple use including sustainable forestry, backcountry recreation, and environmental education. 
We are proud of the habitat restoration we have accomplished there in partnership with state and 
federal agencies, including 86 fish passage projects that have opened 90 miles of streams.  With passage 
reopened, the endangered Atlantic Salmon has returned to its native headwaters at Gulf Hagas for the 
first time in nearly 200 years. 
 
Biodiversity loss is one of the most dire issues of our time. As you know, biodiversity is the variety of 
plants, animals, fungi and microorganisms that come together to form ecosystems. It is the basis of life 
on earth. That diversity is greatly at risk due to a variety of factors including habitat and connectivity 
loss, pollution, climate change and the introduction of non-native species.  
 
We need to do all that we can to protect populations of endangered and threatened species. For that 
reason, AMC supports extending protection to the Bank Swallow, Cliff Swallow, Bicknell's Thrush, 
Blackpoll Warbler, Saltmarsh Sparrow, Tricolored Bat, Ashton’s Cuckoo Bumble Bee, and Marginated 
Tiger Beetle. 
 
Further, given the crisis of biodiversity loss and the clear impacts of climate change, we encourage the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to perform the listing review process more frequently than 
the current 8-year cycle. A cycle of 2-4 years would allow for more rapid response to population 
declines. We also encourage DIFW to gather additional information about species that they have already 
considered listing, so that the Department may better assess whether those species are a good 
candidate for listing. 
 
Thank you for your part in stewarding Maine’s inland fisheries and wildlife. 
 
Sincerely, 
Eliza Townsend 
Mane Conservation Policy Director 
