Testimony in opposition to 5";-as Act to éteteaei endangeaea and Threatened Species i.ist 
February 6, 2023 
My name is John Giewa, St. i iiye in China, hieiee. have caught many tusties in my iifetime. i have 
been a MARAP contribtrtor for some forty years and i iargeiy wrote the chapter on spotted turtles in the 
first edition of the atlas. While growing up in Connecticut, I saw just three box turtles in more than 
twenty years. in recent years, l have documented and reported several wood turtle populations in 
Maine from York to Aroostook counties. l have never seen a box turtle in Maine but l have heard from 
several people who claim to have seen these’: in cerrtrai ‘ Maine. 
l am specifically addressing the portion of this bill which removes the eastern box turtle from the state 
endangered species list. This bill has no basis in science or the law. l am well aware that IFW's statutory 
mission does not even include the word science. lt mission does require IFW to" ...preserve, protect and 
enhance the...wildiife resources of the state.” i his biii is cieariy vieiatitzn 0tiF\!i1 ’s statutory mission. 
lt’s time for a science lesson. Box turtles are native to iviaine and any claims that Maine's box turtles are 
solely released captives has no basis in fact. Years ago former lFW employee Mark McCollough told me 
that the department had documented the presence of a number of box turtles in the state, but that in 
each instance only a solitary animal was located. l have news for lFW and for the committee. Box 
turtles are solitary animals. They are not iike painted ttirties that gather on rocks and logs. They are not 
like wood turtles that collectively hibernate on stream bottoms. Box turtles spend their entire lives, 
except for when they are mating-alone. A box turtle may never see another box turtle during its 
lifetime. This is precisely why they can live to one hundred years old and more. When they are lucky 
enough to find a turtle of the opposite sex, the sperm can remain viable inside the female and she can 
repeatedly nest for years from a singie mating. This is nature’s way of maintaining the species. it isa 
strategy that has worked for millions of years-until now. 
The only ones who will benefit from removing box turtles from the state endangered species list are 
developers and those who destroy southern and central Maine wildlife habitat for profit. Rather than 
condemning this anirf nai to probable extirpation as this biii does, the state of iviaine should be 
responding to box turtle sightings and actively looking for box turtles-perhaps using trained dogs~ 
collecting samples from box turtles for their DNA and radio tracking them so that they can be 
recaptured. Nesting females should be located and eggs should be incubated in captivity so that young 
box turtles will have a good chance at survival. Call on Maine's herpetologists and schoolchildren to 
volunteer their time and resources to incubate and head start box turties—just as has been done 
successfully with Blandings turtles in Nova Scotia. 
Maine has always been at the northern edge of box turtle range. No one is considering the positive 
effect of climate change on box turtles in Maine. Warmer winters will likely mean a northern expansion 
of suitable habitat for box turtles. Given any help at all, box turtles can expand their range and increase 
their numbers in southern and central Maine. Maine could be the best hope for box turtles as their 
numbers and habitat dwindle throughout their range. Preserving, protecting and enhancing Maine's 
wildlife populations is IFW's job. lt’s past time for IFW to step up to the plate and do its job.
