February 6 , 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries & Wildlife  
 
RE: LD 57 – An Act to Amend Maine ’s Endangered and Threatened Species List  
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am 
the Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I 
appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 57, An Act to Amend 
Maine’s Enda ngered and Threatened Species List.  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization 
dedi cated to conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided 
by science, we create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s 
toughest challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a 
collaborative approach that enga ges local communities, governments, the 
private sector, and other partners.  The Nature Conservancy has  been leading 
conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 12th largest landowner 
in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We also work across 
Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the Gulf of Maine 
to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to address 
our changing climate.  
 
LD 57 includes the recommendations from the M aine Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife  (DIFW)  to add to and modify the Maine Endangered 
Species List. Specifically, t he Department recommends : 
 
- Box Turtle and Rapids Clubtail come off the endangered list.  
- Adding to endangered (3  species ) — Ashton’s Cuckoo Bumble Bee, 
Saltmarsh Sp arrow, and Tricolored Bat.  
- Adding to threatened (5  species ) — Bank Swallow, Cliff Swallow, 
Bicknell’s Thrush, Blackpoll Warbler, and Marginated Tiger Beetle.  
 
The Nature Conservancy supports these recommendations . All eight of these 
species are vulnerable to climate change, h abitat loss  or fragmentation, and 
other population -wide threats. In particular, Bicknell ’s Thrush and Blackpoll 
Warbler  are bird species that are high elevation breeders in the stun ted spruce 
“krumm holz ” zone in the mountains  and Saltmarsh Sparro ws breed in salt 
marshes. Both the “krummholz ” zone and salt marsh es are habitat s that  are 
highly  sensitive to climate change impacts.  
 
By adding species to the Maine Endangered Species List, Department staff can 
develop  management and recovery  plans , review proposed projects that might 
affect these species, and assure that negative impacts to these species are 
avoided or mini mized whenever possible. As a public document, this list helps 
businesses, landowners, government agencies  and others know which wildlife 
species are rare and vulnerable  in our state. In addi tion, an accurate and up to  
date list can help communi ties, conservation organizations and wildlife 
advocates focus protection dollars on habitat projects that benefit these 
vulnerable species.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 57. I’m happy to 
answer questions at any time regarding this bill.  
