February 6, 2023  
Testimony  - L.D. 57 An Act to Amend Maine's Endangered and Threatened Species List  
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry and ACF Committee members,  
Thank you for considering my feedback regarding L.D. 57 An Act to Amend Maine's Endangered and 
Threatened Species List . 
I oppose the language of this bill that removes the Eastern Box Turtle from Maine’s endangered species 
list.  I cannot imagine a ny good reason for this proposed update .  The box turtle is still se riously 
endangered, a “ Species of Greatest Conservation Need ” and must continue to be protected.  
According to the Department of Maine Inland Fisheries and Wildlife’s website:  
 
"This is undoubtedly the state’s rarest reptile, and it has probably never been common here. Box turtles 
are locally common but declining elsewhere throughout their range. No popula tions have been 
documented recently in Maine, but, if present would most likely occur in the southwestern part of the 
state. A few individual box turtles h ave been found in the last 20 years as far north as New Vinyard in 
Franklin County and Hermon in Penobscot County, although these may have been released pets."  
Although there may or may not be any verified populations of box turtles of Maine, this should n ot 
translate into a decision to stop protecting their habitat and environment statewide.   There have been 
recent sightings of box turtles in Maine which means that they do exist here and need to be protected.  
 Due to the impact of climate change, Maine i s frequently recording non -native species within state 
borders and in our waters – species that have not historically existed here.  It is our responsibility to 
align our policies with these changes and take every precaution to encourage these rare and dec lining 
species to survive and hopefully, thrive.  
Please amend L.D. 57 to keep the Eastern Box Turtle on the state endangered species list.  
Thank you for your consideration.  
Susanna Richer  
Portland, Maine  
Source:  
https://www.maine.gov/ifw/docs/endangered/boxturtle_74_75.pdf  
 
 
 
 
Susanna Richer
Portland, ME
LD 57
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and ACF Committee members,
Thank you for considering my feedback regarding L.D. 57 An Act to Amend Maine's 
Endangered and Threatened Species List.
I oppose the language of this bill that removes the Eastern Box Turtle from Maine’s 
endangered species list.  I cannot imagine any good reason for this proposed update.  
The box turtle is still seriously endangered, a “Species of Greatest Conservation 
Need” and must continue to be protected.
According to the Department of Maine Inland Fisheries and Wildlife’s website:
"This is undoubtedly the state’s rarest reptile, and it has probably never been common
here. Box turtles are locally common but declining elsewhere throughout their range. 
No populations have been documented recently in Maine, but, if present would most 
likely occur in the southwestern part of the state. A few individual box turtles have 
been found in the last 20 years as far north as New Vinyard in Franklin County and 
Hermon in Penobscot County, although these may have been released pets."
Although there may or may not be any verified populations of box turtles of Maine, 
this should not translate into a decision to stop protecting their habitat and 
environment statewide.   There have been recent sightings of box turtles in Maine 
which means that they do exist here and need to be protected. 
 Due to the impact of climate change, Maine is frequently recording non-native 
species within state borders and in our waters – species that have not historically 
existed here.  It is our responsibility to align our policies with these changes and take 
every precaution to encourage these rare and declining species to survive and 
hopefully, thrive.
Please amend L.D. 57 to keep the Eastern Box Turtle on the state endangered species 
list.
Thank you for your consideration.
Susanna Richer
Portland, Maine
Source:
https://www.maine.gov/ifw/docs/endangered/boxturtle_74_75.pdf

