Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Melrose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Mulliken Court e PO Box 836 =5 Augusta. ME 04332-0836 ~@%Teiephone: 207-626-0005 tie Email: info@mainewoodlandownersorg e Website: www.mainewoodlandowners org DEV/"iL\l.Q 
COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Tom Doak 
Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
In Favor of 
LD 57 
"An Act to Amend Maine’s Endangered and Threatened Species List" 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is Tom Doak, I am 
the Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today in favor of LD 57, 
"An Act to Amend Maine’s Endangered and Threatened Species List." 
This bill makes amendments to Maine’s list of endangered and threatened species. 
The Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife has undertaken a thoughtful review 
of our threatened and endangered species list and is basing these proposed changes on 
sound science. 
In Maine over 90% of lands are privately owned. These endangered and threatened 
species depend on the private lands for their habitat. Landowners care deeply about 
the wildlife on their properties. VVhen landowners are asked Why they own lands, 
wildlife often tops the list. 
We hope that these new listings will bring more resources to the Department and that 
the good working relationship that exists between landowners and the Department 
regarding threatened and endangered species will continue. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I would be happy to answer any 
questions now or at the work session. 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - IRC 501 (o)(3)
