 
 
 
Testimony in Support of L.D. 1606 
An Act to Finance Clean Energy and Infrastructure in Maine  
Steven L. Weems, Board Member 
 Solar Energy Association of Maine 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
April 27, 2023 
 
 Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and other distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology: 
my name is Steve Weems, Board Member of the Solar Energy Association of 
Maine (SEAM); also founder and President of Dirigo Community Solar Group 
(Dirigo CSG), a nonprofit association of small, member-owned community solar 
farms.  We think LD 1606 expresses an important priority, to have our public 
elementary and secondary schools set an example for their learners (students), 
and their extended communities, regarding energy efficiency and the use of 
renewable energy.  Some public schools already are leading by example in this 
area; it would be highly beneficial if others could join them.  LD 1606 would 
facilitate this and for this reason we support LD 1606. 
 Public schools are under great financial pressure, for many reasons, 
including the rapid rise in special needs students, the influx of non-English 
speaking students in certain communities, the need to implement more stringent 
security measures, and schools having to provide more and more student support 
in areas traditionally handled at home within the families.  The provisions of       
LD 1606 would provide important new funding in this context. 
Acknowledging this, we think LD 1606 s too ambitious to be properly  
 
 
2 
 funded in in its current form, and invite the sponsor to bring forth an amendment 
with some of all of the following provisions included in it. 
 First, we suggest a pilot grant program be established in the accelerator to 
finance energy audits and feasibility studies for renewable energy or energy 
efficiency retrofit projects, limited to a defined number of school studies (10-25) 
during the period of the pilot program.  We are aware of the myriad of worthy 
programs and initiatives being undertaken by the Efficiency Maine Trust (the 
“trust”).  We are reluctant to “rob Peter to pay Paul,” so to speak, and do not 
think it would be appropriate to take the funding for this work from other 
projects, or to have electricity ratepayers fund this work.  Therefore we think this 
best would be funded through the State’s General Fund, which would require a 
fiscal note, perhaps $100,000 – 250,000 depending on the number of studies 
included in the pilot. 
 We reluctantly suggest the sponsor consider striking Section 2 requiring the 
trust to establish a pilot loan program.  The types of improvements to be 
undertaken based on the results of the energy audits and renewable energy 
studies are likely to be capital intensive, requiring substantial new capital.  While 
these might fit under the umbrella of the trust’s Maine Green Bank, we think the 
capital for the recommended projects, particularly for renewable energy projects, 
should come from private sources, as would be the case in the C-PACE 
(commercial property-assessed clean energy) program for similar projects in the 
commercial sector.  There are other private sources already being utilized for 
clean energy projects located on school properties as well. 
 We think changes of this nature may be necessary to makes this laudatory 
bill financially digestible, although this is difficult to say based on the urgency and 
“here-and-now” scope of the need.  It may be necessary to get started with a pilot 
while taking more time to evaluate larger, more sustainable funding sources. 
 
 
SEAM LD 1606 EUT Committee Testimony 4-27-23 
