Douglas Farnham \’9‘7S3“R£ilL‘
o -t-' 7. 4-. 
I. 
Major General 7.,“ D““d1;\i§$:m° “d 
Commissioner '- 
(207) 4306000 § (207) 287-7020 
> 7"“-\:s‘s\‘¢\‘$\ 
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management 
Maine Bureau of Veterans' Services 
117 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0117 
Phone (207) 287-7020 Fax (207) 626-4471 
March 30, 2023 
_ Nether for nor against: 
LD 1375, "An Act to Provide Funding for a Chapel at the Maine Veterans ’ Memorial Cemetery 
in Auguata” 
l 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs _ 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the Ioint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. I'm David Richmond, Director of 
the Maine Bureau of Veterans ’ Services and I'm here today to testify neither for nor 
against LD 1375, "An Act to Provide Funding for a Chapel at the Maine Veterans ’ 
Memorial Cemetery in Augusta. ”‘ 
While we appreciate the intent to improve services at our Augusta cemetery, we are 
committed to follow and maintain the high standards and expectations set by the 
Department of Veterans Affairs, National Cemetery Administration, and also honor 
past relationships between the state and the regional non-profit cemetery associations, 
that each of our cemeteries benefit from.‘
V 
Each of our veterans ’ cemeteries include one Committal Service Shelter which is funded 
by the VA. Each of these open, covered pavilions provide a quiet structure, set in the 
terrain with trees and vegetation, with the intention of providing temporary shelter 
from the rain and sun, and limited protection from the wind, for an interment service of 
fifteen to twenty minutes. A family may choose a committal service under the shelter if 
they are concerned about the impact of the weather at a grave-side service- —but either 
choice is designed as a final committal lasting a short ti1ne,often after a funeral 
elsewhere.‘ 
Our regional non-profit cemetery associations fill a very important role for our state 
veterans ’ cemeteries. They raise money for beatification projects and enhancements to 
the facilities that are outside of what the state or the VA has provided for operation- 
but still very important to visitors. When the associations propose a project, there isa 
design review, approval from the state, and the associations place money in escrow to 
maintain the project in perpetuity. 
In addition, our cemetery associations have pursued through fundraising efforts, to 
make improvements to existing structures. For example, the association in Caribou, _ 
proposed an enhancement to the shelter there that includes doors and three wallsof
store front windows to block the prevailing winds. They raised nearly one hundred 
thousand dollars to do this and have provided a meaningful enhancementto the facility 
that had a direct effect on our mutual customers. The Southern Maine Veterans ’ 
Cemetery is currently engaged in a similar project and have also raised the funding on 
their own. 
The structure that is the focus of this bill was an appreciated feature of the original 
Maine Veterans Memorial Cemetery,but it also provided many lessons learned on 
planning for future maintenance and contributed to the current policy of approving and 
accepting new projects. The original Father LeClair chapel was designed and built using 
funds raised by volunteers in excess of five hundred thousand dollars. The building had 
a 44-year service life, cut short due to water intrusion from multiple points in the 
building envelope and the transition of it's ﬂat roof, and it's walls that rose above the 
roof. Leaks also came from the original flat aggregate roof, that was replaced bya 
membrane roof, which in time, also failed. The roof was ultimately covered witha 
sloped metal roof. Unknown to all though, was that the water intrusion at several 
points over the years, caused a serious mold problem. After extensive study by an 
engineering firm, it was determined that the cost to remediate the damage, far exceeded 
the cost of a new building. In 2018, the cemetery system retained a contractor to 
demolish the structure and stabilize the site, and also applied for and received a federal 
grant for the construction of a committal shelter similar to the other shelters in the 
cemetery system; that construction took place around the same time. 
The Bureau has reservations regarding this bill for a couple of reasons. First, the 
possible unintended consequence this may create, such as establishing a precedent of 
funding through the Legislature for purchases and obligations beyond 
recommendations of the VA; in particular, a precedent in funding a structure that the 
other regional associations do not have—and have all raised money to address on their 
own. Second is the amount of money proposed in the bill. Without scoping the project 
and establishing a concept design, we do not have enough information to determine if 
the proposed funding is sufficient to cover design, construction and perpetual 
maintenance costs. If passed and in order to avoid previous mistakes, ftmding should 
be placed in a non-lapsing interest baring account to accommodate current and future 
maintenance. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have. S' 
Respectfully Submitted, 
David Mchmond 
Director, Maine Bureau of Veterans ’ Services ’
