4I 
Good Morning: 
My name is Louise Dorr. l am a member of the Maine Veterans Memorial Cemetery 
Association , a non profit organization, consisting of members who represent other veteran 
organizations, funeral home directors, and public citizens, which lfall under. Our mission is to 
help supplement State and Federal funds to help the cemetery cover cost of such things as 
engraving Veteran’sinames on the Wall of honor, purchasing and installing monuments, 
benches, mulch and conduct the Memorial Day ceremonies, just to name a few. 
April 1970 the Maine Veterans Memorial Cemetery on Civic Center Drive opened it's gates for 
burials. And in 2001 the Veterans Memorial Cemetery on Mt Vernon Road opened it’s gates. 
Between the two as of 2022 there is a total of 26,000 Maine veterans buried in those 
cemeteries.1 
Our Association is trying to solve a problem, but our efforts to re-build the Chapel at Civic 
Center Drive Veteran’s Cemetery can’t reach it’s maximum goal unless we have your backing. 
As a small nonprofit we can’t cover all the costs of this endeavor so we have turned to you for 
substantial help. We are graciously asking the State to help rebuild the chapel at Civic Center 
Drive. The chapel that was there, was funded and built by the American Legion. Unfortunately 
it needed to be torn down due to extensive mold issues that after years of trying to abate , the 
mold kept returning causing the state to recommend it be demolished. Leaving the cemetery 
without a chapel to hold memorial services, and remembrances for the families. lt was sucha 
wonderful integral part of that cemetery. 
Through a private donation the association was able to work with an architectural company 
who drew up the plan with a cost analysis. We are asking for 1.2 million dollars to replace what 
was once there. With Maine’s military population being over 100,000, the amount works out to 
be just about $12.00 a veteran. 
Maine also ranks 5th in the nation of percentage of their population that are veterans. 9.7%. 
Our committee is in hopes that as the legislation makes its decision that you understand the 
need for the chapel is great. The Veteran Cemetery is state and federally funded and there is no 
enclosed chapel for it's Veterans and their families and friends can come to remember them,a 
place of solitude where the families can sit to feel closer to their loved ones. We are hopeful the 
state will make a good conscious effort to provide the needed funds. 
lf this legislation can not cover the total costs, we asked that you consider donating an amount 
that you all feet comfortable backing. Any amount at this time would be immensely heiptul. 
Hopefully you will be able to donate the $12.00 a veteran.'
i
i

