 
 
 
 
 
April 21, 2023 
 
Sen. Craig Hickman, Chair 
Rep. Laura Supica, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 1500 An Act to Strengthen Maine's Elections by Requiring Video Monitoring of Drop Boxes and 
Amending the Laws Regarding Voter Rolls and Absentee Voting Envelopes 
Chair Hickman, Chair Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs: My name is David O’Brien and I am Policy Director for RepresentUs, the nation’s leading 
nonpartisan anti-corruption organization. RepresentUs is submitting testimony today in opposition to LD 
1500.  
RepresentUs is a nonpartisan advocacy organization dedicated to the idea that the government 
should be representative of and accountable to the people. It advocates for policies to 
strengthen our democracy and provides activists with the resources and training to bring 
meaningful change. Regarding the electoral process, we work to pass powerful state and local laws that 
expand voter access, make elections more representative, and enhance election security. 
This bill would automatically cancel someone's voter registration if they move within  the state of Maine. 
If that happens, the voter should be given the opportunity to update their registration, not have their 
registration canceled and make them register all over again. Canceling someone’s registration due to an 
in-state move would create unnecessary administrative burdens for election officials, make voters go 
through unnecessary bureaucracy, lead to confusion about voters' registration status, and will 
disproportionately impact groups who move more often, like students, renters, and people facing 
housing insecurity. 
This bill also requires that all election drop boxes be monitored continuously by surveillance cameras 
and that municipalities retain the video recordings for one year after each election. RepresentUs is 
concerned about the burden this policy would place on municipalities. We think it would result in fewer 
municipalities utilizing drop boxes, which would mean voters would lose access to this convenient and 
user-friendly method of voting.  
Drop boxes are a secure, locked locations where voters can safely return their absentee ballots. Drop 
boxes give voters flexibility and make elections more accessible because a voter can drop off their ballot 
at a time that is convenient and fits within their schedule. Using a drop box can also be a more reliable 
way to return a ballot given recent concerns with the timeliness of the U.S. Postal Service.  

Current Maine law requires that drop boxes are monitored periodically by law enforcement, municipal 
staff, or by a surveillance camera. This provides municipalities with options for monitoring drop boxes 
and allows them flexibility to utilize drop boxes in a way that fits within their municipality’s resources 
and capacity. Our worry with LD 1500 is that municipalities would not have the resources to purchase 
and install surveillance cameras on all drop boxes, and to have someone periodically monitor the video. 
It seems likely that, if this legislation were to become law, some municipalities would decide not to 
dedicate the resources and instead choose to forgo the use of drop boxes entirely.  
As far as we know, there have been no instances of tampering with drop boxes in Maine, so this 
legislation is a solution in search of a problem, and would impose a burden on local towns without a 
documented reason. Given that drop boxes play an important role in making our elections more 
accessible to all voters, we do not think Maine should enact policy that diminishes their use.  
For these reasons, we urge you to reject LD 1500. 
Thank you. 
 
