Jessica  Linzer
Cape Elizabeth
LD 1500
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Distinguished Members of the Veterans 
and Legal Affairs Committee,
Re: LD 1500 – An Act to Strengthen Maine’s Elections by Requiring Video 
Monitoring of Drop Boxes and Amending the Laws Regarding Voter Rolls and 
Absentee Voting Envelopes
Position:  Oppose
I am writing in opposition to LD1500, a bill with a remedy in search of a problem.  I 
am speaking about the requirement that drop box locations throughout Maine be 
retrofitted with 24 hour surveillance during the absentee voting period; the tapes must 
be reviewed periodically by staff and then retained for 12 months after the end of the 
voting period. 
Drop boxes were an excellent and welcome addition to citizens in Maine and 
facilitated our right to vote easily, conveniently, and safely. During the pandemic, as 
an AARP Maine volunteer/advocate, I wrote many letters to members telling them 
where a drop box was located in their town.  Using a drop box ensured vote integrity 
because after the ballots were collected, the envelopes were reviewed by the town 
clerk and the voter rolls were marked as voted.  In our town, collection was done 
multiple times a day, even as often as every hour when the box was seen being 
utilized frequently.  
Let’s get real: if any town had an issue with a drop box, either by vandalism, fire, 
ballot box stuffing (voting illegally more than once) or other nefarious acts, it would 
be major news, a full investigation including law enforcement would ensue, and I am 
certain that the guilty would be caught and punished appropriately.  
Let’s remember our tax dollars are a most precious resource.  We need to use those 
dollars where they are needed, not for a non-existent problem where you are 
mandating an expensive solution! 
If taken to the next step, town officials could say “we can’t afford the surveillance 
camera; we don’t have the personnel to review the tapes, so we will eliminate the 
drop box.”  
That would be an underhanded way of achieving voter suppression!  
Therefore, please vote “Ought not to Pass” on LD1500. 
Thank you for all you do,
Sincerely,
Jessica D Linzer (aka Jessica Simpson)
