LINDA HASKELL
GARLAND
LD 1500
 LD 1500 - An Act to Strengthen Maine's Elections by Requiring Video Monitoring 
of Drop Boxes and Amending the Laws Regarding Voter Rolls and Absentee Voting 
Envelopes
Testimony supporting LD1500 LINDA HASKELL, Garland, co-chair Republican 
Party of Garland
Good Morning, Speaking to the Chair person, Senators and Representatives of this 
committee
I am here as a registered voter and legal resident of Garland, an election clerk for the 
town of Garland, and a concerned citizen of the State of Maine for the protection and 
preservation of the Maine Constitution. It has come to my attention that the legislation
sliding thru these committees, back and forth thru the House and Senate need to be 
watched with a sharp eye and strong mind. 
I support the change in Sec. 1. 21-A MRSA 161, sub-2-A, C.  in keeping the voter list
updated of the registered voters who move from one jurisdiction to another and the 
update of the deceased voters. When checking in registered voters at each election, I 
have found numerous names of voters on the list who have been deceased for a period
of time and the jurisdiction of voters who have moved, are still on the voters list. 
Luckily in my town, I am a business person and neighbor who can reach out and be 
informed of the changes constantly. 
I support the change in Sec. 2. 21-A MRSA 752, sub-3, no. 3, the form of return 
envelope for the change to the use in any election.
I support the change in Sec. 3. 21-A MRSA 752-B, sub-5, no.5 Monitoring of secured
drop boxes and monitored periodically by law enforcement personnel; or municipal 
staff and recorded continuously by a surveillance camera which must be retained by 
the municipality for a year.
Since 2016 there has been a scream from the voters on the change in voting due to the
misinformation dealt to them on the RCV referendum. Voters were expecting a better 
system, not knowing this was a deceptively-worded referendum. Because we have 
moved from a stable plurality method to RCV, the voters have lost their faith in the 
election. One person, one count, no fractional vote, stated in our Maine Constitution. 
Our Maine Constitution, that has served us well for all of these years, is now being 
tread on by an ill-informed generation. 
I have spent several hours preparing these testimonies, driven 2 ½ hours round trip at 
my own expense to speak at this public hearing. It has been my pleasure to appear. 
Thank you for your attention.  
I have attached a list of registered voters from my area who have agreed with this 
testimony and also signed the petitions which circled the area after RCV was not what
they were lead to believe.
Thank you for your attention. Are there any questions?
Testimony of approval for LD1500. LINDA HASKELL, Garland, Maine, co-chair of 
the Republican party of Garland, Maine, lindahaskell1@gmail.com 
I was present at the Public Hearing today. I got there early, 9AM, by realizing the set 
up of the Work Session being first on the agenda. So I sat in the hallway until 10:30 
and then I was very disappointed in the disturbance of Senator Hickman throwing out 
LD1500. Which was not at all like LD1568, totally different. I just spoke over the 
phone with David Boyer, who has told he to enter the testimony because the 
committee went back in after I had left. I thank Rep. Boyer for the outreach of his 
hand to get LD1500 back in the nix of legislature. Please enter my testimony Michele 
Hebert and thank you to the committee for turning this around. LINDA HASKELL

