1 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774-5444
www.aclumaine.org
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ough t Not to Pass – LD 1500  
An Act to Strengthen Maine's Elections by Requiring Video 
Monitoring of Drop Boxe s and Amending the Laws Regarding 
Voter Rolls and Absentee Voting Envelopes 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
April 21, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning. My name is Michael Kebede, and I am Policy 
Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On 
behalf of our members, I urge you to oppose LD 1500 because it is unnecessary, potentially 
disenfranchising, and would compromise our civil liberties.  
First, this bill would require clerks to remove people from voter rolls “when it is determined that 
the voter has moved into another jurisdiction  ... regardless of whether the voter has registered to 
vote in that other jurisdiction.”  This provision could be in conflict with the state law that allows 
a person to vote in the municipality of their voting residence. 21-A M.R.S. §112(1). The law 
defines a person’s voting residence as “that place where the person has established a fixed and 
principal home to which the person, whenever temporarily absent, intends to return.” Id. In any 
case, this bill would require clerks to become sleuths and fact-finders who determine whether a 
person has moved, and whether that move constitutes a move to a fixed domicile or not. This is 
impractical and could lead to voters improperly being removed from voter rolls.  
Second, this  bill would require video surveillance of ballot boxes. There is no evidence that 
ballot drop boxes are unsafe or insecure. 364 municipalities used them in last November’s 
election -- a majority of Maine municipalities.1 To date, there have been no issues. On the 
contrary, drop boxes are extremely popular among Maine towns and cities, and provide an 
alternative to people who would rather not rely on the postal service. The notion that they need 
any extra monitoring is completely baseless.  
Third, video monitoring threatens our civil liberties. The ACLU has long opposed the Big 
Brother approach to solving any actual or perceived problem.  Using cameras in public spaces 
1 Testimony of Secretary of State Shenna Bellows against LD 1055, An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop 
Boxes, 131st Legislature, available at www.mainelegislature.or g/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=169302 . 
2 allows for government m onitoring of our behaviors a t a scale that exceeds what is possible 
through traditional law enforcement methods, invading our right to privacy and making our 
every move subject to observation. Installing cameras, regardless of the purpose, is a step
toward a surveillance camera culture that we should all hesitate to embrace.  
Moreover, while the Legislature might scrupulously attempt to cabin the permissible uses of 
new surveillance capabilities, government agencies can and have exceeded specified  purposes,
at a cost to our civil liberties. Even if the legislature restricted the permissible uses of cameras to 
protection of ballot drop boxes, some officials might feel a temptation to use this technology for 
less palatable purposes, vastly expanding the power of the police at the expense of our liberty. 
Also concerning, the requirement that ballot boxes be surveilled will also vastly curtail the use
of ballot boxes in municipalities without the resources to maintain the surveillance systems, 
restricting the ability of people to exercise their fundamental rights. 
The Maine legislature has a long history of healthy skepticism about government surveillance, 
having passed laws requiring warrants for cell phone location tracking in 2013, well before the 
Supreme Court decided the constitution required this in Carpenter v. United States . The 
Legislature also severely limit ed the ability of government actors to use facial recognition
technology in 2021. The legislature should continue in this tradition and reject surveillance of 
ballot boxes.  
Rather than solving any actual problem, this bill would create new ones. We urge you to vote 
ought not to pass. 
