Maine  Town  & City Clerks’  Association  
Local  Government  Center   60 Community  Drive  
Augusta,  Maine  04330 -9486 
1-800-452-8786  (In Maine)   207-623-8428 
Fax 207-626-5947  
Representing  Over  400 Municipalities   
  
Date:  April 13, 2023  
 
To: Senator Craig Hickman , Senate Chair 
Representative Laura Supica , House  Chair 
And members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
 
From:  Patti Dubois , Chairperson, Legislative Policy Committee   
Maine Town and City Clerks’  Association  
 
Re: LD 1500 – An Act to Strengthen Maine’s Elections by Requiring Video Monitoring of 
Drop Boxes and Amending the Laws Regarding Voter Rolls and Ab sentee Voting 
Envelopes  
 
Position:  Opposed 
 
The Maine  Town  & City Clerks’  Association  is opposed to LD 1500 and we thank you for the 
opportunity  to outline  our points  for your Committee.  
 Members appreciate d the intent of Section 1, but felt that the language of “ when  it is 
determined…” was too vague  and may result in voters being removed from the voter rolls 
based on hearsay.  In addition, clerks expressed concern that this language may be in 
conflict with the Help America Vote Act, which regulates how and when vote rs may be 
removed.  If nothing else, members felt that this language was redundant with the 
language in HAVA.  
 A reasonable compromise may be to flag records in the Automatic Voter Registration System 
when a voter requests a change of address at the Bureau  of Motor Vehicles, similar to the 
notices sent when comparing data to the death records provided by the Office of Data , 
Research  and Vital Records , whereby registrars must verify that the death records are an 
exact match to the voter registration records before the voter can be canceled.  
 Section 2 received opposition from members who have multiple ballot styles in their 
municipality because the party and district information printed on the return absentee 
envelope is used as a final check to be sure that the voters are being sent the correct ballot 
style(s).  Members with single ballot styles indicated that they had not received complaints 
from their voters on this topic.  Should this be passed, clerks with multiple ballot styles would 
be forced to confirm  the ballot styles  by noting the ballot styles on the application and keeping 
the application attached to the mailing envelope until verified , which may be less efficient  
and creates an opportunity for human error if the information is not manually noted c orrectly .   
  
Maine  Town  & City Clerks’  Association  
Local  Government  Center   60 Community  Drive  
Augusta,  Maine  04330 -9486 
1-800-452-8786  (In Maine)   207-623-8428 
Fax 207-626-5947  
Representing  Over  400 Municipalities   
  
Currently, clerks select the ballots when the request is being fulfilled , then  the envelopes to 
be mailed are kept together.  Before mailing, clerks go through that batch and verify the 
ballot styles inside match the party and district indicated  on the return envelope.  With that 
said, clerks are effective problem solvers and would have to adjust their procedures.  
 Section 3 of the bill  has the potential to increase costs for municipalities , since most clerks 
said that video surveillance recordings are generally retained for 30 days.  A retention period 
of one year may require upgrades to current equipment.   In additi on, many municipalities  
who use an absentee ballot drop box do not have video surveillance systems.  If passed, this 
would be a mandate on those municipalities  using a drop box, which would result in a fiscal 
note.   
 The Maine  Town  & City Clerks’  Association  appreciates  the opportunity  to share  its
 
testimony  with the Committee.  Should  any questions  arise,  please  feel free to contact  me at 
207)680- 4210 or by email:  pdubois@waterville -me.gov  . 
