Maine Prisoner Re-Entry Network 
P 
April 24, 2023 
LD 1514 — "An Act to Provide Safe, Short-term Housing to Individuals Recently Released from Correctional 
Facilities" 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and- Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Bruce Noddin, and I am the Executive Director of The Maine Prisoner Re-Entry 
Network or MPRN, a state-wide non-proﬁt focused on providing peer support and coordinated community 
resources for hundreds of individuals returning to Maine communities from prison, jail, and treatment courts. I 
was also appointed to the State Workforce Board by Governor Mills and the Maine Recovery Council by 
Senator Jackson, in 2022. 
I am writing in support of LD 1514 — "An Act to Provide Safe, Short-term Housing to Individuals Recently 
Released from Correctional Facilities." 
We all know that available, affordable, and safe housing in Maine communities is at a crisis level. This has been 
the case since long before the onset of COVID-19. For MDOC Caseworkers, the MPRN Community 
Reintegration Specialists, and many other community agencies, ﬁnding housing is incredibly difﬁcult. If we are 
fortunate enough to ﬁnd a Recovery Residence with an opening or an apartment that’s open, the next hurdle is 
how to pay for a bed or an apartment. LD 1514 seeks to remove this barrier and provides ﬁnancial support for 
housing in the most critical period of 2-months after releasing from prison. We also strongly support the 
additional provision of engaging Maine State Housing Authority, in collaboration with the Department of 
Corrections, to study long-term solutions for transitional housing for recently released indigent clients of the 
Department of Corrections. Hopefully the study will be instructive and provide space for continued 
collaboration. 
I hope the committee will consider recommending that LD 1514 ought to pass. 
Thank you! 
Bruce Noddin 
Executive Director 
Maine Prisoner Re-Entry Network (MPRN) 
PO Box 7157 
Lewiston, Maine 04240 
bruce@re-entrymaine.org
