 
 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org 
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to 
homelessness and hunger
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,
My name is Devon Stockmayer. I am the Advocacy Supervisor at Preble Street in 
Portland. I am writing to ask for your support in the passage of LD1514: An Act to 
Provide Safe, Short-term Housing to Individuals Recently Released from 
Correctional Facilities.
Many of the clients we serve at Preble Street have experienced incarceration, as 
well as what is often referred to as the “revolving door” between prisons and 
homeless shelters. No one should have to exist in this dangerous limbo. In the 
absence of meaningful support from either side of the system, individuals 
frequently become caught up in the same kinds of matters that landed them in 
prison in the first place, resulting in their return to incarceration. 
The transitional housing proposed in LD1514 offers the state of Maine an 
incredible opportunity to begin to reshape a carceral system that is, in many ways, 
designed for recidivism. We must show individuals that we believe in them upon 
release. Belief begins with a strong foundation. Housing is the cornerstone to a 
foundation upon which to rebuild a life after being released from a correctional 
facility. Indeed, a 2018 report from the Prison Policy Initiative found that formerly 
incarcerated individuals are more than ten times more likely to experience 
homelessness than those who have not been incarcerated. On a national level, over 
50,000 people enter homeless shelters directly from correctional facilities annually. 
Until now, we have failed to provide a viable housing option for reentry to 
individuals who do not have the familial or socioeconomic support to obtain their 
own housing. 
LD1514 is a chance for individuals to land on their feet. Though two months is not 
long at all, for many it could mean the difference between an apartment of their 
own and a shelter cot. There are many further steps we can take to strengthen the 
supports we offer to individuals trying to rebuild their lives after prison, but 
LD1514 is a groundbreaking step in the right direction. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Sincerely,
Devon Stockmayer
 
  
