John Clark 
87 bartlett street, Lewiston Maine 04240 
Good afternoon Be-be Center Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the 
criminal justice and public safety committee. 
My name is Johnny Clark, and l'm in support of LD1514 
l'm a constituent of Lewiston Maine a licensed Clinician as alcohol and drug counselor, MHRT- 
C, PBHP, Intentional peer support, State Registered recovery coach and re~entry /re-integration 
specialist, the reason I list all of these credentials is not for pride but because I too was formally 
incarcerated and suffered from substance use disorder. 
I come to you today in long-term recovery I am the owner of two recovery homes one of which 
we are opening for women on the 15*“ of May I work as the program director of Maine prisoner 
re-entry network l'm also the owner of A Hand Up recovery and re-entry housing and the owner 
executive director of second chances family ﬁrst recovery homes which will be opening in 
September .Created to help families as a whole in recovery and work through the reuniﬁcation 
process. 
I didn't start these recovery houses with the intentions of housing individuals during re-entry 
from incarceration but being that l'm a person in long term recovery from drugs and alcohol and 
a person who was formerly incarcerated I knew that the housing crisis is bad in the best of 
situations for people with great credit and no record. So I started helping the cause most of the 
time taking individuals without payment during their re-entry until it almost had me have to 
shut the doors. You see I may own recovery/re-entry housing and what that sounds like meansI 
own housing, but that is simply not the case I own the programs and I write the programs l'm 
the operator I have rent payments, electricity, internet, water/sewer cost for supplies including 
UA cups ,food, ofﬁce equipment and salaries, and I do not turn a proﬁt for this. I work a nine to 
ﬁve job with MPRN and that is how I put food on my table and pay my bills its not fair nor 
feasible for me to suffer the burden because I have a heart, but I do it when I can this bill would 
alleviate this issue and help to provide stability to a problematic situation. This bill would Allow 
for individuals to get the vocational rehabilitation, ﬁnancial literacy, criminal and addictive 
thinking work, and basic skills they need to prepare themselves to be self-sustainable reduce 
recidivism and save more money in the long run for our state than anything that's out there 
right now. I support Ld1514 and I implore all of you to support this bill that's vital to the success 
of individuals returning from incarceration. Thank you everyone for your time and hearing me 
out.
