Testimony	of	Paul	Schlosser,	Disabled	Veteran	Residence:			Homeless,	Portland																										Supporting	LD	1514:		An	Act	to	Provide,	Short	Term	Housing	to	Individuals	Recently	Released	from	Correctional	Facilities	Sponsored	by	Speaker	Rachel	Talbot	Ross		I	am	aware	that	my	friend	and	supporter,	Jan	Collins,	gave	you	a	brief	idea	on	April	25th	of	some	of	the	struggles	I	have	recently	had	with	housing,	but	I	would	like	to	provide	you	with	my	own	personal	experience.			I	have	not	had	an	easy	life,	but	I	know	that	much	of	it	has	been	by	my	own	hand	due	to	some	of	the	mental	health	challenges	and	my	substance	use	disorder.			I	entered	the	Army	in	2003	at	the	age	of	18.			I	served	for	one	year	and	was	honorably	discharged	in	October	of	2004	with	several	mental	health	diagnoses—PTSD,	bipolar	disorder		and	Tinnitus.	I	have	had	several	bad	injuries,	one	following	a	jump	off	a	roof	and	another	following	an	attack	by	a	gang	in	Portland	who	wanted	to	steal	my	watch.			In	the	case	of	the	gang	attack,	I	was	badly	brain	injured	and	was	not	expected	to	live.			But	I	did	live,	though	I	now	have	trouble	walking,	have	terrible	back	pain	and	trouble	remembering	things.				I	have	spent	several	terms	in	Maine	State	Prison,	most	recently	from	2020	through	April	14,	2023.			During	that	time	in	prison,	I	attempted	to	get	my	life	in	order.			I	was	able	to	contact	the	Veterans	Administration	and	was	promised	a	housing	slot	for	homeless	veterans.			I	was	told	I	would	be	Pirst	on	the	list.			But	the	day	before	I	was	released,	I	was	told	that	I	would	not	be	eligible	for	the	housing	due	to	the	robberies	I	had	committed.			Therefore,	the	day	of	release,	I	was	simply	given	a	ride	to	the	city	of	Portland	by	the	prison	staff.			Fortunately,	there	I	was	met	by	a	member	of	the	Maine	Prisoners	Reentry	Network.			They	have	been	trying	to	Pind	me	a	place,	but	so	far	nothing	has	turned	up.			I	have	had	to	use	my	Veterans	disability	  
payments	to	support	a	room	in	a	motel.			I	am	using	the	money	I	had	hoped	to	have	available	to	start	a	new	life.			I	have	no	transportation,	but	my	father	tries	to	help	me.			I	have	not	been	able	to	get	the	health	care	I	need.			I	have	even	thought	about	suicide.			It	would	have	meant	so	much	to	me	if	I	had	had	a	stable	place	to	live	even	for	a	couple	of	months	while	I	worked	on	some	of	the	other	problems	I	am	facing.	Thank	you	for	considering	this	way	of	helping	people	who	are	released	from	prison.
