Se Mi  Anderson
Windham
LD 1514
To: Senator Beebe-Center and Honorable members of the Criminal Justice and Public
Safety Committee
Re: Testimony on behalf of LD1514,
April 25, 2023
Honorable members of the legislature,
My name is Se Mi M Anderson, a United States Marine Corps Veteran currently 
housed as an incarcerated member of Maine’s population. I am excited to be writing 
my personal testimony in favor of LD 1514. I am currently serving my 1st prison 
sentence and am grateful to be releasing in the next 2-4 months hopefully on 
Supervised Community Confinement program. With what I have seen with the LD 
1514 though very minimal information is displayed establish a positive pathway in 
the right direction. I can say for those that are incarcerated and trying to release 
finding housing is near impossible to include finding an available bed at a halfway 
house, sober house, or even a homeless shelter. The housing and economic rise in 
both are very prevalent crisis that limits options. Even with current state funding and 
grants are limited in how much they can help. By creating short-term housing to 
recently released individuals provides a safe place for a healthy transition and 
adaptation period that is well needed. Several individuals are incarcerated for a year 
all the way to life. These sentences carry heavy burdens as well as loss of 
independence for crimes we may or may not have taken accountability of. Through 
the years we have been incarcerated we have been molded and shaped by the 
structures and programs we choose to be a part of and these individuals deserve safety
and security for a proper transition. The outside world may look a lot different and 
even scary for many. Finding the problem such as short-term housing and establishing
it is filling a gap that for a longtime has been neglected from oversight. This will 
implement positive change to reduce recidivism and allow individuals to get the 
assistance they need to get back on their feet and reestablish what independence is. 
With LD 1514, this will also improve relations and communications with support and 
family of incarcerated loved ones to get back to a place of stability. By having places 
like this established, you can also help rebuild the community and the people that are 
a part of it in a detrimental way. 
“With positive change and second chances, all is possible.”
Semper Fidelis,
Se Mi M Anderson

