 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1514, An Act To Provide Safe, Short-term Housing To Individuals Recently Released From 
Correctional Facilities 
 
April 25, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee neither for nor against  LD 1514. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  LD 1514 directs the Department of Corrections to administer a program to provide transitional 
housing to recently released indigent clients of the Department of Corrections and establishes a fund to pay for 
the program. Additionally, this bill directs the Maine State Housing Authority to study long-term solutions for 
transitional housing for recently released indigent clients of the Department of Corrections. 
 
As a general matter, our Association supports the goal of ensuring that incarcerated persons re-enter society as 
contributing and productive members and have safe housing upon their release from correctional facilities. In 
this regard, we support the goal behind the bill, even though we have no position on this particular approach that 
this bill takes to address the issue of transitional housing. However, if the Legislature decides to move forward 
with this bill as it relates to inmates of State correctional facilities, we would ask that the Legislature consider 
expanding the program to include funding to counties in order to administer such housing programs for qualified 
inmates of county jails who are released from incarceration. As the Committee knows, county jails have 
increasingly become the housing option of last resort for many individuals not otherwise served by society, and 
helping such individuals obtain housing post-release could help reduce recidivism and help improve the lives of 
all Mainers. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
