2022-2023
OFFICERS
President
Amber L. Tucker
President-Elect
Jeremy Pratt
Vice President
Matthew D. Morgan
Treasurer
Walter F. McKee
Secretary
Sarah E. Branch
2022-2023
DIRECTORS
Dylan R. Boyd
Andrew Edwards
Devens Hamlen
Scott F. Hess
James Mason
Harris Mattson
Joseph Mekonis
Stacey D. Neumann
Neil Prendergast
Luke S. Rioux
Adam P. Sherman
Adam Swanson
Robert T. Van Horn
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR
Tina Heather Nadeau 
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS 
P.O. Box 17642 
Portland, ME 04112-8642 
(207) 523-9869      
mainemacdl@gmail.com 
 
April 25, 2023 
  
Senator Pinny Beebe-Center, Chair 
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair 
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety 
100 State House Station, Room 436 
Augusta, ME 04333 
  
RE: LD 1514: An Act to Provide Safe, Short-term Housing to Individuals Recently 
Released from Correctional Facilities 
  
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public: 
  
MACDL presents this testimony in support of LD 1514. 
 
If a client is released from prison without stable housing available, their safety, sobriety, 
and security are severely compromised. For far too many of our clients, lack of access to 
decent (or any) housing was one of the major drivers for the conduct that landed them in 
prison in the first place. 
 
Again, housing people in the community—no matter the cost—is and always will be more 
cost effective than imprisoning them. When people are released back into the community 
with a “good luck” and “take care” and nothing more, we are all-but ensuring their swift 
return to incarceration.  
 
Requiring the Department of Corrections to work with the Maine State Housing Authority 
is a strong proposal—as the housing authority has the expertise and knowledge necessary 
to implement this plan and get people housed as soon as possible. The DOC has the 
funding to support such a program. 
 
As with so many of these humane proposals put forth, we all know better now—we know 
that warehousing human beings indefinitely and then releasing them into the same 
conditions that led to their imprisonment does not work.  
 
We know that housing, food, treatment, medical care, education, employment, case 
management and more can help people out of desperation and into stable and safe living—
which benefits us all. It is high time that we start investing in the services needed to make 
our communities’—including the formerly incarcerated—lives better. 
 
Thank you for your consideration, for your attention to this matter, and for allowing me to 
share with you all today on this important issue. 
  
                 Sincerely, 
                                     
                             /s/ Tina Heather Nadeau, Esq. 
                             MACDL Executive Director 
 
