 
   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
     mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler   Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
 Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in Opposition to  LD 1316, “ An Act to Require Auditing for Work Search Requirements of  
Claimants of Unemployment Compensation ” 
April  11, 2023  
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst  
 
Good afternoon  Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing. My name is James Myall. I’m an Economic Policy Analyst at the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. I’m here today to testify in opposition to  LD1316, “A n Act to Require Auditing for Work 
Search Requirements of Claimants of Unemployment Compensation.”  
While MECEP acknowledges that searching for suitable employment is an important component of the 
Unemployment Compensation program, we believe that this init iative would create unnecessary 
administrative burdens for claimants and for the Department of Labor .  
During the COVID -19 pandemic in 2020 and 2021, we all witnessed the important role that 
Unemployment Compensation plays for Mainers who find themselves o ut of work for no fault of their 
own. At the same time, we also saw how access to these critical payments can be delayed or wrongly 
denied due to administrative burdens. I know many legislators fielded calls from constituents and 
helped them navigate the r ules and reporting requirements for the program. We are concerned that LD 
1316 would only add additional unnecessary paperwork for  out-of-work Mainers to complete, and result 
in wrongly denying benefits to people who need them.  
It's also worth noting that there is no evidence that additional reporting requirements around the work 
search requirement are necessary.  While claims for Unemployment Compensation reached record levels 
during the pandemic – for obvious reasons – the number of weekly claimants is currently at relatively 
low levels . The safety net functioned exactly as it s hould – providing  support to Mainers in a ti me of 
great upheaval  in the economy, while transitioning them back to work when it was appropriate. As of 
April 1, 7,651 Mainers were receiving Unemployment Compensation. That’s almost the same number as 
the equivalent period in 2019.i The average length of time a claimant is receiving b enefits is a little over 
13 weeks, compared to almost 17 weeks a year ago.ii 
Our goal sho uld be to have  Unemployment Compens ation  functioning as smoothly as possible and 
fulfilling that critical safet y-net role when Mainers fall on hard times. Evidence from other states shows 
that stringent work requirements succeed in deny ing p eople benefits, or forcing peop le into jobs they  
were over -qualified for , which reduces their  earnings and makes our e conomy less strong overall.iii 
Overly strict work search requirem ents may  also disa dvantage already -marginalized populations – older 
Mainers, those in rural areas, and Mainers of Color are all less likely  to have ac cess to a reliable inter net 
connection to rep ort work search  activity.  
In summary, MECEP believes LD 1316 will create more red tape where none is needed, which will do 
more harm than good. I urge you to vote “ought not to pass” on the bill.”  
Thank you. I’m happy to answer any questions.  
 
Notes  
 
i Maine Department of Labor data. Data for weeks ending April 1, 2023 and April 6, 2019.  
ii Ibid. Data for January 2023 and January 2022.  
iii National Employment L aw Project, Work Search Requirements . Oct 2, 2022. 
https://www.nelp.org/publication/work -search -requirements/    
