 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Sewall Street  
Augusta, ME  04330-6822 
TTY/Voice: (207) 626-7058 
Fax: (207) 621-8148  
www.maineequaljustice.org   
 
 
 
 
 
Kelli Musick 
Policy Advocate 
(757) 634-7896 
kelli@mejp.org 
 
1 
 
Testimony of Kelli Musick, Maine Equal Justice 
In opposition to LD 1316, An Act to Require Auditing for Work Search 
Requirements of Claimants of Unemployment Compensation 
April 11, 2023 
 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Kelli Musick and I am a policy advocate at Maine 
Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid and economic justice organization working to increase economic 
security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. I am testifying in opposition to LD 1316.   
 
Nearly a century ago, states across the country organized to create unemployment insurance 
programs in response to the economic devastation caused by the Great Depression. As we continue 
to recover from the comparable devastation caused by the pandemic, it is clear that reforms to our 
unemployment insurance system are needed. In identifying and crafting those improvements, it is 
critical to look to the purpose of our unemployment system, as written in the statute: “Economic 
insecurity due to unemployment is a serious menace to the health, morals and welfare of the people 
of this State. Unemployment is therefore a subject of general interest and concern which requires 
appropriate action by the Legislature to prevent its spread and to lighten its burden which may fall 
upon the unemployed worker, his family and the entire community. The achievement of social 
security requires protection against this greatest hazard of our economic life.”1 
 
This bill does not lighten the burden on unemployed workers; rather, it creates an undue burden for 
everyone involved in the process of receiving and administering unemployment benefits: the 
Department of Labor, employers, and unemployed workers.    
 
This bill cuts the amount of time an individual has to report their efforts to look for work by setting 
a deadline of 5PM on Friday evening of the week in which the activities were completed. The 
deadline to file an unemployment claim is Saturday at midnight; it’s common sense that these filing 
deadlines are congruent. Currently, an individual may use the online form system created and 
monitored by the Department of Labor to note the details of their work search efforts throughout 
Saturday. The current process allows for the necessary flexibility to document interactions with 
potential employers and collect any documentation needed. Overwhelmingly, people file their 
 
1  MRS Title 26, Chapter 13. UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION §1042 Policy. 
 
2 
 weekly claim and submit their work search requirements at the same time; this needless 
administrative disruption would only cause more confusion in an already complicated system. 
Maine workers who are facing the loss of their job don’t need another headache.   
 
This bill further places an undue burden on these same employers by requiring them to be ready to 
verify every action they take with a potential employee who submits an unemployment claim.  
 
Furthermore, given that this bill would require the Department of Labor to audit no less than a third 
of all claims, this would result in thousands of employers being required to devote needless 
resources to this record-keeping process. To require the BUC to engage in an audit at this level 
would require an army that simply does not exist and that the State of Maine cannot afford.  
 
Finally, this bill requires verification of the individual’s work search prior to payment. This would 
necessarily result in delayed benefit disbursements and result in the Department of Labor to be in 
violation of timely payment law and regulations.2 It is a longstanding provision of federal 
unemployment insurance law that an individual must be paid their benefits promptly when due. The 
Supreme Court of the United States has upheld this principle on several occasions. This requirement 
would almost certainly lead to violations of that critical provision. As stated in the purpose of the 
law, unemployment benefits exist to lighten the burden experienced by unemployed workers, their 
families, and our community as a whole. Any delay in payment certainly exacerbates that burden 
and harms Mainers who need our help the most.   
 
In summation, this bill fails to address the myriad of issues facing unemployed workers today and 
places a needless administrative burden on the Department of Labor and employers across the state.  
 
I respectfully urge you to vote against LD 1316.   
 
2 42 USC 503(a)(1). 
