S T A 'l'" 
E O F M A l N I5 
i)ljP/‘\RTl\/iFIl\"l ‘ or LABOR 
‘i 54 S'l‘A'l'lZ llOLfSl€ STA'l‘l<)N 
/\L5(}l.iS'l ‘A_ E\/iAlNl ’ . 04333-0054 
Jana T Mms l/aura A. Fortnian 
GOVERNOR COl\/iMlSSlONl£R 
Testimony of Laura Boyett, Bureau of Unemployment Compensation 
Maine Department of Labor 
In Opposition to LD #1316 "An Act to Require Auditing for Work Search 
Requirements of Claimants of Unemployment Compensation" 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, April 11,2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing. lam Laura Boyett, Director of the Bureau of Unemployment Compensation at the Maine 
Department of Labor. I am testifying in opposition to LD #1316, "An Act to Require Auditing for Work Search 
Requirements of Claimants of Unemployment Compensation. ” 
This bill requires individuals filing for unemployment benefits to submit their work search and other eligibility 
activities no later than 5:00 pm on Friday of their claim week. Additionally, the bill requires the Department of 
Labor to audit 1/3 of all weekly work search forms submitted prior to paying benefits. This creates significant 
issues under State and Federal laws. 
In Maine, and all but one state, the unemployment claim week begins at 12:01 am Sunday and runs through 
midnight on Saturday. The work search activity form is part of the weekly claim submission, which legally, cannot 
be submitted before 12:01 am on Sunday for the claim weekjust completed. individuals are not required to 
submit their weekly claim on Sunday, although this is the heaviest submission day, but have 14 days in which to 
submit their claim for a specific week. We could not implement the Friday submission as written. 
Federal law requires prompt payment of benefits [”payment when due” provisions under Federal 42 U.S.C. 
503(a)(1)]. The U. S. Department of Labor has interpreted this provision to mean that unless the state has issued 
a determination denying benefits, a claim must be paid no later than the end of the week following the week in 
which the issue was identified. The fact that an audit is underway does not override this requirement. Once an 
individual has been found initially eligible for benefits and is in active payment status, there is a presumption of 
continued eligibility to facilitate the timely payment of benefits until a determination is issued stating otherwise. 
If a potential eligibility issue is detected, it triggers an adjudicatory process that under Maine law, requires 
advance notice of at least 5 days and no more than 14 days to the claimant to participate in a fact-finding 
interview with an adjudicator to gather facts about the potential issue and determine whether benefits will be 
paid. The proposed requirement to withhold payment until a work search audit has taken place would likely 
exceed the Federal ”payment when due” requirement for a large number of weekly claims. Continuing to 
withhold payments prior to the adjudicatory process for potential issues identified in the audit process would bea 
violation ofthe Federal payment when due requirements, This could result in a Federal compliance finding. 
Maine currently has a work search audit process. individuals complete a work search form each week, which lists 
activities performed and includes employer contact information forjob inquiries, application submissions, or 
interviews. In addition to direct employer contacts, participation in job fairs (requires documentation), certain 
training workshops through the department's Career Centers, and mandatory attendance in a RESEA 
l’ll0l‘~i'l5:(207] (>23 7900 TTY userst ll Vliliic Rel:iy711 FAX:{2U7) 287~5292 
The M'ilIlE D9].)2!I'li( ’l'llOfl1BbUl ‘ provides EC|Ll3lLl)§)(1l ‘[l.ll"llL) in Ll7\])l0Yl"\£3il[ and programs 
Auxiliary aids and seivices are available upon lE.qU€‘SL to indiiiduals with disabilities
(Reemployment Services and Eligibility Assessment) session with a Career Consultant; all count as acceptable 
work search activities for receiving unemployment benefits. 
Each week, 3% of weekly claims are randomly selected for work search audits. Claimants are notified and 
required to submit documentation to support the activities listed for the week or weeks being audited. The audit 
group contacts all employers listed to verify the direct contact provided. It is important to note that it is 
extremely difficult to get confirmation from an employer that an individual contacted them to inquire about a job 
or submitted a resume. Unless the employer is large enough to have human resource staff, they generally do not 
maintain information from individuals with whom they do not have a relationship, so can neither confirm nor 
deny whether they were contacted. 
Fact finding interviews are held when work search is inadequate or not performed. Failure to perform a work 
search after filing the first weekly claim, will result in a warning and discussion with an adjudicator to ensure the 
individual fully understands the work search requirement and the fact that benefits will be denied in subsequent 
claims if this requirement is not met. Follow up audits are scheduled for a claim receiving a warning to ensure 
work search is being conducted. After a warning, failure to perform a work search results in a denial of benefits 
for the week or weeks involved. 
Each work search audit takes 45 minutes on average to complete. If the agency is required to audit a third of the 
weekly claims filed each week, this would require substantially more staffthan we have available positions to fill 
and current funding to support. We are currently closely tracking 2019 claim workloads. 283,000 weekly claims 
were filed that year, a third of which is 94,333. Using 45 minutes to complete a work search audit and a 40-hour 
work week, we would need 40 full time staff to complete the required audits under this bill each week. The fully 
burdened annual cost (salary, benefits, and indirect cost) for an Unemployment Compensation Eligibility Agent is 
$83,391. 40 UCEAs would cost $3,335,640 annually. This number would increase exponentially during times of 
higher unemployment. 
Recession Weekly Claim 
I Audits 
I Weekly UCEA Fully burdened 
Level Total 1/3'“ Claims staff required annual cost 
Low 762,500 I 388,666 I 108 FTE $9,003,228 
High* 1,688,500 I 561,666 I 240 FTE $20,013,840 
*this was the weekly claim workload during the highest year of the Great Recession. 
These costs just reflect the additional claims staff that would be required to conduct the audit and gather 
information. If the audits lead to additional fact-finding interviews and appeals, additional adjudicators and 
hearing examiners could be required. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have now or ata 
future work session.
