Testimony of Faye Gmeiner, Kennebunk, ME 
LD 1861: An Act to Reduce Chronic Student Absenteeism 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Faye Gmeiner. l am 
testifying on behalf of the Board of Count ME ln, a l\/laine non-profit, working 
statewide to improve student attendance and decrease chronic absence. 
We are in favor of LD 1861: An Act to Reduce Chronic Absenteeism because it 
wouid continue the existing focus and structure established through the Federal 
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). The Maine Department of Education is 
using attendance data as one of the indicators in its ESSA plan. it is collecting 
data statewide and includes chronic absence numbers on its data dashboard. 
The data show that over 45,000 Maine students were chronically absent during 
the 2021-2022 school year. 
The work is not done. We cannot be content when over 25% of our students are 
missing 10% or more of the school year. LD 1861 would align State statutes with 
current ESSA practices and ensure that the structures in place continue. 
Chronic absence is notjust a high school and middle school challenge, but the 
challenges of chronic absence are more difficult to address if the student has 
been chronically absent since elementary school. The impact of chronic absence 
is cumulative, and the interventions needed are often more complex by middle 
school. identifying elementary level students who have missed 10% or more of 
the school year to date can prevent the long-term effects of chronic absence on 
learning, social emotional skills, and school completion. lf we encourage 
attendance and address chronic absence in our youngest students, they will be 
more likely to read proficiently by the end of third grade, feel better about 
themselves as learners and members of a classroom community, and continue to 
attend consistently. 
Maine has developed a structure for collecting, analyzing, and reporting chronic 
absence data. This is a sound foundation for meeting the challenges of reducing 
chronic absence. LD 1861 would ensure that schools exceeding the thresholds in 
the bill use a team process to regularly review the data and address the needs of 
students who are chronically absent. The structure of a team model, perhaps an 
existing team that also has other areas of focus, can help ensure that the school 
is responsive and successful in its efforts -- and, most importantly, that fewer 
students are missing more than 10% of the school year and the many supports 
and instruction that their schools can provide. 
lt’s much easier to continue work that is already in progress. We support LD 
1861 because it builds on a strong foundation that is data-based and can help
l\/laine schools meet the challenges of reducing our high incidence of chronic 
absence. 
I appreciate the opportunity to share our perspectives about this bill. If you would 
like further information or have questions, please contact me at 
1fa*y_e};gmeiner@gmail.comp.
