I 
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
1. Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
% ",7! 
Testimony 
In Support 
LD 1861: An Act to Reduce Chronic Student Absenteeism 
Mallory Cook, Director of Training and Early Educator Engagement, 
Maine'Education Association 
Before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
May 9, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs, 
My name is Mallory Cook (she/her/hers), and I am the Director of Training and Early Educator 
Engagement at the Maine Education Association. I am also a certiﬁed English teacher and building 
administrator. On behalf of MEA, a labor union representing almost 24,000 educators, I am here to 
testify in support of LD 1861: An Act to Reduce Chronic Student Absenteeism. 
This session, MEA has stood before you in support of legislation that would increase the number of 
school counselors, social workers, and other wrap-around services for our students. This bill is an 
additional step we can take to ensure we are meeting the social, emotional, mental health, and academic 
needs of our students. The National Education Association released data showing that during the 2l-22 
school year, Maine had around 173,237 students enrolled in schools. Each day, though, around 57,346 
students were absent; that’s about 3,500 kids per county. Pre-pandemic, 16.8% of Maine students were 
considered chronically absent, but that percentage was much higher for migrant students, students 
experiencing homelessness, students in foster care, and American Indians/Alaskan Natives. 
During the pandemic, our educators took tremendous strides in making their course content digital and 
accessible from afar. As a secondary educator, this made me notice some concerning behavior once we 
were back in-person — students feeling a sense of connectedness, despite their absence in the classroom. I 
had students complete entire units, while their seat remained vacant. While I appreciated their diligence 
in staying current, the work did not meet the expectations, as they missed out on key instruction, peer 
interaction, scaffolding, and interventions. In short, if a student wants to make academic progress, the 
best place for them to be is in the classroom. 
For many students, though, attending school is a lot more complicated than hopping on the bus. Some 
are caretakers in their homes; some are working to support their families; some have debilitating mental 
health struggles that make going to school a challenge, and others might not have access to bus routes, 
sidewalks, or reliable transportation. Whatever the reason, chronic absenteeism is rooted in challenges 
that professionals in our schools are trained to address. This legislation calls for districts with a chronic 
absenteeism rate of 10% or higher or a single school within the district with a chronic absenteeism rate 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
WW 
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
we aw. ~ - at‘ 
,s;.£__“ 
of 15% or higher to establish an attendance review team. This team, like many that exist across the state, 
will be tasked with reviewing who is chronically absent and developing plans to address the barriers and 
challenges keeping them from attending. The legislation calls for the team to convene monthly. 
We acknowledge that this is a tall ask for the administrators, social workers, school counselors, and 
educators who support our students, but the beneﬁts are incredibly worthwhile. Those who have high 
levels of absenteeism are more likely to drop out of school. Data suggests that those frequent absences 
begin as early as kindergarten and ﬁrst grade. Having a preschool student myself, I ﬁnd it hard to 
imagine a child who would rather stay at home than be in school playing and learning with peers. Ifa 
student is in that circumstance, there are certainly supports the school can provide to help address those 
challenges. 
This bill would also support our students who are exhibiting challenging behaviors. State board rules 
deﬁne an absence as being excused, unexcused, or disciplinary. Formation of these attendance review 
teams would hold teams accountable for discussing supports needed by students exhibiting behaviors 
that result in suspension. Social workers, guidance counselors, and educators can offer supports and 
interventions to help meet student needs, hopefully resulting in fewer behaviors and suspensions. 
Many schools have already implemented attendance review teams. If passed, this legislation would 
ensure they are meeting routinely. For the districts who have not yet implemented an attendance review 
team, we hope models and methods used with success by other districts can be shared. Some of our most 
vulnerable students are sure to beneﬁt from this legislation, which is why we urge you to vote “ought to 
pass” on LD 1861. 
Thank you and I’ll do my best to answer any questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207~622~5866 I 207-888~20'70 fax I www.maineea.org
