A 
49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
. 30"” Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
ASSQCIAIION 
W b t WW b m 5 Q5 
PUB!-‘C EDUCAHON ADVOCATES e S1 e' W 'n7Smawe 'cO MaineSclioolsuperimendemsAsociaiion 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF 
L.D. 1861 
AN ACT TO REDUCE CHRONIC STUDENT ABSENTEEISM 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in support of L.D. 1861. 
Student absenteeism is already on the radar of school and district staff and administrators. It is of concern, a 
concern that has increased during and since the months and years of Covid-19. Making connections with 
students and families to support student attendance is of primary importance to school staff. 
Following a model established through the national effort of Count Me In and Attendance Works, L.D. 1861 
is designed to develop attendance review teams to address issues related to student attendance by providing 
programs and services to students who are truant and chronically absent students and their parents or 
guardians. There are many schools and districts that have such a process in place in Maine, and these have 
provided great improvement in student attendance and family connections with school. Review teams are 
structured and scheduled to meet at least monthly to discuss school interventions and community referrals for 
such students, making any additional recommendations to support the student’s school attendance. 
Some may say this is already occurring and it is not necessary to legislate this. Assuring this as a statewide 
effort will engage all schools and districts in this effort to attempt to reduce the percentage of chronically 
absent students. Last year, 28.4% of Maine students missed more than 17 days of schools. In 2018-2019, 
16.8% of students were chronically absent. Schools who develop a team and intervention system to support 
student attendance have a much better handle on the challenges and Work much more efficiently. 
MSSA and MSBA encourage you to vote OTP on L.D. 1861. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
