Testimony of Susan Lieberman, 
Co-Chair State Advisory Committee on Truancy, Dropout and Alternative Education 
LD 1861: An Act to Reduce Chronic Student Absenteeism 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Susan Lieberman, and lam co-chair of the State 
Advisory Committee on Truancy, Dropout and Alternative Education (TDAE). I am representing 
the TDAE Committee.‘ 
The TDAE Committee fully supports LD 1861: An Act to Reduce Chronic Student Absenteeism. In 
spring 2022, the TDAE Committee presented a report to this legislative committee 
recommending statutory guidance to address the increasing number of Maine students who 
are chronically absent. By aligning with the Maine Every Student Succeeds Act plan which 
includes a multi-tiered system of support, Maine will be better equipped to address 
attendance, truancy, and chronic absenteeism. 
Chronic absenteeism is defined as missing 10% of school for any reason, excused or unexcused. 
Truancy targets only students with unexcused absences. According to ME DOE, 28.4% or over 
48,600 Maine students, kindergarten through high school, were chronically absent, missing 
over 3 weeks of school during the 2021-22 school year. Sixty-four percent of Maine students 
who are chronically absent are also economically disadvantaged, and eligible for free and 
reduced meals. Good attendance means students can access learning opportunities and needed 
support such as two meals a day or basic physical and mental health support. Chronic absences 
impact everyone in the classroom and community. 
Presently only truancy, unexcused absences, is in statute. Truancy can hide the deeper problem 
of chronic absence. Students who are chronically absent miss just two to three days a month. 
This translates to 20 to 30 days over the course of a year, the equivalent of one month of lost 
instruction. 
Chronic absence is an early warning sign that students are at risk of not reading proficiently by 
the end of third grade, struggling academically in middle school, and leaving high school. 
Absenteeism is a problem with cumulative effects extending from one school year to the next. 
A Count ME In study of 40 Maine elementary schools documents that students who were 
chronically absent had statistically significant lower scores in math and reading on the spring 
NWEA assessment than their peers who attended regularly. The students who were chronically 
absent scored on average a grade level lower than their peers who attended regularly. This 
Count ME study mirrors national research.
Addressing chronic absence is a key strategy for meeting our goals of increasing academic 
achievement and graduation rates. By incorporating a whole school approach and utilizing 
current school teams, schools can decrease chronic absenteeism. This bill aligns with the Maine 
State Every Student Succeeds Act and solidifies the existing work in statute. 
For these reasons, we strongly encourage you to support LD 1861: An Act to Reduce Chronic 
Student Absenteeism. 
I am happy to further discuss our position or answer any questions. 
Thank you for your time today. 
Susan Lieberman, Co-Chair State Advisory Committee on Truancy, Dropout and Alternative 
Education
