160 Capitol Street, P.O. Box 438, Augusta, Maine 04332-0438 
(207) 623-2661 • FAX (207) 621-0118 
mtla@mtla.org 
President 
Jason M. Jabar 
 
President-Elect 
Lisa A. Lunn 
 
Treasurer 
Walter McKee 
 
Secretary 
Christiana E. Mann 
 
Past President 
Susan Faunce*++  
 
Board of Governors 
Taylor Asen 
Michael Bigos*++ 
Lauri Boxer-Macomber++ 
Alexis Garmey Chardon 
Thomas L. Douglas 
Christian Foster 
Benjamin R. Gideon 
Christopher Harmon 
Scott Hess 
Daniel G. Kagan*++ 
Timothy M. Kenlan 
Stephen W. Koerting 
Christopher R. Largay++ 
Christian Lewis++  
Scott J. Lynch 
Sanchita Mukherjee 
Jodi L. Nofsinger++ 
James E. O’Connell III 
Sebastian Okun 
Verne E. Paradie 
Richard R. Regan 
Ellsworth T. Rundlett, III ++ 
Randall E. Smith++ 
Daniel J. Stevens++ 
Heather Seasonwein 
Michael J. Welch++ 
Laura White 
 
 
*AAJ Governor 
**AAJ State Delegate 
++Past President 
 
Executive Director 
Steven Prince 
 Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matthew Moonen  
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Room 438  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE:  LD 1251 – An Act to Clarify Immunity from Liability for Municipalities En gaged in 
Recycling Activities  
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Comm ittee on Judiciary:  
I am writing on behalf of the Maine Trial Lawyers Association (“MT LA”) to oppose LD 1251, “An Act 
to Clarify Immunity from Liability for Municipalities Engaged in Recy cling Activities.”  
The current Maine law that governs recycling facilities is codi fied at 14 M.R.S. § 159 -B.  Under current 
law, a private landowner who allows a municipality to host recy cling containers on its property is 
generally immune from civil lawsuits.  However, current la w allows that a municipality itself may still 
be liable under the Maine Tort Claims Act (“MTCA”), becaus e recycling containers are considered 
municipal “machinery or equipment” within the definition of the MTCA.   
LD 1251 would amend this law to provide that, notwithstanding the defini tion of recycling containers 
as municipal machinery or equipment under the MTCA, the provision o f “recycling activities” by a 
municipality – on their land or on private land – is entitled to discretionary function immunity from 
civil suit.  It would make municipalities “immune from liabi lity for personal injury, property damage, 
or death….caused by recycling activities of [a] municipality.”  
MTLA opposes this extension of immunity.  The function of our civil  justice system is to incentivize 
keeping our communities safe and to fairly compensate injury victims through the imposition of civil 
damages.  Immunity erodes this function.  There is a common misconce ption that, absent statutory 
immunity, municipalities are vulnerable to frivolous lawsuits.  The reality is that our current law 
already requires that a municipality must have acted negligently be fore they are subject to civil liability, 
already provides a monetary cap on that liability, and alrea dy strictly limits the kinds of cases that can 
be brought against municipalities.   
MTLA members have litigated cases involving Mainers serious ly injured at transfer stations and 
similar facilities due to municipal negligence.  We are c oncerned that LD 1251 would prevent citizens 
who are hurt due to the fault of a municipality conducting recy cling activities from having any redress 
for their injuries, even in cases where the town in question is clearly at f ault.  Maine towns already have 
no reason to fear liability in cases where they conduct recycl ing activities with due care.  The passage 
of LD 1251 could mean that people hurt at transfer stations through the fault of a municipality and no 
fault of their own have no legal recourse to help them recover from those in juries.  
Sincerely,  
 
Christopher C. Boots  
Co -Chair  
MTLA Legislative Committee  

