LD 1251 An Act to Clarify immunity from Liability for Municipalities Engaged in Recycling 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee my name is 
Ginger Jordan-Hillier. i am a resident of Monmouth, Maine, and am speaking in favor of LD 
1251 (An Act to Clarify immunity from Liability for Municipalities engaged in Recycling). 
All my life, I have lived in housing with items that previously belonged to my grandparents, 
great grandparents etc. l routinely benefited from hand-me-downs and my clothing and toys 
were handed down to younger siblings. Camp is full of recycled items such as a wool blanket, 
that began life as a mill felt, at the local paper mill and a second that was a mill end from the 
textile mill in Augusta, where members of my mother's family worked. 
On occasion l accompanied Dad to the dump in Millinocket, then Orland and Bucksport where 
inevitably, there was a board, just the right size for something. For more than 30 years I have 
routinely found useful items at the Monmouth transfer station (baby carriage & unexpired car 
seat for grandchild, skates, toys, books, clothing, dishes, large bottled water containers for 
garden cloches, bricks to edge gardens, flat rocks, fir boughs to cover gardens in winter etc.) 
Frugal reuse is a way of life for many Mainers. Our transfer stations are funded with our tax 
dollars. 
A friend has taken me to her transfer station where there is an dedicated building with reuse 
items. l have transfer station privileges in another town, where there is also a dedicated 
structure for reuse items. l hope these will not be shut down. 
My hope is that: 
1. This committee will work with the Maine Municipal Association to find a resolution to 
the prohibition on ”picking" due to liability. 
2. Maine people, for whom frugality, reuse, and recycling is common sense (as well as 
valued public policy)will be permitted to obtain useful items at our town transfer 
stations. 
Thank you and I am happy to answer questions. 
Ginger Jordan-Hillier 49 Welch Ave Monmouth, Maine 04259 207-933-9006
