M A|NE MUN|C|pA|_ L800-li52 —8786(instote) 
(T) 207—623—8l+28 
ASSOCIATION S!NCE£ wee (F)2O7_6Mm 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME Ol+330~9486 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Support For 
LD 1251- An Act to Clarzfv Immunity ﬁ"0m Liability for Municipalities Engaged in Recycling Activities 
April 6, 2023 
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen and distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is 
Rebecca Graham, and I am testifying in support for LD 1251, An Act to Clarrfj» Immunity ﬁom Liability 
for Municipalities Engaged in Recycling Activities, as drafted on behalf of the Maine Municipal 
Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. The positions 
of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC). 
Municipal ofﬁcials appreciate the bill proposal before you and the attempt to limit liability for 
injuries or hann received by individuals accessing containers or unstable debris piles attempting to 
recycle material in a transfer station. Waste collection management has historically been one of the most 
dangerous of municipal roles with employees frequently receiving injuries or illness from the handling of 
material. 
While some facilities have construction debris piles that are not in a container, it is important to 
note that this also increases other Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA) identiﬁed 
hazards for visitors and staff. Screws, nails, and torn metal are often attached to the debris and can posea 
risk to vehicle tires or individuals digging through the piles. 
Other communities place the debris in large containers for ease of removal of the material to its 
ﬁnal destination. Employees are not permitted to enter the containers per OSHA rules because of the 
signiﬁcant injuries that often occur as a result. OSHA requires material to be retrieved with a metal claw 
or other mechanical method that does not involve the employee from getting into the container. This 
statute change will not allow that to change and since workplace injury is covered under an entirely 
different section of law, the committee should be aware of this. It may seem counter intuitive to allow the 
public access to areas OSHA recognizes as dangerous for employees. 
That said, each transfer station handles reusable material differently and based on staffing 
capacity as well as ability for that handling to be conducted in a safe manner for the protection of both 
employees and users. Most transfer stations have a location that users may leave usable items no longer 
desired but still usable for others to take. These spaces frequently require additional management of that 
material, particularly when the items are dropped off while staff are conducting other duties. These 
“pickers piles” are important places for community members to ﬁnd usable household and recreational 
items without expending funds on new items, but they also require a signiﬁcant amount of staff 
management to keep them safe to visit.
It might be worth providing at least one real life story about situations that can occur at the 
transfer facility to illustrate the complex ways staff are often required to interact with enthusiastic 
recycling residents. One transfer facility during our LPC process relayed that their facility stopped 
individuals from rummaging through recycling material as a result of an incident that occurred between 
two members of the public in an area where the separation of newspaper material was managed. A well 
meaning materials management professional allowed two enthusiastic coupon clippers go through the 
news material the community dropped off to ﬁnd coupons in the publications and save money on 
groceries and household items. The two individuals began a verbal argument over the coupons and jockey 
for access to the pile. The result was an employee needing to ask both individuals to leave and the closing 
of public access to the pile unless disposing material to the area. 
Mitigating recycling disputes is generally beyond the pale to ask of our increasingly limited 
material management professionals. 
For these reasons, ofﬁcials appreciate limiting liability for public desire to reuse material, 
however, it is not clear that anything about the management of reusable material will change in a facility, 
based on local pressures. The bill may permit communities or even some private collection of 
construction material some freedom from the concern about liability around “dumpster diving” and 
provide an opportunity to rethink how their facility can best manage such activities, without additional- 
drain on stafﬁng time.
