V HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Amy Roeder TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
45 Blackstone Street 
Bangor, ME 04401 
Residence: 207-370-5517 
Anny.Rocder@lcgislaturemainc. gov 
March 23, 2023 
Testimony of Represen tative Amy Roeder Presenting 
LD 690, An Act to Streamline Rental Application Screenings by Allowing Potential 
Tenants to Use Screening Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary. My name is Amy Roeder, and I represent House District 23 which includes a 
portion of Bangor. Today, I present to you LD 690, An Act to Streamline Rental Application 
Screenings by Allowing Potential Tenants to Use Screening Services. 
Rental application screenings are typically used by landlords or residential property managers to screen 
prospective tenants before they rent a space. The idea is that these screening tools will help protect current 
tenants and reduce the risk of liability for landlords. 
In my community, I have heard countless stories from frustrated people trying to ﬁnd housing. In Bangor, 
we have a less than 1% vacancy rate, which means that there are dozens of applicants for every available 
rental property that enters the market. One constituent spoke eloquently in a Bangor City Council meeting 
of her frustration over ﬁlling out countless applications and paying thousands in application fees only to 
be disappointed over and over again. Anecdotally, she said that one apartment that she applied for 
remained vacant for months after she was rejected as a potential tenant. She hypothesized that it may have 
been more lucrative for the landlord in question to keep the apartment open and continue to collect 
application fees rather than rent it out. The latter example is apocryphal of course, but it does underscore 
just how much money is expended by the average renter on application fees. We know that most landlords 
are responsible and do not ﬁnancially exploit their tenants, prospective or otherwise, but if even one does, 
we need to pay attention and we need to take action. My bill protects tenants while also providing 
landlords with the crucial information they need. 
LD 690 allows a prospective tenant to use a screening service report in applying for a rental. An owner of 
residential rental property or a residential rental property manager may choose to not allow a prospective 
tenant to use a screening service report in an application for the rental of a residence, but the owner or 
manager is then limited to charging an application fee no greater than $25. 
Thank you for your consideration. I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District 23: Part of Bangorml
