T HE 
LAW OFFIQE 
DANIEL]. BERNIER 
LLC Lh- 
March 21, 2023 
To The Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee 
From Daniel J. Bernier, representing the 
Central Maine Apartment Owners Association working in conjunction with the Rental 
Housing Alliance of Southern Maine, the Greater Bangor Area Owners’ and Managers ’ 
Association, the Capital Area Housing Association, and Lewiston Auburn Landlord 
Association. 
Re." LD 690 An Act to Streamline Rental Applications Screenings by Allowing Potential 
Tenants to Use Screening Services 
I am submitting this memo in opposition to this legislation. Pushing apartment owners 
into a cookie cutter approach to tenant screening will increase homelessness. 
The process of screening services is evolving and some of these screening services 
maybe better than others. A fundamental problem with this legislation is which screening 
service are the tenants using. Are they using a reliable one? If the tenants are allowed to just go 
out and use any screening service they want, this would deter investment in housing and make 
the housing crisis worse. Many landlords choose to rely on references rather than screening 
services. Tenants who are on the margin will often do better with landlords who use references 
rather than screening services. Tenants also beneﬁt from the variety ways landlords screen 
tenants. Some tenants might pass one apartment owners screening process but not another’s. 
Pushing apartment owners into cookie cutter screening services will just increase homelessness 
for those who are on the margin. If you do not meet the cookie cutter criteria, you will be 
homeless. Most screening services look at credit history and criminal record. Do we really 
want to create a system where if you have bad credit or a criminal conviction you end up 
homeless? 
This legislation is rather anti-tenant in pushing landlords away from references and 
into screening services. 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions on this 
legislation. 
Very truly yo, 
D i . Bernier 
Page 1 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877 .8969 * dan@bemierlawof ﬁce.c0m
