3/10/2023  
RE: Oppose LD 690 An Act to Streamline Rental Application Screenings by Allowing Potential Tenants to 
Use Screening Services  
 
Dear Members of the Judiciary Committee,  
 
I’m writing to oppose LD 690. To be clear we already use a screening service ( apartments.com) that  may 
partially  comply with this bill. Apartments.com lets tenants send up to 10 applications for one single $29 
dollar fee. Apartment.com calculates a resident score for us to determine their risk of defaulting on the 
rent.  
Whe re I have concerns about this bill is when the  applicant  pays for another screening service that we 
have not vetted. The other issue is fair housing laws want us to treat prospective tenants  the same. 
Many services will calculate the resident score  differe ntly. This would be treating tenants  differently and 
could cause us to have issues with the Maine Human Rights Commission for running afoul of fair housing 
laws.  
Additionally, fraud in applications is an ever -growing  issue. Tenants  are known to fake ID’s and wage 
statements to get an apartment. What if an applicant uses a screening service that is not trustworthy? 
Another issue is if tenants paid for a screening report and downloaded a copy by PDF, I would be very 
wary of the validity of that report . 
There  are well over a dozen apartment screening service websites that I know of and there are probably 
hundreds. It would be extremely difficult for housing providers to have accounts with each one of those 
services  to accept screening reports. To accept screen ing reports, it’s not as simple as just getting an 
email. The services require property managers and landlords to verify our identity  (often by inputting 
our own SSN) and make an account. How many accounts is reasonable for a landlord to have to 
maintain?  
Although this bill is well intentioned there are logistical  issues on the side of rental housing providers 
that make  compliance with this bill nearly impossible. Please vote no.  
 
Regards,  
Justin Giroux  
Manager  
Habitat For ME, LLC  
Fairfield  
