 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and 
cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to 
Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
Alison P. Sucy, Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs 
On Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
 
In Opposition To 
 
LD 854 An Act to Fund the Protection and Restoration of Riparian and Estuarine Ecosystems and 
to Impose an Excise Tax on Certain Bottled Water Operations 
 
 
May 11, 2023 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation: 
 
I am Alison Sucy, the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for the Maine 
Tourism Association. The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-
related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA’s 1500 members include lodging, camps, campgrounds, 
restaurants, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, amusements, and cultural and historical 
attractions. I offer this testimony in opposition to LD 854. 
 
The Maine Tourism Association and Poland Spring have long been connected. Hiram Ricker started the 
family business of selling Poland Spring water in 1859. In 1922, his son founded the Maine Publicity 
Bureau--now known as the Maine Tourism Association. For nearly 175 years, Poland Spring has been 
an iconic Maine brand. For over 100 years, MTA and Poland Spring have been working to improve the 
lives of Maine people through employment opportunities and promotion of the State of Maine. 
 
In 2020 Maine’s tourism businesses suffered an unprecedented downturn from the pandemic. In April 
of 2020, Poland Spring reached out to MTA to create a grant program for tourism employees and small 
businesses impacted by the pandemic. Over the course of a year, we distributed over $140,000 to 
individual workers and small businesses. This would not have been possible without the impetus and  
generous donation from Poland Spring. 
 
Poland Spring is a leader in creating economic opportunities in our state. This Maine business employs 
nearly 900 Mainers with generous wage and benefit packages, contributes over $7 million in taxes, and 
spends over $136 million on goods and service from 340 Maine businesses. The competition in the 
bottled water market is fierce. We should be doing all we can to protect and promote a Maine-based 
business that is competitive and to ensure the security of the Maine jobs it provides. 
 
The 2022 Maine Water Study did not recommend a tax on water withdrawal; and no other state imposes 
a tax on water extraction. MTA encourages this committee to adhere to fair and equitable tax policies. 
Assessing a tax on Maine’s iconic, natural, and healthy bottled water is counter to this policy. We are 
concerned about damaging an iconic Maine brand and the jobs it provides; and, therefore, respectfully 
urge the committee to vote against this bill. Thank you for your consideration.  

