15 UNIVERSITY DR
AUGUSTA ME  04330
207-623-9511
www.mwua.org
 
May 5th, 2023 
 
 
Honorable Nicole Grohoski, Senate Chair 
Honorable Joseph C. Perry, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE:  LD 854 An Act to Fund the Protection and Restoration of Riparian and 
Estuarine Ecosystems and to Impose an Excise Tax on Certain Bottled Water 
Operators 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski and Representative Perry: 
 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony 
regarding LD 854. As stewards of public drinking water in the State of Maine, we care deeply about the 
quantity and quality of public water in our State. We also strongly believe that imposing excise taxes on 
public water represents poor public policy and creates an unwarranted threat to our ability to provide 
potable drinking water to Maine people. We therefore urge the Committee to reject LD 854. 
 
About MWUA. The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonprofit association based in Augusta that 
provides support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe 
drinking water through educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, 
and national level. The Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in 
Maine as members.   
 
Commission To Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine  Last year, the 130th Maine 
Legislature voted to undertake a study of Maine’s water resources over the fall of 2022. The Commission 
To Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine(Commission) was composed of a diverse 
array of stakeholders of which the Maine Water Utilities Association was a part. The Commission was 
charged with considering a wide array of issues, including the nature and use of natural resource 
extraction taxes in other states and the advantages and disadvantages of enacted natural resource 
extraction taxes in the State;. After five public meetings and extensive research and debate, a strong 
majority of that Commission voted not to recommend consideration of water extraction taxes. Our 
Association strongly concurred with this recommendation, and we urge this Committee to adhere to this 
recommendation as well. 
 
Water extraction taxes risk undermining water utility access to public drinking water.  LD 854 calls 
for an excise tax for “…the privilege of engaging in the business of extracting water…”  The implication 
that extraction is a “privilege” contrasts with Maine law, which is based in Maine’s Constitution. More 
specifically, the legal standard in Maine is that groundwater extraction is a legal right of the property 
owner, not a “privilege.”  This standard is described in greater detail in the attached memorandum from 
Dennis J. Harnish, Assistant Attorney General, dated April 15, 2005.  This standard is also known as the 
“absolute dominion” rule which was extensively discussed at the Water Resources Commission this fall. 
This standard allows water utilities to extract groundwater through wells located on property they own as 
a matter of right. Any change to this standard risks undermining this important right which ensures our 
ability to provide drinking water to our customers. 
 
For this reason, our Association has historically been strongly opposed to any legislation that would, or 
potentially could, erode our right to both access and protect the water beneath our property. We extract 
water for the benefit or our customers, and to provide fire protection to the communities we serve.  Also, 
water utilities often purchase land within the recharge areas of their wells in order to prevent activities 
that could adversely affect the quality of those water supplies.  
 
LD 854 could impose extraction taxes on a broad range of water utility customers.  LD 854 imposes 
water extraction taxes on “bottled water operators” which are broadly defined in the bill as “a person 
engaged in the business of bottling or packaging water for sale.”  This broad definition would include not 
only enterprises that bottled water, but would also include ice manufacturers, beverage companies, 
breweries, and other customers of public water systems who use water for their products, package them, 
and then sell them to the public. We would be very concerned about such a tax on our major water 
customers. If any of them decided to relocate their business because of the tax, the loss of such a customer 
would reduce an important source of revenue for public water systems that help keep down the rates of 
other customers.  
 
Conclusion. In sum, our Association remains very concerned about this bill. As presented, it risks 
undermining the ability of water utilities to maintain access to drinking water. It would create a new and 
onerous tax that could impact important customers of drinking water who could reduce or eliminate 
consumption and trigger rate increases for all other customers. Finally, this was an issue extensively 
considered by the legislative-created Water Resources Commission who rejected the concept of a water 
extraction tax. We hope this Committee agrees and gives LD 854 an “ought not to pass” report.  
 
Respectfully, 
 
 
Bruce Berger Executive Director 
Maine Water Utilities Association  
 
cc:  Roger Crouse Chair  MWUA Legislative and Regulatory Committee 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel 
 
 
 
