Testimony in Opposition to LD 854, An Act to Fund the Protection and Restoration of 
Riparian and Estuarine Ecosystems and to Impose and Excise Tax on Certain Bottled 
Water Operators 
By Cameron Lorrain, Poland Spring 
May 11, 2023 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the Taxation 
Committee: 
My name is Cameron Lorrain. Pm a lifelong Mainer, resident of Cornish, and I’m the Vice 
President of Technical & Production for the Northeast Region. 
After serving in the Air Force, I returned to Maine in 1988 to find work. I first worked for 
Windham Mill Works but found myself out of work when the company went bankrupt. I then 
found work at the Bridgton Knitting Mill, but that mill also went bankrupt. I was able to get 
work at the Malden Mill in Andover, Massachusetts. I lived in Andover during the workweek 
while my family remained in Maine. Then, sick of being away from my wife and kids each 
week, l attended a job fair at the Portland Civic Center. Before I knew it, I was reporting for 
work at the Poland Spring factory in Poland as a mechanic. That was 1998. 
Twenty-five years later, I've held almost every position someone can have at a bottled water 
factory. I’m now responsible for all factories in Maine, and the entire Northeast Region. I'm 
responsible for our operations and our people — over 900 employees. 
I’m here today to let this committee know that what is being considered — a tax on water ~ will 
hurt Poland Spring. It will hurt our ability to operate in Maine, and that means it will hurt our 
people. 
In the last few years, we have faced the toughest competition I’ve seen in my 25 years with the 
company. Our job is the hardest it has ever been. Our margins are the tightest they have ever 
been. 
We face competition from low-cost private label producers and from new companies who seem 
to enter this space every day. Most of these companies buy their water from municipal sources, 
so they can manufacture their products much closer to the large markets. In the Northeast, that’s 
New York, Boston, and Philadelphia. As a spring water company, we must build our factories 
near the springs — which are usually in less populated areas. Our competitors avoid both the large 
transportation costs and the costs related to spring water. 
This proposed tax would be a tax that our competitors do not pay. I think we might also be one 
of the only companies in Maine that would have to pay this tax.
This tax would take us out of the competitive market, and we would be required to make some 
very difficult decisions about our future in Maine. This tax would make us reconsider plans to 
invest and grow in Maine and may push us beyond Maine’s borders. That would mean Maine 
would lose out on investment and jobs, and we would also have to de-emphasize our Maine 
heritage that the state benefits from on all our labels and marketing. 
I don’t want that to happen. I’m proud to be a Mainers and a leader at Poland Spring. The 
company has been a force for such good, not only for my family and me, but for the 900 or so 
employees and the hundred Maine towns they live in. 
You will meet some of my employees today. Others have submitted written testimony. Please 
understand that my company is not paying them to be here. They are coming on their own time, 
to share their views about this tax and what it means to them. 
I want to thank you for your time today. 
Cameron Lorrain
