 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN OPPOSTION - LD 854 ‘An Act to Fund the Protection and Restoration of Riparian and Estuarine Ecosystems 
and to Impose an Excise Tax on Certain Bottled Water Operators’  
 
Dear Senator Grohoski - Chair , Representative Perry  - Chair , and Members of the Committee on 
Taxation,  
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food 
Producers Association  (MGFPA) .  The Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association is a business 
trade association representing Maine’s food community; Main Street businesses , including 
independently owned and operated grocery stores and supermarkets, food and beverage 
producers and processors, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, and supportive service 
companies.  
 
This proposal targets one of Maine’s most iconic business brands, Poland Spring, a company 
steeped in history having operated sustainably  for more than 17 5 years. Poland Spring makes 
ongoing in-state investments  and provides more than 900 high -caliber jobs . These employees, 
who live in over 100 communities across Maine, pay taxes, engage in community activities and 
local commerce, and send their children to rural schools. Poland Spring is a responsible 
environmental steward  as their bottles are 100 percent recycled content (still water  specifically ) 
plus they ensure 30% recycled content in  other  packaging  material  across their portfolio.  In 
addition, Poland Spring  is well -known for their philanthropic contributions , in 2022 they 
donated $1,000,000 & 1M bottles to Maine's communities.   
 
We oppose the  proposed excise tax within  LD 854 on renewable resources. This discriminatory 
tax will place Poland Spring at a  significant disadvantage to  their  competitors such as private 
label  waters  sold in wholesale clubs and big box stores which have no direct economic link back 
to our state. This tax may very well price Maine products out of the market especially when 
considering our geographic location and  costs for further distribution.  Shoppers are facing the 
highest increase in pricing for consumer goods that they have seen in the last nine years. 
Increased costs disproportionately hurt those on fixed incomes including our state’s elderly and 
those alre ady negatively affected by the pandemic. As with any tax, the likelihood of increased 
product costs will occur and our Maine residents will inevitably incur the costs of th is program.  
 
Assessing a tax on a healthy product in counterintuitive. Bottled wate r serves as a part of a 
healthy diet and is especially important to those with compromised immune systems, battling May 11, 2023  
   
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association    |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME 04330    |    207 -622-4461    |    info@mgfpa.org  
 diabetes and obesity, the elderly, and children or those in areas with poor quality water, all who 
may very well drink bottled water as thei r only source of clean drinking water. Increasing costs 
to access clean, healthy and Maine -made products contradicts the messaging of our state and 
lifestyle.  
Within Maine’s 10 -year Strategic Economic Plan, food is one of the four thematic areas in which 
Maine is well positioned for success, “Maine has the opportunity to meet the significant 
consumer demand on the eastern seaboard…From aquaculture to traditional seafood 
harvesting to value -added food production, growth is anticipated in these food industri es and 
Maine can benefit greatly by growing our capacity to meet these markets.” Maine has the 
foundation of a strong economy that is ripe for continued growth and development. The plan 
notes, “Mature businesses can use these thematic opportunities to help  diversify and stabilize 
supply chains throughout the state, and new enterprises can use them to find high growth 
opportunities.” Poland Spring believes in continued investments in Maine’s roads, rail, and 
ports , support ing a resilient transportation infra structure  that is  necessary to move goods and 
products from Maine to high -demand end markets. It is companies like Poland Spring that we 
all should strive to welcome and encourage to stay in Maine. We suppo rt policies that help align 
with our state’s plan for economic growth , especially in relation to improving our state’s 
transportation needs.  
We urge the Committee to Vote Unanimously Ought Not to Pass. Thank you for the opportunity 
to provide testimony.   
 
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  

