E?!/SA 
LD 853 — WRITTEN TESTIMONY SUBMITTED BY JEFFREY CASTONGUAY — PRESIDENT BISON TRANSPORT USA EAST 
O5/11/2023 
Good morning, 
My name is Jeffrey Castonguay and I am the President for Bison Transport USA East legacy Maine based trucking 
companies Hartt Transportation Systems, Inc. and Pottles Transport with headquarters based out of Bangor, Maine and 
a major terminal in Auburn, Maine. l am here today to speak out against legislative document No.854. Once again law 
makers in this state are specifically targeting Poland Spring Bottling Company. l had been with Hartt Transportation 
Systems, inc. since August of 2000 before Hartt was purchased by Bison Transport. Hartt Transportation was established 
in 1948 by our founder Delmont Hartt from Carmel, Maine. it was solely owned by Delmont's son William Hartt as CEO. 
When l initiallyjoined the Hartt family our primary customer base in the state of Maine consisted of the paper and 
lumber industries. Within the first 8 weeks of my employment with Hartt Transportation Systems, Inc. one major 
customer owning two paper mills filed bankruptcy. it was a very scary time. Additionally, there were several other mills 
within a few years apart that either filed bankruptcy, living on a respirator meaning financially upside down or closed 
their doors for business. There were very few alternatives for business replacement. I then encouraged William Hartt to 
expand our business outside the state of Maine. We moved a portion of our business outside of Maine and grew our 
business in states that appeared to be pro-business. it meant laying off drivers and support staff we had working for us 
in Maine and reallocating our assets to other states. We had to find a way to survive. At the same time we were 
negotiating with Poland Spring as a new customer. We struck a deal where it provided work for 30 drivers. That quickly 
grew to a point where l would like to list our current statistics what Poland Spring means to our company: 
Poland Spring Impact on Bison Transport USA 
0 350 full times driving positions out of 1075 drivers strictly dedicated to Poland Spring business. 
0 Average earnings $89,000.00 plus full benefits to include a 401K. 
0 75 non-driving positions 
0 Average Salary $68,000.00 plus benefits to include a 401K 
Maine vendors indirectly positively affected by Poland Spring Business 
0 Maine based tractor dealerships 
I Maine based trailer dealers 
0 Maine based tractor parts vendors 
0 Maine based trailer parts vendors 
0 Maine based tire vendors 
0 Maine based fuel vendors 
0 Maine based motor oil vendors
1
As a Maine based company, we are committed to purchase our needs with all Maine based vendors literally multi 
millions of dollars on an annual basis. 
0 Close to $3 million 2022 in highway toll revenues for the state of Maine and over $1,000,000.00 in fuel taxjust 
to the state of Maine of which the vast majority is a direct result of our business with Poland Spring. 
0 Poland Spring has helped us to become a safer carrier. Through partnership with Poland Spring we have 
improved our safety practices by sharing ideas and holding each other accountable. We have improved our 
equipment specs with safety such as collision mitigation systems, electronic roll stability, blind side turning 
warning system, disc brakes. We have increased our training sessions that have had a huge positive impact on 
our safety record and signiﬁcant fewer injuries to drivers and the general public. 
0 Poland Spring encourages Hartt Transportation Systems, lnc. to give back to the community in the education of 
trucking to the public, our employees volunteering personal hours to different organizations and fundraising for 
many different organizations such as the Dempsey Center in Lewiston, Maine and the Ecology School in Saco, 
Maine. 
My effort is to illustrate number of lives that are touched by Poland Springs and the jobs that are directly and indirectly 
created because of their business. Jobs that pay great wages allowing Maine citizens to purchase properties, homes and 
spend their money on goods within the borders of Maine. Think of the income tax revenue streams, sales tax and 
property taxes all these employees contribute to the state of Maine being responsible contributors to our society. . 
Of all the hundreds of customers we do business with throughout the entire United States, Poland Spring is by far our 
best business partner. We do business deals on a hand shake and they are always upfront, responsible and trust 
worthy. Zgg
g 
Poland Spring is ultra-sensitive to the needs and concerns of the communities we drive our trucks through. They hold us 
to a very high standard and we do our best to comply. This issue of public relations is such a high priority for Poland 
Spring that Bison Transport USA established a position in our company, safety supervisor in 2010, which the primary 
responsibility of this position is to ride along the roads we operate in Maine to check on our driver's behaviors especially 
on the back roads of Maine to their factories and springs. 
My objective today is to persuade you to kill this bill because a bill like LD 854 is in my opinion, an irresponsible bill for 
the business climate in Maine. With legislation like this particular bill, we might as well hang out a sign on our Maine 
borders stating CLOSED FOR BUSINESS. Maine is a state where the death rate exceeds the birth rate indicating an 
exiting of our young people looking for job opportunities. This bill would potentially hurt the operating ability of Poland 
Spring. Continuing to present bills targeted against Poland Spring will probably discourage them from expanding their 
business foot print. I ask that our law makers look for ways to encourage businesses such as Poland Spring to expand 
their business footprint throughout our state instead of discouraging them. We need them and we are very thankful for 
their business because l cannot imagine what my company would look like today if it were not for their good business 
and responsible business practices. 
This is my 8th time testifying before the Maine Legislation over the course of the past years concerning proposed 
legislation to tax Poland Springs in one manner or another. It is very discouraging to spend all this energy trying to 
convince our elected officials that it is bad business for the people of Maine to discourage companies to grow their
2
business with threat of being taxed to the point it is not worth sustaining business in such an anti-business climate 
especially now they have new ownership. What kind of signal are we sending these new owners? My company is just 
one example of the many other Maine based businesses that benefit by having Poland Springs as part of our business 
climate. Our elected officials should be |ooI<ing for ways to promote their business and encourage them to continue to 
expand their business foot print so many in our state can continue to thrive in supporting their business needs. 
I thank you for the ability to state our concern as a Maine based company and ask that you stand with me, and many 
other Maine based companies against LD 854. 
Respectfully, 
Jeffrey T. Castonguay 
President 
Bison Transport USA East 
Bison Transport, USA 
Bison USA —— 
North America's Freight Solutions Partner 
Bangor — 262 Bomarc Road, Bangor, ME 04401
3
