15 University Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330
' 
e a r Utilities Association 207-62395 11 
Main W te 
Organized 1925 
May 11 20237 
Honorable Nicole Grohoski, Senate Chair 
Honorable Joseph C. Perry, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD 854 An Act to Fund the Protection and Restoration of Riparian and Estuarine 
Ecosystems and to Impose an Excise Tax on Certain Bottled Water Operators 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee on Taxation: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony in opposition 
to LD 854. As stewards of public drinking water in the State of Maine, we care deeply about the quantity and 
quality of public water in our State. We also strongly believe that imposing excise taxes on public water 
represents poor public policy and creates an unwarranted threat to our ability to provide potable drinking water 
to Maine people. We therefore urge the Committee to reject LD 854. 
About MWUA. The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonproﬁt association based in Augusta that provides 
support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water 
through educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The 
Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
Commission To Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine. Last year, the l30‘h Maine 
Legislature voted to undertake a study of Maine’s water resources over the fall of 2022. The Commission To 
Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine (Commission) was comprised of a diverse group of 
stakeholders of which the Maine Water Utilities Association was a part. The Commission was charged with 
considering a wide array of issues, including the nature and use of natural resource extraction taxes in other 
states and the advantages and disadvantages of enacted natural resource extraction taxes in the State. After ﬁve 
public meetings and extensive research and debate, the Commission opted not to recommend consideration of 
water extraction taxes. Our Association strongly concurred that such taxes should not be part of that Report, and 
we urge this Committee not to pursue water extraction taxes either. 
Water extraction taxes risk undermining water utility access to public drinking water. LD 854 calls for an 
excise tax for“ . . .the privilege of engaging in the business of extracting water. . .” The implication that 
extraction is a “privilege ” contrasts with Maine law, which is based in Maine’s Constitution. More speciﬁcally, 
the legal standard in Maine is that groundwater extraction is a legal right of the property owner, nota 
“privilege. ” This standard is described in greater detail in the attached memorandum from Dennis J. Harnish, 
Assistant Attorney General, dated April 15, 2005. This standard is also known as the “absolute dominion ” rule 
which was extensively discussed at the Water Resources Commission this fall. This standard allows water 
utilities to extract groundwater through wells located on property they own as a matter of right. Any change to 
this standard risks undermining this important right which ensures our ability to provide drinking water to our 
customers. 
It is important to note that our Association has historically been strongly opposed to any legislation that would, 
or potentially could, erode our right to both access and protect the water beneath our property. We extract water 
for the beneﬁt of our customers, and to provide ﬁre protection to the communities we serve. Also, water utilities 
often purchase land within the recharge areas of their wells in order to prevent activities that could adversely 
affect the quality of those water supplies.
Testimony of MWUA re LD 854 
May 11, 2023 
Page2 
It is also important to note that the “absolute dominion ” rule that water utilities rely on to ensure sufﬁcient water 
supply is not actually “absolute. ” As extensively discussed before the Commission, Maine’s absolute dominion 
rule has been extensively modiﬁed by state regulation within the jurisdiction of the Maine DEP and the Maine 
Drinking Water Program within DHHS. These regulations ensure that any extraction of water is safe and does 
not cause harm to other water users. 
LD 854 could impose extraction taxes on a broad range of water utility customers. LD 854 imposes water 
extraction taxes on “bottled water operators ” which are broadly defined in the bill as “a person engaged in the 
business of bottling or packaging water for sale.” This broad deﬁnition would include not only enterprises that 
bottle water, but would also include ice manufacturers, beverage companies, breweries, and other customers of 
public water systems who use water for their products, package them, and then sell them to the public. We 
would be very concemed about such a tax on our major water customers. If any of them decided to relocate their 
business because of the tax, the loss of such a customer would reduce an important source of revenue for public 
water systems that help keep down the rates of other customers. 
Why is the loss of a major customer so detrimental to water utilities and their customers? Very simply, the costs 
of running a water utility are largely ﬁxed. Water utilities are capital intensive with substantial investments in 
wells, pumping stations, treatment facilities, and underground pipes. These ﬁxed costs are paid for through the 
sale of water to customers, and the more gallons sold, the lower the price per gallon. In this regard, if LD 854 
results in the loss of a major customer, the number of gallons sold will go down, and the price per gallon will go 
up. The impact will be felt by all water utility customers. 
Conclusion. Our Association remains very concerned about this bill. As presented, it risks undermining the 
ability of water utilities to maintain access to drinking water. It would create a new and onerous tax that could 
impact important customers of drinking water who could reduce or eliminate consumption and trigger rate 
increases for all other customers. Finally, this was an issue considered by the legislatively-created Commission 
To Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine which did not recommend the concept ofa 
water extraction tax. We hope this Committee agrees and gives LD 854 an “ought not to pass” report. 
Respectfully, 
Joshua Saucier, PE 
%> MWUA Legislative Committee Member 
Assistant General Manager/District Engineer, Bangor Water District 
cc: Bruce Berger, Executive Director, MWUA 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
State of Maine 
Office of 
AttQﬁ1ey General Augusta, Maine 04333-0006 y Fax; 625-3312 
7IZeono'uu¢d¢m 
To: Senator Scott W. Cowger 
Representative Theodore S. Koffman 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Natural Resources 
From: Dennis J. Harnish, Assistant Attorney General 
Date: April 15, 2005 
Subject: Analysis of L.D. 1489 6 State House Station phone; 525-3300 
L.D. 1489 claims groundwater as a public natural resource owned by all the citizens of 
the State of Maine. This bill also provides that the citizens of the State of Maine have the right 
to regulate the extraction and use of groundwater. Because groundwater is privately owned, 
L.D. 1489 would change the law with regard to ownership. However, the State of Maine 
already has th e right, under its police powers, to regulate the extraction and use of 
groundwater and to some extent Maine is already regulating groundwater extraction and use. 
A. Groundwater in Maine ls Privately Owned. 
The absolute dominion rule, also known as the English rule, has been the law in this 
State for over a century. Pursuant to the absolute dominion rule, a property owner may diga 
well or make other excavations within his own bounds and be subject to no claim for damages 
even though the effect of this well or excavation may be to cut off and divert water which 
would otherwise find its way to the well or spring of his neighbor. Chase v. Silverstone, 62 Me. 
175, 183-84 (1873). Accord, Chelsea v. King, 74 Me. 164, 170 (1882). 
ln the 132 years since the Chase opinion was issued, mostjurisdictions in the United 
States have adopted the reasonable use, or American rule. The reasonable use rule prevents a 
landowner, over his neighbor's objections, from wasting groundwater or from transporting it 
off his land for use elsewhere. Sgg Roger A. Cunningham, et al., the Law of Property § 7.5(1984) 
and Restatement (Zd of Torts § 858 (1979).
in 1999, the Law Court was invited to abandon the absolute dominion rule in preference 
for the American rule. However, in Maddox v. Giles, 1999 ME 63 Tl 11, 728 A. 2d 150, 154, the 
Law Court declined to do so. First, the Court stated that it was not convinced that the absolute 
dominion rule was wrong for Maine. Second, the Court noted that for over a century 
landowners in Maine had relied on the absolute dominion rule. Third, the Court deferred to the 
Legislature to consider the ”heavy policy considerations involved in this issue, not the least of 
which is the reliance of landowners on the present property laws." §i_l_e_s_, 1| 12. In sum, the 
Court concluded,” . . . that at this time the question of whether to depart from our common law 
on groundwater issues is best left to the Legislature." Q; 
The GE; Court found it significant that the Legislature had, prior to 1999, already 
considered taking action in the area of groundwater rights by creating a Water Resources 
Management Board and by charging it with the duty to undertake a comprehensive study of 
water law in Maine. Sgt-;_, 5 M.R.S.A. § 6301 (Supp. 1998), repealed by 5 M.R.S.A. § 6306 (Supp. 
1998). The Court found that the Water Board had reported to the Legislature and had 
suggested that the Legislature adopt reasonable use principles, but that the Legislature chose 
to leave the common law as it currently stands. Gi _le§ at 1) 13. 
As the Law Court noted in Qilgs, the Legislature had, prior to the GE; decision, enacted 
an exception to the absolute dominion rule by creating liability when a person withdraws 
groundwater in excess of household purposes for a single-family home and the withdrawal 
interferes with a preexisting household use of groundwater. 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 404(1) & (2) (1989). 
However, as the gi gs Court observed, this statute does not regulate commercial withdrawals of 
water and it does not protect potential, as opposed to preexisting, uses of groundwater. In 
sum, Maine remains an absolute dominion rule jurisdiction, except as modified by the statute 
described above, and this means that groundwater in this State is privately owned. 
B. Groundwater Extraction and Use are Subject to Police Power Regulation within 
Constitutional Limits. 
This does not mean, however, that Maine may not regulate groundwater. indeed, 
groundwater extraction and use are already regulated to some degree. For example, the Maine 
Department of Environmental Protection (”DEP" ) regulates groundwater withdrawals under 
the Site Location of Development Law, DEP Regulations, Chapter 375 §§ 8(A)-(D). Maine's 
statutes also prohibit (with a number of exceptions ‘) the transportation of water across 
municipal boundaries by pipelines or in containers larger than 10 gallons. 22 M.R.S.A. § 2660-A, 
Water Resources Management. The quality of groundwater is also regulated by the State of 
Maine. Groundwater is included in the definition of "Waters of the State" set forth atQ 
38 M.R.S.A. § 361-A and, therefore, is subject to Maine's Water Control Act, 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 413, 
403, 465-C and 470, as well as its Oil Laws. See, for example, 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 543 and 548. 
(In sum, although the groundwater in Maine has been, and still is, considered to be 
private property, it is, like other private property, subject to regulation by the State for
2
protection of the public safety, health and welfare. it is clear, however, that legislative 
initiatives that would regulate groundwater withdrawals will be subject to close review by 
parties interested in protecting the private rights of property owners. See, for example, the 
essay entitled Maine Water Resources Management: A Major Legislative Initiative . 6 Me. Bar 
Journal 28 (1991) wherein Martin J. Robles, Esquire argued that ”[w]ater rights are property 
rights. As a result, legislation modifying water rights . . . should recognize that landowners and 
investors may have vested rights in existing riparian and groundwater rights." Implicit in this 
statement is that legislation that interferes with vested rights might be challenged asa 
regulatory taking.l 
Regulatory takings challenges are by nature fact specific and must be decided on a case- 
by-case basis. Therefore, it is impossible to give a bright line answer to whether groundwater 
extraction legislation would go ”too far" and thereby trigger the need to provide compensation 
to the property owner. See Pennsylvania Coal v. Mahon, 260 U.S. 303 (1922). However, asa 
working generalization, regulation of private property that does not deprive the property 
owner of substantially all value of his or her property will not be considered to constitute a 
taking under the Maine or United States Constitutions. Penn Central Trans. Co. v. New York 
Qty, 438 U.S. 104 (1978); Seven islands Land Co. v. LURC, 450 A. 2d 475 (Me. 1982). 
ln conclusion, groundwater in Maine is presently owned by the owner of the surface 
property overlying the groundwater. The State has in the past regulated both the quality of 
groundwater and quantity of groundwater withdrawals in limited circumstances. Additional 
regulation should not violate the takings clauses of the United States and Maine Constitutions, 
so long as this regulation meets the tests e stablished by the United States Supreme Court and 
the Maine Law Court cases cited above.
3
