 
 
Testimony Presented by The Ecology School on LD 854 – May 11, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry distinguished  members of the Committee on taxation , 
My name is Leanna Bonds , and I am a resident of Portland  and the Director of Advancement and Community 
Partnerships  at The Ecology School , a nonprofit overnight  environmental learning center  located at River Bend Farm 
on the Saco River in rural southwest Saco . This afternoon I wo uld like to share with  this committee the many  ways that 
Poland Spring has supported our organization and the children of the communitie s it serve s. As a neutral, non -profit 
environmental education al organization, The Ecology School is non -partisan and does not take a stand  on taxation or 
political issues and therefore  we do not hold a position either for or against LD 854, An Act to Fund the Protection and 
Restoration of Riparian and Estuarine Ecosystems and to Impose an Excise Tax on Certain Bottled Water Operators . I 
would however like  to share  some important  information about our long -term relationship with Poland Spring and how 
our ability to serve Ma ine’s children for more than twenty -five years has been directly and positively impacted by the 
support we have received fro m Poland Spring.   
The Ecology School , located on the Saco River, has educated more than 1 90,000 children and adults  in the past 2 5 years  
since our first term in the fall of 1999 . We have a  solid reputation as a leader in the field of environmental , conservation , 
agriculture  and sustainability education. Over many years w e have built a strong community partnership with  Poland 
Spring.  In the past 20 years, Poland Spring has provided over $ 450,000 in funding that  has enabled  more than 10,000 
young people from the elementary schools of RSU #16 (Poland , Mechanic Falls, and Minot ), as well as  Bonny Eagle 
Middle School in Buxton , being able to participate in our transformative outdoor ecology education . This experience 
includes  overnight programming with  lodging , meals  and field ecology lessons . 
In 2020, and  through Poland Spring’s support , The Ecology School  created new programs including a national Teacher 
Institute for Watershed Science and Conservation  and an online curricul um. Currently we are in the third year of this 
institute and  will have been able to provide an incredible professional development opportunity, in Maine, to  290 
teachers across the country.  
To date,  Poland Spring has provided over $2. 5M in funding for new Ecology School initiativ es. Poland Spr ing’s strong 
commitment to community education and  the value they  place on environ mental and water shed  science education 
has earned the respect of local classro om teachers, administrat ors, town officials and citizens.   
Poland Spring’s commitment to ecology education does not end with their financial support.  On numerous occasions, 
Poland Spring representatives have visited our campus  to see our programs in action and to interact with the students 
and teachers they are supporting.  
Poland Spring has proven to be a responsible and generous community partner of The Ecology School. Their 
commitment to science and water shed education  ensur es that more Maine young people , teachers, and adults  are 
learning about the amazing natural resources that Maine has to offer. With the help of Poland Spring,  The Ecology 
School is educating future stewards of o ur great state and the Earth.  And that’s beneficial to all of us !  
Thank you , 
 
Leanna  Bonds  
Director of Advancement and Community Pa rtnerships  
The Ecology School  
