Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the Taxation 
Committee: 
My name is Lisa Troup. I grew up in Florida, but currently reside in Brunswick, 
Maine. I have worked at Poland Spring for 7 years. I have held many positions at 
Poland Spring, including the Warehouse Manager for both our Hollis and Poland 
bottling facilities, but currently serve as the Northeast Regional Logistics Director. 
The passage of LD 854 worries me. Not just for my job, but for all employees of 
Poland Spring. 
Poland Spring is always getting involved in our communities and with disaster 
relief. We have donated millions of bottles of water statewide, aiding in boil water 
alerts, PFAS contamination and emergency relief efforts. In fact, we’ve even 
provided tankers of water to assist fire fighters in structure fires such as the 
Fryeburg Fairgrounds Fire in 2018. We listen to the communities where we live 
and work and go to great lengths to respond to community needs Whether it’s 
heating assistance, food insecurity or the local little league team. Not only do we 
get involved with charities and relief causes, but we also manage ourselves to be as 
environmentally friendly as possible. We have practices in place for zero waste, 
use LED lighting on motion detectors to keep our electrical usage down, and our 
bottles are 100% recyclable. 
Our overhead cost is already high as our water is natural spring water from Maine 
and we have high demand for our product nationwide. If this passes, I fear that 
many of us will be out of good-paying jobs. Many of us depend on staying at 
Poland Spring for our entire career and would have nowhere else to go that 
provides the same pay, benefits, and growth opportunity. 
I appreciate all that Poland Spring has done for me and the opportunities the 
company has provided me. If our operations were to be harmed, which I believe 
they would be if this bill were to pass, then hundreds of Maine employees would 
suffer. I ask that you please vote No on LD 854. 
Thank you, 
Lisa Troup
