1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Thursday, May 11, 2023, 1:00 PM 
  
L.D. 854 – “An Act to Fund the Protection and Restoration of Riparian and 
Estuarine Ecosystems and to Impose an Excise Tax on Certain Bottled Water 
Operators” 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against L.D. 854, “An Act to Fund 
the Protection and Restoration of Riparian and Estuarine Ecosystems and to 
Impose an Excise Tax on Certain Bottled Water Operators.” 
This bill would create an excise tax of 5¢ per gallon on groundwater or 
surface water extracted and bottled for large-scale commercial use.  The proposal 
would allocate that revenue to the Land for Maine's Future Fund to acquire, 
restore, or protect certain lands in the state that are essential to the protection of 
aquifers, surface waters, or intertidal waters upon which human and natural 
communities depend. 
MRS is not aware of any other state with an existing excise tax on water 
extraction.  We are opposed to this type of tax on water extraction because it could 
significantly impact an important sector of Maine’s economy.   
Similar proposals to L.D. 854 have been regularly introduced in previous 
Legislative Sessions.  This bill is substantially similar to those, differing only by 
2 
 directing revenue collected to the Land for Maine’s Future Fund.  The most recent 
proposal passed, as amended, as Resolve 2021, chapter 185, “Establishing the 
Commission To Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine.”  
The Commission published its report to this Committee in December last year and, 
although the report did not directly address the taxation of water extraction, the 
Commission requested renewal in this current session to continue the study.  
Additionally, two bills that would re-establish the Commission have been 
published; both L.D.s 1641 and 1723 have been publicly heard in the Joint 
Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources and are under review 
in a work session today at 1:00 PM. 
Should the Committee decide to move forward with this proposal before the 
Commission is reformed, MRS would like to address several major technical 
concerns.   
  First, the language of the bill is ambiguous as to whether the tax applies 
only to water extracted and sold as bottled water, or whether water extracted for 
use in another bottled product, such as soda, would also be subject to the tax.  
Next, it is unclear whether the tax only applies to entities that both extract 
and sell water.  If this were the case, a taxpayer could potentially avoid the 
proposed tax by altering its entity structure.   
Further, the tax would only be imposed on a bottled water operator if it met 
the “gallons-extracted” threshold in the prior year.  A bottler could extract several 
millions of gallons of water in one year and not owe any tax, so long as the prior 
year’s extraction volume was under 1.5 million gallons.   
Lastly, the bill does not create a registration or licensing regime for bottled 
water operators.  As drafted, the bill would require every bottled water operator to 
3 
 report total gallons extracted, even if they are under the threshold and have no tax 
liability.  The revenue transfer clause should also specify that funds transferred are 
allocated from the revenue reported for the month prior. 
The preliminary cost estimate for creating a new tax type in STARS is 
$140,000; however, completing this work prior to the proposed implementation 
date may not be possible while MRS is upgrading and implementing other taxes in 
the new tax system.  Should this bill pass, given the focus on the implementation of 
taxes planned for October 2023, MRS would be unable to implement this by 
November 2023.  
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.  
