HOSPITALITY 
MAINE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
May 11, 2023 
In Opposition to LD 854, '14n Act to Fund the Protection and Restoration of Riparian and Estuarine 
Ecosystems and to impose an Excise Tax on Certain Bottled Water Operators" 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Taxation Committee: My name is Nate Cloutier, 
and I am here today on behaif of HospitalityMaine representing more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all 
sizes across the state. HospitalityMaine opposes LD 854, “An Act to Fund the Protect/ ‘ on and Restoration of R/‘ par/an and 
Estuarine Ecosystems and to impose an 5\'c/se Tax on Certain Bottled Water Operators. ” 
LD 854 proposes to create an excise tax of 5 cents per gallon on the extraction of groundwater or surface water for the 
commercial bottling for sale. This funds collected from this tax would be allocated to the Land for Maine's Future (LMF) 
Fund. 
HospitalityMaine has consistently opposed legislative efforts that seem to be a direct affront to one of Maine's ﬁnest and 
largest employers, Poland Spring. The hospitality and tourism industry have tremendous respect for Poland Spring and the 
brand they have created over the years. The company should be highly cherished as a business asset and not penalized 
for the their contribution to the Maine economy. 
Taxing a product, like water, that has such positive health inﬂuences seems to be counterintuitive. We want people to 
drink more water because it is good for them and the millions of people Poland Spring provides water to across the United 
States. Because Maine has such an abundance of water as a resource, it only makes sense that we should promote this 
resource as a healthy choice and a viable commercial endeavor that employs almost 1,000 people in rural areas of the 
state, where good jobs can be difﬁcult to ﬁnd. 
Poland Spring has left a legacy of good jobs and development throughout the state of Maine. Their contributions to Maine 
charitities and to Maine's growing business climate have been immeasureable. The fact that Poland Spring spends almost 
$140M dollars/year with local businesses and vendors is telling of its greater economic impact. We should instead celebrate 
the contributions that Poland Spring has given the State of Maine through the years and not tax a resource that helps so 
many people. Additional points for consideration: 
- The 2022 Commission To Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine did not recommend a tax 
on water withdrawal. No other state imposes a tax on water extraction. 
- This is an unfair tax proposal that targets a sole company, which may be deemed unconstitutional if it violates the 
equal protection clauses of the U.S. and Maine Constitutions. 
- We should not enscribe into statute that withdrawing groundwater is a “privilege. ” Withdrawal should remaina 
right as it currently exists under State Statute. 
- The perennial threat of harming Poland Spring’s operations is itself, taxing. We should be ﬁnding ways to ensure 
Poland Spring continues its successful operations here in Maine. 
Hopefully, this legislation is less about taxing one of our largest employers and is more about funding for Land for Maine's 
Future. LMF has had tremendous success at the ballot box through bonding proposals. The state also has record surpluses 
that could be used to provide funding to the program. 
We urge you to please vote LD 854 ought not to pass. Thank you, and I would be pleased to answer any questions.
