Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 854 
 
“An Act to Fund the Protection of Riparian and Estuarine 
Ecosystems and to Impose an Excise Tax on Certain Bottled Water 
Operators”  
 
May 11, 2023  
 
Patrick Strauch, Executive director  
Senator Grohoski , Representative P erry and distinguished members of the Taxation 
Committee, I am Patrick Strauch from Exeter, Maine, and the executive director of the 
Maine Forest Products Council (MFPC). I represent Maine’s forest product industry, 
which includes  more than $8 billion in economic contribution to the state’s economy, and 
more than 33,000 direct and indirect jobs.  
Since 1961, MFPC has represented the broad spectrum of our state's diverse forest 
products community, including logging contractors, sawm ills, pulp and paper mills, 
biomass energy facilities, pellet manufacturers, furniture manufacturers, and the owners of 
more than eight million acres of commercial forestland in Maine.  
To be effective, taxes should be stable, transparent, and impose the le ast number of 
possible distortions and hardships on the economy. LD 854 achieves none of those goals. 
It would tax an extremely narrow sector of the economy -- essentially, one company 
(Poland Spring) , producing one product .  
The 129th Legislature recognized the problems with a similar bill, LD 1074, and rejected it , 
as did the 130th Legislature with LD 1569.  
MFPC’s  landowners oppose this natural resource extraction tax because of the precedent it 
would establish for taxing other natural resources ( e.g., trees, medicinal plants). The 
precedent of expanding taxes on renewable resources is of major concern to the forest industry.  
Forest landowners are concerned about their property rights, since under the common law 
in Maine the owner of land also owns the groundwater beneath the land. If a water tax is 
imposed, the opportunity for generating revenues from groundwater aquifer s and springs is 
diminished, as would be the value of their land.  
Landowners interested in forestland stewardship are facing increased pressure from 
development and escalating land values. Groundwater sales are an important opportunity 
for forestland owner s to diversify and improve their revenue.  
Opportunities that help create greater returns for forestland owners are in the best interest of a community that wants to keep its forestland intact. Taxes that reduce the 
competitiveness for water markets in Mai ne negatively affects these forest landowner 
opportunities.  
MFPC forest industry manufacturers are concerned about the treatment of a natural 
2 
 
 resource industry that is growing and building new jobs for Maine's citizens. Maine cannot attract 
environmentally compatible businesses if policy makers are focused on short term financial gains and not long-
term opportunities and partnerships with job- makers.  
Taxing water will distort markets and threaten an important opportunity for Maine's more rura l areas. The Council 
urges you to vote ought not to pass on LD  854. Thank you for your consideration. 
