Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the 
Taxation Committee: 
My name is Ryan Pitas. I am a lifelong Mainer, who currently resides in Westbrook. 
While attending Westbrook high school I determined I was set on going to college to 
study mechanical engineering technology. I graduated from the University of Maine 
in Orono with a degree in Mechanical Engineering Technology. I started working for 
Poland Spring in 2017, just after I graduated from the University of Maine.I 
currently serve as the Operations Manager for Poland Spring. 
I struggled finding a job in manufacturing in Maine. I finally received a job offer fora 
position in Massachusetts and reluctantly accepted the position. I wanted to stay in 
Maine but understood that I needed to move to the job. I accepted the position, found 
an apartment in Massachusetts, and was set to move. I received a call from a recruiter 
about a position for a maintenance supervisor and ended up accepting a position after 
Poland Spring has given me the opportunity to continue to live and work in Maine, 
with a job that provides an incredibly competitive wage. Poland Spring offers some 
of the most competitive Wages in the State of Maine and employs over 900 men and 
Women across this great state. Additionally, Poland Spring provides me and all their 
employees with excellent medical, dental, vision, prescription, and long and short- 
term disability insurance. 
Today, this committee is considering a tax proposal that is clearly aimed at one 
company, Poland Spring. If passed, this tax will jeopardize exactly the types of jobs, 
benefits, and career opportunities that you and all our elected representatives are 
obligated to protect. 
In conclusion, I ask that you keep all this in mind and remember that Maine is a blue- 
collar state, and that the jobs this tax proposal place in jeopardy are good paying blue- 
collar jobs. I am proud to be a Poland Spring employee and appreciate every 
opportunity that Poland Spring has given me. I have always enjoyed the people and 
team that I work with. Anytime someone asks me what I do for work, I am proud to 
say I work for Poland Spring. I enjoy working with the passionate employees at 
Poland Spring. I respectfully ask that you vote No on LD 854, so that I can continue 
my career here at Poland Spring. 
Thank you, 
Ryan Pitas
