Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the 
Taxation Committee ‘:’ 
My name is Sarah Cohen. I am a lifelong Mainer, who currently resides in Minot. 
I serve as the Senior Transportation Manager for Poland Spring. I have been 
working at Poland Spring for almost 23 years, just two weeks after I graduated 
high school. Poland Spring has given me the chance to succeed and havea 
successful career. I have been able to raise and support my family in the state 
where I was born and raised. . 
Adding this Water tax will be harmful to Poland Spring, the company I work for, as 
well as many other companies that support our community. This tax will add too 
much money to our bottom line and our product will no longer be competitive in 
the marketplace. , 
To make sure we stay competitive in the bottled water industry, we are constantly 
looking for ways to improve our business. Not only for our business, but the 
communities we live in and support. Our natural spring water costs more because 
it is natural spring water that comes from right here in Maine. Being located so far 
north, transportation can be challenging. However, we have been working ona_ 
few things to help us stay competitive andbe a good neighbor. 
It is not fair to only tax water that is used for bottling, but not water that is used for 
other purposes. As a proud employee of Poland Spring, it worries me that our, 
lawmakers would consider a tax this extreme. It is possible that people just do not 
understand the ﬁnancial impact that his tax would have on the State of Maine. 
As the Senior Transportation Manager, I know that we are bringing in and shipping 
out hundreds of trucks each day. This tax would not only impact Poland- Spring, 
but it would also impact our carrier partners —- a large percentage of which are 
Maine-based carriers. We believe in supporting our local businesses. These trucks 
support the State of Maine daily: by paying tolls to travel‘ 
on our roads, stopping at 
local stores for the goods they need, using our local mechanic shops to keep their 
wheel turning — all these things support local jobs that could be lost if this tax were 
to be passed.' 
,' 
In conclusion, I ask that you vote No on LD 854. Not only for me, but for my 
family, my coworkers, their families, and the State of Maine. Poland Spring is my 
second home. The company believed in me, even though I did not have a degree 
from a higher education. It has been part of my life and I have made many lifelong
ﬁ'iends at the company that I like to consider family. They say that if you love 
your job, you will never work a day in your life. I agree. I love my job and look 
forward to working for Poland Spring for the rest of my career. 
Thank you, 
Sarah L. Cohen
