Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the Taxation 
Committee: 
My name is Scott Monko. I grew up in Pennsylvania, but a little over 5 years ago 
my wife who is a lifelong Mainer had dearly missed this great state wanted to be 
back here. Closer to her childhood friends and her family. I have worked at Poland 
Spring for the entire 5 years since we moved, and currently serve as a Warehouse 
Supervisor. 
When I was looking to relocate to Maine, I knew there were very few opportunities 
in the state that offers the kinds of jobs that Poland Spring does. Since then, Poland 
Spring has invested in me and my family’s future. Along with a decent wage, they 
have provided me with competitive health insurance and a 401(k) retirement plan. 
I come before you today to ask you to vote No to LD 854, an unfair tax that will 
impact my livelihood and many others in this great State. Let me repeat that. an 
unfair tax that will impact my livelihood and many others in this great State. 
This will not only impact those of us who work for Poland Spring directly but will 
impact many other indirect jobs as well. Such as Truck drivers, over 800 that come 
to Maine a day and pay tolls to pick up our great product, if they don’t, more lost 
revenue for the state and its people. If we lose these well-paying jobs in rural 
areas, the effects will ripple throughout our communities and will have a negative 
impact on its residents along with all other companies that directly deal with 
Poland Spring. 
In closing, I would again ask that you stop this anti-business, anti—Maine tax. Let’s 
stop draining Maine of its young citizens. One of them being my 6 month old son, 
Declan, born and hopefully raised in Maine, ifI do not lose my job if this unfair 
tax bill passes. Let’s create a place where manufacturing is strong, and our 
economy and revenues will grow as we add jobs and taxpayers. We the workers 
and manufacturers make Maine a stronger and better place to live and thrive. The 
employees of Poland Spring are proud of what we do, and do not feel these bills . 
are fair to us and the product we produce. 
Thank you, 
Scott Monko
