Testimony of Melissa Hackett 
Policy Associate, Maine Children's Alliance 
in support, LD 1013, An Act to Provide Training, Professional Development and Wellness 
Supports for Child Protective Services Workers 
April 21, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. My name is Melissa Hackett. l am a policy associate with the Maine 
Children's Alliance. I am also the coordinator for the Maine Child Welfare Action Network. l am 
here today in support of LD 1013. 
Child welfare caseworkers do the essential and challenging task of working to ensure children 
can grow up in safe, stable, and permanent homes. This is also often work that creates trauma 
and stress for caseworkers. Having a well-trained and well-supported workforce is a critical 
component of an effective child welfare system. Yet in Maine, we struggle to attract and retain 
enough caseworkers to meet the demand. This means that the caseworkers we do have are 
managing higher caseloads and workloads, to make up for the deﬁcit in caseworkers. For many, 
this can lead to burnout. To ensure we can attract more individuals to this important work, and 
to retain the workforce we already have, it is essential that we consider how best to support 
new caseworkers, and more seasoned caseworkers, so they feel they have the resources and 
tools necessary to do their work well, and to be able to take care of themselves in the process. 
While we know that OCFS already has some training and supports in place for caseworkers, we 
think more could be done to ensure we have a well-trained and well-supported workforce in 
child protection. Additional efforts based on national ‘ and state“ recommendations include: 
0 Reduced caseloads and additional training for new caseworkers as they onboard into 
their new roles, ensuring they have sufficient opportunities to learn critical skills on the 
job, and to understand the legal child protective process. Additional supervision during 
this process is important to provide additional coaching. 
0 For all caseworkers, being able to beneﬁt from, or help provide, mentorship is an 
important way to provide additional coaching and support. incentives should be 
considered to provide this opportunity. 
0 Training specific to bias and stigma around particular groups caseworkers will engage 
with in their work with families. intentional and ongoing opportunities for child 
protective staff to learn and reﬂect on bias, racism, poverty, and stigma, are important to 
ensure caseworkers are engaging with families in the most respectful and supportive 
ways. 
0 Consideration of ﬂexible work schedules, including telecommuting, compressed work 
weeks, and job sharing.
National survey data of child protective workers estimated that around 80% of the workforce 
was composed of women managing multiple caretaking responsibilitiesl “ Recognizing this 
should lead us to develop more family-friendly work policies that don't force caseworkers to feel 
they have to choose between their work supporting other families, or having time and space to 
support their own families. 
Further evidence in Maine indicates a need and desire from caseworkers and supervisors for 
more training and support in their work, as noted in a recent OPEGA survey of child protective 
caseworkers and supervisors. 
”When asked to describe what training would help caseworkers prepare for 
investigations, both caseworkers and supervisors frequently mentioned: increased job 
shadowing, preferably with an experienced worker; mentoring opportunities with 
supervisors or experienced workers; and an increased focus on the investigations 
process in Foundations. 
Other suggestions offered by fewer survey respondents include: observing investigations 
from start to ﬁnish before having cases assigned and more supervision and smaller 
caseloads at ﬁrst. A few caseworkers surveyed noted speciﬁc training that would be 
helpful, including better preparation for the court and legal aspects of investigations and 
training on conducting interviews. 
Caseworkers and supervisors are of the same mind regarding the need to focus on the 
practice aspects of getting caseworkers ready for conducting investigations. Comments 
provided by caseworkers and supervisors also indicated that a more stable workforce, 
lower caseloads, and to a lesser degree, better knowledge of laws and policies governing 
the work, would have a beneﬁcial effect in the training of new caseworkers. ” -OPEGA 
CPS Investigations report, page 31, httpszj/legislature.mainegov/doc/8493 
The child welfare workforce in Maine is essential to family engagement and child safety and 
permanency. With vacancies resulting in signiﬁcant workloads for these workers, on top of what 
is already incredibly challenging work, we need to do all that we can to ensure we are able to 
recruit and retain a well-trained and well-supported workforce in child welfare. To that end, we 
hope the committee will join in supporting this legislation. Thank you. 
lhttpsﬂggwwi.orgj ﬁles/W9rkfo§g;_g;Developmgnt Fran_1ework __B_rief.pdf and https;/j_ncwwi~- 
cimsorg/resourcemenu/resource-librarv/organizational-culture-and-climate/1657-key-takeaways —from~bui1ding~a- 
resilient-workf0rce —t0-address-trauma~and~enhance-well-being-connecting-to~cultural-ways/ ﬁle 
“ b.tti2.§.11/.!_eg¥_S¥ _e1L;1£@.-_r1'>Ri ﬂe-aqyLd.9cZ843§ 
“‘ https:[/www.ncwwi.0rg/iiles/Wor|<force_pemographic Trencis_l_yl __@/2011;pdf
