 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1782  (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1782 , An Act to Empower Jurors by Allowing I nstructions That They May Find a 
Defendant  Not Guilty if a Guilty  Verdict  Would  Yield an Unjust Result  
 
DA: May 10, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1782 .    
 
 Jury trials are the culmination of a process governed by laws--statutes enacted by the 
Legislature, rules  adopted  by the courts,  judicial cas elaw , and our State and federal Constitutions .   
These laws and processes have been develop ed over many years of deliberation and review to 
protect the constitutional  rights of defendants while holding persons who engage in criminal 
behavior accountable .   Legal standards that govern the presentation of evidence  and the jurors ’ 
application of the law to that evidence encou rage even -handed application of the law.   To 
encourage juries to set aside laws enacted after a deliberative, publicly noticed process  based on 
their feelings toward a particular individual is con trary to the  entire concept  of applying laws 
equally and fairly .  To tell a jury,  “This is the law, but you don ’t have to foll ow it ” renders a verdict 
entirely subjective.   It would alter the nature of evidence presented, creating issues about whether  
evidence  become s relevant because it speaks to the “fairness ” of a verdict, rather than to whether or 
not the defendant engaged in certain conduct .    It intro duces t he very real possibility  that 
defendants who have e ngaged in the same conduct will not be held to the same standard, based 
merely on how sympathetic they appear to the jury .   It would shi ft the focus of a criminal trial away 
from the conduct at issue .  The Maine Law Court, citing its own  longstanding  precedent and that of 
other state and federal courts, has explicitly  rejected a “right ” to jury nullification , while 
ackno wledging that it may  in fact occur .    “We have long held that it is the function of the court to 
instruct jurors on the  law, and it is the duty of the jurors to de cide the facts and be governed by the 
law as it is stated by the court. ”  State v Masker , 2007 ME 4, ¶¶ 7-8. 
 
 Encouraging ju rors not to convict , despite proof beyond a reasonable doubt, may have 
unintended consequences.  If ju rors are instructed that they may i gnore the law to prevent an unjust 
conv iction , it undermines any other instruction given by the judge, and thus raises the specter that 
jurors may ignore  the law for other reasons, for example, to convict an unlike able defendant, or to 
compensat e a sympathetic victi m.     
 
 The Leg islature can repeal laws that it determines to be unjust .  Courts can dismiss  charges 
that are “de minim is,” and impose sentences  that reflect the individual circumstances of the 
defendant  (absent mandatory sentences the Legislature  has established).   Pre-trial d iversio n 
 
 programs, d irect appeals, post -conviction review p roceedings, motions for acquittal ,  new trial  and 
to corre ct sentences,  community corrections programs such as work -relea se and supervised 
community confinement, and the clemency process are some of the existing mechanis ms available 
to cor rect errors , redress  unfairness, and recogniz e individuals ’ capacity for redemption.     CLAC 
does not support introducing a wild card of sanctioned and subjective jury nullification  into this 
process.     
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislatur e.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current  members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the C o-Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crim es in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
