FINANCE AUTHORITY Of MAINE 
Testimony by Carlos R. Mello 
Acting Chief Executive Officer 
In Support of L.D. 46 
An Act to Amend the Statutory Balance Limit on the 
Finance Authority of Maine ’s Loan Insurance Reserves 
February 14, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement, and Business 
Senator Curly, Representative Roberts, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business: 
My name is Carlos Mello. I am the Acting CEO at the Finance Authority of 
Maine (FAME). I live in Camden and am here to testify in suppoit of L.D. 46, An Act to 
Amend the Statutory Balance Limit on the Finance Authority of Maine ’s Loan Insurance 
Reserves. 
First, I wish to thank Senator Curry for sponsoring this bill on FAME’s behalf. 
FAME’s mission is to provide financial solutions that help Maine people achieve 
their business and higher education goals. One of the ways we do this is by insuring 
lender loans to Maine businesses needing financing. 
We are asking you to increase the cap on the amount of funds that FAME may 
have in its combined Loan Insurance Reserve and Mortgage Insurance Fund from 
$40,000,000 to $50,000,000, thus continuing the $1,000,000 transfer to the Loan 
Insurance Reserve until the new cap is reached. 
Current law provides that the State Controller transfer, at the close of each ﬁscal 
year, up to $1,000,000 from the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund to the Loan 
Insurance Reserve within the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME) until the combined 
balance of the Loan Insurance Reserve and the Mortgage Insurance Fund, also within 
FAME, reaches $40,000,000. This transfer is the 2nd priority in the so-called "cascade" 
after transfers to replenish the State Contingent Account pursuant to 5 MRSA §l507 are 
made.
1
Loan insurance helps to cover a bank or credit union's credit risk. For a business, 
it may mean the difference between obtaining a loan, going out of business, or never 
getting the opportunity to start a business. FAME’s commercial loan insurance is 
available for almost any prudent business activity and insures up to 90 percent (100 
percent for veterans) of a loan to a maximum FAME insurance exposure of $7.5 million. 
This maximum insurance amount is set at least annually in accordance with FAME’s 
Direct Loan and Loan Insurance Credit Policy. 
As we mentioned to you during your recent committee orientation, our 
Commercial Loan Insurance Program is a successful workhorse program leveraging 
economic development in partnership With local Maine lending institutions across the 
state. Over the years, the state has invested approximately $40 million in this program, 
which has in turn led to approximately $1.5 billion in direct lending to Maine businesses 
and over 100,000 Maine jobs created. 
In FY 22 alone, FAME commercial loan insurance supported approximately $105 
million in ﬁnancing by lending institutions (Our best year ever! And up from $49 million 
last year) for 248 loans to 202 Maine businesses. This helped to create and retain 
approximately 3,062 Maine jobs. 
We respectfully request that you help FAME enhance one of our most successful 
economic development tools by approving this dollar limit for the program to continue to 
be eligible for funding from the cascade. 
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony. I will be happy to answer any 
questions you have.
2
