 Aroostook County                                                   Shawn D. Gillen, Sheriff 
Sheriff’s Office                                 Joey Seeley, Chief Deputy 
 
                                           
                     Patrol                      Transportation                      Corrections                      Civil Process                     
 
FAITHFULLY SERVING OUR NEIGHBORS SINCE 1839 
 
25 School St., Suite 216, Houlton, ME 04730          Tel: 207-532-3471          Fax: 207-532-7319 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF Shawn D. Gillen 
Sheriff 
AROOSTOOK COUNTY 
IN SUPPORT OF  
LD 1889 An Act to Provide Authorization to Aroostook County to Use the Statewide Radio and Network System 
 
STATE OF MAINE LEGISLATURE 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, UTILITY & TECHNOLOGY 
 
Senator Lawerence, Representative Zeigler & Honorable Members of the Committee: 
 
My name is Shawn Gillen, and I am a resident of Blaine and serve as the Sheriff of Aroostook County. I submit this 
written testimony supporting LD 1889, "An Act to Provide Authorization to Aroostook County to Use the 
Statewide Radio and Network System."  
 
LD 1889 will allow the County of Aroostook to access state-owned tower sites and existing building structures.      
 
LD 1889 will allow the Aroostook County Sheriff's Office to use the statewide radio and network system, 
specifically tower sites and structures that house equipment. These state-owned tower sites are already 
established in Aroostook. They would enhance our radio communication capabilities in one of Maine's most rural 
and remote counties. They will provide a level of safety to emergency services and public protection that we 
cannot offer at this time. The Aroostook County Dispatch Center provides services not only to our own rural 
patrol deputies and corrections transport but also to local police, fire, and ambulance service providers and 
municipalities from the top of Aroostook to the bottom and parts of northern Washington and Penobscot 
Counties.  
 
Aroostook County is utilizing nearly $3.5 million in American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds to significantly 
upgrade from a three-radio tower system to a fifteen-radio tower system. These new tower sites are already in 
place throughout the region and will dramatically help increase our communication coverage of the County. Our 
coverage now is spotty, with little to no communication in areas in the north and south. We have no 
communication in the town of Fort Fairfield, which is a town that we often assist. Earlier in the year, we had a 
shooting in the Allagash. We had zero communications with other agencies and our communication center. This 
situation could have turned out extremely bad. This example is just one of many incidents that have happened, 
and why it is so essential that we move forward with this project. Our communication system should have been 
 Aroostook County                                                   Shawn D. Gillen, Sheriff 
Sheriff’s Office                                 Joey Seeley, Chief Deputy 
 
                                           
                     Patrol                      Transportation                      Corrections                      Civil Process                     
 
FAITHFULLY SERVING OUR NEIGHBORS SINCE 1839 
 
25 School St., Suite 216, Houlton, ME 04730          Tel: 207-532-3471          Fax: 207-532-7319 
 
replaced years ago, and we are fortunate no one got hurt. Upgrading our current equipment along with LD 1889 
will keep this project moving forward and provide life-saving support to the public and emergency responders.  
 
If LD 1889 did not pass, we would far exceed the 3.5 million set aside for this project. New tower sites would have 
to be built. Because this project is life or death, we would have no choice but to put the burden on the taxpayers 
of Aroostook. Doing so would make no sense since we have already paid for existing towers.   
 
This problem is not unique to Aroostook. Some other counties and towns in Maine have also tried to utilize state-
owned radio towers and have been told no. Several counties have reached out to express their concerns and 
support of LD 1889.           
     
The Aroostook County Sheriff's Office expects to fund any costs associated with this project and does not expect 
the state to fund any part. For example, Aroostook County would fund any work studies or equipment 
installation needed for the project. The Sheriff's Office also intends to help the Maine Office of Information 
Technologies succeed in its mission, and LD 1889 would directly support that.      
 
In closing, I thank you for considering LD 1889 and ask for your support and Ought to Pass recommendation.  
 
 
Shawn D. Gillen 
 
 
Sheriff 
 
Shawn Gillen
Aroostook County Sheriff's Office
LD 1889
TESTIMONY OF Shawn D. Gillen
Sheriff
AROOSTOOK COUNTY
IN SUPPORT OF 
LD 1889 An Act to Provide Authorization to Aroostook County to Use the Statewide 
Radio and Network System
STATE OF MAINE LEGISLATURE
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, UTILITY & TECHNOLOGY
Senator Lawerence, Representative Zeigler & Honorable Members of the Committee:
My name is Shawn Gillen, and I am a resident of Blaine and serve as the Sheriff of 
Aroostook County.  I submit this written testimony supporting LD 1889, "An Act to 
Provide Authorization to Aroostook County to Use the Statewide Radio and Network 
System." 
LD 1889 will allow the County of Aroostook to access state-owned tower sites and 
existing building structures.     
LD 1889 will allow the Aroostook County Sheriff's Office to use the statewide radio 
and network system, specifically tower sites and structures that house equipment.  
These state-owned tower sites are already established in Aroostook.  They would 
enhance our radio communication capabilities in one of Maine's most rural and 
remote counties.  They will provide a level of safety to emergency services and public
protection that we cannot offer at this time.     The Aroostook County Dispatch Center
provides services not only to our own rural patrol deputies and corrections transport 
but also to local police, fire, and ambulance service providers and municipalities from
the top of Aroostook to the bottom and parts of northern Washington and Penobscot 
Counties. 
Aroostook County is utilizing nearly $3.5 million in American Rescue Plan Act 
(ARPA) funds to significantly upgrade from a three-radio tower system to a 
fifteen-radio tower system.   These new tower sites are already in place throughout the
region and will dramatically help increase our communication coverage of the 
County.   Our coverage now is spotty, with little to no communication in areas in the 
north and south.  We have no communication in the town of Fort Fairfield, which is a 
town that we often assist.  Earlier in the year, we had a shooting in the Allagash.  We 
had zero communications with other agencies and our communication center.  This 
situation could have turned out extremely bad.  This example is just one of many 
incidents that have happened, and why it is so essential that we move forward with 
this project.  Our communication system should have been replaced years ago, and we
are fortunate no one got hurt.  Upgrading our current equipment along with LD 1889 
will keep this project moving forward and provide life-saving support to the public 
and emergency responders. 
If LD 1889 did not pass, we would far exceed the 3.5 million set aside for this project.
New tower sites would have to be built.  Because this project is life or death, we 
would have no choice but to put the burden on the taxpayers of Aroostook.  Doing so 
would make no sense since we have already paid for existing towers.  
This problem is not unique to Aroostook.  Some other counties in Maine have also 
tried to utilize state-owned radio towers and have been told no.  Several counties have
reached out to express their concerns and support of LD 1889.          
    
The Aroostook County Sheriff's Office expects to fund any costs associated with this 
project and does not expect the state to fund any part.  For example, Aroostook 
County would fund any work studies or equipment installation needed for the project. 
The Sheriff's Office also intends to help the Maine Office of Information 
Technologies succeed in its mission, and LD 1889 would directly support that.     
In closing, I thank you for considering LD 1889 and ask for your support and Ought 
to Pass recommendation. 
