 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1889, An Act to Provide Authorization to Aroostook County to Use the Statewide Radio and 
Network System 
 
May 16, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in support of LD 1889. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
What does LD 1889 do?  LD 1889 requires the Department of Administrative and Financial Services’ Office of 
Information Technology to authorize Aroostook County to utilize the statewide radio and network system, and 
amends the provisions of law governing the Statewide Radio and Network System Reserve Fund to include 
Aroostook County. 
 
Discussion.   The Statewide Radio and Network System Reserve Fund was established as an internal service 
fund within the Department’s Office of Information Technology to acquire, expand, upgrade and replace 
a statewide radio and network system for use by state agencies. When the Fund was originally established, it did 
not include counties or authorize counties to use the statewide radio and network system. Our Association 
understands potential challenges presented by authorizing Aroostook County to utilize the system and include 
the county in the Fund, but we believe that further cooperation among state agencies and rural communities is 
important for public safety and communications. MCCA also looks forward to being part of any future 
discussions that involve authorizing Aroostook County or other counties to utilize such network system. For 
these reasons, we write in support. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
