45 Melville Street, Suite1 
. yﬁsgc-5%,! !T= Augusta, ME 04330 
M N E Phone: 207.623.1149 
voice of Maine Retail www.retailmaine.org 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
Members ofthe Health Coverage Insurance and Financial Services Committee 
RE: Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 1082, An Act Advance the Maine Retirement Savings 
Program 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members ofthe Health Coverage Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee: 
My name is Curtis Picard and I am the President and CEO of the Retail Association of Maine. I ama 
resident of Topsham. We have more than 350 members statewide and represent retailers ofall sizes.l 
am here to testify Neither for Nor Against LD 1082 with a couple of recommended changes. 
First, we believe that helping people retire with dignity is important. Nearly ten years ago, the Retail 
Association of Maine launched a multiple employer 401K retirement program. It was the first in the 
country, and we have since created an organization called the Alliance of State Retail Associations so 
that we can offer our program nationally. We now have nearly 20 states participating and providing an 
affordable retirement solution to thousands of retail employees. Additionally, with the recent passage 
ofthe SECURE 2.0 act at the federal level, it has made participating in a 401K even more affordable, and 
in many cases, no cost. 
We recognize the need for LD 1082, and the necessary delay in the program's rollout. We have two 
recommendations for changes to LD 1082, however. First, while we have no problem with requiring 
employees to be automatically enrolled initially, and requiring them to opt-out, we do have concerns 
with automatically re-enrolling people after a certain amount of time. Instead, periodic communication 
with the employee to opt-in at certain times is a better approach. Secondly, we share the concern of 
including seasonal employees in the program. We would recommend that seasonal employees be 
exempted from the program. 
Thank you for your consideration of comments. 
Sincerely, 
Curtis Picard, CAE, President and CEO
