Maine Retirement Investment Trust 
Testimony of Elizabeth Bordowitz - April 11, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
In Support of LD 1082 - An Act to Advance the Maine Retirement Savings Program 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
I am Elizabeth Bordowitz of Portland and I am here today to testify in support of LD 1082 - An 
Act to Advance the Maine Retirement Savings Program. As the Executive Director of the Maine 
Retirement Savings Board, l manage the day-to-day aspects of the Board's implementation of 
the Auto-lRA program envisioned by the legislature in 2021 when it enacted the legislation 
creating the Maine Retirement Savings Board and the Maine Retirement Savings Program. The 
Board members were appointed by Governor Mills and held their ﬁrst meeting in April 2022, as 
required by the statute. Since then the Board has hired me; we have stood up a new 
independent agency of the State, run successful RFPs for specialized legal counsel, Investment 
Advisors and for communications and website development, and become familiar with similar 
programs operating in other states. We have learned that setting up a Program, particularly one 
housed in a new independent agency often takes several years. We believe that we can 
improve on that timeline. 
When it is fully implemented this program will: 
0 Allow working Mainers to contribute to a Roth lRA directly from their paycheck. 
0 Allow small business employers that do not offer their own retirement savings plans to 
facilitate a deduction for their employees. 
0 Ensure that the deducted funds that go into the employee's lRA will follow the employee 
from job to job. 
0 Ensure that eligible employees are automatically enrolled, but they can change the 
amount they contribute or opt out entirely if they want.- 
The Board understands the importance and urgency of establishing the Program and is moving 
forward swiftly and prudently. However, the Board was not able to have a program in place in 
time for employers of 25 or more employees to enroll in the Program by April 1, 2023, the initial 
deadline established by the enabling legislation. Many employers are aware of the registration 
requirement and are concerned that they are not able to fulﬁll their obligation to register with 
Page1
ERIT Maine Retirement Investment Trust 
the Program by April 1, 2023. This amendment extends the time for implementation of the 
Program. The new statutory deadline will be December 31, 2024. The Board anticipates 
having a pilot program before the end of 2023 and enrollment open to all Maine employers in 
the ﬁrst quarter of 2024. Consistent with extending the initial enrollment deadline, the 
legislation extends the enforcement timeline. Establishing realistic timeframes for the 
implementation of the Program is necessary to provide clarity to businesses. To provide this 
clarity for small businesses as soon as possible, the legislation includes an emergency preamble. 
The legislation will also change the timeline for the Board's reporting to the legislature. The law 
requires submission of the ﬁrst report on February 1, 2024. This legislation will change that to 
February 1, 2026. This is consistent with the changed enrollment timeline. The law anticipated 
accounts opening in early 2023. The reality is that the ﬁrst accounts will not be funded until late 
2023 or early 2024 - there is a lag between program registration and account funding. The 
Program operates on a calendar year, so the report for 2024 cannot be completed for 
submission on February 1, 2025. 
The law also provides for employees of the Board to participate in State health insurance and to 
participate in the 401(a) and 457b plan administered by lVlainePers without requiring 
employees to participate in the State deﬁned beneﬁt pension plan. 
The Board also is aware of the legislative intent that the Program be self-sustaining. To 
understand how long it will take for the Program to reach sustainability, the Board has 
contracted with Pew Charitable Trusts to undertake a sustainability study. The draft study 
shows that the Program can be self-sustaining in 10-12 years with some additional help from 
the legislature in the next couple of years to make the bridge to sustainability. The Board has 
undertaken actions to achieve sustainability as quickly as possible. In particular, the Board has 
directed me, working with a Committee of Board members, to explore entering intoa 
partnership with a State that has an established payroll deduction IRA program. This will have 
multiple beneﬁts: Working with a larger state will reduce the overall costs to Maine employees 
who will save for retirement in the Program; coordinating with an existing program allows the 
Maine Program to be available sooner. It will be possible to share some ongoing administrative 
costs of the Program. Maine will gain by learning what works best from its partner. This 
process is well underway. 
The importance of establishing this program for the State continues to grow. According to 
preliminary and soon-to-be published estimates from The Pew Charitable Trusts, a nonpartisan 
Page2
MERIT Maine Retirement Investment Trust 
nonproﬁt, in partnership with Econsult Solutions, an economic consulting ﬁrm, Maine is 
projected to spend an additional $1.63 billion on social assistance programs for older Mainers 
due to a lack of retirement savings from 2021 to 2040 than it would if residents in the state 
achieved recommended levels of savings? Additionally, based on current and projected tax 
ﬂows, Maine taxpayers may be on the hook for another $3.3 billion in excess costs for federal 
programs. ’ Combined, these costs to Mainers attributable to insufficient retirement savings 
total $4.94 billion dollars which works out to an additional $13,400 per working age household 
over this period. 
The Maine Retirement Savings Board urges enactment of LD 1082. 
‘Medicaid, Medicare Part D, SNAP, and the various Older Americans Act programs 
2 
Medicaid, the Medicare Part D Low income Subsidy, Supplemental Security Income, SNAP, 
LlHEAP, Supportive Housing for the Elderly, and Older Americans Act Programs) 
Page3
-.
