Sen. Bailey, Rep. Perry, and Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for your service and for the opportunity to speak with you today. My name is Gigi 
Guyton-Thompson. I am a member of the Maine Retirement Savings Board. I live on Peaks 
Island, and have lived in Maine since 2007. 
Senator Vitelli was my boss for more than a decade at New Ventures Maine where I taught 
business planning and ﬁnancial education. When Senator Vitelli asked me to serve on this 
board, 1 jumped at the chance. Before moving to Maine, lwas a business owner in North 
Carolina. I offered my employees health and dental beneﬁts — something almost unheard of fora 
small business with less than l0 employees today. However, even back then, I was never able to 
offer my employees retirement beneﬁts. I could never quite get there fmancially. I would have 
jumped at the chance to enroll in a program like this had it been offered in North Carolina. It 
wouldn’t cost me anything. I wouldn’t have to match any savings. The most Iwould have to do 
is spend a little bit of time keying in and clicking a mouse to enter my employees ’ names and 
pertinent information into the retirement savings program. My employees, if they did not wish to 
participate, would only have to click a mouse and opt out. It’s just that simple, and that’s what 
we are trying to accomplish here. 
But in order for it to be that simple, there is heavy lifting, and the heavy lifting is being 
accomplished now by the Maine Retirement Savings Board. We are in the process of developing, 
establishing, implementing, and understanding the best way of maintaining the program. We are 
conducting market, legal and feasibility analyses, and have worked on the naming and branding 
of the program. 
We knew when We started that we had a very aggressive deadline. We have listened to countless 
consultants from other states offering this type of retirement program. They all said the original 
deadline was aggressive. pI 
As you may know, Maine will be one of only nine states in the country offering this type of 
retirement savings program. Once again, it gives Maine recognition, but it also provides value to 
our workforce, a worlcforce that is already demanding more, and rightfully so. 
The thing Ilwant to reiterate is that this retirement savings plan is not complicated for the 
employer or employee. We are making sure of that. It will not be cumbersome. It will add value, 
and hopefully give employers an opportunity to educate its workforce on the importance of 
retirement savings. 
While teaching one of my ﬁnancial education classes for New Ventures Maine at the Women’s 
Re-Entry Center in Windham a few years ago, a woman participating in work release wanted to 
argue that she had already blown through her retirement savings buying and using drugs, and that 
she was too old to save for retirement. The response from the ﬁnancial advisor I had brought into 
the class as a guest speaker said, “It is never too late to save for retirement. Start now!” I hope 
this message will reverberate throughout Maine with this program with all employees. It’s never 
too late to save for retirement. Start now.
1
I ask you to please extend our deadline so we can successfully ﬁnish What we’ve started. Thank 
you for your time. It is important that we let employers know the new timeline so they can rest 
assured they are not facing any penalties while we continue the process of implementing the 
program in the best interests of Maine’s employees and employers. 
Respectfully, 
ﬁts 
Gigi Guyton-Thompson 
Member, Maine Retirement Savings Board
2
