.1 HQSPETALITY 
MAINE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
April 11, 2023 
In Support of LD 1082, ”An Act to Advance the Maine Retirement Savings Program” 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Health Care, Insurance, and 
Financial Services Committee: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine 
representing more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the state. 
HospitalityMaine is testifying neither for nor against LD 1082, "An Act to Advance the Maine Retirement 
Savings Program." 
Current statute dictates that Maine employers who meet certain thresholds were supposed to begin 
enrolling employees into the ME Retirement Savings Program by April 1, 2023. We received clear 
communication from the Executive Director of the program, Beth Berkowitz, that the program needs 
additional time and the compliance date needed to be extended to give more time to ensure a smooth and 
successful rollout. We appreciate the need for additional time and have since disseminated that information 
to our employers through multiple channels. This bill allows the opportunity to make preemptive 
adjustments to the program in statute regarding seasonal employment and re-enrollment provisions. 
The merits of the Maine Retirement Savings Program were debated in the last Legislature, so we offer only 
two suggestions that we think will enhance the rollout and long-term stability of the program. We are 
thankful to have had the chance to meet with Senator Vitelli ahead of this Public Hearing and bring these 
concerns to her attention. The two suggested changes both take place in Section 5 Paragraph B of LD 
1082. 
1. The ﬁrst change would amend the bill to reﬂect the reality behind the administration of enrolling 
seasonal employees. Many seasonal workers are not Maine residents, and many do not even live 
in the United States. This places a large burden on employers who are required to enroll every 
worker in the program regardless of your work status (full time, parttime, seasonal, etc.). We would 
suggest adopting language that mirrors that of our New England neighbor, Connecticut, by 
requiring 120 days of employment in one year prior to mandatory enrollment in the program. This 
would not preclude a worker from stacking multiple jobs to meet the 120-day threshold. 
2. The second change we propose is removing the language that requires employers to re-enroll 
employees who have already opted out of the program. This would also remove the provision that 
ﬁnancially penalizes employers who do not re-enroll employees. If an employee changes his/her 
mind and would like to enroll, s/he still may do so. 
These changes consider what other states, including Connecticut and Oregon, have done. As stated above, 
Connecticut has a 120-eligibility threshold, and Oregon 60. It also creates consistency with other current 
state programs. Maine's recently enacted Earned Paid Leave law requires 120 days of employment before 
an employee is eligible for beneﬁts. Around 10 states have a similar program to Maine's, and even less
have fully launched. We feel that should the Committee adopt these changes now it will better serve the 
program's rollout in the future. 
Thank you for your consideration. Please vote LD 1222 ought to pass. I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have.
131st Maine Legislature 
An Act to Advance the Maine Retirement Savings Program 
L.D. 
in carrying out its responsibilities and exercising its powers under this chapter, shall employ or retain 
appropriate entities or personnel to assist or advise it and to whom to delegate the carrying out of such 
responsibilities and exercise of such powers; 
Sec. 5. 5 MRSA §173, sub-§2, as enacted by PL 2021, c. 356, §1, is amended to read: 
2. Required elements of program. In accordance with the implementation dates schedule set forth in 
subsection 3, the program must: 
A. Allow an eligible individual in this State to choose whether or not to contribute to an IRA under the 
program, including allowing a covered employee in the State the choice to contribute to an IRA under the 
program through a payroll deduction IRA arrangement; 
B. Notwithstanding any provision of state law related to payroll deduction to the contrary, require each 
covered employer to offer its covered employees the choice whether or not to contribute to a payroll 
deduction IRA by automatically enrolling them in the payroll deduction IRA with the opportunity to opt out. 
A covered employer is not required to enroll a covered employee who has worked less than 120 days in 
Maine in one year 
C. Provide that the IRA to which contributions are made is a Roth IRA, except that the board has the 
authority at any time, in its discretion, to add an option for all participants to affirmatively electto contribute 
to a traditional IRA as an alternative to the Roth IRA; 
D. Provide that, unless othen/vise specified by the covered employee, a covered employee must 
automatically initially contribute 5% of the covered employee's salary or wages to the program and may 
elect to opt out of the program at any time or contribute at any higher or lower rate, expressed asa 
percentage of salary or wages, or, if the board in its discretion permits, expressed as a flat dollar amount, 
subject in all cases to the IRA contribution and income eligibility limits applicable under the Internal 
Revenue Code at no additional charge. The board is authorized to change, from time to time, the 5% 
automatic initial default contribution rate for all covered employees in its discretion; 
E. Provide on a uniform basis, if and when the board so determines in its discretion, for an annual 
increase of each participant's contribution rate, by not more than 1% of salary or wages per year up toa 
maximum of 8% _1 __Qf’[9. Any such increases must apply to participants, as determined by the board in its 
discretion, either by default or only if initiated by affirmative participant election and are in either case 
subject to the IRA contribution and income eligibility limits applicable under the Internal Revenue Code; 
F. Provide fordirect deposit of contributions into investments under the program, including, but not limited 
to, a default investment such as a series of target date funds and a limited number of investment 
alternatives including a principal preservation option determined by the board. In addition, the board may 
provide that each participant's initial contributions, up to a specified dollar amount or fora specified period 
of time, are required to be invested in a principal capital preservation investment or, in the board's 
discretion, must be defaulted into such an investment unless the participant affirmatively opts fora 
different investment for those contributions. The board shall determine how often participants will have 
the opportunity to change their selections of investments for future contributions or existing balances or 
both; 
G. Provide that employer contributions by a covered employer are not required or permitted; 
H. Be professionally managed; 
LRO698, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page2
131 st Maine Legislature 
An Act to Advance the Maine Retirement Savings Program 
L.D. 
An Act to Advance the Maine Retirement Savings Program 
Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not become effective until 
90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and 
Whereas, current law requires that by April 1, 2023 a covered employer with 25 or more covered 
employees must offer the Maine Retirement Savings Program to its covered employees; and 
Whereas, current law requires that by October 1, 2023 a covered employer with 15 to 24 covered 
employees must offer the Maine Retirement Savings Program to its covered employees; and 
Whereas, current law sets forth penalties for covered employers that fail to comply with the law; and 
Whereas, the Maine Retirement Savings Program will not be implemented in timefor employers to offer 
the program on April 1, 2023 or October 1, 2023; and 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within the meaning of the 
Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as immediately necessary for the preservation of 
the public peace, health and safety; now, therefore, 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sec. 1. 5 MRSA §172, first 1], as enacted by PL 2021, c. 356, §1, is amended to read: 
The Maine Retirement Savings Board is established as a body corporate and politic and a public 
instrumentality of the State pursuant to section 12004-G, subsection 33-G to develop and maintain the Maine 
Retirement Savings Program for individuals employed or self-em ployed for wages or other compensation in 
this State. 
Sec. 2. 5 MRSA §172, sub-§8, as enacted by PL 2021, c. 356, §1, is amended to read: 
8. Meetings. The board shall meet menthlyat such times as established b\Lpolicy of the board, but at 
least guarterly, beginning no later than May 2022 and may also meet at other times at the call of the chair. 
All meetings of the board are public proceedings within the meaning of Title 1, chapter 13, subchapter 1. 
Sec. 3. 5 MRSA §173, sub-§1, 1IA, as enacted by PL 2021, c. 356, §1, is amended to read: 
A. Develop, establish, implement and maintain the program and, to that end, may conductmarket, legal 
and feasibility analyses if the board considers them advisable and may determine a name for the 
.KE>_q£i"_; 
Sec. 4. 5 MRSA §173, sub-§1, 1IE, as enacted by PL 2021, c. 356, §1, is amended to read: 
E. Develop and implement an investment policy that defines the program's investment objectives 
consistent with the objectives of the program and that provides for policies and procedures consistent 
with those investment objectives. The board shall strive to select and offerinvestment options available 
to participants and other program features that are intended to achieve maximum possible income 
replacement balanced with an appropriate level of risk in an IRA-based environment consistent with the 
investment objectives under the policy. The investment options may encompass a range of risk and return 
opportunities and allow for a rate of return commensurate with an appropriate level of risk in view of the 
investment objectives under the policy. The menu of investment options must be determined by 
considering the nature and objectives of the program, the desirability b%e 
ﬁnding-s of limiting investment options under the program to a reasonable number and the extensive 
investment options available to participants in the event that they roll over funds in an IRA established 
under the program to an IRA outside the program. In accordance with paragraphs K and O, the board, 
LR0698, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page1r
