,-
— 
F5.¢~fl‘1_*' 1”?‘-it-
.
I i R
i
s 
~/ Maine Summer Camps 
Real Kids. Real Camps. Real Maine! 
Testimony of Newell Augur, on behalf of the Maine Youth Camp Association 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Neither for Nor Against LD 1082, An Act to Advance the Maine Retirement Savings Program 
Sponsored by Senator Eloise Vitelli 
April ll, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, My name is Newell Augur.I 
am a resident of Yarmouth and a partner at Pierce Atwood, LLP. I appreciate the opportunity to 
submit this testimony on behalf of the Maine Youth Camp Association (“MYCA”), the State 
Wide non-proﬁt organization of Maine camps, neither for nor against LD 1082, An Act to 
Advance the Maine Retirement Savings Program. 
Children ’s camps are an important part of the fabric of our state, providing an outdoor 
educational experience for children from Maine, from across the country and around the World. 
Maine is the leader for children ’s camping. The first camps Were established here more than 100 
years ago. Today, children ’s camps in Maine serve an estimated 40,000 children annually, and 
about half of all camper days are ﬁlled by Maine children. 
In a normal season, and the last three seasons have been anything but nonnal, our camps 
collectively employ approximately 13,500 people. The vast majority of those employees are 
under the age of 25 and with us for less than 90 days. Roughly half are not residents of Maine, 
and often not from the United States. Most of them do not need to claim any exemptions under 
federal tax law. 
For many of our staff, a summer job at one of our camps is their ﬁrst job. We spend a good 
amount of time explaining to them Why certain amounts of money are removed from their 
paycheck pursuant to Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) - Social Security, Medicare, 
Federal Unemployment Tax Insurance. There also are soft costs tied to the camps respective 
payroll processor related to overseeing these deductions. Many of our camps offer a retirement
l 
157055874 
#15946449V1
