MAINE ASSOCIATION OF POLICE
President:
Kevin Riordan
Vice Presidents:
Chris Todd
Shane Stephenson
Gino Bianchini 
Steve Borst
Secretary/Treasurer:
Jason Burke
Executive Director:
Paul Gaspar
   Post Office Box 2263 
South Portland, ME  04106Legal Counsel:
Troubh, Heisler, P.A.
         William K. McKinley
Daniel R. Felkel
Jonathan M. Goodman
 
Kelly & Chapman
John W. Chapman
 (207) 767-2558
     “In Valor There Is Hope”
LD 362 "An Act to Clarify Coverage for Retired County and Municipal Law Enforcement 
Officers and Municipal Firefighters Under the State Employer Group Health Plan"
February 17, 2023
South Portland, Maine
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. My name is Paul Gaspar and I am a resident of 
South Portland.
I am proud to speak in my current capacity as the Executive Director of the Maine Association of 
Police (MAP). MAP currently represents approximately 900 full time, municipal police officers 
and public safety dispatchers throughout the state. MAP is also proud to be a founding partner of 
the Maine Law Enforcement Coalition, which, along with the Maine State Law Enforcement and 
Troopers Associations, as well as the Fraternal Order of Police, represents over 90% of the full 
time certified, state, municipal and county first responders. 
I am proud to speak in support of LD 362 "An Act to Clarify Coverage for Retired County and 
Municipal Law Enforcement Officers and Municipal Firefighters Under the State Employer 
Group Health Plan"
For those who may have served in the 122nd Legislative Session, you may remember this 
program in its bill form, as LD 1021. MAP was proud to be a part of a partnership with the 
Professional Firefighters of Maine in seeing this become the established and flourishing program 
it is today. Its creation was hard fought; however, it has shown not only it’s importance in 
protecting retired first responders, but that it is also well managed in first responders serving on 
its advisory committee.
Website:  www.maineassociationofpolice.com
LD 1021, after its passage became Public Law Chapter 636 – The “Retired County and 
Municipal Law Enforcement Officers and Municipal Firefighters Health Insurance Program” in 
2007. The program, once fully established, allowed first responders to retire and receive 
assistance to help with their health insurance costs. Along, with cost, it also provided access to 
insurance which would have been otherwise unavailable to retired first responders who have 
high exposure to life altering issues and illnesses during the course of their career. This otherwise 
forces first responders to stay well past the Rubicon that ultimately affects their overall health, 
family life and life expectancy. 
Unlike any other health insurance subsidy programs that exist, first responders pay into the 
program while in service much like we do to any retirement program, knowing that they will be 
helping not only themselves, but their fellow first responders as well.
As with any groundbreaking legislation, it became apparent that over the course of time, issues 
arise that the original framers or legislation could not foresee. This required several important 
changes that were made legislatively; including the creation of a stakeholder advisory board, 
working with the state to continually monitor and ensure the continued efficiency of the 
program. Again, first responders serve on the Advisory Board as trustees as they lend their 
experience not only in the creation of the legislation and program but the critical insight needed 
to know how to address the program’s ability to remain efficient to provide the best service to 
Maine’s First Responders and retirees.
Within the first two years of the program’s inception, the Advisory Board, in working with the 
program’s state administrators, dealt with unforeseen challenges with the original statute 
governing the program. The Board worked diligently during this time to date, in addressing these 
matters with successive legislative changes better defining participation and access to the state’s 
group health plan. As with any benefit program guided by other laws in addition to its own, the 
Board continually works to monitor and adjust for the benefit of the program’s performance.
This proposed legislation brought by Senator Baldacci, neither creates a new program, incurs no 
additional costs, or expands the program by creating new groups of people. This clarification 
merely makes a correction that although could not have been foreseen in its beginnings, been 
addressed much earlier. However, the opportunity exists today to make this important change 
through Senator Baldacci’s efforts with LD 362.
On behalf of our members and future first responders, I would like to thank Senator Baldacci for 
bringing this matter forward, and I would urge this committee to vote it out “Ought to Pass”.
Thank You for your time and I will be happy to answer any questions.
Sincerely,
Paul D. Gaspar
Executive Director
Maine Association of Police
Maine Law Enforcement Coalition
