 
21398463_2   
 
 
 
 
LD 362, An Act to Clarify Coverage for Retired County and Municipal Law Enforcement Officers 
and Municipal Firefighters Under the State Employer Group Health Plan  
 
February 7 , 2023  
 
Senator  Bailey , Representative  Perry , and members of the Joint St anding Committee on Health Coverage , 
Insurance and Financial Services,  my name is Stephen Gorden and  in addition to serving as a member of  the 
board of commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee  of the Maine County Commissioners Association . We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in support  of LD  362, with one recommended amendment discussed below . 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Associati on was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta , represents all of Maine’s 16 counties , and is governed by a b oard 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion .  Maine law currently allows state employees and certain other persons to be eligible for a group 
health insurance plan, subject to several provisions. LD 362 would add a provision  to the law  to clarify that 
retired county or municipal law enforcement officers or retired municipal firefighters are eligible to enroll in the 
group health insurance plan offered to state employees if the officer or firefighter meets the requirements for 
such program. Our Association is supportive of this concept;  however,  we would ask that the language be 
amended to include county firefighters, in addition to municipal firefighters. A growing number of Maine 
counties have shared fire personnel and depa rtments , and retirees from those departmen ts should be eligible for 
the plan in question.  
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let  us know.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Stephen Gorden  
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee  
 
cc: James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel  
Maine County Commissioners Association  
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207 -623-4697  
www.mainecounties.org  
 
