 
April 28, 2023 
SUPPORT LD 1512 by Representative Holly Stover to create Bentley’s Law in Maine 
The Honorable Anne Carney                                           The Honorable Matt Moonen 
Chair, Joint Committee on Judiciary                              Chair, Joint Committee on Judiciary 
 
Dear Chair Carney, Chair Mooney, and Joint Committee on Judiciary Members, 
Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) commends you on holding a hearing on the LD 1512 by 
Representative Stover to require impaired drivers to pay child support when an impaired driver causes 
a crash that kills a parent or guardian of a child under the age of 18. LD 1512 is modeled after Ethan’s, 
Hailey’s, and Bentley’s Law enacted in Tennessee, which makes impaired drivers pay child support to a  
surviving spouse or other relatives who are raising the children of victims of the 100% preventable crime  
of driving impaired, until the children reach the age of 18. In March of this year, the state of Kentucky 
enacted a similar law with Melanie’s Law (SB 268). MADD hopes Maine will become the third state to 
enact such a law by advancing LD 1512. 
 
The problem of impaired driving is not going away: Drunk driving is still a deadly crime. According to the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), 45 people were killed in drunk driving crashes 
in Maine in 2021 representing 29% of all traffic fatalities. 
 
Bentley’s Law better ensures justice and accountability. MADD believe that passing LD 1512 will make 
individuals think twice before getting behind the wheel impaired. If a person makes the choice to drive 
impaired and kills a parent, the person will encounter another consequence for their deadly decision. To 
the victims of impaired drivers, this proposal allows for another avenue of restitution to help ensure 
justice. 
 
On a personal note, I cannot look another young mother in the eye - after the loss of her husband and 
young child, as a result of someone driving impaired – and tell her everything will be alright, and “WE” 
are doing everything “WE” can do to end this horrible crime, until the day when WE are actually doing 
everything within our power to protect innocent victims.  
 
MADD urges you to support and advance LD 1512 to create Bentley’s Law. If you have any questions, 
please do not hesitate to contact me at bob.garguilo@madd.org  or 203.764.2566 x6960. Thank you for 
your time and consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Bob Garguilo 
MADD New England Executive Director 

