             
 
 
April 1 7, 202 3 
 
Support LD 1512 by Representative Stover  to Create Bentley’s Law  
 
The Honorable  Anne Carney     The Honorable Matt Moonen  
Chair, Joint Committee on Judiciary    Chair, Joint Committee on Judiciary  
 
Dear Chair Carney, Chair Moonen, and Joint Committee on Judiciary Members,  
 
Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) urges you to hold a hearing and advance LD 1512  by 
Representative Stover to require impaired drivers to pay child support when an impaired driver causes a crash 
that kills a parent or guardian of a child under 18 . LD 1512 is modeled after Ethan’s, Hailey’s and Bentley’s Law 
enacted in Tennessee, which makes impaired drivers pay child support to a surviving spouse or other relatives 
who are raising the chil dren of victims until the children turn 18. Last month, Kentucky enacted a similar 
measure with Melanie’s Law (SB 268). MADD hopes Maine will become the third state to enact such a law by advancing LD 1512.  
 The problem of impaired driving is not going awa y. Drunk driving is still a deadly crime. According to 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), 45 people were killed in drunk driving crashes in Maine in 2021 representing 29% of all traffic fatalities.  
 
Bentley’s Law better ensures ju stice and accountability. MADD believes that passing this proposal will 
make people think twice before getting behind the wheel impaired. If a person makes the choice to drive 
impaired and kills a parent, the person will encounter another consequence for t heir deadly decision. To the 
victims  of the impaired drivers, this proposal allows for another avenue of restitution to help ensure justice.  
 MADD urges you to support  and hold a hearing on LD 1512 to create Bentley’s Law . If you have any 
questions, please do not hesitate to contact me at  bob.garguilo@madd.org  or 203-764-2566 ext. 6960. Thank 
you in advance for your prompt consideration of this important request.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Bob Garguilo  
MADD New England Executive Director  

Frank Harris
Irving, TX
LD 1512
Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) urges your support for LD 1512 to make 
Maine the third state to enact Bentley's Law.  
