 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 151 2 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1512, An Act to R equire Restitution for a Child Whose Parent Is Killed by a Drunk  
Driver  
 
DA: May 2, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony opposed to LD 1512 . 
 
 The emotion al and financial impact on families that have suffered the sudden loss of  loved 
ones due to operating under the influence  cannot be overstated.   Nevertheless, CLAC opposes  LD 
1512, which would expan d criminal restitution to include  a form of  financial  compensation that is 
more appropriately addressed in civil actions.   The proposal would also result in different and less 
expansive  restitution rules for  children and dependents whose parents or guardians have be en killed 
or incap acitated by other crimin al conduct resulting in convictions of, for example,  murder, 
mansla ughter , aggravated  assault, or elevated aggravated assault.      Finally, the Criminal Code  
currently recognizes dependents of deceased victims as authorized claimants of restitution. 17-A 
M.R.S. § 2004.    It is mandatory that the court inquire regarding and order restitution where 
appropriate .  17-A M.R.S. § 2003.   The concepts of “dependent ’s economic l oss” and “dependent ’s 
replacement loss ” are included in the definition of “economic loss” under the restitution statutes, 
and apply to all convicted defendants.   17-A M.R.S. § 2002 (2), (3)(C)(D).  
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members ap pointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the C o-Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crim es in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
