April 6th, 2023 
 
Dear Marine Resources Committee, 
My name is Amanda Moeser and I am writing to express my opposition to LD 711- “An 
Act to Regulate Oyster Seed.” I grow diploid oysters on a 9-acre standard lease in between 
Yarmouth and Freeport, in addition to wild harvesting hard clams in New Meadows Lake and 
holding a municipal shellfish license in Phippsburg. Some days I go harvest oysters and other 
days I go for clams. Some days I do both. I buy my gear and supplies at Brooks Trap and 
Midcoast Marine Supply, dock my boat at a mixed-use commercial wharf shared by lobstermen, 
clammers, and farmers, buy diploid seed from Muscongus Bay Aquaculture, and sell my oysters 
to places like Clam Hunter Seafood in Phippsburg and Fishermen’s Net in Brunswick-- all of 
which are within 15 miles of my home. The income I generate from growing oysters stays in the 
local community and allows me to afford to work, live, and stay on the coast of Maine. 
 
In 2022, I signed a 15-year standard lease agreement with the State of Maine, which 
was the result of 8 years of work and a 3+ year leasing process that involved the participation of 
and unanimous support from the town harbormaster, shellfish committee, fishermen, and 
farmers who share the area. Diploid oysters are the preferred type of oysters to grow in my 
area, and as such, I now have hundreds of thousands of these oysters planted on the bottom of 
the ocean-- which cost me money, time, blood, sweat, and a more than a few tears. What do 
you expect me to do now, should this bill move forward?  
 
Please note that, as written, this bill not only affects commercial shellfish aquaculture, 
but inadvertently the research and restoration projects that are operating under the same DMR 
leasing and licensing program. In areas where conservation biologists work to restore or 
enhance native oyster populations--either to improve water quality, provide shelter for juvenile 
fish and invertebrates, and protect shorelines against storms and erosion--native diploid oyster 
spat and seed are preferred and widely used. Lastly, it is my opinion that a bill forcing farmers to 
use and grow sterile seed (in this case oysters) sets a dangerous precedent and is a threat to 
the broader agricultural community and food sovereignty in the State of Maine.  
 
When I learned of this bill, I called and had the opportunity to speak to Mike Pinkham, 
the shellfish warden in Gouldsboro and gentleman who came up with this idea. I understand 
that this bill was not drafted with ill-will towards aquaculture, but rather from a place of concern 
and respect for historic fisheries and eye to the future. Like Mr. Pinkham, I support independent 
research to monitor interactions between wild fisheries and aquaculture, being proactive, and 
keeping an open mind to conversations and discussions of these important topics. I just don’t 
support this bill, nor do I support a state-wide ban on the use of diploid oyster seed in 
commercial and conservation-related aquaculture projects.  
 
This is not an issue of one or the other-- wild fisheries or aquaculture. We are in the 
same boat, operating in the same waters and communities. I mean this quite literally, too. I 
share a boat with two wild harvesters and we work together to harvest the same area because 
is safer and more economical, especially in the winter months. We are stronger together and I 
hope to continue this conversation in a broader and more inclusive way, but kindly request that 
we do so prior to and outside of the state legislature next time around.  
 
Thank you for your time and attention, 
 
Amanda Moeser 
West Bath, Maine  
 
 
