Statement of Christopher V. Davis, Ph.D. 
Pemaquid Oyster Company 
before the 
Marine Resources Committee 
Thursday, April 6, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative I-Iepler and members of the Marine Resources Committee. My name is Chris 
Davis and I am here today to testify in opposition to LD 711 "An Act to Regulate Oyster Seed" . I ama 
founding partner in the Pemaquid Oyster Company which was established in 1986. While growing our 
farm though the 90's, l earned a Ph.D. from UMaine with a focus on shellfish biology and speciﬁcally on 
shellfish genetics and so am quite familiar with the history and production of triploid shellfish. 
Over the course of 38 years, Pemaquid Oyster has built a national reputation and market for the high 
quality, all-natural diploid oysters we produce. I am really concerned that being forced to shift to a triploid 
product would impact our brand, reputation and market. 
Others testifying today will address the fact that eastern oysters have naturally occurred and coexisted 
with soft-shell clams up and down the coast of Maine for millennia as evidenced by the numerous shell 
middens for both species we have in Maine. So, I would like to focus with a brief primer on triploidy. 
To fully understand the impacts of this bill, one needs to understand some of the complexities of producing 
triploid oysters. The term triploidy refers to the number of chromosome sets found in every cell nucleus 
of an organism. The diploid state is the natural condition where upon every cell contains two sets of 
chromosomes. Everyone in this room is diploid having 23 sets of chromosomes in nearly every cell in your 
body. Natural oysters have 10 sets of chromosomes whereas triploid oysters created through various 
manipulations, have 3 sets of chromosomes. Triploid oysters are generally produced one of two ways - by 
a chemical treatment method or by breeding tetraploid broodstock with natural diploid broodstock. 
Chemical treatments of oyster eggs to produce triploid offspring typically results in high larval mortality 
and rarely produces 100% triploid seed and hence, would not guarantee sterility of the crop. The second 
method consists of crossing tetraploid oysters with diploids. This necessitates securing tetraploid 
broodstock and only two principal sources exist in the US for this species - Rutgers University and the 
Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences. Only one commercial hatchery in Maine currently has agreements to 
secure tetraploid broodstock with these laboratories so that is a major concern. Furthermore, it's been 
known for years that triploid oysters are not necessarily 100% sterile. Also, tetraploid broodstock in 
existence are not derived from Maine oysters nor have they undergone selective breeding for essential 
shellfish disease resistance traits we depend upon. Our farm uses diploid seed specifically bred for MSX 
disease resistance - a shellfish pathogen that in 2010 wiped out most of the adult oysters on our farm and 
others in the Damariscotta River. We can not afford to operate without disease resistant stocks. 
The ﬁscal note accompanying this bill states that "Any additional costs to the Department of Marine 
Resources to implement the provisions of this bill are expected to be minor and can be absorbed with in existing 
budgeted resources." Were this bill to be enacted, enforcement and compliance by the DMR would 
necessitate sampling of oysters off our farms and having them tested for their ploidy state. This would 
require sampling 15-20 oysters and shipping them to a ploidy testing facility having flow cytometry 
capacity - an analysis that typically costs $40-50 per oyster and thus would burden the DMR with upwards 
of $750 to test just one oyster farm. Maine currently has upwards of 150 oyster farms so there could be 
signiﬁcant expense involved with enforcement. 
For these reasons among others, I urge this Committee to reject this bill.
