Testimony Opposing LD711 "An Act to Regulate Oyster Seed" 
Darcie A. Couture 
Public Hearing - April 6, 2023 — 1pm 
Ladies and Gentlemen of the Marine Resources Committee, my name is Darcie Couture, andI 
appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony today in strong opposition of LD 711, ”An Act to 
Regulate Oyster Seed" . Today, l am speaking to you as the owner and operator of a small-scale, woman- 
owned oyster farm in Harpswell, Maine. I started my farm in 2020, when the COVID pandemic 
decimated my other businesses, and rather than take any hand-outs, I pivoted and made a new business 
for myself, growing and selling oysters. 
My extended family are lobstermen, clammers, and wormers in Downeast Maine, and i havea 
long history of working on the water myself, serving as the Director of Biotoxin Monitoring for the 
Department of Marine Resources for seven years, followed by eight years of running my own marine 
environmental monitoring and consulting business, which brought me to all areas of the coast of Maine, 
from New Hampshire to Eastport, doing shellfish sampling, water sampling, municipal shellfish resource 
surveys, and assorted collaborative research projects with other scientists from nationally recognized 
groups such as the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute. l also work part time as a sternman ona 
lobster boat in mid-coast Maine. In short, l have both the nerdy-science/academic background, as well 
as the on~the-ground, working waterfront real~life experience to speak to this issue before us on oyster 
seed. 
i have seen situations such as this one time and time again over the last several decades, when 
someone with good intentions comes up with a bill thinking it will help to solve a problem, when, in 
reality, the bill as written would end up causing more far more damage than help. ln this case, it is my 
understanding that this bill is a reaction to concerns that oysters in the environment are somehow 
threatening other shellfish species. l understand how frustrating it can be when we see changes 
happening in the environment and we feel like we have no control over how those changes unfold ~l 
worked for several years helping to assess the cause of the crashes to soft-shell clam populations in 
Harpswell and Brunswick, and although we still don't have all the answers, we do know that predation 
by green crabs and milky ribbon worms, as well as warming waters and increased nutrient run-off and 
algal blooms from shoreside development are all likely contributing to the problem. Any fears that 
oysters are "stealing" too much food away from other shellfish is completely unfounded — if the 
phytoplankton populations anywhere in Maine were in decline, we would be seeing a complete collapse 
of multiple species across the entire food web — it certainly would not impact only one or two species of 
shellfish. And as for oysters potentially crowding out other species — also not possible, oysters are 
selective about where they settle; they don't like mud or soft sediments, and if a stray oyster does end 
up on mud, they will usually not survive — you can ask any oyster farmer who has overwintered their 
gear over soft sediment and seen the losses - larval oysters prefer to settle on hard structure, like 
intertidal rock and ledge, but their favorite spot is on other oysters, which is how natural oyster reefs 
form. 
Over the last few years, we have also seen concerns from skeptical shellfish harvesters and 
lobstermen that oyster farms might "take over" valuable space that is needed for those ﬁsheries — but, 
more recently, we have seen these same han/esters and lobstermen recognize that there is room for
oyster farms to fit neatly into the fabric of the existing working waterfront, and compliment, rather than 
clash with, the other fisheries. In fact, l have personally written dozens of aquaculture permit 
applications for shellfish harvesters and lobstermen that want to add oyster farming to their world. 
Until now, the only real threat to the growth of the Maine oyster industry has been wealthy land-owners 
from away, who don't want to look at oyster farms, because they feel like they own the view in front of 
their very expensive waterfront summer homes. if passed, this bill would do far more damage than all 
the rich summer people put together, effectively crippling the Maine oyster industry overnight, by 
depriving all farmers of the main source of seed that we need to continue operating — triploid seed is 
not readily available, is extremely expensive when it is available, and if we ended up competing amongst 
ourselves for who has access to this limited resource, you would see the biggest farms quickly squash 
every small farm in Maine out of business, including mine. 
l would like for you all to thoughtfully consider what is happening here — a well-meaning 
attempt by a group to "save" one species, based on flawed reasoning and wild guesses, from folks who 
don't understand how an industry actually functions, is about to destroy that industry. This is simplya 
smaller scale version of the Right Whale rules from NOAA, based on missing data and wild guesses, now 
being forced on our Maine lobster industry. Please, l’m humbly begging the Committee members to 
learn all the facts about how oyster farms work, use that knowledge to understand why this bill should 
never pass, and don't become the accidental vehicle for any more destruction of the livelihoods of our 
working waterfront men and women in l\/laine. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Darcie A. Couture 
90 Middlesex Rd 
Topsham, ME 04086 
~ * ' 
1...; f..;-_2.\:._.' .1_2;;:r; _ 
(207) 266-8984
