TESTIMONY OF 
Deirdre Gilbert 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
In Opposition to 
LD 711 An Act to Regulate Oyster Seed 
Before the Committee on Marine Resources 
Sponsored by Representative Faulkingham 
Date of Hearing: April 6, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepier, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Marine Resources, my name is Deirdre Gilbert, Director of State Marine Policy for the 
Department of Marine Resources, and I am testifying on behalf of the Department in opposition 
to LD 711. 
LD 711 restricts oyster farmers operating under a lease or license issued by the Department of 
Marine Resources to growing oysters only from triploid oyster seed, defined as seed that yields 
sterile oysters that do not reproduce. 
Given that Maine oyster farmers currently use both diploid and triploid oyster seed depending 
on their particular farm and growing practices, DMR anticipates that this bill will havea 
significant detrimental effect on both oyster growers and hatcheries. Those impacts are best 
explained by the businesses in those sectors.‘
. 
Our understanding of the genesis of this proposal is a concern that oysters that propagate off 
the lease or license site could outcompete soft shell clams or other shellﬁsh resources. We are 
not aware of any evidence of this occurring, but are aware that shellfish and oysters have co- 
existed for millions of years. Researchers from the UMaine Darling Marine Center have data 
from three sentinel sites over two years in the Upper Damariscotta River that show there is 
extremely limited overlap in the habitat distribution of softshell clams and oysters. Oysters are 
predominantly found in rocky habitats and softshell clams are predominantly found in mudflats. 
Beyond the business and financial impacts of this proposal, prohibiting the use of diploid seed 
will also preclude Maine’s involvement in habitat restoration work, in which programs such as 
SOAR (Supporting Oyster Aquaculture and Restoration) buy oysters directly from growers and 
deploy them in oyster reef restoration projects across the U.S. 
Finally, because even triploid oysters are not 100% sterile, the proposed requirement to use 
only seed yielding oysters that do not reproduce could have theresult of prohibiting all oyster 
aquaculture. 
Thank you for your consideration, and l would be happy to answer any questions you might' 
have.
