EAST lNsr 
0’ ' 
1 1 .- 
2,, >; ‘.,,,. 
0% ~§‘¢o 1\ 
v \iP~ 
E'"'- Eoucimou — \““° 
Located on the shores of 
Black Duck Cove on 
Great Wass Island 
Address 
39 Wildflower Lane 
P.O. BOX 83 
Beals, ME 04611-0083 
Phone 
207-497-5769 
Website 
www.downeastinstitute.org April 6, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepier, and Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Marine Resources: 
My name is Dianne Tilton, i’m the Executive Director of the Downeast 
institute. Since 1987, our organization has been working to replenish 
clam ﬂats, and conducting research to understand how predation and 
other factors affect soft-shell clam populations. You will not find an 
organization in Maine that knows more or cares more about clams 
than Downeast institute. 
l am testifying in opposition to LD 711 because it is not necessary.1. 
You support MAA and our efforts to find constructive solutions that 
address public concerns while allowing Maine aquaculture businesses 
to grow. 
Feral oysters can provide clammers a way to diversify their incomes, 
especially during the winter months. The value of clams is at its yearly 
low during the winter when the value of oysters is at its yearly high.A 
clammer can make more money harvesting oysters during the winter 
than digging clams if populations of feral oysters occur in their area. 
Today, one oyster is as valuable as 6-7 clams. if fewer clams are 
harvested during the winter for a low price, there will be more clams 
available for harvest during the summer when the price increases. 
Eastern oysters are a native species to Maine. Their populations 
dwindled thousands of years ago due to a minor "ice age" that resulted 
in reproductive inhibition but some of the ancestors of these native 
oysters may still exist in midcoast estuaries. Oysters were harvested 
by Native Americans and were an important part of their diet which is 
evident by the enormous shell middens in the Damariscotta region. 
Oysters require a hard substrate to settle. Most feral oysters are 
found growing on rocky outcrops in the high intertidal. Clams do not 
grow on rocks but rather require soft sediments to burrow into. 
Creating true triploid oysters is a complicated process wherea 
tetraploid male is used to fertilize diploid females. A tetrapioid male 
is created using very nasty carcinogenic chemicals which are 
hazardous to hatchery staff. But, in this scenario, you still need fertile 
diploid females to produce triploids. If all farms and hatcheries were 
prohibited from growing diploid animals, where would the fertile 
mothers come from? 
The mission of the Downeast Institute is to improve the quality of life for the people of 
downeast and coastal ll/Iaine through marine research, marine science education, and 
innovations in wild and cultured fisheries
There is currently no lab in the state of l\/laine conducting the type of testing necessary to 
prove ploidy in oysters. The process requires a sophisticated machine called a Flow- 
cytometer and each test can be expensive. it this bill passes, there should be large 
FISCAL NOTE to fund this testing. 
The process to create triploids is not 100% effective. if a farmer buys “tripl0id ” seed but 
diploid animals are found during enforcement testing, the farmer could be found in 
violation of the law. 
There is no harm in oysters and clams co-existing in a habitat. We believe this bill is 
unnecessary and costly. Thank you.
