Elizabeth Hall
Muscongus Bay Aquaculture
LD 711
I am a born and bred Mainer that has been working on the waterfront off and on for 
the majority of my life.  I currently work for Muscongus Bay Aquaculture in Bremen, 
ME.  If this baseless LD 711 bill were to pass, it would cripple the aquaculture 
industry and destroy the livelihoods of countless individuals. MBAq alone employs 
over 30 people and supplies 80 farms in the state of Maine with seed, not including 
the 200 farms up and down the East coast.  
Not only are triploids more difficult and costly to produce but there is no guarantee 
the process to create them will be %100 effective.  Let alone the years it would take to
have a market size product.  With only 2 commercial hatcheries in the state, the 
industry would not survive.
 DMR would find the enforcement of LD 711 incredibly difficult with the need to 
purchase specialized equipment, train staff, subcontract testing of seed which would 
cause lease applications to fall wayside and department costs to skyrocket. And if a 
farmer buys triploid seed but diploids are found in testing, the farmer is then in 
violation of the law unknowingly, because as previously stated, the production of 
triploids is not %100.  
What is happening to the wild harvesters is not a product of aquaculture interference.  
It is a product of climate change.  The Gulf of Maine is warming faster than anywhere
on our planet. %98 faster than anywhere else, with record setting temperatures in fall 
2021.  The consequences of this affect all our working waterfront industries. 
Warming waters are allowing green crabs, ribbon worms and blue crabs to thrive and 
in doing so they are having a devastating impact on shellfish populations. This is the 
real issue that needs addressing. 
Oysters and clams have lived harmoniously for millions of years. Living in the same 
waterways but still separated by evolution. Clams burrow in mudflats, whereas 
oysters thrive on subtidal, rocky bottom and spawn at different times of year.  There is
no scientific evidence showing competition between the two for food or space.  If 
these two species have managed to coexist for so long, the industries that depend on 
them should be striving to do the same. 
