04/05/2023 
To Whom it may concern, 
 
I am writing in opposition of LD 711.  I am an owner and partner at Maine Ocean Farms.  An 
aquaculture business in Casco Bay primarily producing oysters.  In addition, my business partner 
and I own and operate a Marine Services business and a compostable + biodegradable shellfish 
packaging company.  I am also a licensed USCG captain and Merchant Mariner.  We have built our 
life, careers around the ocean and since 2017 have founded three businesses here in Maine each 
with a different focus, all centered around the water.  This proposal, LD 711 would have wide 
reaching and devastating effects on the oyster aquaculture industry, our other businesses and the 
various industries and businesses that support and supplement the states commercial working 
waterfront, aquaculture, seafood harvesting and distribution. 
 
From the minimal and simple language of this bill there is no clear reason or evidence as to why we 
are even discussing LD 711.  It appears to be yet another unfounded and uninformed attack on the 
states aquaculture industry by means of restricting the seed source so as to stop the growth of 
oyster farming in its tracks and cause a major contraction which would put nearly all of the states 
oyster farms out of business in a matter of years if there is, as is almost certainly a catastrophic 
disruption to our seed supply should this bill pass.  There is currently only one hatchery in Maine 
producing triploid seed.  Removing the option of diploid seed from the market would cripple the 
supply to the states oyster farms, cause enforcement and compliance issues as the triploid seed may 
contain diploids as the process of producing triploids is not 100% effective.  There is little if any 
scientific evidence that supports the assumptions made in this bill.  For example the Eastern Oysters and 
soft shell clams have coexisted in our states waters for millions of years and have evolved parallel to one 
another reducing natural competition simply by growing in different habitats and spawning at different 
times.   
 
It is frustrating that for the second time in only a few weeks to be here testifying against another 
uninformed bill that seems to take direct aim at our livelihood from an oblique angle.  This at one of the 
busiest times of our year when we are making large capital and labor investments to our farm in 
anticipation of the summer sales and growing our operation to support ourselves and employees into 
the future.  We as an industry care very much and are heavily invested in the continued and improved 
health and management of the states marine resources, ecological health and economy.  All we want to 
do is continue the stewardship and work we are already doing and not to be at our computers writing 
testimony and zooming in to defend ourselves from another attack.  Please vote LD 711 ought not to 
pass and let us get back to work. 
 
Regards,  
Eric Oransky 
Owner/Partner at: 
Maine Ocean Farms, Casco Marine, Ocean Farm Supply 
 
