 April 6th, 2023 
 Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
 Cross Building, Room 206 
 Augusta, ME. 04333 
 Representative Faulkingham, Representative Davis, Representative Strout, Representative 
 Thorne, Senator Moore, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine 
 Resources: 
 Thank you for taking the time to hear my testimony today. My name is Hillevi Jaegerman. I am 
 co-owner of Wolfe Neck Oyster Company which is located in the waters of Casco Bay and I live 
 in Portland. 
 I am testifying in opposition to LD 711, “An Act to Regulate Oyster Seed.” 
 Each year in the spring our small scale farm sources our baby oysters (called “seed”) from 
 Maine hatcheries. To my knowledge, there are three hatcheries that have tried to produce 
 triploid oysters in our state in years past. Only one has continued to offer triploid oysters for 
 purchase for small farms. I hope others can offer testimony on the decisions of these hatcheries 
 to discontinue triploid spawns, but some reasons have likely been related to the cost prohibitive 
 fees required to use tetraploid lineages from out of state research facilities, or derived from 
 instances where triploids have not grown or survived as well in their early life stages as the 
 diploids produced under the same care and expertise. Forcing shellfish farmers to rely on one 
 hatchery for the entire state is unfair. It creates a serious vulnerability to all aquaculturists should 
 triploids perform poorly in any given season. 
 This bill also creates inequity in marine use between wild shellfish fishermen and farm-based 
 cultivators. If spawn-out from farms is a growing public concern, wild harvesters and 
 aquaculturists can find constructive solutions that don’t rely on a genetic parameter that requires 
 shellfish to have an extra chromosome to be grown in our waters- especially where naturally 
 present wild diploid oysters have flourished and sustained coastal communities here since our 
 earliest histories. 
 I want to thank the committee for your willingness to listen to those of us who make our living on 
 the water and help preserve Maine’s endangered working waterfronts. Please vote Ought NOT 
 to Pass on LD 711. Thank you for your attention. I would be glad to answer any questions you 
 have. 
 Respectfully, 
 Hillevi Jaegerman 
