Hello, 
My name is Jeff Auger and I have enjoyed working on Maine’s waterfront for the last 10 years farming 
oysters. Shellfish aquaculture in Maine has afforded me a career and livelihood unattainable in other 
states: I have been fortunate to start a family, purchase my first house, and live life the way it should be 
due to our shellfish community. Currently I work with Muscongus Bay Aquaculture: an oyster farm and 
hatchery located on the Damariscotta River. I am writing to express my opposition to LD 711…simply put 
this is an unprecedented move not backed by science which will cripple our industry. 
Shellfish farmers rely on “seed” to run their business; every year farmers across the Maine coast 
purchase tiny oysters, clams, or scallops to put on their farms and grow to market size. Without seed 
farms cannot survive: much like low young-of-year Cod numbers prevent the fishery from growing, a 
farm that receives little to no seed for their operation will not survive.  
Our hatchery is one of only two commercial hatcheries that supply seed to all the farmers in the state. 
For 24 years we have provided oysters, clams, and scallops to farmers in Maine. We source over 80 
farms in Maine and over 200 farms up and down the East coast with the “future” of their business. 
Oyster sales are over 90% of our hatchery business, and we only sell diploid seed. Producing triploid 
seed involves processes and techniques we are not suited to undertake or cannot easily implement. 
Quite simply, if LD 711 passes our hatchery will shut down: eliminating the livelihoods of our 31 
employees and threatening the livelihoods of the 80 farms we supply seed to in our state.  
I can’t imagine any supporter of LD 711 understands how devastating abolishing diploid oysters would 
be for the oyster community. The majority of farmers in Maine grow diploids. Triploid seed will not only 
be unavailable to most farmers (since only one hatchery produces it) but it’s cost-prohibitive (the 
techniques used to grow triploids make it more expensive). Furthermore, diploids and triploids grow in 
different manners and have different characteristics. We only grow diploid oysters on our farm and the 
customer base we have built over the last 24 years want characteristics and quality specific to diploid 
oysters. Currently we have millions of oysters in the water representing years of work and millions of 
dollars in future sales…if LD 711 passes what are we supposed to do with these crops? Walk away from 
them? Furthermore, it takes two years to grow an adult oyster: even if we were able to acquire triploid 
seed (which we can’t) we wouldn’t be able to sell an oyster until 2025…2 years without revenue while 
we wait for our crop to grow would shut the company down.   
Aquaculture and wild shellfish harvesters can and need to coexist. For millions of years these bivalves 
have lived together without threatening each other…we need to do the same. Our company also buys 
and sells hundreds of thousands of clams through our dealer license, how would it be in our interest to 
displace the individuals raking them? I recognize wild harvesters are having issues, but this is due to 
climate change and the influx of new predators in our bays. Ribbon worms, green crabs, and blue crabs 
are having a devastating effect on all wild populations, not diploid oysters. 
Maine has one of the last working waterfront traditions on the East coast. I moved here because there 
was an opportunity to make a living on the water and we need to work together to continue this 
tradition while protecting it from a small minority who want to see us off the water. I am sympathetic to 
the concerns wild harvesters have, but proposing a bill that completely destroys another fishery doesn’t 
seem appropriate or just. 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
