Joanna Fogg
Bar Harbor
LD 711
LD 711
Greetings Members of the Marine Resource Committee,
Thank you for hearing me today. My name is Joanna Fogg and I oppose this bill. I’m 
co-owner and operator of Bar Harbor Oyster Company. I’ve been raising oysters in 
Frenchman Bay since 2014. I also sit on the Marine Resource Committee for the 
Town of Bar Harbor. I see absolutely no reason for LD 711 to be enacted and if it 
passes it would be detrimental to small oyster farms including mine.
Oyster farms do not threaten clam populations. The town of Bar Harbor has seen a  
decline in soft shell clams over the past 10 years. As a town, we have been monitoring
it closely with the help of College of the Atlantic. Our research indicates the largest 
things affecting clams now are green crabs and climate change. 
We have one cove now on Mt. Desert Island where there is a wild oyster population
and it is also one of the best places for digging clams. Oysters, quahogs, and soft-shell
clams co-exist in that cove—they live in different parts of the intertidal and spawn at 
different times. Everyone I have spoken to is happy to have multiple species available
for harvest there. Diversifying what we harvest from the waters makes our bays 
healthier, our dinners better and our economy more resilient. 
People who grow oysters also want clams to thrive. We are all invested in healthy 
ecosystems and using the resources that Maine’s rich waters can provide.
As a farmer I buy oyster seed every year to put on my lease and it is one of my 
largest expenses as is. Many years we are waitlisted for seed because there isn’t 
always enough to keep up with demand. There is only one hatchery in Maine that 
sells triploid seed now and its more expensive. If this bill passes there is absolutely no
way that hatchery would be able to produce enough triploid seed. I can’t think of a 
farm that could survive a year or two without a year class to sell. Most of us, 
particularly the small farms, would go under. 
LD 711 is an effort to fix a problem that doesn’t exist. If it passes it will cause a lot 
of real problems for all the families trying to make a living raising oysters and that 
includes mine.
