WINNEGANCE OYSTER FARM 
Jordan Kramer – Owner/Operator
jordan@winneganceoysterfarm.com
207-518-8179 
Dear Marine Resource Committee,
I am writing to voice my opposition to LD711. 
I’ve operated my farm on the New Meadows River since 2014. Over that time I’ve adjusted 
my farming techniques and budget through trial and error to adapt to what works best. On my 
farm, growing diploid oyster seed clearly works best- producing a better crop with lower 
overhead costs. 
The added costs of triploid oyster seed would squeeze the bottom line for farmers, 
particularly for the small, owner-operated family farms that make up the bulk of the state’s 
oyster industry. Many of these farms are still recovering from pandemic-related losses and do 
not need further financial hardship.
Choice in oyster seed in Maine is already limited and would be further reduced by this bill.
Relying on a limited number of genetic lines (and hatcheries) makes the industry more 
vulnerable to environmental change, pests, and diseases like MSX, which devastated the state’s 
oyster farms in 2010. To prevent a similar disaster, we need to increase the genetic diversity of 
our crops- and to do that effectively we need diploid oysters to breed, and more hatcheries 
breeding them.
Oysters are native to Maine were historically found in much higher abundance than today 
(oyster shell middens along the Damariscotta are some of the largest on the entire east coast and 
date back over 5000 years). Oysters are not an invasive species, but are part of our state’s marine
ecosystem. Unlike other commercially important species that rely on muddy habitat (like clams), 
oysters utilize hard substrate. 
I strongly believe the proposed law will harm countless small businesses and will make 
Maine farms more vulnerable to disease and climate change. I hope that the committee will vote 
against it.
Jordan Kramer
Bath, ME

Jordan Kramer
Winnegance Oyster Farm
LD 711
Dear Marine Resource Committee,
I am writing to voice my opposition to LD711. 
I’ve operated my farm on the New Meadows River since 2014. Over that time I’ve 
adjusted my farming techniques and budget through trial and error to adapt to what 
works best. On my farm, growing diploid oyster seed clearly works best- producing a 
better crop with lower overhead costs. 
The added costs of triploid oyster seed would squeeze the bottom line for farmers, 
particularly for the small, owner-operated family farms that make up the bulk of the 
state’s oyster industry. Many of these farms are still recovering from 
pandemic-related losses and do not need further financial hardship.
Choice in oyster seed in Maine is already limited and would be further reduced by 
this bill. Relying on a limited number of genetic lines (and hatcheries) makes the 
industry more vulnerable to environmental change, pests, and diseases like MSX, 
which devastated the state’s oyster farms in 2010. To prevent a similar disaster, we 
need to increase the genetic diversity of our crops- and to do that effectively we need 
diploid oysters to breed, and more hatcheries breeding them.
Oysters are native to Maine were historically found in much higher abundance than 
today (oyster shell middens along the Damariscotta are some of the largest on the 
entire east coast and date back over 5000 years). Oysters are not an invasive species, 
but are part of our state’s marine ecosystem. Unlike other commercially important 
species that rely on muddy habitat (like clams), oysters utilize hard substrate. 
I strongly believe the proposed law will harm countless small businesses and will 
make Maine farms more vulnerable to disease and climate change. I hope that the 
committee will vote against it.
Jordan Kramer
Bath, ME
