RUNNING TIDE   PORTLAND, ME   RUNNINGTIDE.COMApril 4, 2023
In regard to LD711 Act to regulate oyster seed
 
          For the past 27 years I have been involved in shellfish aquaculture. I grew up in Maine, 
went to school in Maine, and have worked in Maine for much of my career. Primarily my work 
has involved shellfish hatchery which is a seasonal business offering a range of challenges. 
LD711 concerns me a great deal as it will make doing business even more difficult by adding 
bottle necks and limiting access to quality local genetic strains of oysters acclimated to our 
state’s waters.
          When ABC Breeding company came out with the technology to create triploids many 
years ago, I was excited. I had been down to visit Stan Allen at the Virginia Institute of Marine 
Science (VIMS) to find out more about triploids a couple years earlier and he told me they had 
not figured it out yet for Eastern oysters. ABC Breeding company licenses its products through a
breeding program at VIMS and Rutgers University. These two Universities first produce 
tetraploids through a patented process. The most common method to do this is the use of 
Cytochalasin b (a cell permeable mycotoxin).  The tetraploids are crossed with a normal diploid 
oyster to create a triploid. Shellfish hatcheries have to sign contracts with ABC Breeding to 
obtain rights to access the tetraploids with a line charge of 14% of the value of the seed 
generated from the offspring. This is generally charged to the grower of the seed as an 
additional fee, or it is built into the cost of the oyster seed.  
          In the state of Maine, a shellfish hatchery has to have a quarantine room certified by the
State of Maine to possess imported marine organisms. Once certified you can then fill out 
import permits regulated by the Department of Marine Resources. Once cleared, you can put in
a request for broodstock from out-of-state or closed areas. Rutgers has the most Northern 
stock for triploid oyster production. It still isn’t quite Northern stock. They are raised in New 
Jersey at Rutgers facilities. Broodstock have only been through New Jersey winters. Once you 
have coordinated through Rutgers they ship out the brood stock.  The oysters are received and 
conditioned until the gonads are developed. Then you coordinate with Rutgers to ship the 
oysters back to them so they can check for tetraploid males. Numbers vary and there are other 
forms of ploidy mixed into a given batch. Once they identify the tetraploid males, they tape 
them shut and send them back to you. You need to be ready to spawn or strip out the gonads 
of your animals immediately upon receipt. You select for your stock of diploid females and 
dispose of the males. The male tetraploids are then stripped of their sperm. The sperm is mixed
with the eggs, and you have fertilized eggs. 

RUNNING TIDE   PORTLAND, ME   RUNNINGTIDE.COMThe results from the triploid spawns 
were always a great deal less than when doing a diploid spawn. So, more spawns, more time, 
more work, more expense. Once they have grown you ship a sample back to Rutgers to 
determine the percentage of triploids in the batch. Ultimately, the use of tetraploid creates a 
genetically modified organism.  
          For a diploid spawn I source broodstock that have been grown in the area I want to 
grow in. I track their growth, cup size, and survival. The best oysters are set aside for 
broodstock. They are brought into the hatchery as needed, conditioned and spawned. 
Frequently you go through the import process to bring in disease resistant stocks to hybridize 
with your local oysters. Rutgers has a great New England High Survival line that fought off an 
outbreak of MSX in 2005.  In this process, you separate males from females and can control all 
the variables in-house. There is no fear of things getting lost in the delivery of the males, and 
survival was much higher for us.
          Over the years, I have grown triploids side-by-side with diploids in Maine. The outcome 
for us was there was no discernible difference. Just expense, coordination, and stress. Some 
places see great success using triploids, while other areas do better with diploids. The choice of 
ploidy is a tool an oyster farmer can use to help them succeed.
          On the environmental side another consideration is how the depleted shellfish stocks 
affect the food chain. In our state, the chances are slim, or had been slim, for oysters to 
naturally spawn. Wild populations were knocked out due to overfishing and pollution. Then you
have ocean acidification decreasing the fecundity of shellfish. Then, to top it off, an explosion of
green crabs. Shellfish in this state are hurting. When they are hurting, they don’t reproduce in 
great numbers, if at all. The larval form of shellfish swims for a period then settles to the 
bottom. In this time, the larvae are being consumed by larval fish and other organisms. Without
this influx of protein, the species that would eat these larvae dwindle due to lack of food to 
sustain them. With shellfish in decline due to numerous factors, diploid shellfish can help if they
are able to spawn.
          I am uncertain where this proposal came from and what the rationale of it is. To put 
further financial constraints, challenges, and bottlenecks on this industry is not what we need. 
We need to be able to produce diploids to create triploids or diploids as needed. This bill would 
force the oyster growing community to only get brood stock from one source, and that would 
be out-of-state. It also sets up a company to have a monopoly over oyster broodstock coming 
into Maine - a major risk.  
Maine shellfish growers have benefitted from a long-standing relationship with the 
University of Maine to create the oyster strains we have to bring back the oyster. This bill will 
throw away 60 years of this work as well as the work of the hatcheries in the state. We also 
don’t really need to say all oysters raised in Maine are a GMO product. 
RUNNING TIDE   PORTLAND, ME   RUNNINGTIDE.COMIf you have any questions about my testimony, please contact me.
Sincerely
 
Karl L. Eschholz
Senior Biologist Running Tide Technologies
 207-542-5961
karl@runningtide.com
              
