April 5, 2023 To Whom It May Concern, My name is Krista Tripp and I am the owner of Aphrodite Oysters LLC, a small oyster farm located in South Thomaston, ME. I am opposing this bill! I have been buying my oyster seed as diploids because this type of seed overwinters better than triploid seed does. It is crucial for my business to be able to overwinter oysters without a major die oﬀ because it takes 3-4 years for me to grow my oysters to a harvestable size. The success rate of my oyster farm business goes hand in hand with the success rate of  overwintering my oysters.  It is important for me to mention that I applied for 2 more LPA lines in which to grow oyster seed on and because the Shellﬁsh Committee person in my area has a large stake in the clamming business he put a requirement that I only use these 2 LPA lines to grow triploid seed on. I put in an order for triploid seed early last year in 2022 and I couldn’t get the seed I needed because there was not enough Triploid oyster seed to go around. Another thing I should mention is that the diploid seed I have been buying I am able to buy at a larger size than I could buy any triploid seed. The diploid seed I buy is 9-13mm, which gives my farm a very big success yield. The bigger the oyster I buy the better success my oysters have, meaning they don’t have a big death rate. The success rate of my oysters at my farm is at 90%, this is huge and it is a very important part of my process! If I was forced to buy only triploid oyster seed, the biggest size seed they sell at is only 2mm. This causes me to not only pay my employees to handle that seed far many more times than they would if I was buying my seed at 9-13mm but buying such little seed also means that the seed may have a larger percentage of death rate. This would be a huge risk to my farm.  There are not enough Oyster Seed Hatcheries growing this type of triploid seed to supply all the current oyster farms here in Maine, or any future ones. I highly recommend you give oyster farmers a choice as to what type of seed they need to buy for their farms to be successful. It is crucial for Maine’s Aquaculture Industry to be as successful as possible and this would certainly hinder the states ability to be a leader in the Aquaculture Industry.  I am concerned that the Shellﬁsh Committee has the authority to tell oyster farmers which type of seed they can use on their farms without any scientiﬁc data to back up their claim of oysters and clams not being able to coexist with each other.  Sincerely yours, Krista Tripp Aphrodite Oysters LLC. 207-542-0121 krtripp08@yahoo.comKRISTA TRIPP                                                    PO BOX 91                                   SPRUCE HEAD, MAINE 04859 
Krista Tripp
SOUTH THOMASTON
LD 711
April 5, 2023
To Whom It May Concern,
My name is Krista Tripp and I am the owner of Aphrodite Oysters LLC, a small 
oyster farm located in South Thomaston, ME. I am opposing this bill! I have been 
buying my oyster seed as diploids because this type of seed overwinters better than 
triploid seed does. It is crucial for my business to be able to overwinter oysters 
without a major die off because it takes 3-4 years for me to grow my oysters to a 
harvestable size. The success rate of my oyster farm business goes hand in hand with 
the success rate of  overwintering my oysters. 
It is important for me to mention that I applied for 2 more LPA lines in which to grow
oyster seed on and because the Shellfish Committee person in my area has a large 
stake in the clamming business he put a requirement that I only use these 2 LPA lines 
to grow triploid seed on. I put in an order for triploid seed early last year in 2022 and I
couldn’t get the seed I needed because there was not enough Triploid oyster seed to 
go around.
Another thing I should mention is that the diploid seed I have been buying I am able 
to buy at a larger size than I could buy any triploid seed. The diploid seed I buy is 
9-13mm, which gives my farm a very big success yield. The bigger the oyster I buy 
the better success my oysters have, meaning they don’t have a big death rate. The 
success rate of my oysters at my farm is at 90%, this is huge and it is a very important
part of my process! If I was forced to buy only triploid oyster seed, the biggest size 
seed they sell at is only 2mm. This causes me to not only pay my employees to handle
that seed far many more times than they would if I was buying my seed at 9-13mm 
but buying such little seed also means that the seed may have a larger percentage of 
death rate. This would be a huge risk to my farm. 
There are not enough Oyster Seed Hatcheries growing this type of triploid seed to 
supply all the current oyster farms here in Maine, or any future ones. I highly 
recommend you give oyster farmers a choice as to what type of seed they need to buy 
for their farms to be successful. It is crucial for Maine’s Aquaculture Industry to be as
successful as possible and this would certainly hinder the states ability to be a leader 
in the Aquaculture Industry. 
I am concerned that the Shellfish Committee has the authority to tell oyster farmers 
which type of seed they can use on their farms without any scientific data to back up 
their claim of oysters and clams not being able to coexist with each other. 
Sincerely yours,
Krista Tripp
Aphrodite Oysters LLC.
207-542-0121
krtripp08@yahoo.com
KRISTA TRIPP                                                   
PO BOX 91                                  
SPRUCE HEAD, MAINE 04859 
