 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 711 “An Act to Regulate Oyster Seed”     
    
March 14, 2023 
 
To the Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources, 
 
October of this year will mark our 40th year in business.  We are a reliable, well-paying, small 
business in the furthest southern region of this state.  We have 12 people working year ‘round and 
add an additional 6-8 staff who join us for the summer months. 
 
I am here today to testify in opposition to LD 711.  This bill would require that only so-called, 
“sterile” oyster seed be used.  The proponent aims to accomplish this through the use of triploid 
seed.  However, not all triploid seed is sterile, or, in other words, incapable of reproduction.   
 
Decades of collaborative research has been done on diploid seed, the most commonly used seed 
type in Maine, to develop resistance to several known, wild, diseases that affect oysters.  Changing 
to triploid would sacrifice that important work and work jeopardize the success of Maine’s oyster 
industry.  This would also place Maine at a disadvantage to other states that do not prohibit the 
use of diploid seed. 
 
In addition, a triploid requirement would leave Maine farms without enough seed to supply 
industry needs.  We have just two commercial-level hatcheries in Maine.  These hatcheries supply 
more than 400 farms in Maine and other northeast states. 
 
I’m not sure why this bill is before you; perhaps it was from fear of oysters eating other wild 
shellfish larvae, however, just as oysters may eat larvae, so too, do clams.  I’d be willing to bet that 
clam populations in Maine far exceed oysters.  There are many, many, larvae of all types in the 
water columns at certain times of the year as well as other larvae-eating shellfish and organisms. 
 
The traditional thought was that Maine was at the upper end of the natural reach of wild oysters.   
Through the reaches of history, the Damariscotta River may have been the most productive, as 
evidenced by middens more than 12,000 years old.  In our recent history, that is, the years that all 
of us can remember, populations of wild oysters have fallen off.  There have been smaller sets of 
Lori A. Howell, M.S., J.D.  
27 Howell Drive 
Eliot, Maine   03903 
Plant and Sales:  207-439-2719 
Fax:  207-439-7643 
Email:  lahowell@spinneycreek.com  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 oysters, but not every year and perhaps not everywhere in the river system.  It would not be 
unheard of for this population to rebound, even in some small way.  
 
At Spinney Creek Shellfish we have been raising hundreds of thousands of diploid oysters over the 
last couple of decades.  Spinney Creek is an impounded water body with warm water; in other 
words, prime oyster growing territory, and we have not seen oyster reproduction from hatchery 
seed.   
 
The only thing that this bill will certainly accomplish, if passed, is to imperil the Maine oyster 
industry and those partners that serve and are served by the farmers. 
 
Please vote Ought Not to Pass  on LD 711. 
          
 
       Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Lori A. Howell 
 
 
 
 
 
 

