Madeleine Cox
Portland, ME
LD 711
Hello,
My name is Madeleine Cox and I am a 9 year employee of Muscongus Bay 
Aquaculture. This proposed bill would put my livelihood and the 30 other full time 
employees at our company at risk, not to mention the hundreds of farms we supply 
oyster seed to. Such a bill would halt oyster production, as only 1 hatchery in the state
of Maine produces triploid seed. There is no way there will be enough triploid seed 
available for all Maine farmers. The ripple effect of this bill would be devastating and
would threaten an industry that is one of Maine’s most valuable commercial species.
Wild shellfish harvesting has been on a decline for years, not due to oyster farming, 
but due to climate change. Friends of Casco Bay, a program tracking water quality 
along Maine’s coast for over 25 years, has found that water temperature in Casco Bay
has warmed an average of 3 degrees Fahrenheit since 1993. While eastern oysters and
soft-shell clams have coexisted in Maine waters for millions of years, warmer waters 
introduce invasive species such as Green Crabs and Ribbon Worms, the main 
predators to soft-shell clams. There is very little, if any evidence to suggest that 
oysters and clams compete for food. Oysters and clams also use very different 
habitats and reproduce at different times of the year. There is no evidence to even 
suggest the assumptions inherent in this bill. 
One of the most important things to point out is that triploid seed is not, as this bill 
claims, 100% sterile. There is a variety of fecundity levels seen in triploid oysters. If a
farmer buys triploid seed, and diploid animals are found during enforcement testing, 
that farmer could be found in violation of the law. 
Supporters of this bill are putting hundreds of Mainers businesses and incomes at risk,
backed with very little evidence and skewed knowledge as to what the natural 
relationship between oysters and clams in our waters actually is. Aquaculture and 
wild shellfish harvesters should work together to solve this issue. If oysters and clams 
have coexisted peacefully for years in our waters, we should be able to figure out a 
solution together, instead of tearing down a whole fishery that brings so much 
revenue to the state of Maine. 

