  My name is Michael Pinkham, I am a Retired Maine Patrol who started his career in 1979. With 
almost 33 years of Service, 28 years of which was around the Frenchman Bay area. I am currently the 
Shellfish Warden for the Town of Gouldsboro.  I dug clams through high school and college. I am not a 
scientist, I am just a conservation officer who is concerned that oysters could threaten the wild soft 
shell clam fishery.  
  I am writing this Testimony in support of LD 711. I expected to testify in person, but I have a 
previous engagement that won’t allow me to do that. I am also the person who asked Representative 
Faulkingham to submit this bill. I knew that the bill would generate a great deal of discussion, but 
discussion is good. I believe that we need to stop being reactive and become proactive in managing the 
wild resources that we currently have. The wild clam fishery has been number 2 in the State for many 
years in landings value. The soft shell clams landings value for 2021 was approximately 25 million 
dollars for 2022 it was over 16 million dollars moving clams to number 3.  I would like to state this up 
front that I am not against aquaculture, I recognized early in my career that aquaculture was important 
to support fisheries that are in decline for various reasons. As the Gulf of Maine warms approximately 
7 times faster than anywhere else. The number of folks growing oysters has continued to increase, they 
are setting up their lease sites with diploid oysters that spawn. Climate change is increasing the water 
temperature, warming waters could allow the oyster spat to move from the lease site to a productive 
clam area. I have spoken to many folks who have told me that there isn’t any evidence that oysters are 
threatening clams. I have also been told by folks that oysters are in places that they were never were, 
moving further east. There is a problem with taking a chance and not looking at the possibility that 
oysters could overwhelm the flats and threaten a wild fishery that is already being threatened by green 
crabs. For example, Gouldsboro’s best clamming is in the rocks, oyster spat settles on rocks, the oysters 
could potentially smoother the clams. Again, what really upsets me as a society we tend to be more 
reactive than proactive, that needs to change. I don’t expect that we will require all oyster farmers to 
stop using diploid seed tomorrow and change to triploid. I think that we need to examine the facts and 
develop a process to monitor the progression of oysters and how they interact with the wild soft shell 
clam fishery. The study needs to be conducted by an independent group that has no dog in the fight and 
is concerned with doing science right and not tilting the numbers one way or the other. I am not going 
to ramble on, I think that we need to recognize that oysters could take over a productive clam flat and 
possibly threaten the livelihood of clam diggers.  
 In closing I spoke to Deputy Commissioner Mendelson from the Department of Marine 
Resources at the Fisherman's Forum, mentioning that I was the person who asked to have the Bill 
submitted regarding Regulating Oyster Seed in Maine, using triploid seed. She asked me if I had 
spoken to Sebastian Belle, I told her that I hadn’t, she thought that it could be helpful. I reached out to 
the Maine Aquaculture Association by phone on the morning of March 15, 2023. I spoke with the 
person who answered the phone and told them why I was calling. I told them my name and that I was 
the person who asked to have the oyster bill submitted regarding oyster seed. I told them that I spoke to 
Deputy Commissioner Mendelson, she thought it would be a good idea to reach out to Sebastian and 
have a conversation. The person told me that Sebastian had a busy schedule on that day, but they would 
leave him a message to give me a call. At the writing of this Testimony, I haven’t received a call from 
Mr. Belle or anyone from that office.  I have a saying that I have used as chair in welcoming new 
members to committees I served on. It is as follows: Come to the meeting, be prepared to defend your 
position, but be open minded enough to listen, we may be able to take two ideas and make one great 
idea. 
 
 Thank you for time. Michael A. Pinkham, Maine Marine Patrol Retired 
Michael Pinkham
Sullivan
LD 711
My name is Michael Pinkham, I am a Retired Maine Patrol who started his career in 
1979. With almost 33 years of Service, 28 years of which was around the Frenchman 
Bay area. I am currently the Shellfish Warden for the Town of Gouldsboro.  I dug 
clams through high school and college. I am not a scientist, I am just a conservation 
officer who is concerned that oysters could threaten the wild soft shell clam fishery. 
 I am writing this Testimony in support of LD 711. I expected to testify in person, 
but I have a previous engagement that won’t allow me to do that. I am also the person 
who asked Representative Faulkingham to submit this bill. I knew that the bill would 
generate a great deal of discussion, but discussion is good. I believe that we need to 
stop being reactive and become proactive in managing the wild resources that we 
currently have. The wild clam fishery has been number 2 in the State for many years 
in landings value. The soft shell clams landings value for 2021 was approximately 25 
million dollars for 2022 it was over 16 million dollars moving clams to number 3.  I 
would like to state this up front that I am not against aquaculture, I recognized early in
my career that aquaculture was important to support fisheries that are in decline for 
various reasons. As the Gulf of Maine warms approximately 7 times faster than 
anywhere else. The number of folks growing oysters has continued to increase, they 
are setting up their lease sites with diploid oysters that spawn. Climate change is 
increasing the water temperature, warming waters could allow the oyster spat to move
from the lease site to a productive clam area. I have spoken to many folks who have 
told me that there isn’t any evidence that oysters are threatening clams. I have also 
been told by folks that oysters are in places that they were never were, moving further
east. There is a problem with taking a chance and not looking at the possibility that 
oysters could overwhelm the flats and threaten a wild fishery that is already being 
threatened by green crabs. For example, Gouldsboro’s best clamming is in the rocks, 
oyster spat settles on rocks, the oysters could potentially smoother the clams. Again, 
what really upsets me as a society we tend to be more reactive than proactive, that 
needs to change. I don’t expect that we will require all oyster farmers to stop using 
diploid seed tomorrow and change to triploid. I think that we need to examine the 
facts and develop a process to monitor the progression of oysters and how they 
interact with the wild soft shell clam fishery. The study needs to be conducted by an 
independent group that has no dog in the fight and is concerned with doing science 
right and not tilting the numbers one way or the other. I am not going to ramble on, I 
think that we need to recognize that oysters could take over a productive clam flat and
possibly threaten the livelihood of clam diggers. 
In closing I spoke to Deputy Commissioner Mendelson from the Department of 
Marine Resources at the Fisherman's Forum, mentioning that I was the person who 
asked to have the Bill submitted regarding Regulating Oyster Seed in Maine, using 
triploid seed. She asked me if I had spoken to Sebastian Belle, I told her that I hadn’t, 
she thought that it could be helpful. I reached out to the Maine Aquaculture 
Association by phone on the morning of March 15, 2023. I spoke with the person who
answered the phone and told them why I was calling. I told them my name and that I 
was the person who asked to have the oyster bill submitted regarding oyster seed. I 
told them that I spoke to Deputy Commissioner Mendelson, she thought it would be a 
good idea to reach out to Sebastian and have a conversation. The person told me that 
Sebastian had a busy schedule on that day, but they would leave him a message to 
give me a call. At the writing of this Testimony, I haven’t received a call from Mr. 
Belle or anyone from that office.  I have a saying that I have used as chair in 
welcoming new members to committees I served on. It is as follows: Come to the 
meeting, be prepared to defend your position, but be open minded enough to listen, 
we may be able to take two ideas and make one great idea.
Thank you for time. Michael A. Pinkham, Maine Marine Patrol Retired
