  
 
My name is Nate Cole and I wanted to write to express my opposition to LD 711. I have worked in Maine 
for 5 years on a farm in the Damariscotta River and am extremely concerned for what this bill will do to 
my livelihood and the company I work for.  
Our farm only grows diploid oysters. In the 5 years I have worked on the water I have never farmed a 
triploid oyster, we have practices and techniques specific to diploids that all would have to change if LD 
711 is passed. Furthermore, we have worked hard to develop a premium product loved and sought after 
by many restaurants up and down the coast. That brand is diploid specific, many of our restaurants and 
chefs do not like or want to buy triploids.  
I also have questions on how this bill could even be enforced? From my understanding the process to 
create triploid seed is not 100% effective. Most batches of triploids contain some diploids mixed in 
which would allow for farmers to be in violation of the law even when abiding by it? Also, how would 
this be enforced? Would this make DMR have to test all the oysters on our farms? I am not sure what it 
would take to do this, but it seems very expensive and be an unnecessary cost on a department already 
overburdened.  
I don’t understand the logic behind this bill. To my knowledge there isn’t evidence to support diploid 
oysters harming other shellfish populations. Climate change seems to be impacting our estuary in much 
more significant ways. We have many predators along our shore (ribbon worm, green crabs) in greater 
abundance now due to warming waters. We have even seen numerous breeding pairs of blue crabs on 
our lease within the last two years.  
I enjoy working on the water with my fellow ocean farmers, fisherman, and wild harvesters. I think 
Maine needs to keep our working waterfront tradition going by supporting all of these industries and we 
can all work together to ensure that we keep producing more of the great seafood our state is known 
for.  
 
 
