Nellie Brylewski
Muscongus Bay Aquaculture
LD 711
My name is Nellie Brylewski and I am the General Manager for Muscongus Bay 
Aquaculture and Dodge Cove Marine Farm. I have been working in aquaculture for 
13 years and look forward to many more, and eventually bringing my young 
daughters into the trade. 
I OPPOSE bill LD 711.
Muscongus Bay Aquaculture has been producing oyster seed for over 20 years. We 
only produce and farm diploid oysters, providing seed to over 80 of Maine’s oyster 
farms. The vast majority of Maine oyster farmers are using diploid seed. To produce 
triploid seed is much more difficult and costly, with lower returns, making the end 
product more expensive; for some farms prohibitively so. 
In addition to being one of only two commercial shellfish hatcheries in the state, 
MBAq employs over 30 people in our hatchery and on our farm. This bill would be 
devastating for our company, our customers whose businesses rely on our seed, and 
all those employed with us.
Eastern oysters and soft-shell clams have coexisted in Maine waters for millions of 
years and have evolved to reduce competition between themselves. Oysters and clams
utilize very different habitats – mud flats vs. harder, rocky substrate, they spawn at 
different times of year, and there is little, if any, evidence to even vaguely support the 
assumptions inherent in this bill.
Conversely, there is plenty of evidence to show that wild shellfish harvests have been 
declining for years due to increasing water temperatures and the invasive species 
these bring, namely Green Crabs, Blue Crabs, and Ribbon Worms. Increasing water 
temperatures and their knock-on effects are a concerning problem to everyone making
a living harvesting and farming on the water.
This bill would be very difficult and expensive for DMR to enforce. DMR would 
have to purchase expensive, specialized equipment, train staff, or subcontract out the 
testing. All three options would increase the department's costs and decrease their 
ability to process lease applications in a timely manner, which is already a problem 
for the department.
The oyster aquaculture community is always willing to work alongside wild shellfish 
harvesters to ensure that both farmed and wild shellfish coexist successfully. We need
to support all types of seafood in Maine. Warming waters and invasive species are a 
common threat to both fisheries. This bill’s attempts to pit growers and harvesters 
against each other are manipulative and counterproductive at a time when we should 
have a common focus to keep Maine’s working waterfronts vibrant and productive.

