 
 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources  
in opposition to   
LD 711, An Act to Regulate Oyster Seed  
 
April 6 , 2023  
Nicholas Branchina, Director, Fisheries & Aquaculture  Program  
Coastal Enterprises Inc. , Brunswick, Maine  
Nick.Branchina@ceimaine.org  
 
Dear Senator Reny, Represent ative Hepler,  and Distinguished Members of the Committee : 
 
My name is Nick Branchina,  and I  am the Director of the Fisheries & Aquaculture Program at 
Coastal Enterprises , Inc. (CEI) . I reside in  Kennebunk . I am submitting this testimony  on behalf of  
CEI, to express our  organization’s  concerns about  LD 711, An Act to Regulate Oyster Seed . 
 
Coastal Enterprises, Inc.  (CEI) is a private, nonprofit Community Development Corporation (CDC) 
and Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick, Maine. CEI was 
founded in 1977 to develop job- creating natural resource -based  business ventures in Maine’s 
rural  and coastal  regions . Today we continue to work to build a just, vibrant, and climate -resilient 
future for people and communities in Maine and other rural regions. We do this by integrating 
finance, business expertise and policy solutions in ways that make the economy  more equitable . 
 
CEI has a 46-year history  of invest ment in  Maine’s commercial fishing , lobster and aquaculture  
businesses. We do this by providing business services including free business counseling and 
technical assistance, and by making loans and investments in those marine businesses wishing to 
start or expand.  Since the 1970’s o ur total portfolio of loans to this sector has grown to over $18 
million and these loans have sustain ed or created over 2,200 jobs in Maine.   
 
CEI supports all fisheries in our state, wild -catch and aquaculture , and  we believe that LD 711 
establishes  a barrier  to the  responsible  development  of sustai nable aquaculture  in Maine  waters . 
We support the concerted efforts  of the  Maine Aquaculture Association  on behalf of the 
aquaculture industry  to find constructive solutions that address public concerns while allowing 
Maine aquaculture businesses to grow .  
 CEI respectfully asks that this co mmittee consider the negative effects that this bill, as  currently  
written, will have upon our state ’s oyster growers and  our seafood industry . Specifically, our 
concerns  include  the following : 
 
• Most  Maine oyster farmers are using diploid seed, and this bill would threaten their 
business.  
 
• Diploid  and triploid  seeds  have distinctive characteristics ; there are advantages to using 
each. Removing  an option would put a large and unnecessary  strain on Maine oyster 
farmers , and mak  them less competitive in the marketplace.  
 
 
• Only one hatchery in Maine  currently produc es triploid seed . As a result, it is not readily 
available to most farmers and is cost -prohibitive. There  will not be enough triploid seed 
available for all Maine farmers  to use . 
 
• Wild shellfish harvesting has been on the decline for years due to climate change and 
invasive species. Many shellfish harvesters have begun to harvest wild oysters around 
farm sites to generate additional income. Some members of the wild harvest community  
have started their own farms and grow oysters, including diploids.  
 
• Multiple studies have shown that Eastern oysters and soft -shell  clams have coexisted for 
millions of years . They have evolved specific life history strategies to reduce or eliminate 
competi tion. There is inadequate  scien ce to support this bill. Oysters and clams utilize 
vastly different  habitats, spawn at different times of the year , and rely on different food  
resources .  
 
• Many growers are also licensed seafood dealers that buy wild clams and oysters. It is not 
in their  economic interest to harm the wild populations they  depend on to provide a 
diverse product mix to their  customers.  
 
• The bill will be difficult for DMR to enforce. The  Department  will have to purchase 
expensive specialized equipment, train staff, and/ or subcontract out the testing. A ny/a ll 
of these  options will increase costs and decrease their ability to responsibly process 
lease applications  in addition to the department’s other monitoring responsibilities . 
 
• It is our understanding that the process to create triploids is not 100% effective. If a 
farmer buys “triploid” seed but diploid animals are found during enforcement testing, 
the farmer could be found in violation of the law.  
  
CEI is steadfast in its support for this sector .. Aquaculture is a significant source  of diversification 
for Maine’s marine economy . It has co -existed successfully with other marine activities for 
decades . If implemented , LD 711 could create insurmountable hurdles to an industry that is 
already operating in a well- regulated environment. Current resource management  isdesigned to  
minimize  impact s on any and all natural resources that have co -evolved in Maine  waters ..  
 
This is a  fragile time for Maine ’s natural fisheries resources . The State of Maine  should be 
facilit ating  the sustainable  growth of aquaculture  in accordance with the State ’s official economic 
development strat egy.  It is for this reason that we encourage the committee to vote Ought Not 
to Pass on LD 711.  Thank you for considerin g CEI’s testimony.  
 
