0 
MAINE' 
. AQUACULTURE 
1 ASSOCIATION 
April 6, 2023 
The Honorable Cameron Reny, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Allison Hepler, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
State House, Room 206 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, Honorable members of the Joint Committee on Marine 
Resources: 
My name is Sebastian Belle and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Aquaculture 
Association (MAA) and the current president of the National Aquaculture Association. The MAA 
is the oldest state aquaculture association in the country. We represent Maine's aquatic farmers 
that raise finfish, shellfish and sea vegetables. Our farmers annually produce over 100 million 
dollars in farm gate revenue and directly employ roughly 700 Maine citizens year-round. We 
purchase goods and services from over 400 Maine businesses and our total economic impact 
is roughly 150 million dollars annually. l stand before you today to testify in strong opposition to 
LD 711 “An Act to Regulate Oyster Seed". 
Our opposition is based on five factors: 
1. Science does not support the assertion that oysters negatively impact clam populations. 
2. Oysters and clams have coexisted for millions of years. 
3. The majority of Maine farms do not currently use and could not access triploid seed. 
4. The same paid campaigners who targeted the lobster industry to try to pit one working 
waterfront group against another are now doing that up and down the coast with the wild 
harvest shellfish community. 
5. This bill would require DMR expend significant resources to try to enforce a bill that is 
virtually unenforceable for technical reasons. 
A comprehensive literature review (Abgral et. al. 2010) of the potential for interactions between 
cultured oysters and wild Softshell Clams found that Eastern Oysters and Softshell Clams have 
coexisted for millions of years and have evolved specific life history strategies to reduce or 
eliminate competition. Spawning occurs during different periods of the year; early summer for 
the Softshell Clam and late summer for the Eastern Oyster. The difference in the spawning 
period is likely to minimize competition for food between veligers (the planktonic juveniles) of 
different species. If veligers of both species are present in the water column at the same time, 
Softshell Clam larvae will usually be older, thus bigger than Eastern Oyster larvae. The 
difference in larval size is likely to minimize potential food competition since potential food 
particle size increases with increasing larval size. Potential food competition in juveniles and 
adults is minimized by the fact that both species have evolved mechanisms and strategies that 
optimize their co-existence. lnterspecific competition for space is unlikely to occur between 
Eastern Oysters and Softshell Clams as both species settle on different types of substrates. 
339 Water Street | Gardiner, ME 04345 I (207)622-0136 I www.maineaqua.org
Oysters like hard substrate like rocks or ledge, clams like sand or mud. The idea that oyster spat 
from farms will "smother" clams makes no sense because oyster spat that settled on mud 
would not be big enough to prevent itself from sinking into the mud and smothering itself. 
Wild shellfish harvesting has been on the decline for years due to climate change and invasive 
species. Many shellfish harvesters have begun to harvest wild oysters around farm sites asa 
way to generate additional income. Some members of the wild harvest community have also 
started their own farms and grow oysters, including diploids, to diversify their incomes and 
hedge against the ups and down of wild resources. 
The vast majority of oyster farmers are using diploid seed, and this bill would threaten their 
businesses. Only one hatchery in Maine is currently producing triploid seed, which is not readily 
available to most farmers and is cost-prohibitive. There is no way there will be enough triploid 
seed available for all Maine farmers. To make matters worse, l learned yesterday that one of our 
four shellfish hatcheries in the state is shutting down. This means that oyster seed supplies this 
year, both triploid and diploid, will be very tight.' 
Finally, this bill will be very difficult for DMR to enforce. The method of testing whether an oyster 
is triploid or diploid is complicated and relies on specialized equipment and technical 
knowledge. DMR will have to purchase expensive equipment, hire or train staff or subcontract 
out testing. All three options will increase the department's costs and decrease their ability to 
use their limited resources to manage Maine's valuable marine resources, ironically including 
clams. 
The process to create triploids is not 100% effective. In any batch of triploid seed there is 
always some level of diploids. If farmers buy "triploid" seed but diploid animals are found during 
enforcement testing will the farmer be found in violation of the law? 
The oyster aquaculture community is ready and willing to work alongside the wild shellfish 
harvesters to ensure that both farmed and wild shellfish coexist. The last thing we want is to 
displace wild shellfish harvesters or have our animals drive them out. We need all types of 
seafood in Maine, including wild and farmed. Many of our growers are also licensed seafood 
dealers that buy wild clams and oysters. It is not in our interest to harm the wild populations we 
depend on to provide a diverse product mix to our customers. 
Maine has a long tradition of producing high quality, healthy seafood and of working waterfront 
communities working together to ensure vibrant coastal communities. Maine seafood is an 
iconic part of the Maine brand and Maine aquaculture products have earned their place as part 
of that brand. Please help us continue to build the Maine brand and defend Maines working 
waterfronts. 
Vote "OUGHT NOT TO PASS" on LD 711. I thank you for your attention and patience and would 
be glad to answer any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
,( 
‘I/";=
I 
Sebastian Belle 
Executive Director 
339 Water Street I Gardiner, ME 04345 | (207)622-0136 I www.maineaqua.org
 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
ON FILE 
