\ Lakes EnvironmentaIAssociation l 
U Protecting Mame s lakes smce 1970 
April 27, 2023 
Re: Support for LD 1342: "An Act to Increase Funding for the Prevention and Control of 
Invasive Aquatic Species" 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, 
My name is Colin Holme and I am the Director of the Lakes Environmental Association. Our 
organization is headquartered in Bridgton and We directly work on waterbodies in the upper Sebago 
and Saco River watersheds. We have the largest milfoil control program in the state and hire, train, 
and oversee around 35 Courtesy Boat Inspectors each year. 
Last year, we spent $199,798 on removing invasive milfoil from Sebago Lake, Long Lake, Brandy 
Pond, the Songo River, and Sebago Cove. We have made amazing progress in these areas and have 
functionally eliminated this species in some of the busiest inland waterways, marinas, and boat 
launches in the state. Of that total, $50,600 was from a competitive grant from through the MDEP. 
The remaining $149,198 we had to raise on our own to pull and kill this invasive plant from these 
publicly owned waters. We are currently receiving more funding from out-of-state foundations, 
(whose trustees have seen the full impact of unchecked invasive aquatic plants), then we receive 
from the Maine DEP. 
This lopsided funding burden is not unique to our organization. Last year, the state spent $654,000 
on control of invasive aquatic plants, while non-proﬁts (who do the vast majority of control work) 
spent and additional $879,000. 
When it comes to invasives prevention, the story is the same. In 2022, non-proﬁts across Maine 
spent and additional $664,000 to fund Courtesy Boat Inspector programs. The Maine DEP spent 
around $430,000 in prevention programs. 
The state is already relying on non-proﬁts to do the bulk of prevention and control, with the ﬁnancial 
burden for non-proﬁts growing every year. While this makes the program very efficient from a state 
budget perspective, it will not be effective in the long-term if funding does not increase as costs and 
Wages continue to go up. 
What is most alarming about the current funding stream, is what is not being done. 
230 Main Street, Bridgton ME 04009 201647-8580 www.mainelakes.org
According to a risk analysis from MDEP staff, 234 Waterbodies are highly vulnerable to invasive 
species in the state and 213 of these waterbodies have no boat inspection program at all. Prevention 
programs are the most effective use of ﬁmding and these waterbodies are completely unprotected. 
Running an efﬁcient boat inspection program on these waterbodies on weekends alone during the 
summer months, would likely cost an additional 1.5 million dollars. 
There is also minimal funding for early detection of invasive species. Finding emerging colonies of 
invasive plants before they become established, can save hundreds of thousands of dollars annually 
in control costs. And, those costs are only going to grow, like the plants themselves, each year. 
Motorboats are the primary vector for spreading invasive aquatic species and the proposed fee 
increases are modest and insigniﬁcant compared to the cost of owning and operating a motorboat. 
This additional funding is absolutely necessary if We want to keep our lakes and ponds free of 
invasive plants. 
Please vote “ought to pass” on LD 1342. 
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter. 
Colin Holme 
Executive Director 
Lakes Environmental Association
