1 
20362799.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Opposition to L.D. 1364,  
An Act to Prevent Opioid Overdose Deaths by Establishing Safe 
Consumption Sites
April 27, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
distinguished Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is 
Charles Rumsey. I am the Chief of the Cumberland Police Department, and 
President of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association. I am submitting testimony 
on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association in opposition to LD 1364.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill authorizes municipalities to approve safe consumption sites for 
individuals to self-administer  previously  obtained  drugs.    The  bill  
requires  the  sites  to  satisfy  certain requirements,  including  providing  
hygienic  facilities,  providing  safe  disposal  of hypodermic apparatuses, 
providing naloxone hydrochloride as needed and making referrals to 
medical and social services.  The bill provides immunity from arrest or 
prosecution for clients and staff members acting in accordance with the 
provisions of the bill.  The bill requires  municipalities  that  approve  safe  
consumption  sites  to  participate  in  a  peer-reviewed  study  and  requires  
the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  to  submit reports related 
to the studies to the Legislature and the Governor's office. 
The Maine Chiefs are in opposition to this bill and others like it this session because 
we are sworn to protect lives, and we have not seen enough data to show that harm 
reduction centers protect lives. We do have concern, however, that establishment 
of these sites would lead to an increase in drug dealing and other criminal activity 
associated with addition to illicit drugs near the sites. As you know, criminal 
activity that individuals engage in to support their habits can include property 
crimes such as theft and vehicle burglary, as well as violent crimes such as robbery 
and human trafficking.
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 
20362799.1 Maine has a crisis with illicit drugs. We have set records in overdose deaths for 
three straight years and, in 2022, we lost 716 people. Each of these people had 
dynamic lives and left behind loved ones.  Their lives were cut short, and we believe 
that our community is worse off for it. We have and want to be supportive of every 
single initiative that might save just one of those lives. Like we know - because the 
data confirms it - that more lives are saved when Narcan is accessible, so we have 
been supportive of those initiatives at the Legislature.   
We are in support of legislation that help people to stop using drugs that can wreak 
havoc on their own lives, their family’s lives and the community. We 
wholeheartedly support efforts to establish detox centers, including centers that will 
accept patients who present while under the influence of drugs. But we have not 
seen enough evidence that harm reduction centers assist people to stop using illicit 
drugs. Rather, we are concerned that these centers enable continued use, and 
potentially even “normalize’ the use of these substances. 
For these reasons, we would ask you to oppose LD 1364 and vote ought not to 
pass on this bill. On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want 
to thank the committee members for your work on this Committee.  
