Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 1364
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Joint Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety
In SUPPORT if amended of: LD 1364, An Act to Prevent Opioid Overdose Deaths by
Establishing Safe Consumption Sites
Public Hearing: Thursday, April 27, 2023 at 10:00 AM, State House, Room 436
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Joint Committee
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety:
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse of nearly 45 years, President of the 
Maine State Nurses Association, Vice-President of National Nurses United, and a 
resident of Brewer. I am providing testimony today supporting LD 1364, if amended, 
on behalf of Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), 
representing 4,000 nurses and caregivers across the state of Maine.
LD 1364 has the potential to reduce deaths from opioid overdoses and to connect 
opioid users to critical health services. Safe consumption sites are a proven way to 
reduce the harms of opioid use. However, it is essential that safe consumption sites be
overseen by a licensed health care professional who has the expertise necessary to 
assess and treat health issues experienced by the site’s clients and who is accountable 
to a licensing board for provision of safe care. Therefore, MSNA/NNU conditions its 
support for the bill on the addition of the word “licensed” before “health care 
professional” in clause 2.A, as follows:
2. Safe consumption site requirements. In order to qualify for approval, a site must 
meet the following requirements. The site must:
A. Provide a hygienic location supervised by a licensed health care professional and 
other trained staff where a client may self-administer previously obtained drugs; 
The Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United thanks the committee for
accepting our testimony and asks that committee members support the above 
amendment and vote “Yes” on the bill if the amendment is included.
Sincerely,
 
Coralie Giles, RN
President, Maine State Nurses Association
Vice-President, National Nurses United
