ﬂ Recovery 
U Advocacy 
l = I Prc:‘§e<:t 
Testimony in response to Governor Mill’s opposition to authorizing Harm Reduction 
Health CentersISafe injection Sites as information for the Criminal Justice Committee 
April 27th, 2023 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salizbury, and members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Courtney Gary-Allen. I am the Organizing Director of the Maine Recovery Advocacy 
Project, a grassroots bipartisan network of lawmakers, advocates, and organizations working on 
community and public policy based solutions to substance use in Maine. l am writing today to 
provide information about the debate around Harm Reduction Health Centers, Overdose 
Prevention Sites, and/or safe injection sites, (all of which are apples of the same tree). 
Attached to this testimony you are going to ﬁnd my testimony on LD 1159, a bill that was just 
voted out of the Health and Human Services Committee yesterday, in response to Governor 
Mills testimony in opposition to the bill. l thought it was important information for your committee 
to have as l imagine that her administration will also be testifying against the bill before you 
today. 
In my response, l provide a detailed rebuttal to each of the oppositions of the Governor ’s office 
l hope that you will consider this information as you consider the bill before you today. 
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Courtney Gary-Allen 
Organizing Director 
Maine Recovery Advocacy Project
ﬂ Recovery 
V I Advocacyi 
» H 
Q Pi‘<.ije=:: ‘t 
Testimony in response to 
Governor Mill’s Opposition to LD 1159 
April 26th, 2023 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services; 
My name is Courtney Gary-Allen. I am the Organizing Director of the Maine Recovery 
Advocacy Project. I am writing today to directly address the testimony of Governor Mills in 
opposition to LD 1159: An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm Reduction Health 
Centers. 
While we are disappointed with the fact that Governor Mills is attempting to block a life saving 
measure for people who use drugs, we remain hopeful that once again our allies in the State 
Legislature will send a clear message to the Governor that in Maine we believe that people who 
use drugs do not deserve to die. Harm reduction health centers continue to be the only life saving 
intervention that has a 100% effective rate of keeping our friends, family, and community 
members alive. In the face of such devastating loss and in the words of Govemor Mills herself: 
We must not rest till we reduce overdose deaths to zero. Harm reduction health centers are one of 
the many evidence-based strategies needed to accomplish that. 
And now I will respond to each of Governor Mills points: 
1. Governor Mills Testimony: Federal law prohibits the operation of such a “safe 
consumption site.” While two such facilities have operated in New York City for one and 
one-half years, there has been no statement by the Department of Justice as to its 
intention regarding such facilities. Even if there were, this could change with a new 
administration without a change in the law. The Rhode Island legislature authorized the 
establishment of such a facility in 2021, but that facility has not opened and it is not 
scheduled to open until 2024. None of the other 48 states have an authorized safe 
consumption site operating. 
a. Our Response: Federal law also prohibits the cultivation, use, and possession of 
cannabis. That has not stopped Maine from legalizing, regulating, and taxing it 
anyways. If we accept Governor Mill’s argument, we are essentially saying that 
we can break the law so that Maine can take in millions of dollars in cannabis tax 
revenue but we cannot break the law so that people don’t die from drug use.
ﬂRecove:"y 
_I Advocmzy 
. 
1 Project 
Testimony in response to 
Governor Mill’s Opposition to LD 1159 
The Govemor's testimony overstates the ﬁnality of federal law on this matter. In 
reality, federal law is unclear at best. Sites are currently operating in New York 
City and the Biden Administration has not prosecuted them. Rhode Island’s site 
was delayed due to administrative issues resulting from the pandemic and has full 
support from state leadership. The staff are working as fast as they can to open as 
quickly as possible. 
Safe House, the harm reduction health center in Philly sued by the Trump 
Administration, is currently in negotiations with the Department of Justice about 
the operation of their centers. In the coming days, advocates expect the DOJ to 
put out a statement in favor of these centers. 
When the Governor claims that these sites violate federal law she is saying that 
the sites exist only for the purpose of using drugs. That is not true. Harm 
Reduction Health Centers are for the purpose of providing necessary medical care 
for a population who ﬁnds medical care not accessible due to stigma, lack of 
insurance or transportation. 
The State already encourages supervised consumption through their OPTIONS 
program, “Don’t use alone” PR campaigns, fentanyl test strips and naloxone 
distribution. Governor Mills talks about how much Naloxone she has distributed, 
the Good Sam Law encourages people to call 911, and OPTIONS tells people to 
use drugs in groups. The only difference between that and a harm reduction health 
center is 4 walls, a roof, and a doctor. 
2 Governor Mills Testimony: While there are many (proponents note at least 200) 
facilities operating in some other countries, there is no model that we are aware of that 
has operated in a primarily rural state. 
Our Response: Maine is not just a rural state. We also have cities - like Lewiston, 
Bangor, and Portland. These communities are struggling with public drug use and 
skyrocketing overdoses. They should have the opportunity to decide if they want 
to have this tool in their tool box. 
Furthermore, the rural areas of the State of Maine face some of the largest 
obstacles to recovery and greatest danger of overdose. The isolation means many 
are using drugs alone, which we know puts them at the greatest danger of 
preventable overdose. The inherent lack of transportation means that treatment is 
not accessible. There is a clause in the bill that a mobile unit could be created ifa 
rural community chose to take that route.
ﬂ Recovery 
I AdvocacyT 
> 
I Praia-zit 
Testimony in response to 
Governor Mill’s Opposition to LD 1159 
Governor Mills Testimony: While there was testimony at the public hearing stating 
there would be no cost to the taxpayers, in fact, the operation of the facility would likely 
be the responsibility of the state as the DHHS would be contracting out the operation and 
none of the services would be eligible for MaineCare reimbursement or covered by any 
commercial health insurance. And the operational cost, based upon the facilities we have 
reviewed in New York City and in Montreal, Canada would be substantial. The medical 
staffing and security costs alone would be costly. A ﬁscal note has not yet been 
developed but, for reference, the budget for the operator of the two sites in NYC is 
currently $17.3 million. 
a. Our Response: The intention of the advocates is to follow in the footsteps of RI, 
who used $2.6 million dollars in opioid settlement funds to fund the creation of 
two harm reduction health centers. We do not want ftmding from the Maine State 
Legislature, as there is funding available from other sources, including the Opioid 
Settlement monies, both state and local, as well as private funders. If the language 
of the bill requires that the State funds it, change the language of the bill. 
b. To use the cost evaluation of sites in NYC is grievously wrong. The population 
that these two sites serve is 8.8 million people, while the population of the entire 
state of Maine is only 1.3 million people. 
Governor Mills Testimony: The other services specified in the bill — speciﬁcally health 
service referrals — are supports we already provide in eighteen recovery community 
centers across the state. Only two counties, Somerset and Waldo, are presently without 
such a center and we are actively working with individuals and organizations in each of 
those counties to look at sites for a potential recovery community center. 
a. Our Response: While we appreciate the Governor ’s commitment to recovery 
community centers across Maine, a recovery community center (RCC) is not the 
appropriate place for someone who is actively using drugs. Though built upon 
multiple pathways of recovery, RCCs need to maintain a chemical free 
environment to be inclusive to the abstinence based recovery models. Due to this 
people who are currently using often find themselves pushed away from these 
spaces. Furthermore, if referrals to health services through recovery centers were 
an effective strategy, we wouldn’t be seeing the alarming number of infections, 
untreated mental health concems and people unable to access substance use 
treatment.
T 
Q Recovery 
1 Advocemy if 
1 Froierzt 
Testimony in response to 
Governor Mill's Opposition to LD 1159 
Governor Mills Testimony: There is insufﬁcient evidence to date that safe use sites 
encourage individuals to ﬁnd a pathway to recovery. Given the lethality of the current 
drug supply, we should be doing all We can to encourage individuals to ﬁnd a pathway to 
recovery, as continuing to use in this environment all too frequently results in a fatal 
overdose. Eighty percent of Maine’s fatal overdoses last year involved fentanyl, which 
acts quickly and is 50 to 100 times more lethal than morphine. Only two milligrams of 
fentanyl is considered a potentially lethal dose. Given that an individual would be 
unlikely to — and may not be able to — use the facility in every instance (the NYC 
facilities are open only 12 to 14 hours per day and only 5 days per week), the 
establishment of such a site may actually increase the risk to users by creating a false 
sense of security in ongoing use. 
a. Our Response: This is just fundamentally untrue. There is over 3 decades of 
research that show that hann reduction health centers save lives, reduce syringe 
waste, and help people get into treatment. Furthennore, the danger is exactly the 
reason we should allow the creation of hann reduction health centers - not the 
reason we shouldn’t. The bottom line is that dead people do not recover. People 
will continue to use whether or not there is fentanyl, so we need to use whatever 
tools we have available to keep our citizens in Maine safe. 
b. Harm Reduction Health Centers give people time. They may not be ready to stop 
using drugs today but maybe they will be ready tomorrow. These sites ensure that 
they make it there. 
c. We agree with Governor Mills that every Mainer deserves access to a pathway of 
recovery that works for them. Recovery is deﬁned by SAMSA as “a process of 
change through which individuals improve their health and wellness, livea 
self-directed life, and strive to reach their full potential. ” Harm reduction is 
recovery and harm reduction health center will provide a new pathway of 
recovery in Maine. 
d. Two milligrams of fentanyl is considered a potentially lethal dose for someone 
who has never done fentanyl. Two milligrams for a person who uses fentanyl 
every day is not a lethal dose. Tolerance builds the longer someone uses opioids 
and individuals use varies. Scare tactics like these are harmful and inaccurate. 
Additionally, non-pharmaceutical fentanyl is not “pure fentanyl ” and contains 
additives and adulterants. . 
e. Governor Mills, Gordon Smith, harm reduction and recovery advocates alike 
agree that people who use drugs die most often because they are using drugs 
alone. Harm Reduction Health Centers fix that problem: people don't have to use
Q Recovery 
,_ 1 AdvocacyA 
» ﬁ Project 
Testimony in response to 
Governor Mill’s Opposition to LD 1159 
alone and therefore don't die. At the core of this bill is our collective desire to 
save lives. This is a bill that will save lives. 100% of the time. 
f. At Insite Supervised Injection Site, the ﬁrst overdose prevention facility in North 
America, which began operating in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, in 
2003, one study found that the fatal overdose rate in the area around the site fell 
by 35% after it opened. littpszx ’./pubmcdncbi.nlm.nih.gov/214978929 
g. Additionally, the programs help increase entry into substance use disorder 
treatment programs, according to Kallenach. Another study found that more than 
half of users at Insite entered addiction treatment within two years. 
hltps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. <:’ _Q_\’/P111C/£lI ‘llClCS/Pl\/l C55‘)()7l 7/ 
h. Additionally, harm reduction health centers reduce public drug use and the 
amount of public discarded syringe waste by offering indoor spaces for people 
who are unhoused and/or who use drugs to manage their disease, instead of in 
public places like parks. littps://\~ ww.ncbi.nlm.nih.go\~/pmc/articlcs/PMC 5 l 7857/ 
i. This is the part that we think is important for Cities like Bangor, Lewiston, 
and Portland, who struggle with people using drugs in parks and public 
places (like libraries and recovery centers) - which none of us want. 
6. Age of Harm Reduction Health Center Participants: Govemor Mills testimony 
implies that harm reduction health centers would allow young people to receive services 
there. Advocates believe that harm reduction health centers should be required to follow 
the same SSP rules that already exist in the State, which means that people under 18 
would not be eligible for services at a hann reduction health center. 
The time has come to set aside false belief systems that continue to have no effect on the number 
of Mainer’s dying of preventable overdose deaths for evidence-based interventions that save 
lives, reduce syringe waste, and help people get into treatment when they are ready. 
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Courtney Gary-Allen 
Organizing Director 
Maine Recovery Advocacy Project
