-' 
Q Recovery2 
' 
Q Advocacy 
_I 
i Project 
IN FAVOR of LD1354: 
An Act to Prevent Opioid Overdose Deaths by Establishing Safe Consumption Sites 
April 27th, 2023 
Greetings: Chairpersons Senator Bee:-Be-Center and Representative Salizbury and the Criminal and 
Public Safety Committee. I am Jeanne Marquis, a parent of a person in recovery, Selectman for China, 
Maine; and an organizer for Maine Recovery Advocacy Project. I am testifying in favor of establishing 
Safe Consumption Sites in Maine. 
When you have a family member with substance-use disorder, you can‘t wish their addiction away. Your 
loved one needs to choose the path to recovery on their own. Until they make this choice, we need to keep 
them alive. Safe Consumption Sites will keep our sons and daughters alive. 
Harm Reduction is not a new concept to Maine. Since 1998, this state has allowed Syringe Service 
Programs because we know that clean syringes reduce the risk of bloodborne infections such as HIV and 
hepatitis. Safe Consumption sites, otherwise known as Harm Reduction Health Centers are Maine’s next 
step in evidence-based initiatives addressing substance use. These centers will be run by experienced 
harm reduction specialists and nursing staff who will support clients who have consumed substances 
on-site by monitoring and providing emergency medical care if necessary. All of the centers will also 
provide support by recovery specialists so when people make the choice to choose recovery, they will 
have the help they need. 
As an elected oﬁicial, I am pleased to see there is a clause in the bill that municipalities have the 
opportunity to decide if a center is right for their community. It would be a choice of the residents; oneI 
hope they would make. 
You may hear an argument from our own state’s opioid response committee that our I8 recovery centers 
act as Harm Reduction Centers, that is not true. Recovery centers do not allow drug consumption onsite, 
because that would trigger people in serious recovery. Recovery centers do not have medical staff on hand 
in case of emergencies. Our I8 recovery centers will not substitute for Harm Reduction Centers; we need 
both to save lives and support recovery. 
To the critics who think Harm Reduction Health Centers will enable more drug use, I say this also is not 
true. What these Harm Reduction Health Centers yv_i_l_l do is enable people to not have to use alone, enable 
people access to related health services, enable people to have access to recovery services, and, most 
importantly, enable people to live. 
Sol urge you to vote in favor of LDI 354. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Jeanne Marquis 
China, Maine
