Good afternoon Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members 
of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety: 
I am James Berry MD, a physician in the practice of Addiction Medicine in Portland, speaking in 
support of LD1364. 
The modality of safe use sites (also known as Overdose Prevention Sites) to prevent overdose 
deaths and other negative consequences of substance use is supported by major medical 
professional organizations: the AMA, AAFP (American Academy of Family Physicians), ASAM 
(American Society of Addiction Medicine), and NNESAM (Northern New England Society of 
Addiction Medicine), which is the local chapter of ASAM.  I am the immediate past president of 
NNESAM and am speaking on their behalf today.  
OPSs have been in operation for many years in Canada, Australia, and Europe.  They are widely 
accepted in Canada.  Data from the period 2017-2019 reveals 39 sites in operation across the 
country, with 35,000 clients visiting a total of 2 million times.  70,000 referrals were made for 
substance use treatment, medical care, and other services.  
In Canada, OPSs have experienced difficulty covering a large, sprawling city such as Toronto 
from a few fixed locations.  I believe OPSs are well adapted to smaller cities with accessible 
urban centers such as we have in Maine, where they can be paired with existing syringe service 
programs: Portland, Biddeford, Lewiston and Bangor come to mind.   This is borne out in the 
Canadian experience, with successful OPSs serving the small Ontario cities of Guelph, 
Peterborough, and St. Catherine’s.   
Positive Outcomes are: 
1. Reduced overdose deaths.   More effective than syringe service programs alone. 
2. Reduced infections associated with use:  HIV, hepatitis, abscesses, heart infections. 
3. Reduced ambulance calls, OD resuscitations, and ED visits.  
4. Less negative interaction with law enforcement. Decrease in criminal drug activity. 
Movement toward decriminalization of personal substance use.  
5. Better urban environment—fewer discarded needles and other trash, less furtive use.  
Discarded needle counts dropped 90% around the site in New York City.  
6. There has been no increase in illicit substance use associated with OPSs.  
7. Accessing needed services for a vulnerable population—mental health, SUD treatment, 
medical, housing assistance, case management, and peer support.  
8. Successful programs don’t need 24-7 staffing, daytime availability works..  
9. They are cost effective: preventing just one case of endocarditis requiring valve surgery 
would fund a site for a year.  
10. Engagement in substance use disorder treatment by a significant percentage of clients. 
A number of OPS startups are in the pipeline across the US.  2 sites in New York--funded by a 
combination of state and private money-- have been in operation for over a year.  Rhode 
Island’s site was approved by their state legislature, funding from the Opioid Settlement 
obtained, a stie selected and contract signed.  Denver has a site ready to open pending 
legislative approval: a bill similar to LD1364 is currently being debated there in the state Senate.  
The San Francisco City Council recently approved a site, though the recent veto of a bill similar 
to LD1364 by Governor Newsom has allowed the opposition to throw up roadblocks.  
Philadelphia is working with the DOJ to reverse a Trump-era court ruling that stalled its site. 
Concerned has been raised about OPS sites being in violation of federal law.  This is analogous 
to the cannabis situation, where cannabis being a DEA Schedule I substance with severe 
penalties around its manufacture and distribution for recreational use has not stopped Maine 
and other states from enacting extensive regulation and taxation.   As with cannabis, so far the 
Biden administration and DOJ have signaled a hands-off approach to OPSs. While we hope for 
more clarity from the feds, this lack has not stopped the above-mentioned planned OPSs from 
going forward, nor affected the 2 established sites in New York.  The urgency of the situation 
and the rising overdose death rate does not allow us to be complacent and wait for federal 
action. It is possible for a recovery organization to develop a site without state endorsement, 
but as the San Francisco experience is demonstrating, permissive legislation such as LD1364 will 
be critical in getting OPSs off the ground in Maine.   
Thank you 
James Berry MD 
  
Jmes Berry
Northern New England Society of Addiction Medicine
LD 1364
Good afternoon Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety:
I am James Berry MD, a physician in the practice of Addiction Medicine in Portland, 
speaking in support of LD1364.
The modality of safe use sites (also known as Overdose Prevention Sites) to prevent 
overdose deaths and other negative consequences of substance use is supported by 
major medical professional organizations: the AMA, AAFP (American Academy of 
Family Physicians), ASAM (American Society of Addiction Medicine), and 
NNESAM (Northern New England Society of Addiction Medicine), which is the 
local chapter of ASAM.  I am the immediate past president of NNESAM and am 
speaking on their behalf today. 
OPSs have been in operation for many years in Canada, Australia, and Europe.  They 
are widely accepted in Canada.  Data from the period 2017-2019 reveals 39 sites in 
operation across the country, with 35,000 clients visiting a total of 2 million times.  
70,000 referrals were made for substance use treatment, medical care, and other 
services. 
In Canada, OPSs have experienced difficulty covering a large, sprawling city such as 
Toronto from a few fixed locations.  I believe OPSs are well adapted to smaller cities 
with accessible urban centers such as we have in Maine, where they can be paired 
with existing syringe service programs: Portland, Biddeford, Lewiston and Bangor 
come to mind.   This is borne out in the Canadian experience, with successful OPSs 
serving the small Ontario cities of Guelph, Peterborough, and St. Catherine’s.  
Positive Outcomes are:
1.Reduced overdose deaths.   More effective than syringe service programs alone.
2.Reduced infections associated with use:  HIV, hepatitis, abscesses, heart 
infections.
3.Reduced ambulance calls, OD resuscitations, and ED visits. 
4.Less negative interaction with law enforcement. Decrease in criminal drug 
activity. Movement toward decriminalization of personal substance use. 
5.Better urban environment—fewer discarded needles and other trash, less furtive 
use.  Discarded needle counts dropped 90% around the site in New York City. 
6.There has been no increase in illicit substance use associated with OPSs. 
7.Accessing needed services for a vulnerable population—mental health, SUD 
treatment, medical, housing assistance, case management, and peer support. 
8.Successful programs don’t need 24-7 staffing, daytime availability works.. 
9.They are cost effective: preventing just one case of endocarditis requiring valve 
surgery would fund a site for a year. 
10.Engagement in substance use disorder treatment by a significant percentage of 
clients.
A number of OPS startups are in the pipeline across the US.  2 sites in New 
York--funded by a combination of state and private money-- have been in operation 
for over a year.  Rhode Island’s site was approved by their state legislature, funding 
from the Opioid Settlement obtained, a stie selected and contract signed.  Denver has 
a site ready to open pending legislative approval: a bill similar to LD1364 is currently 
being debated there in the state Senate.  The San Francisco City Council recently 
approved a site, though the recent veto of a bill similar to LD1364 by Governor 
Newsom has allowed the opposition to throw up roadblocks.  Philadelphia is working 
with the DOJ to reverse a Trump-era court ruling that stalled its site.
Concerned has been raised about OPS sites being in violation of federal law.  This is 
analogous to the cannabis situation, where cannabis being a DEA Schedule I 
substance with severe penalties around its manufacture and distribution for 
recreational use has not stopped Maine and other states from enacting extensive 
regulation and taxation.   As with cannabis, so far the Biden administration and DOJ 
have signaled a hands-off approach to OPSs. While we hope for more clarity from the
feds, this lack has not stopped the above-mentioned planned OPSs from going 
forward, nor affected the 2 established sites in New York.  The urgency of the 
situation and the rising overdose death rate does not allow us to be complacent and 
wait for federal action. It is possible for a recovery organization to develop a site 
without state endorsement, but as the San Francisco experience is demonstrating, 
permissive legislation such as LD1364 will be critical in getting OPSs off the ground 
in Maine.  
Thank you 
James Berry MD 
 

