295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMa ine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1364  
An Act to Prevent Opioid Overdose Deaths by Establishing  
Safe Consumption Sites  
Sponsored by Representative Lookner  
4.27.2023  
 
Good afternoon , Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety . I am 
Malory Shaughnessy, a Westbrook resident,  and the Executive Dir ector of the 
Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide 
association representing the majority of Maine’s safety net community -based  mental 
health and substance use treatment providers. The Alliance advocates for the 
implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices that serve to 
enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of  LD 1364 , “An Act to 
Prevent Opioid Over dose Deaths by Establishing Safe Consumption Sites .” According 
to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), the 
agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services that leads public 
health efforts to advance the beh avioral health of the nation, "Harm reduction is 
critical to keeping people who use drugs alive and as healthy as possible, and is a key 
pillar in the multi -faceted Health and Human Services' Overdose Prevention 
Strategy." I would like to thank Representat ive Lookner for bringing this bill forward.  
 
Last year, 716 people died from preventable overdoses, and hundreds more died 
from complications related to non -sterile equipment for substance consumption and 
Maine’s inconsistent, contaminated drug supply. Th ere has never been a fatal 
overdose in any of the over 120 existing Safe Consumption Sites, anywhere in the 
world, ever. The bottom line is that Safe Consumption Sites save lives because they 
are reacting to the world we live in – not to the world they wis hed we lived in.  
 
Centers have been implemented in countries all over the world since the 1980s and 
have had a proven positive impact on the community. Research shows that centers 
connect people to treatment and recovery support services and bridge gaps i n 
healthcare for people who use drugs.  
 
Each year in our state the number of accidental overdose deaths rises. And you all – 
and your colleagues before you – have spent a lot of time trying to create solutions 
for the problem. Yet, the numbers still rise. And each one of those deaths is 
someone’s child, one of our community member s – a Mainer. The proposal in front 
of you today has a 100% effectiveness rate for saving lives. Again, there has never 
been a fatal overdose in any of the over 120 exi sting Safe Consumption Sites, 
anywhere in the world, ever. There is no single  answer to the overdose crisis, but this 
is another important step on the way to wards turning the tide.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the Alliance today. I respectfully 
urge  you to support  this common -sense  proposal  to save the lives of our fellow 
Mainers.  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Brighter Heights Maine   
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  Mental Health  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Concepts, Inc.  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
KidsPeace Maine  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Pathways of Maine  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

