\ j:" 1'( ‘Y 
-*1] act, W-. 
(If)! ) ,1"//P-—S"l/14 
wwwac. .1;"~- 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 
Marne TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1364 — Ought To Pass 
An Act to Prevent Opioid Overdose Deaths by Establishing Safe Consumption Sites 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, 
and I am the policy director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support LD 1364, which would save 
lives. 
More than four years ago, I stood before this legislature in support of LD 949, An Act To 
Prevent Overdose Deaths, a bill that would have authorized harm reduction health centers, also 
known as overdose prevention centers. In 2019, when I testiﬁed about the “long, brutal opioid 
epidemic, ” Maine had just lost 307 of its people in a single year to preventable drug overdoses. It 
felt unimaginable to lose that many. Last year, we lost 716 people. The drug overdose death 
epidemic, like all health epidemics, requires a comprehensive strategy. One part of such a strategy 
is to reach people who have not sought treatment, through facilities like harm reduction health 
centers. 
Overdose prevention programs like the pilot project established in this bill, have been 
operating across Australia, Canada, and Europe for decades and have successfully prevented 
overdose deaths and the transmission of bloodbome disease, and have connected people to 
treatment. There have also been two set up in New York City, where over 2,000 people have gone 
in first year of their operation, and where staff have intervened in over 600 overdoses to prevent 
deaths.‘ Rhode Island passed a similar bill to LD l 159, and will open harm reduction health centers 
in early 2024. The evidence shows that overdose prevention sites work.2 
Maine has a proud history of doing what is best for Mainers, even when there is tension 
between state and federal law. While the consumption of scheduled drugs remains illegal under 
the federal Controlled Substances Act (CSA),3 and LD 1364 cannot change that, the Maine 
legislature should nevertheless support the bill. Despite the fact that cannabis consumption is 
illegal under federal law, the state of Maine has allowed cannabis consumption for medicinal 
' 
Dan Krauth, 7 On Your Side: I year later, NYC' 
s overdose prevention centers have saved hundreds of lives, ABC 
7 NY, Nov. 22. 2022, available at https://abs ’/ny.com/7-on-your-side-investigates-nyc-overdose-prevention-center- 
drug-addiction/125 l 1336/. 
3 
See, e.g., Potier C., Laprévote V., Dubois-Arber F., et a1., Supervised injection services." What has been 
demonstrated? A systemic literature review, Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 2014; 145148-68 (review of 75 articles 
regarding supervised consumption sites found that these sites were associated with better health outcomes for 
intravenous drug users and fewer overdose deaths). 
3 2l U.S.C. §80l et. seq.
purposes since 1999.4 Voters approved consumption and possession for recreational purposes in 
2016. The state legalized cannabis initially because the legislature took a patient-centered 
approach, and found that the beneﬁts of cannabis to patients suffering from pain and illness 
outweighed the state’s interest in criminalizing the drug. Maine has continued with legalization 
despite the federal opposition and direct conﬂict of Maine’s laws with federal drug laws.5 
It is well-established that the state and federal governments can adopt different laws 
addressing the same activities and separately enforce each within the boundaries of the state under 
the ‘dual sovereignty ’ doctrine." Under the principle of dual sovereignty, state-sanctioned hann 
reduction health centers will not shield individuals acting in compliance with state law from arrest, 
indictment, or conviction under the federal CSA. Rather, like Maine’s medical and recreational 
cannabis laws, LD 1364 would establish immunity under state law, but offer no legal protection 
from possible punishment by the federal govemment under the CSA. 
LD 1364 asks us: how does Maine as a state want to use its own resources to tackle 
overdose deaths? The United States Supreme Court has determined that the 10"‘ Amendment 
restrains Congress both from requiring a state to enact or keep on its books any law requiring or 
prohibiting certain acts,7 and also from commandeering state actors to enforce federal laws.8 Since 
the federal government cannot, as a constitutional matter, count on state resources to enforce its 
laws, a state’s decision to create harm reduction health centers is within the purview of the state 
legislature. 
As Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis famously wrote, “[i]t is one of the happy 
incidents of the federal system that a single courageous state may, if its citizens choose, serve asa 
laboratory; and try novel social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of the country. ”° 
The laboratory of democracy, at its best, means community-based answers that solve difﬁcult 
social problems bubble up to the federal level and are eventually ensconced in federal law. And, 
in our federalist system of govemment, public health is a core state power, which is to be granted 
great deference by the federal government. ” Because harm reduction health centers, and 
preventing overdose deaths, is a matter of public health concern, it is especially ﬁtting that the 
state would participate in the laboratory of democracy in this area speciﬁcally. 
The ACLU of Maine has pushed, and will continue to push, for evidence-based health 
responses to problematic substance use, in an effort to save lives and protect civil liberties. We 
urge the legislature to prioritize the health and well-being of Maine people over fear of conﬂict 
with the federal govemment. We urge you to support LD 1364, which is one piece ofa 
comprehensive response needed to tackle our overdose death epidemic. Please vote ought to pass 
on this important legislation. 
4 22 M.R.S. §2383-B 
5 
See, e.g., 21 U.S.C. §§84l(a)(1), 844(a) (criminalizing drug possession). 
6 See Moore v. Illinois, 55 U.S. 13, 20 (1852). 
7 
New York v. U.S., 505 U.S. 144, 166 (1992) 
8 
Print: v. U.S., 521 U.S. 898, 935 (1997) 
9 New State Ice Co. v. Liebman, 285 U.S. 262, 311 (1932). 
'0 
See Jacobson v. Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 1 1, 24-25 (1905).
