 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition to 
LD 1364 - An Act to Prevent Opioid Overdose Deaths by Establishing Safe Consumption Sites 
April 27, 2023 
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing testimony, in support of LD 1364, An 
Act to Prevent Opioid Overdose Deaths by Establishing Safe Consumption Sites, on behalf of the Maine 
Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. 
The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), 
who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. 
 Municipal officials are deeply concerned about a public policy move to establish safe injection 
sites without necessary residential treatment facilities available in the state. They feel that such a policy 
move has only been in locations with wide and deep access to treatment options to eliminate the need for 
safe injection sites, which should be the ultimate public policy goal. Officials are aware that such sites 
have shown to reduce the public consumption of drugs which has become endemic in many areas of 
Maine however, they have not been shown to decrease crime related to drug use in the area, which is a 
deep concern for the same communities.  
 A frequent complaint from residents to municipal officials is the way in which their public spaces 
have been impacted with the allowance of needle exchanges with no disposal options, and the 
proliferation of discarded and dangerous material has had on their shared public spaces. While such sites 
may reduce the hazardous waste left in parks and along streets, officials are not convinced that enough 
individuals will purchase their drugs and then travel to a site to prevent this in a meaningful way. 
 Officials have heard from their colleagues in other states that businesses and residents flee from 
the neighborhoods where a site has been established with the exception of individuals and small business 
owners, often from minority communities, who do not have the capital or the ability to move elsewhere. 
This may make it unlikely that a municipality will actively pursue such an option as reviving 
neighborhoods is a usual municipal practice even in blighted areas.   
 Officials hope the committee will understand the balance necessary to have all treatment and 
enforcement pieces needed to adequately address the growing substance use cycle in Maine. It’s not 
enough to keep people alive; we must also have resources to get them off the substance and stop the 
economy that causes the material to flow into the state. All three pieces need to be in place and officials 
hope the committee will move forward with a system view.  
 With regards to municipal approval of the sites, while officials appreciate that the bill requires 
municipal approval with a public engagement piece, the process in Sec. 1. does not mirror typical 
approval processes within town meeting towns or charter communities. Such approval should be 

conducted within the current authority of the municipality, including but not limited to approval of the 
legislative body of the municipality and processes that address the appropriateness of the site, and 
adherence to all other planning reviews which frequently require multiple public hearings.  
 If the committee choses to move forward with the bill officials ask that the approval process for 
municipalities match their home rule authority and allow for residents to have direct input into the 
approval process, particularly those homes and businesses that may be adversely impacted. Officials share 
the desire to stem the plague of substance use impacting our communities and hope that the Legislature 
will pursue all needed tools including expanded and abundant residential treatment facilities such safe 
injection sites would play a key role in helping individuals recover. Municipalities and their residents 
want to destigmatize recovery as a public policy priority.  
  
