 
 
 
 
Legislative Document 1646 : Automatic Expungement of Cannabis Possession  
 
Prepared for:  Chair Anne Carney  
Maine Committee on Judiciary  
  
Prep ared by: Vittorio Nastasi and Geoffrey Lawrence  
     
Date: May 10, 2023  
 
 
 
Dear  Chair  Carney  and members  of the committee:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit a comment for your review. The cultivation, manufacture, distribution, 
sale, and possession of cannabis for adult use is legal in Maine. Yet, many people are still suffering the 
consequences of cannab is prohibition. Legislative Document 1646 would help mitigate past harms of 
prohibition by expunging criminal records related to cannabis possession and ending incarceration for 
possession -related offenses.  
 
While there may sometimes be a public safety in terest in maintaining records of arrests, convictions, and 
adjudications, a one -size-fits-all approach of lifelong criminal records simply doesn’t make sense. There is no 
evidence that people convicted solely for cannabis possession pose a credible threat to public safety.  
 
People with criminal records face significant difficulty engaging in productive activities like finding a job, 
securing housing, obtaining occupational licenses, joining the military, gaining admission to universities, 
accessing financial services, and maintaining child custody. For example, more than 90% of employers  
nationwide conduct background checks on job applicants. Research  finds that job applicants with felony 
conviction records are approximately 60% less likely to receive a callback for an interview.  
 
Criminal records related to cannabis possession make it more difficult for people to remain productive members 
of society. Thus, expungement policies can help promote justice while contributing to public safety. At least 21 
other states and Washington, D.C.  have already adopted r eforms that facilitate the expungement or sealing of 
cannabis -related criminal records.  
 
In nine states, D.C., and the U.S. Virgin Islands, the expungement process is automatic, meaning eligible 
individuals need not bear the time or expense of hiring coun sel to apply to courts for an expungement. This is 
the gold standard for expungement provisions because evidence demonstrates that an application process can be 
a high barrier that only a small minority  of eligible individuals will overcome. Legislative Document 1646 
would vacate all arrests, convictions, and adjudications for cannabis possession and require automatic 
expung ement of all records by January 1, 2025. Before that date, eligible individuals would be able to apply to 
have their records expunged at no direct cost. This policy would be among the best in the nation for achieving 
restorative justice to victims of arbitrary government action during the drug war . 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Vittorio Nastasi, Director of Criminal Justice Reform  
Geoffrey Lawrence, Director of Drug Policy  
Reason Foundation  

