      
                     
 
Sen. Carney , Rep.  Moon en, members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary,  my name is 
Judith Meyer . I am the editor of the Sun Journal in Lewiston, the Kennebec Journal and the 
Morning Sentinel .  
I write o n behalf of the Maine Press Association  in opposition to  LD 1646, An Act to Vacate or 
Adjust Sentences and Expunge Arrests, Convictions and Adjudications for Cannabis -related Offenses . 
* * *  
When the Criminal Records Review Committee was formed and convened in 2021 , on which a 
representative of the Maine Press Associ ation served, we were tasked with coming  forward 
with a recommendation on what criminal records, if any, might qualify for expungement , seal, 
vacating, pard on or some other method of shielding the record.  
Top of the list was sealing or va cating criminal records relating to cannabis convictions , a topic 
that consumed many of our meetings . 
The committee – which included more than two dozen stakeholders in law enforcement, prison 
reform, public access, victim advocacy groups and other interested parties -- met for months 
and came forward with a number of recommendations, but did not settle the question of what 
cannab is convictions should be sealed /vacated  and how. Vacate all cannab is convictions f rom 
all time? J ust thos e convictions since cannabis use was legalized in Maine? Some combination  
of those  options ? Or, something else  entirely ? 
We invited experts to  talk about options, including what other states were doing, and heard 
from both the Judicial Branch and the Maine State Bureau of Identification, which collect s and 
maintains criminal history information, about the  process of sealing/vacating/expunging tens of 
thousands of criminal records, and what the cost might be.  
There was robust debate surrounding these i ssues, including how to manage defendants 
current ly serving s entenc es for cannabis convictions, and while there was some agreement on 
some issues and members of the Criminal Records Review Committee were making progress on 
a recommendation  for certain cannab is convictions , we did not ha ve time to complete our 
research and make recommendation s in the time allotted for our work . 

Given the amount of research that has already been gathered and the level of discussion that 
has already been held on this concept by members of the Criminal Reco rds Review Committee, 
the Maine Press Association opposes this bill and requests that Judiciary move further discussion back to a reconstituted Criminal Records Review Committee for recommendation.  
I invite the Judiciary Committee to take a peek at the records the Criminal Records Re view 
Committee has amassed on this topic, and the committee work that has already been 
completed, in hopes you will recognize  a great deal of work has already been accomplish ed in 
advancing recommendations that will address many of the suggestions in this bill , if the 
Criminal Records Review Committee is given the time needed to finish up its work.   
  * * *  
The Maine Press Association (MPA), founded in 1864 , is one of the oldest professional news 
organizations in the nation. Our goals, as spelled out in our charter and by -laws are to promote 
and foster high ethical standards and the best interests of the newspapers, journalists, and 
media organizations of th e state of Maine that constitute its membership; to encourage 
improved business and editorial practices and better media environment in the state; and to 
improve the conditions of journalism and journalists by promoting and protecting the principles of fre edom of speech and of the press and the public’s right to know.  
 
