State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Erin Frazier, State Director of Special Services and Inclusive Education 
In Support of: L.D. 79 
An Act to Ensure a High-quality Education for Students with Disabilities by Clarifying the 
Deﬁnition of "State Agency Client" and Who Provides Special Education Programs and Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Crafts 
Date: February 9, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee: 
My name is Erin Frazier, Director of the Ofﬁce of Special Services and Inclusive Education, and 
I am here today representing the Department speaking in support of L.D. 79, An Act to Ensurea 
High-quality Education for Students with Disabilities by Clarifying the Deﬁnition of "State 
Agency Client" for purposes of Special Education and clariﬁes who is entitled to establish or 
obligated to provide Special Education Programs and Services. This Department bill isa 
collaborative effort between the Department of Education and the Department of Health and 
Human Services. LD 79 clariﬁes the outdated, ambiguous historical deﬁnition of state agency 
client to further reﬁne the eligibility criteria. It identiﬁes the parties responsible for the provision 
of special education by detailing who is entitled or obligated to provide special education 
services and programs. These activities include but are not limited to enrollment, state 
assessments, student attendance and behavior data, as well as ﬁscal responsibility. 
A state agency client is a student that meets one of four conditions (currently) and is identiﬁed 
for special education services. It is a mechanism to provide ﬁscal support for educational costs 
from the Maine Department of Education. The proposed changes in statute allow us to align 
current practice and move away from ambiguous definitions that make it difficult to identify 
ﬁscal responsibility for these students. Clarifying the language helps the Departments of 
Education and Health and Human Services ensure that there is no disruption in coverage and 
programming for State agency clients. 
In addition to providing clarity for the term State Agency Client (SAC), the bill clariﬁes 
responsible entities to include intermediate education unit (CDS), public school, and public 
agency (magnet schools). 
For these reasons, the Department of Education is in support of L.D. 79. We are happy to 
answer any questions and will be available for work sessions on this bill.
1
