   
 
April 25, 2023 
 
Re LD 1428: - An Act to Ensure Treatment for MaineCare Recipients with Serious Mental Illness by 
Prohibiting the Requirements for Prior Authorization and Step Therapy for Medications 
 
To the Members of the HCIFS Committee: 
 
Mental Health America (MHA) – founded in 1909 – is the nation's leading community-based nonprofit 
dedicated to addressing the needs of those living with mental illness and to promoting the overall 
mental health of all Americans. Our work is driven by our commitment to promote mental health as a 
critical part of overall wellness, including prevention services for all, early identification and intervention 
for those at risk, integrated care, services, and supports for those who need it, with recovery as the goal.  
MHA is very much in support of legislation LD 1428 that would establish an exception to step-therapy 
and prior authorization for medications for serious mental illness. Removing such limitations is essential 
for people who take medication for psychiatric conditions. Medication is an important tool for people 
living with mental health conditions, and it is imperative for individuals to work closely with their 
providers to find a medication regime that is right for them without undue delay, without having to 
experience intolerable side-effects, and without risking their recovery. Efficacy of medications and side-
effect experience is very individualized and cannot without dire consequences conform to set of steps 
often based only on consideration of the price of specific drugs, wherein people are forced to try, or 
retry, medications that have not (or will not) work for them. Having to fail, or go through a series of 
onerous steps, before being able to obtain medications that are clinically indicated often drives people 
out of care, causes worsening of symptoms, and results in disruptions of life circumstances in areas such 
as education, employment, housing, and too often leads to involvement with the criminal justice 
system. Likewise, a change in employment or insurance coverage that may require a person to switch 
medication has a high likelihood of imperiling an individual’s recovery in the absence of a mechanism for 
an exception to step-therapy protocols.  
MHA strongly supports this legislation on behalf of people living with mental health conditions.  
Please feel free to contact me if I may offer more information at dplotnick@mhanational.org 
 
Debbie F. Plotnick, MSS, MSLP 
Executive Vice President for State and Federal Advocacy 
 
 
 
 

