POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT 
LD 1428: An Act to Ensure Treatment for MaineCare Recipients with Serious Mental Illness by 
Prohibiting the Requirements for Prior Authorization and Step Therapy for Medications 
Presented to Maine's Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state's largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMl Maine supports the passage ofAn Act 
to Ensure Treatment for MaineCare Recipients with Serious Mental Illness by Prohibiting the Requirements for Prior 
Authorization and Step Therapy for Medications. Life for the one in four Mainers who are affected by mental 
illness; can be a complex and difficult journey, full of significant barriers and obstacles. By eliminating step therapy, 
or fail;-first policies, that have been put in place, this committee will be providing life--changing and potentially 
lifesaving policy. Mental Illness has roots in multiple biological and experiential factors, resulting in the need fora 
provider/patient driven response that is dictated on an individual basis. 
As this committee examines these issues, NAMI Maine is here representing the most ill and vulnerable individuals 
in our state. These are individuals often with no legal guardian, no parent to advocate or provide support during 
appointments. These are individuals who often must rely solely on the trust they have developed with their 
providers. Although these policies have been put into place as a cost saving measure, it is found that this can lead 
to more costly care and potentially catastrophic outcomes. This includes loss of work and relationships, lasting 
cognitive impacts, homelessness, incarceration, hospitalization, and even suicide. Research studies have 
demonstrated that step therapy protocols are linked to decreased treatment effectiveness, decreased adherence 
to treatment, and result in higher system costs. 
Many states have shifted to systems in which step therapy protocols for people with serious mental illness show 
little to no financial impacts reported as it relates to rebates that are being collected. We urge this committee to 
examine closely the fiscal note that is attached to this bill. 
One sad story that was relayed to NAMI Maine was regarding an individual who was hospitalized due to severe 
depression and a mental health crisis. They were then stabilized on an inpatient unit and were discharged into the 
community. When they went to fill the prescribed medications that had assisted tremendously in stabilizing the 
symptoms, they were informed they would have to work with their provider for a prior authorization. Due to 
lengthy waitlists, the individual was left without medications while trying to navigate what can be a complex 
system. As a result, the individual ’s symptoms returned, they decompensated, and felt overwhelming 
hopelessness, resulting in them dying of suicide. Depression should not be a terminal illness. 
As it stands now, the stigma and barriers surrounding mental illness results in individuals waiting on average 10 
years to seek treatment. Once an individual is able to step forward to seek treatment, their providers should 
dictate the most appropriate course of treatment, not regulatory requirements. We ask this committee to ensure 
that these barriers are removed to support the one in four Mainers living with a mental health diagnosis. 
ABOUT NAM! MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state's largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state's mental health system through 
LEGlSLATi\/E CONTACT: Hannah tongiey, LCSX/ii Director of Community Programs 
(207) 622~57i57 Hannahi@namirnairieorg 
POSETEONS is POUCY AGENDA: v»,/wx/v.hamimaineorg/ ’advocacy
