 
PO Box 190 / 30 Association Drive / Manchester, ME 04351 / 207-480-4194 / www.mainepsych.org 
  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY AGAINST LD 1428 
 
An Act to Ensure Treatment for MaineCare Recipients with Serious Mental Illness  
by Prohibiting the Requirements for Prior Authorization and Step Therapy 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Cross Building 209 
Date:  April 19, 2023 
 
Representative Meyer, Senator Baldacci and distinguished members of the Health and Human Services Committee, my name is Henry 
Skinner, MD and I am President of the Maine Association of Psychiatric Physicians.  I also serve as Secretary of the Maine Council of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatrists (MCCAP).  Clinically, my roles include Medical Director at Tri-County Mental Health Services 
and at the Aroostook Mental Health Center and at Family Psychiatry of Maine in Yarmouth. Through these organizations, I serve 
Mainers of all ages in every county except York.  
 
One might expect a psychiatrist to be in favor of eliminating prior authorization schemes. After all, they can be time consuming and 
they infringe on both prescriber and patient autonomy.  
 
But the effect of this bill would be to transfer tens of millions of dollars from Maine taxpayers to international pharmaceutical industry 
conglomerates. Those tens of millions of dollars would then be unavailable to pay for other important mental health and substance 
abuse services which we are already struggling so hard to provide. That’s why Mainecare has a very carefully developed Preferred 
Drug List. If you look at it, you will see that it is very detailed and the decisions about which medications are preferred (available 
without a PA) is carefully designed to make accessible the most effective medications in each class.  
 
Furthermore, the bill has a deceptive title. Usually, the term “serious mental illness” is reserved to refer to schizophrenia, 
schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder, severe major depression, and sometimes PTSD. However, the fine print of this bill defines it 
as “any illness in the diagnostic manual.” It’s a sleight of hand introduced by a PHARMA lobbyist from law firm Preti Flaherty.  
 
It would be great if the pharmaceutical industry’s latest, most expensive products were also the most effective. But in the field of 
behavioral health, this is rarely the case. Of all the antipsychotics with brand-only status at this time, only ONE is clearly superior to 
any of the older generically available ones. The world’s most effective antipsychotic was introduced in 1973. None of the newer 
branded antidepressants is superior to the older generic ones. There is ONE “new” ADHD drug that is superior to the generic ones, but 
it is only “new” because it was reformulated as an extended release product. At one time there were THREE psychotropic medications 
where the branded drug was actually superior to the generic version, but now there are NONE. So it is very very reasonable to have 
people try the good older drugs before moving on to the newer, expensive ones.  
 
The Mainecare preferred drug list has been established and continuously updated by a dedicated and long-serving team of researchers, 
headed by an astute Maine psychiatrist who is a previous President of the Maine Association of Psychiatric Physicians. This team is so 
highly regarded that it has been contracted to provide the same service by 17 other states. This team continuously reviews efficacy and 
side effect data for all drugs, both new and old. Only when drugs have similar benefit/risk profiles are rebates considered in 
determining which will be on the preferred list.  This process assures Mainecare that prescribers will reach first for the most effective 
drugs, no matter how much the drug companies spend on advertising to either doctors or patients.  
 
The consequence of spending hard-earned taxpayer dollars to line the pockets of pharmaceutical executives is that Mainecare will 
have that much less money to fund all the behavioral health programs that we so desperately struggle to afford in the midst of our 
mental health and addiction crises. We are talking tens of millions of dollars.  
 
PA’s for medications are really not that much of a burden anymore.  Most electronic medical record systems allow them to be 
completed at the same time as the prescription, preventing any treatment delays. An alternative is a system called Covermymeds.com, 
which allows prescribers to receive email notifications if their prescriptions require a PA. It connects to an online form that can be 
completed in 30-60 seconds in the vast majority of cases.  
 
Physician and patient autonomy are nice ideas, but they are often corrupted by the billions of dollars spent by the pharmaceutical 
manufacturers in advertising. Step therapy regimes are necessary to counter this undue commercial influence.  
 
This bill is bad policy and ought not to pass. I don’t think there should be any question about that. 
 
Thank you for your thoughtful consideration of this bill. 

