 
 
 
April 10, 2023 
 Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair Representative Michele Meyer, Chair Joint Standing Committee on H ealth and Human Services 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re:  
LD	1428	“An	Act	to	Ensure	Treatment 	for	MaineCare 	Recipients 	with	Serious	Mental	Illness	
by	Prohibiting 	the	Requirements 	for	Prior	Authorization 	and	Step	Therapy	for	Medications” 	
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer,  and Members of the Jo int Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
 
My name is Jane Moore and I am an advocate for Disability Rights Maine. DRM offers this 
testimony in support	of LD	1428	“An	Act	to	Ensure	Treatment 	for	MaineCare 	Recipients 	with	
Serious	Mental	Illness	by	Prohibiting 	the	Requirements 	for	Prior	Authorization 	and	Step	Therapy	
for	Medications” 	
	
Step Therapy also known as “fail first” requires a person to try other medications and have 
them fail to be effective or have side effects that are intolerable before being able to have MaineCare cover the cost of the doctor’s first choice of medication. There are multiple reasons 
why we support eliminating step therapy and allo w a person with a psychiatric illness to start 
a medication that the prescriber and patient ag ree is the most effective treatment with the 
fewest or most tolerable side effects. I will highlight a few. 
 
1. Step therapy prolongs the struggle that the medication is designed to alleviate. The 
length of step therapy can be a week or months. In reviewing the  MaineCare list                                               
of  preferred antidepressants
1 there are some generic medications that require trials of 
3 other types of antidepressants for a minimum of 4 weeks each before MaineCare will 
approve the provider’s recommended medication. A delay could be 3 months before the originally prescribed medication is covered and not to be too dramatic this could mean 
lifer or death. the medications that require step therapy are newer ones designed to be 
more effective and have less severe side effects such as less weight gain, sexual 
dysfunction or involuntary movements.
2 
 
1 http://mainecarepdl.org/pdl  (February  2023)  
2 https://medical.mit.edu/fa qs/antidepressants#faq ‐‐1278 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330 
207.626.2774  .800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org 

2. The use of step therapy interferes with the doctor-patient relationship. The relationship 
between a psychiatric provider and a patient is extremely important and may take time 
to establish the trust necessary to determin e treatment options so that an informed 
decision to take medications can be made. The interference and delay that step therapy 
causes may undermine this trust and often a patient who may have agreed to the original 
prescribed medications is not willing to take  1-3 other medications before the one that 
was originally agreed upon is authorized. 
 
3. The argument for step therapy is that it is more cost effective and keeps medical 
expenses down. However, in some cases the exact opposite is true, and the waiting 
drives up costs. If the medications that first must be tried are not effective or cause 
serious side effects this can lead to an increased use of the emergency departments, 
inpatient hospitalization, loss of employment and additional doctor’s appointments. It 
also adds cost to the prescriber as the bureaucratic hurdles take time and is an added expense. Also, in a field where there is a shortage of providers it takes up time that 
could be used for seeing other patients. 
 
Of note is that in the 129
th Maine Legislature a similar bill from this committee was passed 
into law that eliminated prior authorizat ion requirements for opioid use disorder 
treatment, including medication assisted treatment and intensive outpatient therapy.4 
DRM believes it is equally important that psychiatric medications not have prior 
authorization requirements. 
Finally, on a personal note in addition to be ing an advocate for DRM I am a person with a 
psychiatric disability. As such I have taken psychiatric medications for many years and have 
been subjected to step therapy requiring me to wait to receive antidepressant and antipsychotic medications that my provider an d I had agreed would be the most effective 
and safe for me to take. There were some difficult times while I moved through step 
therapy and took antidepressant that were less effective plus highly sedating and caused 
significant weight gain in order to take the me dication that I am successfully on now. I hope 
that passage of this bill will make it so others  will not have to engage in the painful process 
of step therapy or failing first on multiple other medications. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.  I urge the committee to vote ought to pass. 
On LD 1428. 
Sincerely, 
 
Jane A. Moore, JD 
Advocate 
Disability Rights Maine 
 
 
 
 
4 Public Law 645 Maine 129th Maine Legislature  
