295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1428 
" An Act to Ensure Treatment for MaineCare Recipients with 
Serious Mental Illness by Prohibiting Prior Authorization and Step 
Therapy for Related Medications "  
Sponsored by Representative Madigan  
 
Good afternoon  Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer , and esteemed  members 
of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community based mental health and substance use treatment providers , 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children .  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here to testify in support of LD 1428, “An Act to 
Ensure Treatment for MaineCare Recipients with Serious Mental Illness by 
Prohibiting Prior Authorization and Step Therapy for Related Medications .”  
 The job of a psychiatric prescriber is to find the best fit for their patients 
based on potential side effects  and response  in relation to their condition. 
Appropriate medication options provide better care and improve results. 
Requiring patients to “prove” that they need a specific medication and 
treatment as prescribed can be problematic.  
 
“Fail first” policies and requireme nts for authorization only allow psychiatrists 
to pursue different drug options after other treatments fail. Forced drug 
switching, treatment gaps, and cessation of effective therapy are dangerous to patients because of the potential for nonresponse, flare  ups and relapses. 
Not to mention that the process imposes a major workload on psychiatric 
prescribers and takes time away from patient care, drawing out the treatment process unnecessarily. Workforce availability for behavioral health supports is a proble m in Maine. Adding unnecessary steps drags the process down and 
makes it more difficult for patients to get the care they need.   
 MaineCare has several FDA -approved medications to address SMI available 
without requiring a prior authorization  review or step therapy protocols 
within and across different drug classes. However, in  the case of a choice 
between a branded or generic form of the same medication, the preferred one to use  is chosen based on their  ability to negotiate supplemental rebat es 
with the drug manufacturer.  
 While I understand this from an economic perspective, I also know that 
sometimes the difference between the generic and the name brand can have 
an impact. As someone that has had to take two forms of thyroid replacement therapy for many years, I can unequivocally  state that my lab results show  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
that I have to take the name brand of Synthroid, rather than the generic Levothyroxine.  When    
I was switched to the generic by my insurance a few years ago, my numbers shifted pretty 
dramatically in short order. Eventually they switched me back to the brand name.  
 Sometimes it really matters a lot  which one you get.  
 According to a recent article in the Washington Post, “ Lawmakers in 36 states have passed laws that 
attempt to solve the biggest problems with step therapy —  offering more clarity on the rules and a 
process for patients and their doctors to seek exceptions. While the new  laws may help some 
patients, they don’t fully eliminate ‘fail first ’ requirements. ”
1  
 
Maine has passed legislation such as this to provide more clarity and timelines around its step 
therapy protocols but the policy still stands.  
 
Proposed federal legislation called the Safe Step Act , which has bipartisan support in the Senate and 
the House, would go further, creating more transparency about step therapy rules and covering more patients . But do we have to wait?  
 
 
                                                           
1 https://www.washingtonpost.com/wellness/2023/02/06/prior -authorization -fail-first-step -therapy/   
