  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 21, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1428 – An Act to Ensure Treatment for MaineCare Recipients with Serious Mental Illness by 
Prohibiting the Requirements for Prior Authorization and Step Therapy for Medications  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information in opposition to LD 1428 – An Act to Ensure Treatment for MaineCare 
Recipients with Serious Mental Illness by Prohibiting the Requirements for Prior Authoriza tion and Step 
Therapy for Medications . This bill prohibits prior authorization requirements and step therapy protocols 
under the MaineCare program for prescription drugs used to assess or treat serious mental illness  (SMI) . 
The implementation of the prohib ition must be consistent with the requirements of the Medicaid drug 
rebate program.  
 
This bill is virtually the same as the amended version of LD 1877 of the 130th Legislature, which did not 
pass. The Department opposed that bill and maintains that positio n at this tim e. 
 
This change would severely limit MaineCare’s ability to manage the pharmacy benefit in a fiscally 
responsible, clinically appropriate, and transparent manner.  
 
When changes are made to our Preferred Drug List (PDL), there are several optio ns for our members to 
continue receiving their prescribed drugs in accordance with clinical indications. In some instances, they 
can maintain their current regimen without a prior authorization (PA). For other changes to MaineCare -
preferred medications, me mbers have several months to transition to a preferred alternative or request a 
PA to stay on their current regimen.  
 
Our average turnaround time for PA reviews is less than twenty -four hours. In the case of a delay due to 
a weekend, our members are offere d a 4 -day override when they require medication while awaiting a PA 
review by our clinical team.  
 
On our PDL, MaineCare has several FDA -approved medications to address SMI available without 
requiring a PA review or step therapy protocols within and across different drug  classes.  
 
In the case of a choice between a branded or generic form of the same medication, the preferred agent is 
chosen based on our ability to negotiate supplemental rebates with the drug manufacturer. Using one 
 
 rebate agreement as an ex ample, losing the ability to prefer medications puts $ 10 million  annually  in 
rebates at risk.  
 
The breadth of conditions covered by LD 1428 is extremely wide. It defines a serious mental health 
disorder through DSM -5 criteria. A list of conditions that MaineCare members are living with include, 
but are not limited to, the following:  
 
• Attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder  
• Anxiety  
• Bi-polar disorder  
• Major Depressive Disorder  
• Opioid Use Disorder  
• Schizophrenia  
 
Furthermore, manufacturers of these high -cost drugs would take advantage of the lack of utilization 
management that would result from this bill by more aggressively promoting these high -cost products in 
the state of Maine, thus leading to even further incr eases in expenditures for MaineCare beyond the year 
one estimate. By removing step therapy protocols and prior authorization requirements from our tool kit, 
we would be losing mechanisms by which MaineCare manages clinical appropriateness of therapies, our  
negotiating power with drug manufacturers for rebates, and our ability to ensure value for the services we 
cover for our members.  
 
In response to similar legislation reviewed in 2022 , LD 1877 from the 130th Legislature , the Department 
engaged with the Nat ional Alliance on Mental Illness Maine and Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services  to identify any obstacles  to care for our members with SMI. After several meetings , no examples 
of MaineCare members who were denied care or experienced poor outco mes were shared. Understanding 
the importance of including representation from the mental health community in  our drug coverage 
decisions, the Department added a psychiatrist to our Drug Utilization Review committee  in June 2022 . 
Per federal regulations , SSA, 42  U.S.C.  §g (3), the Drug Utilization Review committee reviews clinical, 
utilization , and financial data on  medications covered by MaineCare and makes recommendations to the 
Department regarding coverage policies including when and if to use  step therapy or prior authorizations.  
These meetings are open to the public and invitations have been extended to both NAMI Maine and the 
Alliance for Addiction  and Mental Health Services to address the committee by provid ing public 
comment.   
 
If you have any furt her questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

