 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
     
219 Capitol Street, Suite 7
Augusta, ME 04330
Phone: 207.430.8300
Fax: 207.430.8301
Toll-Free: 877.207.5073
www.maineccsm.orgApril 21, 2023 
                                              
 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, 
 
My name is Simonne Maline.  I am the Executive Director for the Consumer Council System of Maine 
(CCSM). I am here today on behalf of the CCSM to testify in support of LD “1428 An Act to Ensure 
Treatment for MaineCare Recipients with Serious Mental Illness by Prohibiting the Requirements 
for Prior Authorization and Step Therapy for Medications.” 
 
 
The Consumer Council System of Maine is a public instrumentality written into State Statute by the Maine 
Legislature to serve in an advisory capacity and to provide legislators with guidance and advice regarding 
the delivery of effective and appropriate adult mental health services from those served by them. 
 
 
A great many of our fellow peers use psychiatric medications as part of their recovery path. Step therapy 
requires that MaineCare determines the number of drug(s) you must fail to get to the drug you and your 
doctor agree that you need to try. Prior authorization can be just as challenging and can include step 
therapy as part of that process.  
 
The time this could take could be weeks and/or months for each medication. In this time, a person could be 
suffering from either the drug not working or the side effects that can come with each medication. We could 
not determine by the bill text if other medications not specifically identified as psychiatric medications but 
routinely used for psychiatric reasons. A good example is a lot of anti-seizure medications are used for 
mood disorders as well. If not included, we recommend adding them. We fully support removing the 
barriers that prior authorization and step therapy protocols cause for individuals living with mental health 
challenges. Ultimately the decision making should land squarely with the person who needs medications 
and their prescriber who has the expertise to guide someone who is considering medications. 
 
According to the Nord State Report Card: 
“More than half of all states have instituted protections around the use of step therapy to help patients 
obtain the care and treatment they need at the right time. In 2022, four states signed step therapy 
protections into law. In general, these protections: 
1. Ensure step therapy protocols are based on medical criteria and clinical guidelines developed by 
independent experts; 
 
 
  
 
 
 
     
     2. Create a simple and accessible exceptions process for providers and patients to challenge the use 
of step therapy; 
3. Establish a clear and expedited timeline for decisions for both emergency and non-emergency 
situations, to ensure patients do not experience delays in treatment; and 
4. Establish a basic framework for when it is most appropriate to exempt patients from step therapy.” 
https://rarediseases.org/policy-issues/step-therapy/  
 
 A recent article from the Washington Post states that: “As of 2023 lawmakers in 36 states have passed 
laws that attempt to solve the biggest problems with step therapy — offering more clarity on the rules and a 
process for patients and their doctors to seek exceptions.”  
https://www.washingtonpost.com/wellness/2023/02/06/prior-authorization-fail-first-step-therapy/  
 
Here is a link to step therapy legislation by state: https://www.steptherapy.com/step-therapy-legislation-by-
state  
 
And finally, Senator Hassan and fellow legislators in Congress introduced the bipartisan Safe Step Act of 
2023, which places reasonable limits on the use of “step therapy,” and works to improve access to safer 
and more transparent treatments for patients. 
https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/senate-
bill/652?s=2&r=13&q=%7B%22search%22%3A%5B%22S+652%22%5D%7D  
 
 
In closing I urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1428. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Simonne M. Maline 
 
Executive Director 
