April 17, 2023
Good Morning/Afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed 
members of the Health and Human Services Committee,  
My name is Vickie Morgan, I am a resident of Norway and I am here today to testify in 
favor of LD 1428 “An Act to Ensure Treatment for MaineCare Recipients with 
Serious Mental Illness by Prohibiting the Requirements for Prior Authorization 
and Step Therapy for Medications”.  
Currently, MaineCare requires prior authorizations and step therapy for certain 
medications for the treatment of  serious mental health issues.
I spent many years working with a psychiatrist trying to find a medication that worked for
me in regards to the treatment of my severe and persistent depression, PTSD, and 
Anxiety He tried several medications that provided no improvement of my symptoms. 
He wanted to try newer medications that had good results with a lot of patients, but 
before he could prescribed them, I had to take one or more other medications first. This 
entailed taking the medication for at least three weeks before it even took affect and 
waiting another three weeks or more to find out if it even worked. 
Meanwhile, all the time that my psychiatrist was working with me on finding the 
medication that would work for me, I was experiencing a serious mental health crisis.
I went to the Emergency Department, was hospitalized in a Psychiatric Unit, and a 
Crisis Stabilization Unit many times. My life was spiraling out of control. It affected my 
ability to work, do household chores, my relationships with my family and friends and 
my  ability to just want to get of bed and take care of my personal care needs. This went
on for a very long time.
If MaineCare eliminated the prior authorizations and step therapy protocols, this would 
lower the need for the use of Emergency Departments, Crisis Stabilization Units and 
admissions to Psychiatric Hospitals for a mental health crisis. This would also reduce 
the costs for MaineCare, but more importantly it would lessen the suffering and promote
a faster recovery for our peers experiencing mental health issues.
In closing, I urge you to pass  LD 1428.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Sincerely,
Vickie Morgan
Vickie Morgan
Norway

