www.maineacep.org
Maine Chapter, American College of Emergency Physicians 
 
 
 
LD 1003 An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with 
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism 
 
Testimony in Support of Sponsor Amendment 
March 29, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Perry and members of the Health and Human Services Committee, my name 
is Andrew Ehrhard, MD, FACEP.  I am here today providing testimony on behalf of Maine Chapter, American 
College of Emergency Physicians (MEACEP) speaking support of this bill.  Maine Chapter - ACEP has a network 
of over 200 emergency-trained physician members practicing in each major hospital in Maine.  
 
This bill is one in a series of bills addressing the crisis of behavioral health youth “living” in hospital emergency 
departments or experiencing extended inpatient hospitalization in an acute psychiatric hospital.  In January, 
the Maine Department of Health and Human Services Office of Child and Family Services issued the 2022 
Children’s Behavioral Health Services Annual Report.  As you have heard many times during the legislative 
session the report documents that 861 youth had extended stays in emergency departments between January 
and October of 2022.  The report states that the average length of stay for youth meeting the psychiatric 
inpatient criterion was seven (7) days, while those who were determined to meet an alternate level of care 
remained in the emergency department for an average of three (3) additional days.   
 
We are testifying today to provide insight into the distress caused by extended stays in the emergency 
department, and to ask for your support of legislation that will provide crisis and respite services to children 
and individuals with intellectual disabilities and autism in an emergency department. When appropriate 
housing and treatment options are not available, emergency departments become the fallback resources for 
children with intellectual disabilities, autism, and other behavioral health needs. Emergency departments, 
however, are not designed for long-term patient care and therefore cannot provide the care and treatment 
this population needs. Our testimony today will highlight some of the issues and impacts to children that ME-
ACEP physicians want to address with LD 1103. 
 
Issue #1 – Youth are being transported out of state for treatment.  
Recently, a 13-year-old autistic child was brought to the emergency department. The emergency department 
team worked unsuccessfully over the course of several months to find placement for this youth. During this 
time, the patient required 1:1 care. Eventually, the patient was accepted for treatment at a facility in Ohio and 
the child was transported there by ambulance with one of the hospital’s nurses. Finding treatment has been 
challenging and one side effect of providing treatment out of state is that it takes them away from family, 
friends and any established local support network. 
 
Issue #2 – Emergency Department Facilities are not designed for long-term care. 
Anyone who has spent time in the emergency department understands that these facilities are designed for 
accessibility, function and safety. Some spaces within the emergency department lack a connection to the 
outdoors – windows. When a child has aggressive and violent tendencies, it can be difficult to find safe space 
within the emergency department, resulting in reduced access to people and increased barriers to accessing 
nature, sunlight, and educational resources.  
 
 The experience of housing youth in the emergency department over the course of weeks or months is difficult 
to describe. It is frustrating when treatment and resources are unavailable and when efforts to find placement 
are unsuccessful. It is heartbreaking that children are spending prolonged periods in the emergency 
department, often through holidays and birthdays. It is morally distressing when our physicians are working to 
provide the highest level of care do not have appropriate and timely resources for youth with intellectual 
disabilities and autism.  
 
We ask that you support this critically important and comprehensive solution to the crisis of children and 
individuals with intellectual disabilities and autism stuck in hospitals and emergency departments.   
 
Thank you. 
 
Cathryn Stratton, CAE 
Executive Director 
Maine Chapter, ACEP 
(207) 592-5725 
acepmaine@gmail.com 
