 
The Progress Center, Inc. |  progresscentermaine.org  
5 Fore St., Oxford, ME | 35 Cottage St., Norway, ME | 300 Portland Rd., Bridgton, ME | 6 Main St., Gray, ME  
 
Board of Directors  
Kathleen Perkins , 
Chair person  
 
Herbert Rau , 
Vice Chairperson  
 Mike Grass , 
Treasurer  
 Susan Hanley,  
Secretary  
 Melissa Burgess  
 
Jeanne Silverman  
 
Caitlyn Paige  
  
Directors  
Ashleigh Barker,  
Executive Director  
 
Eric Ross , 
Director of Finance 
and Operations  
 
Maureen Bilodeau , 
Director of Case 
Management & 
Children’s Services  
 
Amanda Wozich,  
Director of Human 
Resources  
 
Kathleen Corliss,  
Director of Home and 
Community Based 
Services  Testimony of Ashleigh Bark er, Executive Director  
Opposed to LD 1003 Proposed Amendment  
An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with  
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
March 29, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Services Committees.  
My name is Ashleigh Barker .  I am the Exec utive Director for The Progress Center Inc.  The 
Progress Center provides Communi ty Support Services, In -home Support Services, Shared 
Living oversight, Community Case Management to Adults with Intellectual Disabilities, Behavioral Health Home, Children’s Case Management to Children with Mental Health Disorders and/ or Intellectual Dis abilities, Outpatient Therapy, Rehabilitative and Community 
Support Services for Children with Cognitive Impairments and Functional Limitations, and we have five residential facilities and seven independent living apartments.  We have office locations in N orway, Oxford, Gray, and Bridgton.   
The Progress Center’s mission is to inspire hope, independence and lasting change within our community through building a healthy environment in which all individuals may thrive.   
Our vision is to increase participation and expansion of opportunities to create sustainable 
independence.  We reliably empower individuals to make lasting changes in their own lives and 
communities providing the range of support that individuals and families need to achieve independence t hroughout their entire lifespan.    
I am writing in opposition to the proposed amendment to LD 1003. I am in favor however of the 
bill as originally printed which seeks to ensure crisis services for both individuals with behavioral health diagnosis and individuals with intellectual disabilities  or autism spectrum 
disorders (ASD).  
Section 5 of t he Sponsor Amendment which establishes a “no reject, no eject” policy for 
residential facilities would  cause significant harm to the population we serve.  The Progress 
Center has faced a workf orce crisis since the pandemic that has led to a near complete turn over 
in our residential staff.  We are simpl y not capable of accepting members w ith significant 
behavioral needs i f assigned to us  at this time.  If section 5 of LD 1003 were to pass and we 
were required to support folks that we currently would not accept  it would create s afety 
concerns f or both the member and our staff.  We require more time to develop our staff to 
handle such needs.  W e have , in fact, w illingly and knowingly transitioned several members to 
environment  which could offer a higher  level of support  over the last two year i n 
acknowledgment  that their needs were beyond our capac ity at this time.   
People with  intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorders (ASD) deserve access to 
appropriate and specialized services, including crisis care and support based on their individual 
needs.  We urge you to support only sections 1- 4 of the proposed amendment and to consider 
 
The Progress Center, Inc. |  progresscentermaine.org  
5 Fore St., Oxford, ME | 35 Cottage St., Norway, ME | 300 Portland Rd., Bridgton, ME | 6 Main St., Gray, ME  
 
the unintended consequences of adopting a “no reject, no eject policy” for the IDD service 
system as proposed.   
Thank you for your time and consideration. Please reach out with any questions you may have.  
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
Ashleigh Barker  
ashleighbarker@progresscentermaine.org 
  
 
 

