 
 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330 
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org 
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION  AND ADVOCACY  AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
April 12, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair Committee on Health and Human Services 
Cross Office Building, Room 209 
Augusta, Maine 04333  Re: L.D. 1003, An Act to Increase Acce ss to Behavioral Health Services for 
Children and Individuals with In tellectual Disabilities or Autism 
 Dear Senator Baldacci, Represen tative Meyer, and Members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services: 
 My name is Atlee Reilly and I serve as the Legal Director of Disability Rights Maine, 
Maine’s Protection and Advocacy agency for people with disabilities.  DRM provided 
oral testimony neither for nor against, LD 1003.  We are providing some additional 
information in advance of the work session. 
 
Our concerns with the current state of the child ren’s behavioral health  system have been 
detailed in testimony already provided this Committee and we will not repeat them here.
1  
 
                                                            
1 DRM testimony on LD 181, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services 
to Implement Secure Children's Psychiatric  Residential Treatment Facility Services , is available 
here: http://www.mainelegislatu re.org/legis/bills/get TestimonyDoc.asp?id=168846 ; DRM 
testimony on LD 378, Resolve, to Eliminate the So-called Fail First Requirement for Children's 
Residential Services for Certain Individuals Wh ose Needs Are Unable to Be Met with Home and 
Community-based Services by Expandi ng Eligibility for Those Individuals is available here: 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/leg is/bills/getTestim onyDoc.asp?id=167405 ; DRM testimony 
on LD 435 - Resolve, to Ensure the Provision of Me dically Necessary Behavioral Health Care 
Services for Children in Their Homes and Communities  is available here: 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/leg is/bills/getTestim onyDoc.asp?id=169548  
Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 12, 2023 Page 2  
At the outset, we want to state clearly that  the problems LD 1003  seeks to address are 
very real and that no individua l with a disability should spend any unnecessary time in an 
emergency department.  As this Committee hear d at the hearing, these settings are not 
therapeutic and are not designed to provid e anything beyond immediate stabilization. 
Allowing children (or adults) with disabilities to become stuck in these settings is 
damaging to all involved. But we will never solve the problem s at the top of the service 
delivery pyramid without buildin g out the community-based serv ices that should form the 
base. I know we keep saying that – but th at is because it continues to be true. 
 
1. DRM supports the no eject no reject require ment in Section 5 of LD 1003. But 
these requirements should be expa nded beyond institutional settings. 
 
As Maine’s Protection and Advo cacy agency we have the uni que opportunity to engage 
with children and their families across th e system. Through DRM’s monitoring and 
outreach activities, we are present in many of institutional settings a nd regularly talk to 
children who are stuck in hosp itals after being denied services from every residential 
provider in the state. While  at the same time, we visit numerous residential programs 
each year and consistently hear  from youth, parent s, and program sta ff that many children 
could be home if they had access to appr opriate community-based  services. We also 
provide information and technical assistance to parents on a near weekly basis who are 
unsure of where to turn after being turned away at every d oor. We are failing many of our 
youth, but youth with the gr eatest needs have the most difficult time accessing services. 
 We recently had a situation where we visite d a crisis stabilization unit with five open 
beds, and the very next day , we participated in a meeting for a youth stuck in an 
emergency department who had b een presented to all CSUs in  the state only to be told 
that all the beds were full. We have worked  with youth stuck in emergency departments 
who the hospitals are seeking to discharge because, in the view  of the hospital, they don’t 
need to be in the ED, don’t meet hospital level of care, don’t meet the level of care for a 
CSU and don’t meet residential level of care, while at the same time  they are denied from 
each and every residential provider in the stat e due to their acuity, in the view of the 
residential provider. Youth stuck in CSUs , hospitals and emergency departments are 
regularly denied admission to each and every residential prog ram in the state. They will 
be told that there is no staff, that they don’t fit the milieu, or that their needs cannot be 
met. Many times, they are gi ven no reason at all.   
 But the real reason is that the residential pr oviders don’t have to answer to anyone and 
can easily fill the same bed, fo r the same money, with an individual who has less need for 
their services.  So long as DHHS allows providers to pick and choose the youth that they  
Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 12, 2023 Page 3  
serve, youth will continue to be  stuck in unnecessarily high le vels of care.  And so long 
as our residential programs con tinued to be filled with yout h who could easily be served 
in the community if we had an adequate sy stem of community-based  services across the 
state, the youth who might actually need that level of care, and as a result may be deemed 
difficult to serve, will be stuc k in inappropriately restrictiv e placements. The no eject no 
reject provision in LD 1003 would he lp address this longstanding problem. 
 
a) No eject no reject requirements should be implemented for children across the 
system. 
 It has been over four years since the 2018  Children’s Behavioral Health Services 
Assessment, which included a recommendation that residential placement “contracts 
should specify referral accepta nce and denial policies to promote transparency and 
consistency, and ‘no reject, no eject’ policies as other states have done.”
2 The 2018 
Assessment advised that these policies be impl emented in conjunction with other changes 
aimed to “strengthen the treatment interventions  offered at residential programs” and that 
rates may need to be revisited at the same time. But while the residential provider rates 
were raised and quality and oversight mechanisms were  refined through Maine’s 
transition to Qualified Residential Treatmen t Programs over the past few years, DHHS 
refused to require no reject, no eject policies as part of the rate changes and reforms. 
Section 5 of LD 1003 would address this omission and require DHHS to do what it 
should have already done.3 
 
                                                            
2 Maine Department of Health and Human Serv ices, Office of Child and Family Services, 
Children’s Behavioral Health Services Asse ssment Final Report,” P ublic Consulting Group, 
2018, page 74. Available at: https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/f iles/documents/ocfs/cbhs/documents/ME-
OCFS-CBHS-Assessment-Final-Report.pdf. This a ssessment also found there were significant 
problems with access, concluding: “Children’s be havioral health servi ces are not available 
immediately (or at all).” Id. at p. 22.   
 
3 We were encouraged that DHHS, in its test imony regarding LD 1003 seemed to recognize the 
need for no eject no reject approaches.  See: DHHS testimony re: LD 1003, available at: 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legi s/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=169573  (“The Department 
supports the concept of a no reject, no ej ect policy, but developing one must be done 
thoughtfully in order to mitigate any potential de trimental effects to th e individuals receiving 
care in our delivery system.”)  
Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 12, 2023 Page 4  
Although the no eject no reject requireme nt in LD 1003 as amended focuses on 
residential facilities (“Direct the Department  of Health and Huma n Services to adopt 
rules to require written approval from the Depa rtment of Health and Human Services to 
terminate care or decline referrals by reside ntial facilities providi ng children behavioral 
health services and residential facilities fo r members with Intellectual Disabilities or 
Autism Spectrum Disorder”), these principles should be infused th roughout the system 
and should not be limited to residential providers.  Youth with the greatest needs often 
face additional barriers in accessing and main taining community-based  services for the 
same reasons that youth with comparatively higher needs have trouble accessing higher 
levels of care – providers that can get the same  public dollars to serve youth that are seen 
as easier to serve often ch oose to do just that. 
 
b) No eject no reject principles should be implemented and en forced in the adult 
system for individuals with I/DD or Autism. 
 
We suggest that the Committee provide add itional guidance to DHH S in developing its 
rules to require providers to obtain DHHS appr oval to discharge or reject an adult with 
I/DD or Autism.  First, for adults receiving the Section 21 and 29 waivers, the waiver  rules state that a 
provider cannot terminate a member's serv ices without obtainin g written authorization 
from OADS.  14-197 C.M.R. ch . 2, §§ 21.10, 29.10. Despite the existence of these 
provisions, service providers often claim ignor ance and discharge or attempt to discharge 
individuals from their homes without the nece ssary written authorization. Furthermore, 
there are no consequences for the service pr ovider if they discharge a person without 
written authorization. To address this issue,  we propose modifyin g the legislation to 
require DHHS to establish rules that would enable them to penalize service providers 
who discharge individuals w ith intellectual disabilities a nd autism without the required 
written authorization.  Second, DHHS currently uses a vendor ca ll system for matching providers with 
individuals with I/DD or Autism who need serv ices.  Because there is no direct referral, 
no one is actually rejected.  Instead, case managers draft a de-identified profile of the 
individual and the services they need, which is  sent out to providers,  who respond if they 
are able to assist this person.  In practic e, the vendor call system  discriminates against 
those with the highest needs. We suggest modifying this legi slation to require DHHS to 
review this system to ensure those with the greatest needs are able to have equal access to 
available services.  
Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 12, 2023 Page 5  
c) Maine already knows how to devel op no eject no reject proposals. 
 Maine knows how to develop no eject no reject approaches.  For example, in the adult 
behavioral health system, there are regulat ory requirements that providers “Accept 
referrals through the Department -defined referral process with in (7) calendar days.  Only 
in cases where providers have  received written approval of declination from [Office of 
Behavioral Health] may a referral be declined.”
4 LD 1003 would require DHHS to 
develop similar procedures in other areas of the behavioral health system.  This would 
improve access to services and reduce barrier s to accessing services for those with the 
greatest need for them.  
2. DRM agrees that the current crisis system  is not meeting the needs of youth or 
individuals with ID/Autism and supports Sections 2 and 3 of  LD 1003, but has 
significant concerns with the prioritizati on of crisis services contained within 
Section 1. 
 
The lack of crisis services for children and for individuals  with I/DD or Autism is a 
critical issue that must be addressed. In 2018,  the Children’s Behavi oral Health Services 
Assessment raised significant c oncerns about the crisis syst em for children, especially 
children with I/DD and Autism, and made a number of recommendations in that regard.5 
And the United States Department of Justice identified the lack of appropriate crisis 
services as one of the factor s leading to the unnecessary institutionalization of youth, 
writing:  
Maine’s failure to make crisis services available to families causes children 
to enter institutions or to be at se rious risk of institutionalization. The 
State’s crisis hotline, staffed by co ntracted private providers, is 
understaffed, and mobile cr isis providers are often unable to respond in a 
timely manner or reach parts of the State…In fact, several families we interviewed said that after reaching the crisis hotline, sta ff told them there 
was no available service in their area and suggested taking children to the 
emergency room or calling law enfor cement. Because of a shortage of 
Crisis Stabilization Units, which ar e designed to provide short-term 
inpatient treatment and care, hospital st aff described children remaining in  
                                                            
4 10-144 Chapter 101, Mainecare Benef its Manual, CH. II, Sec. 17.08.  
5 Children’s Behavioral Health Servi ces Assessment: Final Report, pp. 78-81. 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 12, 2023 Page 6  
emergency rooms for weeks or even months, even though the emergency 
rooms were ill-equipped to meet their needs.
6 
Families continue to report a lack of meaningful  access to crisis services. As a result, we 
support Sections 2 and 3 of LD 1003, requiring DHHS to establish statewide crisis 
systems for children and individua ls with I/DD and Autism.   
But we have significant concer ns about the language in Se ction 1, which states that 
“Crisis beds in a residential facility must be prioritized for persons who are discharged 
from hospital emergency departments.”  Things like crisis services ca nnot be effectively 
prioritized.  But if one were to try and do so , it does not make sense to prioritize someone 
who may be an emergency department inappr opriately over someon e in the community 
whose life may be in danger. If LD 1003 mo ves forward, it should do so without this 
provision. 
Thank you for your time at the hearing and your attention to these important issues. 
Please reach out with any questions. 
 
Sincerely,   
Atlee Reilly           Legal Director          Disability Rights Maine           
 
                                                            
6 The June 2022 Letter of Findings is available here: https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-
department-finds-maine-violation-ada-over-in stitutionalization-children-disabilities     
