 
(207) 866-3769            info@iamsupport s.org          www.iam support s.org 
 
Testimony of Catherine Thibedeau, Executive Director 
Opposed to LD 1003 Proposed Amendment  
An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Hea lth Services for Childre n and Individuals with  
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism  
Joint Standing Committee on H ealth and Human Services  
March 29th 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representativ e Meyer, and esteemed members of  the Health and Human Services 
Committees: 
 
My name is Catherine Thibedeau, a nd I am the Executive Director  of Independence Advocates of 
Maine. Our agency provides services and supports for  people with intellectual and  developmental 
disabilities in the nor thern part of our Stat e, specifically in  Penobscot, Piscataquis, Hancock, and 
Aroostook Counties. We have b een in operation since 1977, and o ur services include  various types of 
services within Sections  20, 21, 29, and 50 of MaineCare. Throu gh these services, we support many of 
Maine's most complex clients i n our various residential service s.  
 
I am writing in strong opposition to the proposed amendment to LD 1003. While, I am in favor of the 
bill as initially printed, which seeks to ensure crisis service s for individuals wit h behavioral health 
diagnoses and individuals with int ellectual disabilities or aut ism spectrum disorders (A.S.D.), adding a 
"No reject, No eject" provides  no real solutions and places our  State's most vulnerable individuals in 
increased danger. There is a lim it as to what can be safely acc omplished within Maine's current HCBS 
system. This, coupled with a minimal number of institutional be ds, makes managing th e situation more 
problematic. Clients with violen t or unresolved behavioral issu es pose an extreme ris k to their staff and 
housemates. Maine’s rurality cre ates another layer of challenge s. Our agency's group homes operate in 
small towns in Northern Maine and solely rely on  state police a nd the sheriff's office for first 
responders leading to long emerg ency response times. On top of that, the Crisis Program staff can 
rarely make emergency home vis its, and if they can, their respo nse time is often hours.  
 
Maine's support system for adults  with complex behavioral healt h needs and intellectual/ 
developamental disabilities a nd autism is beyond broken. It has  been a long-standing practice of the 
State-operated crisis homes to r eject referrals for their open beds due to safety a nd staffing concerns. 
This means that the State of Mai ne, with all their resources, c an't uphold a "no eject, no reject" policy. 
It is unconscionable to think Mai ne's program community can. Ye ars ago, changes within the state 
system forced those with comple x behavioral health needs to rec eive funding equvilant of those 
without  the needs.  A fundamental  flaw in the system design is  the lack of acceptance at the state level 
that services and funding need to m atch an individual’s needs, especially those who present with  
complex needs. Because of the negative profit margins our progr ams already operate within, we can't 
take on any more complex clients.  
 
 
Another major challenge is the lack of access to clinical suppo rt and expertise. Very few psychologists, 
behavioral analysts, and psychiat rists are available to offer c ommunity-based support. Maine's state 
crisis service is on its sec ond round (due to a lack of submiss ions) of an R.F.P. to pay for clinical 
support for clients in their c risis homes and awaiting E.R. dis charges. Again, if the State cannot obtain 
services with its resource, it is unreasonable to expect that t he provider community can. This short-
cited amendment does nothing to advance the fixes needed for ou r crisis system.  
 
Recently, we supported a client who committed a crime and engag ed in highly unsafe  behavior ending 
up with a police encounter over 200 miles from their home. Inst ead of arresting her, the police brought 
her to the local emergency room . Everyone on her team agreed th at returning to her home immediately 
was unsafe. The state’s crisis  homes couldn't take them as she was not fit with the oth ers in their care. 
No treatment hospitals would take them - they were either too o ld, too young, too easily victimized, or 
too easily a perpetrator. The Cr isis Program and their team dev ised the treatment plan for the 
individual to remain in the E.R. until a safety plan could be d eveloped. Had our agency been subjected 
to this policy and forced to bri ng the individual back to their  residential setting; imminent and serious 
harm would likely have occurred. W as the Crisis Program willing  to take her (as the service is set up to 
do) most certainly not. Were we a ble to safely bring her back t o her remote home in an unorganized 
township in Northern Maine with  ill-equip caregivers, most cert ainly not. Was the hosp ital able to keep 
her and provide a safe environmen t while a plan was developed, most certainly. Our s ystem of services 
and care is complex. Blanket pol icies issued by our state gover nment without deep c onsideration of the 
dangerous implications would be a  tremendous disservice to our State's citizens. 
 
People with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disord ers (A.S.D.) deserve access to 
appropriate and specialized servi ces, including crisis care and  emergency medicine, based on their 
individual needs. We urge you t o support only sections 1-4 of t he proposed amendment and to consider 
the unintended consequences of  adopting a "no re ject, no eject policy" for the IDD service system as 
proposed.   
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. Please reach out wit h any questions you may have.  
 
 Respectfully Submitted,   Catherine Thibedeau cthibedeau@iamsupports.org  
207-866-3769 
 
 
