 
 
Testimony of Clifford Winn, Executive Director 
Opposed to LD 1003 Proposed Amendment 
An act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with Intellectual 
Disabilities or Autism 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 29th, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Mayer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committees. 
My name is Cliff Winn. I am the Executive Director of Coastal Opportunities.  We provide residential, 
community support, work support, and in home support services to adults with Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities or Autism. 
I am writing in opposition to the proposed amendment to LD 1003.  I am in favor, however, of the bill as 
originally printed which seeks to ensure crisis services for both individuals with behavioral health 
diagnosis and individuals with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorders (ASD). 
Crisis services for the people that we support are in dire need of strengthening and development.  It is 
prudent to build a system that can support individuals in crisis and ensure that necessary interventions 
can take place, under the supervision of skilled and trained crisis professionals, while stability and 
resolution can be achieved within individual home settings.  A “no reject, no eject” does not take the 
needs of countless individuals already living in those settings, and what their very specific needs might 
be, into consideration.  The “no eject” addition could hinder providers who are trying to find a more 
appropriate setting for and individual with developing complex needs.  
With staffing levels stretched so thin for so many, there are few homes prepared to manage the 
potential complications of a new admission of an individual in crisis.  The idea of “no reject, no eject” 
flies in the face of the Home and Community Based Services rule that emphasizes the choices of who 
individuals opt to live with, and the overall tenor of the setting.   
People with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorders (ASD ) deserve access to appropriate 
and specialized services, including crisis care and support based on their individual needs. We urge you 
to support only sections 1-4 of the proposed amendment and to consider the unintended consequences 
of adopting a “no reject, no eject” policy for the IDD services system as proposed.   

Thank you for your time and consideration.  Please reach out with any questions you may have. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Cliff Winn 
cwinn@coastalopportunities.org   
 
