      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
March 29, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1 003, An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and 
Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism 
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health and Human Services  
Committee , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of 
Maine or CHOM .  I am also the parent of a 2 6-year-old son with Intellectual/Developmental 
Disabilities (ID/DD).  I serve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality Services, a 
coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on housing and quality 
services for people with ID/DD.  I also serve as chair the Main e Developmental Services Oversight 
and Advisory Board (MDSOAB).   
 I am testifying in support of LD 1 003, An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for 
Children and Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism.  This bill, as amended by the 
Sponsor, requires DHHS  to: 
1. Provide crisis and respite services for children with behavioral health diagnoses and persons with intellectual disabilities or autism receiving care in an emergency department to ensure that 
such a person does not stay in a hospital emergency department for more than 24 hours after the 
individual has met the medical criteria for safe discharge . 
2. Establish and maintain a statewide system of crisis services to meet the needs of children who 
have behavioral health needs.  
3. Maintain crisis and respite services system for people with i ntellectual disabilities and Autism:  
The system must include mobile crisis outreach, including assessment and stabilization, and 
crisis beds in a residential facility for individuals with intellectua l disabilities or autism whose 
needs cannot be met in their residences or who are hospitalized but no longer need hospital -
level care. The department shall establish metrics to track access to the statewide system of 
crisis services.  
4. Maintain information r egarding use of crisis and respite services for children with behavioral 
health diagnosis and individuals with intellectual disabilities and autism.  
 
Passing LD 1 003 would provide an opportunity to actualize aspects of the 
Developmental Services 
Lifelong Continuum of Care  (which was created by the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality 
Services in partnership with DHHS), by improving upon the current  crisis response system for 
people with ID/DD commensurate with the need.    
 
The Developmental Services Lifelong Continuum of Care model prizes the concept of “No one -
size-fits-all”.  It takes into account that formal support, such as that required for unique or 
complicated behavioral or medical conditions, must be flexible and designed to meet each person where they are.  Support must ebb and flow over the lifespan as  the individual’s needs change.  
Included within the model is quality flexible wraparound support, which means varying services as 
needed (from minimal to maximum) to promote personal development, safety, stability, and 
inclusion.  This is inclusive of suf ficient crisis services.  An efficient, effective statewide crisis 
services system allows resources to be used collaboratively, addressing the gaps in the system  and 
people’s individual needs  in a proactive, collaborative, and comprehensive way.   
 
LD 1 003 would dovetail nicely with the Developmental Services Lifelong Continuum of Care 
model and would ensure that the full spectrum of needs of people with ID/DD in Maine are met effectively.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
