 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community 
Programs 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT 
LD 1003: An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with 
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism 
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with Intellectual 
Disabilities or Autism.  
Maine has followed the national trend of reducing psychiatric hospital beds without increasing access to 
community-based providers or services. As a result, hospitals have become a placeholder for individuals 
requiring underfunded and understaffed services. The crisis system has also been piecemealed together, 
providing sporadic contact and transfer from one entity to the next, with little provider communication 
and collaboration. This has resulted in fragmented support in stabilization with a minimal transition to 
the required treatment, housing children and adults struggling with behavioral health challenges in 
restrictive, costly, and stigmatizing levels of care. Many hospitals have initiated internal mental health 
protocols, with no coordination of care with community providers, resulting in those most vulnerable 
often being discharged from assessments without services or supports in place in their communities.  
It is also critical that the data put forward in this bill be collected and utilized. It would also be 
recommended that the in addition to the call volumes and regions that the crisis line is receiving, 
referrals to mobile crisis programs also be collected, as well as the number of calls that are referred to 
hospitals or other higher levels of care. This data will provide critical information regarding the 
utilization of the state crisis system. Additionally, hospitals providing data regarding their mental health 
assessments, recommendations, and then connections to community crisis or other resources will 
further paint a more accurate picture of the current crisis system that is in place.  
Due to the ongoing concerns of individuals being seen for crisis concerns and being discharged with 
limited or no follow-up while sitting on long waitlists for community and residential services, NAMI 
Maine supports the initiatives put forward in this legislation. Many children often fall through the cracks 
following assessments and recommendations being made while in emergencies departments with no 
treatment or supports provided either while awaiting placement while in emergency rooms or upon 
their discharge. The more information that can be gathered and utilized to ensure our most vulnerable 
are cared for is critical, as well as ensuring that this information is being utilized by this committee for 
future planning and legislation to form a robust community response.  
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state’s largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
 
