Uplift  Inc.  Dreams, Opportunity, Growth, and Laughter 
P.O. Box 1106 
25 Winter Street 
Gardiner, ME 04345 
(207) 582-8021 
Supporting Persons with Disabilities  
 
 
Testimony of Heidi Mansir, Executive Director  
 
Testimony of Heidi Mansir, Executive Director 
Opposed to LD 1003 Proposed Amendment 
An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with  
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
March h 29, 29, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human 
Services Committees.  
 
 
My name is Heidi Mansir.  I am the Executive Director of Uplift, Inc. UMy name is Heidi Mansir, I am the 
Executive Director of Uplift, Inc.  Uplift is a private nonprofit that provides services to 187 individuals with 
intellectual and developmental (ID/DD) disabilities in the Kennebec Valley region.  We have been providing 
services in this community for more than 60 years. 
 
I am writing in opposition to the proposed amendment to LD 1003. I am in favor however of the bill as 
originally printed which seeks to ensure crisis services for both individuals with behavioral health diagnosis 
and individuals with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorders (ASD).  
 
Maine’s crisis system in is broken for adults with intellectual disabilities/developmental  
disabilitiesdevelopmental disabilities ( ID/DD).  This amendment is an attempt to force agencies to provide a 
highly specialized service that they may not be equipped to provide.  This is a flawed solution that will not fix 
the problemnot the answer.  The “no reject, no eject” policy doesn’t consider whether an organization has the 
resources necessary to provide the supports.  Agencies such as Uplift are currently extremely short staffed and 
underfunded.  We have limited the referral we accept not because we do not want to support more people, 
but because we do not have the resources to support more people safely.    
 
People with ID/DD deserve access to appropriate and specialized services, including crisis care and support 
based on their individual needs.  I urge you to support sections 1-4 of the proposed  billproposed bill and to 
reject the amendment that includes the “no reject, no eject policy” for the IDD service system.   
 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. Please reach out with any questions you may have.  
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Uplift  Inc.  Dreams, Opportunity, Growth, and Laughter 
P.O. Box 1106 
25 Winter Street 
Gardiner, ME 04345 
(207) 582-8021 
Supporting Persons with Disabilities  
Heidi Mansir 
Heidi.mansir@upliftmaine.org  
Heidi Mansir  
Heidi.mansir@upliftmaine.org  
 
 
 
 
To Submit Testimony, Click Here: https://www.mainelegislature.org/testimony/  
• Choose Public Hearing, then choose the Health and Human Committee and the date of the hearing, 
March 29 1pm  
• Choose the bill LD 1003  
• You can upload a file or type your testimony in the open box.   
• When filling out your name, use the “TOWN” box to enter the name of your organization.  
• Once you have provided the rest of the requested information you will check the box next to “I’m not a 
robot”  
• Click the Submit/Register button   
• You will receive a response almost immediately that your testimony has been received.  
 
