March 28, 2023 
 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony in Support of LD # 1003 An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services 
for Children and Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism. 
Senator Baldacci Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services Committee, 
My name is Hope Churchill and I live in Fort Fairfield. I am a self-advocate, meaning I am a person 
who lives with a disability.   I am part of Speaking Up For Us. I am submitting this testimony in support 
of LD 1003 because of a personal experience.   
 
At one time I was in Crisis and at risk of losing my home.  I was in a group home in Van Buren and 
someone in crisis didn’t have anywhere to go so they made a room for her.  Ten months later it didn’t 
work out for me, and they were opening another place for me to live because I needed more than 
they could provide and all three of us couldn’t stay in the home.  I had to pack up everything and go to 
my new house which was taking a couple of days to prepare. I was told I was moving, and they 
wouldn’t tell me where until later at night.  This put me into depression mode and because of my 
family history of suicide, my dad, I go into depression mode and want to kill myself.  I fell in the 
driveway and hurt my back and spine and I’m still having problems.   
 
I was going to be sent to the ER until they found me a place to live, I told them either you find a place 
to put me, or I don’t want to leave, and they were still fighting about my custody.  I was all on my own 
and had no one to help me, my mom didn’t even know where I was, I was supposed to be dropped off 
at my Gram’s house, but they brought me to a house in Van Buren and I was told Gramp was put into 
a holding cell all night.  This caused me depression.   
People should not be put in the ER if they don’t have a place to go.  They should be talking to their 
caregivers or the people that take care of people when they are in crisis.   
 
This bill is important to me because I don’t want this to happen to anyone else.   I have a friend in 
Lewiston who is homeless, and I don’t want to live like that.   I have been through 8 homes. 
 
This bill will help me and others.   It hurts my heart to see people with disabilities being left in 
Emergency rooms, getting poked by needles, and wondering where their next home is going to come 
from.   People are hurt if they are left in the emergency room versus helping them with their mental 
health.    
 
I urge you to vote in support of this bill.  Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Hope Churchill 
Fort Fairfield, ME 
hopechurchill0@gmail.com 
 
