 
 
 
  
Testimony of JAN BISBEE, PROGRAM DIRECTOR, MERT ENTERPRISES, INC 
Opposed to LD 1003 Proposed Amendment 
An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with 
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 5, 2023  
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committees.  
 
My name is Jan Bisbee.  I am the Program Director for MERT Enterprises, Inc.  MERT Enterprises is a 
supported living provider based out of Bangor, Me.  We provide home and community support services 
to adults with intellectual disabilities and autism.  Our goal is to maximize and maintain a person’s 
ability to live as independently as possible in their own home, with their family, as well as their ability 
to be an active member of their local community.   
 
I am writing in opposition to the proposed amendment to LD 1003. I am in favor however of the bill as 
originally printed which seeks to ensure crisis services for both individuals with behavioral health 
diagnosis and individuals with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorders (ASD).  
 
The crisis system in Maine is broken for adults with ID and Autism and forcing agencies to provide 
highly specialized supports isn’t the answer.  The “no reject, no eject” policy doesn’t take into account  
the cost of providing these services.  Agencies such as MERT are currently short staffed.  We currently 
have to balance the needs of our consumers and consider their rights when choosing a house mate to 
live with.  We would be violating many federal HCBS rules setting policies in doing such. 
 
People with  intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorders (ASD) deserve access to appropriate 
and specialized services, including crisis care and support based on their individual needs.  We urge you 
to support only sections 1-4 of the proposed amendment and to consider the unintended 
consequences of adopting a “no reject, no eject policy” for the IDD service system as proposed.   
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Jan T. Bisbee 
Jan.bisbee@mertenterprises.org 

 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
To Submit Testimony, Click Here: https://www.mainelegislature.org/testimony/  
● Choose Public Hearing, then choose the Health and Human Committee and the date of the 
hearing, March 29 1pm 
● Choose the bill LD 1003 
● You can upload a file or type your testimony in the open box.   
● When filling out your name, use the “TOWN” box to enter the name of your organization. 
● Once you have provided the rest of the requested information you will check the box next to 
“I’m not a robot”  
● Click the Submit/Register button   
● You will receive a response almost immediately that your testimony has been received.  
 
