CSP ' 
liiaine Association For 
Community Service Providers 
i 
Testimony oflennifer Putnam 
Member, MACSP Board of Directors, Executive Director, Waypoint 
in Opposition to LD1003 Proposed Amendment 
An Act to increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with Intellectual 
Disabilities or Autism_ 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 29, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee.-
_ 
My name is Jennifer Putnam, l am the Executive Director of Waypoint (formerly Waban). We are located in 
southern Maine and provide services for children and adults with intellectualand developmental 
disabilities, including_a Pre-k through Grade 5 school, case management and residential services for adults. l 
am also a longstanding member of the Maine Association for Community Service Providers (MACSP) Board 
of Directors.' 
lam here representing our members in opposition to the proposed amendment to LD 1003. We are 
strongly in favor however of the bill as originally printed. 
MACSP is the statewide association of 85 agencies providing person centered and individualized 
educational, vocational, residential and community supports, as well as specialized services and care to 
several thousand of Maine’s children and adults who have either intellectual disabilities, autism spectrum 
disorder, or brain injuries, so that they may live full and meaningful lives in the community. 
As we are all aware, Crisis Services for individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities have 
followed a predictable path over the years, with providers voicing the need for additional interventions, 
hospitals frustrated that beds are taken, sometimes for months, by someone without a medical condition 
requiring hospitalization and the State acknowledging or studying the problem. The end result has been 
little or no discernible improvement in the care and support of people with the highest and most acute 
behavioral needs. 
Most recently, OADS contracted with the UNH National Center for START Services to assess Maine's crisis 
services for people with IDD and there may be some light at the end of what has been a very long tunnel. 
Changes that address the current, immediate need for crisis beds, however, have not materialized. We 
support many parts of this bill, including in fact, all of the Sections 1 through 4 which call for increased 
availability of crisis beds and direct the Department to quantify the scope of crisis calls and need 
throughout the state._'
Given that OADS currently has only eight (often fewer) crisis beds throughout Maine for people with 
intellectual disabilities and autism, it is unconscionable that any entity would seek to require residential 
group homes to accept referrals of members who could put other vulnerable residents at risk oflphysical 
harm or abuse. Forcing a provider to continue to provide residential care in a small group home to a‘ 
person 
whose severe behaviors put themselves or others in the home at risk is simply not appropriate and not an 
acceptable solution to the behavior crisis impacting hospitals in the state.I 
We are currently in the midst of a workforce crisis which shows no sign of abating even as the public health 
emergency winds down. Imagine telling a direct care worker that they will be compelled to support 
someone exhibiting violent or extremely risky behavior. it's not realistic to expect low wage workers in what 
is essentially a residential home setting to bear the brunt of Maine’s lack of safety net for people with 
severe behaviors. 
Providers in our network do not just one day decide not to care for a member with severe behaviors and' 
drop them off at the hospital. instead, there is a precipitating crisis event that has caused or threatened 
physical harm and the police and / or crisis are called to intervene. it is an emergency situation which 
requires an emergency response. As you have all heard in previous testimony last year, health care 
professionals as well as direct care workers have experienced assault and trauma due to someone's 
behavioral crisis. 
We urge you to support only sections 1-4 of this bill and to consider the unintended consequences of 
Section 5. Please vote no on any version of LD 1003 that includes this section as proposed today. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Jennifer Putnam 
.lPutnam@waypoint.org 
l\/IACSP I P.O. Box 149, Hallowell, i\/iE 04336 1 (207) 6235005 | L_aWtga.Cordesg ﬂ2meacsp.org
