  
                     Testimony of Jennifer Kinnelly, Director of Operations 
                               Opposed to LD1 003 Proposed Amendment 
An Act to increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals 
with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 5, 2023 
   
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee. 
 
My name is Jennifer Kinnelly and l am the Director of Operations for Uplift, Inc. in Gardiner, Maine.   
We provide services to adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities in the greater Kennebec 
region.   We have several licensed group homes providing residential supports to 2- 5 people in each 
home.  We also support people 24/7 in their own homes, and provide intermittent home supports to 
others.  Uplift has robust community case management service supporting an additional 170 
individuals throughout central Maine.  Uplift has been providing services to individuals since 1959. 
 
I am writing to urge you to oppose the section 5- “no reject/eject” policy proposed amendment to LD 
1003.   
 
Uplift has always tried to provide the supports and services that an individual needs.  We try to work 
with individuals and assist them to receive additional supports.  Although we have involuntarily 
discharged a few individuals, no one has ever been involuntarily discharged from our services without 
trying to work with the person and their team to receive the supports the person needs and wants.    
There are many concerns with a policy like this.  First, Maine’s crisis system is broken.  There are not 
enough supports or services to individuals with behavioral needs.  The crisis homes themselves “reject” 
people needing services as “not being a good fit.”  Second, to “force” a provider to either admit or 
continue to provide services to someone that we are not equipped to support is dangerous to the 
person, to the housemates, to the staff and to the system itself.   As a service provider, we are aware 
of our strengths and weaknesses.  We are also aware of the needs of the people we are currently 
supporting.  Third, this policy would be in direct conflict with the HCBS requirements.  People have a 
right to participate in choosing the people they live with.  People also have the right to be free from 
abuse and mistreatment.   Having an abusive housemate is a violation of these rights. 
There is a workforce crisis that is unlike anything we have experienced before.  Forcing a direct support 
employee to provide services with health and safety risks to themselves and those around them simply 
because the system is broken is not fair and not acceptable.   
 
We urge you to support only sections 1-4 of this bill and to consider the unintended consequences of 
Section 5. Please vote no on any version of LD 1003 that includes this section as proposed today.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  Please reach out with any questions you may have.  
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Jennifer Kinnelly, Uplift, Inc 
jennifer.kinnelly@upliftmaine.org 

