Fa mily of Services 
Youth Driven ~ l-arnily Centei'ed » (ionirnt.ini ’ty fo<:usecl 
LD 1003 An Act to increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals 
with intellectual Disabilities or Autism 
Representative Graham, and distinguished members of the joint standing committee on Health 
and Human Services. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 1003. l am in full agreement 
that the system is in need of immediate action, but I strongly oppose Section 5, the "No Reject, 
No Eject" clause. 
My name is Justin Gifford, and I am representing Becket Family of Services as the Executive 
Director of children's residential services. I recently surpassed my 23"‘ year with the 
organization, all of which has predominantly focused on children's residential services. The 
typical age range for youth in our mental health programs is 14-20 years old. Our largest 
program is a 14-bed facility that specializes in the treatment of problematic sexual behavior for 
adolescent males, which has been in operation for over 23 years. 
l would not categorize myself as an expert in all matters and implications of this bill; however, as 
it pertains to Section 5 (Residential Treatment) it has been my area of expertise my entire adult 
career. l agree that the system requires signiﬁcant change, but I strongly believe that we cannot 
legislate ourselves out of this very difficult situation. As a matter of fact, I believe that LD 1003 
Sec. 5 "no reject, no eject” would inadvertently worsen the availability of residential beds in the 
State if it passes. 
ln 2001’ , there were approximately 800-900 active children's residential beds available here in 
our State; currently, there is only an estimated 300 beds. Our admissions team receives several 
formal residential referrals on a weekly basis, in addition to cold calls from parents who are 
pleading for help for their children who are in a constant state of crisis. Many of these referrals 
are within our scope of care, but we do not have the capacity to serve them. 
In the past three years, we have been forced to close two of our children's residential treatment 
programs. in both circumstances, the primary factor for the closure was a lack of staff. Although 
our pay rates are competitive for the mental health ﬁeld, the turnover rate for our Children's 
Residential programs is more than double that of our other services, at over 50%. Youth care 
workers commonly experience and intervene in situations that inc|ude— constant verbal 
aggression, physical aggression, self-harm, serious property destruction, sexualized behavior, 
and sexual aggression. Although less common, my staff have also experienced physical 
aggression from makeshift weapons, that require emergency medical attention. In someof
these cases, our staff have required surgery and lengthy rehabilitation leaving them out of work 
for months. 
Unfortunately, over the last decade, the level of acuity (severe physical aggression, self-harm, 
severe property destruction, and elopement) has risen dramatically. Conversely, our community 
partners- mobile crisis, police, Department of Corrections, Emergency Departments, are not as 
accessible as they once were when a youth experiences a severe crisis situation that we cannot 
safely address; presumably because of the same factors that have impacted our programs. 
Maine lacks a critical component in its continuum of care, which is access to longer term 
psychiatric residential or psychiatric centers, which are designed to treat youth with very 
complex treatment needs. The primary reason some youth get stuck in emergency departments 
and psychiatric hospitals for months, and even years, is because their treatment needs greatly 
exceed the level of care a Maine licensed residential treatment facility can provide. Our current 
programs and their regulatory framework are not, nor were they ever intended to serve youth 
with such high levels of suicidality, physical aggression, sexual aggression, and complex medical 
conditions. Forcing programs to accept children whose safety and treatment needs cannot be 
met will lead to dire consequences. 
ln closing, I would urge each of you to reach out to people that actually do this work on a daily 
basis to better understand the strengths and limitations of children's residential services in 
Maine. A key to understanding our programs, and their limitations, requires a good 
understanding of our regulatory framework that guides the care we are able to provide. Many 
people have asked me why l\/laine cannot serve some of the higher needs youth that are getting 
”stuck" in ED's and hospitals. Although there is no simple answer to that question, the prevailing 
factor in my opinion, is the lack of a long-term psychiatric option for youth with very high needs. 
Thank you for taking the time to listen to my testimony. I would be happy to entertain any 
questions that you or your colleagues may have. 
Justin Gifford, Executive Director 
Becket Family of Services
