l\’laineHealth 
Local Health Systems 
F1‘;\l1l£l_lIl Coinilnniity 
Hcaltli Ne-l'\vorl< 
Lincolnhlcaltli 
Mainel‘-lenltli Cure At Home 
Maine Behavioral l-lealthcare 
Memorial Hospital 
Maine Medical] Center 
Mid Co:1st—Parkvle\v llealth 
NorDx 
l-‘en Buy l\-‘lcclical Center 
Southern i\"l~.iine Health Cure 
VV-Aldo County General l-lospitul 
VVcstcn1 l\/lninc llcalth 
Part of the 
l\/laincHcalth Family 
1\'lain.cHcal_tl1 /\cmuntablc 
Care Org1\ni'//ation 
Nlain e H ealth Affiliates 
l\’l;\ineGene|'ul Health 
New Englancl Rehabilitation 
l lospitul of Portluml 
St. i\/lz1ry' s Health System l\/lainel-lealth 
Testimony of Kelly Barton, MaineHealth 
In Strong Support of LD 1003, “An Act to Increase Access 
to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals 
with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism” 
Wednesday, March 29, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Kelly Barton, 
President of Maine Behavioral Healthcare, and I am here to testify in 
strong support of this legislation. 
As you have heard repeatedly this Session, Maine continues to experience 
a crisis with people with behavioral health disabilities who are not able toy 
access appropriate levels of care. The situation is particularly acute as it 
relates to children and adolescents. This Session, you have a number of 
bills that relate to one another on this topic, including Senator Black’s 
PRTF bill that you heard last Week, this bill, and Rep. Stover’s bill that 
you will hear next. 
Our intent with these bills is twofold: ﬁrst and foremost, it is to ensure that 
individuals with behavioral health diagnoses have timely access to the 
levels of care necessary to best meet their needs. To accomplish that goal, 
organizations that provide all levels of behavioral health services need 
adequate resources to safely provide care for individuals whose needs can 
be very challenging at times. Second, we need to ensure that the Maine’s 
continuum of services includes all that are necessary to meet the needs of 
our population. 
This bill is focused on two factors: providing access to crisis services, and 
speciﬁcally crisis beds, to support families and residential providers in 
meeting the needs of individuals experiencing crisis; and 
Ensuring that residential providers develop a safe discharge plan that is 
approved by the State, in which an Emergency Department cannot be 
identiﬁed as a discharge option. 
Among our continuum of services, Maine Behavioral Healthcare provides 
crisis services in seven hospital emergency departments and we operate 
twelve residential treatment facilities. Every day, the crisis teams see 
children and adults with autism and IDD who need high levels of care that 
would be much better served in settings designed to meet their needs. And 
all too often, these individuals are coming from residential treatment 
providers who refuse to take them back. 
110 Free Street ' 
Portland. l\-ll‘; 04101 Phone: ZO7—(>(;l~7OUl Fax: 207-661-7029 m:1lnel1<:\lth our
Let me be clear — We do not blame those providers. The crisis systems for children and adults 
with IDD and autism are severely broken. They lack adequate resources, and particularly crisis 
beds. Providers of residential services are left with no option but to bring people to the 
emergency department as a last resort. 
Adults with mental illness who live in residential treatment housing are less likely to get stuck in 
hospital emergency departments. I have attached a chart that shows the average lengths of stay 
for children and adults with behavioral health needs, and those who have physical health needs in 
MaineHealth EDs in 2022. The data reﬂect the challenge we face. As a society, we pay for that 
which we value, and behavioral health services have long suffered as a result. To that end, we 
do appreciate the support of the Department and the Legislature in updating MaineCare rates for 
these services. 
There is an important distinction between residential facilities for adults with mental illness and 
those for children and adults with IDD - mental health residential facilities are required to submit 
to the Department discharge plans for approval for residents of the PNMI. That policy prevents 
PNMIs from discharging residents to hospital emergency departments. Attached to my testimony 
is the MaineCare Beneﬁts Manual section on PNMIs. l’ve highlighted on page 37 the 
termination requirements for adult mental health residential facilities. 
As I mentioned earlier, MBH operates l2 PNMls for adults. So we live with this rule. 
When this rule change was proposed, we joined other providers in expressing serious concerns. 
And we readily admit that it can be frustrating and burdensome for our care team members. 
Particularly when a resident actively and volitionally fails to adhere to group rules. But the 
policy also ensures that we do not discharge any clients without a safe, appropriate discharge 
plan. Which is the intent of this legislation. 
Last year, we had a residential facility leave three adults with IDD at Maine Medical Center. One 
spent 3 months living in the ED and the other 5. Both had high levels of need, including very 
violent behaviors at times. Care team members were injured. Others quit. Both individuals were 
eventually discharged to residential facilities out of state, where they thrive today. Neither 
belonged in the hospital. Crisis beds would have been far more appropriate for these individuals, 
but were told that they were not available. 
Last month, we ﬁnally discharged an adolescent who spent three months in an ED. The 
residential facility that left him at the ED refused to take him back because he was an elopement 
risk. He did not experience a single behavioral outburst during the three months he was with us. 
These situations are not ok. They are detrimental for the patients ’ health and well-being. They tie 
up needed emergency room space at a time when EDs often have to go on diversion due to 
capacity challenges. They take a huge emotional toll on the care team members. 
This bill would take an important step in providing the resources necessary to support residential 
facilities when their clients experience crises. And it would further support the clients by 
ensuring that, when they are not a good ﬁt for the milieu of the residence, they are discharged to 
an appropriate and safe option.
