March 28, 2023 
 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony in Support of  LD # 1003 An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health 
Services for Children and Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism. 
Senator Baldacci Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee,  
My name is Kile Pelletier and I live in Fort Kent. I am a self-advocate and an employee of 
Speaking Up For Us, Maine’s Self-Advocacy Network. I am here today in support of LD 1003.  
In Maine we have a problem with people with disabilities going to the emergency room for 
mental health treatment and then getting kicked out of their home and being stuck in the ER for a 
long time. I feel that people with disabilities should be able to go home where they live after 
being the ER and they should not be kicked out of shared living because of their mental health. 
People who do not have a disability can go home right after being in the ER for the same 
reasons. Why is it different for people with disabilities when they also pay rent at their group 
homes. We should have safe places to live and not worry about getting kicked out.  
This bill is very important to me because I do not want to see people with disabilities be worried 
that if they go to the ER for their mental health that they will be kicked out of their place to live. 
People with disabilities are people, not animals. We pay bills, we pay rent so stop treating us 
differently than people without disabilities. We should be able to go back to the place we call 
home or to another safe place in a timely manner.  
Passing this bill will help me and others who have to go to the ER for mental health to find a 
secure place to live and get the crisis services they need when they leave an ER. People will be 
able to know where there stuff is and have a place to call home when they leave the ER.  
If this bill is not passed then we will continue to see people stuck in the ER and getting kicked 
out of their homes and having nowhere to go back to. I feel like if this bill doesn’t get passed we 
will be falling backwards not moving forward. Not knowing where you are going to live after a 
crisis can cause a lot of anxiety about where someone is going to live, what happens to their 
stuff, and can add to the crisis. This is why I think we should keep space and rooms open for 
people with disabilities to not be staying too long in the ER.  
I would like to say thank you for your time to the Health and Human Services Committee 
members to take the time and list to my testimony. Please accept my testimony as a person who 
has lived experience of what t is like to have a disability. A statewide system for crisis very 
important to have these services available to those who are in crisis.  
Sincerely,  
Kile Pelletier 
Fort Kent, ME  
kpelletier@sufumaine.org  
