 
 
 
April 3 , 2023  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers , and honorable members of the  Joint Standing Committee on  
Healt h and Human Services , my name is Kristin Overton and I am the Executive Director of SKILLS, 
Inc.  SKILLS is a non -profit organization in central Maine, serving people with intellectual and 
developmental  disabilities  for more than 60 years.  SKILLS provides more than 110 people with 24/7 
residential support and day programming  under Sections 21, 29, and 97 -F.  We have 9 waiver -funded 
group homes, 4 PNMIs, 3 community support programs, and a number of other one -on-one support 
services.  We are strongly  opposed to  LD 1003 : An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services 
for Children and Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism  due to the amended Section 5 
language.  
The language added  reads , “Section 5 – Direct the Department of Health and Human Services to adopt 
rules to require written approval from the Department of Health and Human Services to terminate care 
or decline referrals by residential facilities providing children behavioral health services and residential 
facilities for members with Intellect ual Disabilities or Autism Spectrum Disorder. This bill will prohibit 
the department from approving a discharge plan to a hospital emergency department.  
The language in the bill does not specify what type of residential facilities for people with Intellect ual 
and Developmental Disabilities and Autism (I/DD) is incl uded.  Providers of Section 21 Home Support 
– Per Diem services, which refer to agency -owned waiver homes, also known as group homes, are non -
medical facilities and do not have the clinicians on staff to address significant health and medical or 
crisis -level behavioral issues, nor are these associated costs included in the reimbursement rate.  Private 
Non-Medical Institutions ( PNMIs ) between Appendices  in Section 97  are vastly differ ent, are allowed 
different staff, and are paid differently.  There are only 12 PNMIs  that serve adults with I /DD in the 
entire state , while there are 128 which serve behavioral health; often with reimbursement rates doubled 
or tripled those seen i n Section  97- Appendix F (I /DD).   
It is critical that the distinction between support and treatment be understood.  Supporters of the bill state 
that people with I /DD would be better served by “residential treatment facilities that are better able to 
serve the needs.”  Crisis  settin gs exist in such small numbers, with only 8 crisis beds for adults with 
I/DD for the more than 6,000 people who receive services.  This m eans that people are being returned to 
a home setting that is NOT equipped to provide the treatment or support services necessary. According 
to statistics released by OADS, t he vast majority of residential providers for adults with I /DD are shared 
living p roviders with minimal training .  The next largest group of residential settings are  home support 
providers who have 2 -6 people being suppor ted by Direct Support Professionals  (DSPs) who are not 
equipped to handle significant medical or behavioral needs.   
Residential services, defined as home support -agency per diem under the Section 21 Mainecare 
Regulations, define the services provided at residential homes  as: Kristin Overton, 
Chesterville, ME  
 
 
 
“individually tailored Direct Support  that assists Members with acquiring, retaining, and/or imp roving 
skills related to living in the community. The agency owned or controlled setting is integrated in and 
facilitates the Member’s full access to the greater community including opportunities to seek employment 
and work in competitive, integrated setti ngs; engage in community life, control personal resources, and 
receive services in the community like individuals without disabilities. These supports include adaptive 
skill development, assistance with Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) and Instrumental Activities of Daily 
Living (IADL), community inclusion, transportation, and social and leisure skill development.  These 
supports  also include protective oversight and supervision. Services are developed in accordance with the 
needs of the Member and includ e supports to foster independence and encourage development of a full 
life in the community, based upon what is important to and for the Member, as documented in their 
Person -Centered Service Plan (PCSP). Individual initiative, autonomy, and independence i n making life 
choices, including but not limited to daily activities, physical environment, and with whom to interact are 
optimized and not regimented. Individual choice regarding services and support, and who provides them, 
is facilitated.  
 There must be  at least one staff person in the same setting as Members receiving services at all times 
(24/7) that is able to respond immediately to the requests/needs for assistance from the Members in the 
setting.  The Department reimburses for the delivery of a servi ce to a Member and that assumes that the 
provider is awake.  
 Members cannot be made to attend a day program (any other service or support other than Home Support) 
if they choose to stay home, would prefer to come home after a job or doctor’s appointment in  the middle 
of the day, if they are ill, or otherwise choose to remain at home.  
 Payments are not made for room and board, the cost of facility maintenance, upkeep, or improvement. 
The cost of transportation is included in the residential habilitation rate .” 
Section 21 reimbursement methodology does not include any clinical staff; i.e., no social workers, 
behavioral health staff, nurses, etc.  These residential services are providing support for the waiver 
members to remain as independent as possible  in a house -sharing environment.  They are far from 
“treatment facilities.”  
We do favor the bill as originally printed which seeks to ensure crisis services for people with  
intellectual disabilities. A “no reject, no eject policy,” as proposed in the amen dment, will not fix the 
state’s crisis system nor guarantee the level of care and clinical services for adults with high behavioral 
needs. It assumes that providers are currently able to support people with complex behaviors that may 
put themselves and oth ers at risk which is a fallacy due to the workforce crisis coupled with residential 
rates which are far too low to provide the more individualized support needed for people with high 
needs.   Unfortunately, due to the culmin ation of these two factors, SKILL S has stopped accepting new 
people with challenging behaviors/high behavioral needs because the rate does not support the level of 
care and therefore  we cannot pay our staff enough to entice enough people to enter this workforce in 
order to meet the needs of individuals with more challenging behaviors .  We are certainly not the only 
provider who is experiencing it.  We have heard from many other MACSP members who are in the 
 
 
 
same situation.  Unfortunately, the lack of individualized care available, due to de creased staff 
availability and attention, means increased crisis situations.    
A “no reject, no eject  policy ” would be in direct violation of the Home and Community -Based Settings 
Rule, which was just enacted in Maine last year.  The Home and Community -Based Settings Rule is a 
federal rule under Medicaid law.  One of the tenets of the Home and Community -Based Settings Rule is 
that people living in residential facilities be afforded their choice of roommates.  By eliminating the 
ability to decline referrals, LD 1003 would force I /DD providers to be out of compliance with this 
federal mandate and would not provide the ability for the people already living in a residential facility to 
decide with whom they live .   
People with intellect ual disabilities or autism spectrum disorders deserve access to appropriate and 
specialized services, including crisis care and support based on their individual needs.   We urge you to 
support only sections 1 -4 of the proposed amendment and to consider the  unintended consequences of 
adopting a “no reject, no eject policy” for the I /DD service system as proposed.   
I thank  the committee for their consideration and am glad to answer any questions that may arise from 
this testimony.        
 
 
 
