04/12/2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am Lisa Morgan, consultant and advocate for crisis 
supports for autistic people.  
I strongly support LD 1003, “An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for 
Children and Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism.”, although I do not 
support the amendment that states, “no reject – no eject”. 
As the founder and co-chair of the Autism and Suicide committee of the American Association 
of Suicidology, I have developed several autism specific resources and toolkits being used in 
over 200 crisis centers across the nation. The Crisis Support for the Autism Community Toolkit 
is also being used by professionals, family, and friends of autistic people in crisis. The Warning 
Signs of Suicide – Considerations for the Autism Community resource takes the warning signs of 
the general public and explains considerations to take when supporting autistic people.  
I am a co-lead on the Clinician Training Team of PCORI’s 9-million-dollar award to Brenna 
Maddox at UNC Chapel Hill, which is comparing two autism specific safety plan interventions 
for autistic people between the ages of 15 and 24. 
I have presented worldwide about crisis supports and suicide prevention for autistic people. I was 
invited to be the Guest Speaker at the first ever autism and suicide conference in Australia, 
hosted by LaTrobe University. I also attended the Roundtable discussion that followed the 
conference and published a policy brief that was disseminated to governments all over the world. 
I have presented at Stanford University, Drexel, Duke University, INSAR (International Society 
of Autism Research), Hospice Foundation of America, State agencies, school districts, and in 
several countries.  
I put together an international team of subject matter experts consisting of researchers, clinicians, 
and autistic people to develop a new resource of a proposed set of warning signs of suicide for 
autistic people. The resource includes 10 proposed warning signs of suicide based on research 
findings, scenarios depicting the behaviors and presentations of autistic people exhibiting each 
warning sign, relevant research, additional research, and a page pull-out to use in real time. 
I train professionals on the experience of autistic adults in crisis. I directly support autistic people 
in crisis. As an autistic adult, I understand first-hand what it’s like to be in a crisis and be 
misunderstood and even unintentionally harmed by the well-meaning professionals who are 
trying to support me. Let me be clear – unintentional harm is still harm. Autistic adults in crisis 
may have slow processing speeds due to high anxiety, a regression of skills, including the ability 
to communicate their needs, as well as both emotional and sensory dysregulation. Autistic adults 
need access to behavioral health services that are strengths-based, autism specific, and sensory 
friendly to even begin to provide support. 
If there are not enough support people at places the children and individuals are sent to, the lack 
of access to behavioral health services will remain the same.  
As well, unintentional harm will greatly increase. Unintentional harm is experienced by autistic 
children and adults when the support people do not understand their needs in communication, 
sensory challenges, literal thought process, varied processing speeds, food sensitivities, and 
adherence to routine. 
The need is great for autistic people to have access to behavioral help that is truly supportive, but 
the need will be even greater if the answer compounds the problem. 
I urge you to support the legislation before you today, minus the amendment, because the current 
system is not acceptable. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Lisa Morgan M.Ed. CAS 
lisamorganconsulting@gmail.com  
www.autismcrisissupport.com  
 
 
