"' 
Officers “' 
Dave Mccluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1* Vice-President 
Day One' 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"“ Vice- 
President 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
Kara Hay, Secretary ‘ 
Penquis CAP inc.H 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"’ Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational Institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, lnc.-_ 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Sewing Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties1 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health 8: Counseling 
con Health“ 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
TriCounty Mental Health Services 
Wellspring, inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Senrices, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's communiqy behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
. .. 
A Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 1003D 
"An Act tolncrease Access to Behavioral Health Services for' Children and 
Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism"A
' 
Sponsored by Representative Anne Graham
- 
_\ y March 29, 2023 " ' 
Good afternoon Senator Baldaccl, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members 
of the Health and Human Services Committees. My name is Maiory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine's communitybased mental health and substanceuse treatment providers, 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance 
advocates for theimplementationofysound policies ande _vidence~based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
5V5Yem- _ _. 
_- 
.- 
_ _ T‘ 
On behalf of the Alliance, l am here today to speak to LD 1003, "An Act to Increase 
Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with Intellectual 
Disabilities or Autism." l am speaking in the category of Neither For Nor Against this 
bill, but truly l wish there was a category of both For and Against this bill. This 
proposal has many sections that we would support as much needed additions to 
the continuum of care. There are however, several aspects that are of grave 
concern to providers of behavioral health services.. .
_ 
g. 
.
g 
The directives to the department to ensure that children withbehavioral health 
diagnoses or intellectual disabilities do not stay in _a hospitalgemergency .-T 
department "for more than 24 hours after the person has met the medical criteria 
for safe discharge" is laudable. We do not want -to see youth continue to be stuck in 
our E.D.s as we are seeing now. 1- 
The directive to the department to establish a statewide system of crisis services to 
meet the needs of children who require behavioral health sen/ices or who have 
intellectual disabilities or autism, including _these crisis beds in residential facilities, 
as well as crisis outreach, assessment and stabilization is also laudable, andvery 
needed in Maine. We do not have a functional expansive crisis system for youth. 
The directive to the department to establish metrics to track access to and the use 
of this new crisis system, as well as provide a publicly accessible website showing 
the data regarding length of hospital stays, use of crisis beds, unmetneeds and wait 
times is also laudable, and again, very needed. 
However, this document does not yet have a fiscal note, and I am sure it will be 
quite large. The department is in the process of updating its crisis system, but l do 
not think it is planning such an expansive system as this calls for. l agree that this 
would be the best model, but it will likely cost more than is already budgeted. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "’ Phone 207.621.8118 " Fax 207.621.8362 " theAllianceMaine.org_
Also, to raise the reimbursement rate to residential facilities to support the staffing needed for more complex cases, and to financially support them in creating crisis beds within the facility, will be very expensive. TT 
The final section which is what the department has been calling a "no eject, no reject policy" within the adult residential mental health rules, is of grave concern. lt is proving to be problematic within the adult residential services realm and would be even more problematic within children's residential services. 
When a referral is declined by _a residential facility, it is because the child or adult does not meet the admission criteria of the program, or their needs rise to a level of more complexity and staffing than the facility can offer. it is not because they arbitrarily decide that theyjust don't want to deal with "that client" , or that they are seeking ”easy to handle" clients. This is one of those urban myths. 
Intake and discharge are guided by clinically based policies that seek to maintain the safety and therapeutic needs of all of the residents of a facility.V 
If the department mandates that facilities take a client regardless of the facilities ’ capacity to safely care for that client," they are putting that child and the other children in the facilityat risk of harm, as well as the staff. We have seen this within the adult residential system already. 
The fiscal note for this bill needs to be carefully assessed and supported or you will cause havoc within children's residential services. There must be sufficient funding included to create new levels of reimbursement for residential facilities to create and staff higher levels of need. There must be sufﬁcient funding to build out a more comprehensive crisis system. And there must be sufficient funding to retroﬁt some facilities so that they can offer some secure crisis beds to meet the intensive needs that clients may have.' 
Too often a bill like this will get great support, a unanimous Ought to Pass from the committee, unanimous support in House and Senate, and then end up on the appropriations table only to have its funding stripped and the dictate to the department to enact the planning and the rule for the ”no eject,’no reject policy"iwith no additional funds. We have all seen this happen. 
Without assuring this fiscal note is sound and sufﬁcient for all of these new services and mandates, you will be adding a ”no eject, no reject policy" rule that will lead to more residential closures and danger to many children. 
Please think long and hard, and possibly strip out the ﬁnal section, before you vote Ought to Pass on this bill. Thank you for your attention to these concerns.V 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAl|ianceM:iim= nrn
