 
 
10 Speirs Street, Westbrook, ME 04092     207.879.1140     beingcreativeworks.org 
 
 
 Opposed to LD 1003 Proposed Amendment 
An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with  
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 29th, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Services Committees.  
 
My name is Matt Hickey, Chief Executive Officer, for Creative Works. Creative Works is a non-
profit founded in 1967. We serve more than 500 individuals with disabilities, and our mission is to 
create communities of inclusion.  
 
I am writing in opposition to the proposed amendment to LD 1003. I am in favor however of the 
bill as originally printed which seeks to ensure crisis services for both individuals with behavioral 
health diagnosis and individuals with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorders.  
 
Creative Works operates 22 group homes for individuals with intellectual disabilities and autism 
spectrum disorder. Currently, we serve 50 individuals in these settings. Several individuals require 
positive supports with challenging behavior. Our experience with the current crisis system has 
been inconsistent, with limited options.  A “no reject, no eject” policy as proposed in the 
amendment will not strengthen the crisis system nor guarantee the level of care for adults with 
behavioral needs. Not every Creative Works staff is trained or has the expertise to serve those 
with high behavioral needs, and we have adults of all ages with different levels of need in our 
homes. The proposed amendment could create safety issues for those we currently serve if 
mandated to accept referrals into homes where the appropriate levels of staffing, training, and 
expertise were not present. In addition, the workforce crisis further complicates our ability to 
accept referrals. Again, the “no reject, no eject” policy as proposed in the amendment could force 
providers to close or consolidate programs rather than accept referrals and create potentially 
unsafe situations. 
 
 
People with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorders deserve access to appropriate 
and specialized services, including crisis care and support based on their individual needs.  We 
urge you to support only sections 1-4 of the proposed amendment and to consider the 
unintended consequences of adopting a “no reject, no eject policy” for the IDD service system as 
proposed.   
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. Please reach out with any questions you may have.  
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Matt Hickey 
mhickey@beingcreativeworks.org  
 
 
 
10 Speirs Street, Westbrook, ME 04092     207.879.1140     beingcreativeworks.org 
 
 
 
