526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207 -480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
  
 
March 29, 2023  
 
Testimony in Support  of LD 1003 , An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for 
Children and Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism . 
 
Senator Bald acci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Nancy Cronin , and I am the Executive Director  of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities Council.1  The Council mostly supports this bill.  We a gree that people with 
Developmental Disabilities (DD)  should never be stu ck in em ergency departments.  We also 
agree that current cris is system  is not meeting the needs .  We hear regularl y about families 
urged to call cris is only for those services to not be available , quickly, in the area.  If cris is 
responders cannot res pond rapidly to an urgent situ ation , what is the poi nt?  Given that, w e 
strongly support the idea of a more robust mobile cris is unit .   
  
In addition , MDDC requests that language is added to the bi ll that re quires responders of cris es 
to have the requirement of ongoing training and technical assistance regarding commun ication 
and de -escalation methods specifically for people with DD , especially people with DD who have 
minimal verbal lang uage.  To o often we hear about cris is responders  utilizing talking techniques 
 
1 Councils on Developmental Disabilities were cr eated through the Developmental Disabilities 
Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD Council has been advocating with 
and for individuals with developmental disabilities for over  50 years.  The DD Council is a 
federally funded, inde pendent organization with members from across the state, including 
persons with disabilities, family members, and representatives of public and private agencies 
which provide services and/or funding for services for individuals with developmental 
disabilit ies.  As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, capacity building and 
systemic change activities, with the goal that individuals with developmental and other 
disabilities of all ages are fully included, integrated,  and involved in their comm unities and the 
decisions impacting their lives.   
 
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council  
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207 -480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
 with the intent to deescalate .  These can be highly i neffective for some people with DD, in fact 
it can make the situation worse.   
 
MDDC  struggled with whether  to support this bill or testify neither for nor against.  We decided 
to support this bill , at this time , because of how brok en our system seems to be.  So many 
children are on waitlists not getting the treatment that they need.  This is pushing  these 
children and fa milies into crises.  For some adults, lack of services is also the problem driving 
the increased need  for cr isis services. It is access  to needed services  that is driving the 
emergency.   MDDC is concerned that when the solution to a n access  problem is  creating more 
crisis  beds, then while the  beds may  be fill ed, the real problem will not be addressed.    This just 
creates additional cris es.   
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide input .  
 
 
 
 
 

