Paul Dann
Child and Family Provider Network of Maine
LD 1003
Testimony of Paul L. Dann, PhD , President Child and Family Provider Network
LD 1003   An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and 
Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism 
Senator Baldlacci, Representative Meyer, Representative Graham and members of the
Joint Committee on Health and Human Services.  By way of introduction, my name is
Paul L. Dann, PhD.  I’m the Executive Director of NFI North a behavioral health 
organization that provides services across the life continuum.  I am also the President 
of the Child and Family Provider Network.  The Child and Family Provider Network 
is an association whose mission it is to improve the quality of life for all children, 
youth and families here in Maine.  The 14 organizations that comprise the Child and 
Family Provider Network represent the majority of the children’s residential and 
children’s service providers within the state of Maine.  The association is well 
respected and recognized for the depth and breadth of the services the collective 
membership provides for children and families across the State.
I’m here to speak on behalf of the Child and Family Provider Network’s membership 
to express our opposition to the proposed amendment to LD 1003.  Specifically, 
section 5, that, and I quote, “Direct the Department of Health and Human Services to 
adopt rules to require written approval from the Department of Health and Human 
Services to terminate care or decline referrals by any residential facility providing 
child behavioral health services, and residential facilities for members with 
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism Spectrum Disorder”.  In a common terms section 5 
of the proposed amendment to LD 1003 creates what is called a “no eject/no reject” 
rule for all children’s residential services as well as facilities serving individuals with 
Intellectual Disabilities or autism spectrum disorder.
While a “no eject/no reject” policy sounds inviting, like a simple step to address the 
challenges faced by having children stuck in hospitals or within hospital emergency 
rooms, the truth is that this rule will only compound the issues facing the children’s 
system of care.
It’s important to understand that each residential placement is licensed and accredited.
Because of licensing and accreditation standards each organization must develop 
extensive practices and policies to ensure that the rules, regulations, the clinical 
practice, and standards of care are met.  These policies include strict criteria that 
identify the intended population to be served, the scope and breadth of clinical 
services provided, intake procedures, and discharge policies.  At all times each service
must work within the scope of their licensed and accredited practice.  A “no eject/no 
reject” rule would disregard the requirements set forth within the licensing statutes as 
well as the organization’s accreditation standards and place the organization at great 
administrative and clinical risk. 
In addition to meeting licensing and accreditation requirements each residential 
service must, by statute, adhere to the State’s Rights of Recipients.  Among the five 
basic rights each individual who receives services has the right to a humane 
psychological and physical environment within, the facility or program. Recipients 
have the right to be treated with courtesy and dignity and Recipients shall not be 
incapacitated nor denied any right, benefit, privilege, franchise, license, authority or 
capacity of whatever nature that they would otherwise have, simply due to their status
as recipients of mental health services (DHHS, Right of Recipients)
Creating a “no reject/no eject” rule will create situations that will directly impinge on 
the basic rights of recipients of mental health services.  
Let me provide you with an example that will help illuminate the impracticality of 
instituting a “no eject/no reject” policy as contemplated in section 5 of the proposed 
amendment to LD 1003.   In this example the Department has a need to place a child 
in a residential treatment program and this child exhibits extremely aggressive 
sexualized behavior due to significant sexual abuse.  This child regularly assaults 
other children in such a serious way as to cause injury and trauma to the children 
around them.  With the “no eject/no reject” rule the Department will have the 
authority to simply place the child in the identified residential program.
Now, in this example, the residential program will be forced to accept the child, even 
though they don’t have expertise in working with sexually reactive youth, have only 
one bedroom available and bedroom that is available is a double, shared with another 
child.  In this instance the program is forced to violate their own policy related to the 
type of children served.  In addition, they will be acting outside of their policies as 
determined by their license and accreditation and are placed in a position of practicing
outside of their clinical expertise.  In addition, the roommate in this example will not 
only have their basic rights of recipients of mental health services violated but will 
also be further traumatized as a result of the behavior exhibited by the child that the 
program was forced to accept. 
Now one could take the stance that this example is unrealistic, or certainly wouldn’t 
happen.  I can assure you that the children’s system is already dealing with instances 
of this nature, the only difference is that residential services, as of this writing, are not
subject to a “no eject/no reject” rule. In fact I’m quite sure you’ll hear testimony from 
our membership of actual situation that will illuminate just how inappropriate a “no 
eject/no reject” rule would be. 
Today the children’s residential service system for behavioral health is already under 
extreme pressure.  The workforce challenge continues unabated, costs continue to rise
and the environment for operating these critical services continues to be ever more 
challenging.  In the last few years multiple organizations have decided to stop 
providing these essential services.  Leaving us with fewer residential options for 
Maine’s children and youth.  Children and Youth continue to be sent out of state for 
service delivery or find themselves on waiting lists or in emergency room awaiting 
service delivery.  Placing a “no eject/no reject” rule in the mix will certainly be the 
last straw for many providers of these critical services.  
I want to be clear that I’ve heard directly from our membership that if this becomes 
law and rules are established that create a “no eject/no reject” requirement that they 
will have to make the tough decision to close their residential services.   
The intent of LD 1003 without the section 5 amendment is an important legislative act
that can help the system of care across the State of Maine.  Without the amendment 
the Child and Family Provider Network support the proposed law and see the value of
ensure appropriate crisis and respite services.  Section 5 though of the proposed 
amendment, if approved, will have a catastrophic effect on residential services for 
children and for facilities serving individuals with Intellectual Disabilities or autism 
spectrum disorder.  As a result the membership of the Child and Family Provider 
Network urges the Committee to reject section 5 of the proposed amendment. 
Thank you for taking the time to consider my testimony.  I’d be happy to provide 
answer any questions or provide additional input upon request. 
Yours truly, 
Paul L. Dann, PhD
President
Child and Family Provider Network
