 
3 Industrial Parkway , Suite 1  - Brunswick, Maine 04011  
Ph. 207 725 4371 - Fax 207 725 1416 - Toll Free 877 653 4760  
www.independenceassociation.org  
 
 
TESTIMONY  OF RAY  NAGEL,  EXECUTIVE  DIRECTOR  OF INDEPENDNCE  
ASSOCIATION,  BRUNSWICK,  MAINE  
 
IN OPPOSITION  TO LD 1003  AN ACT  TO INCREASE  BEHAVIORAL  HEALTH  
SERVICES  FOR  CHILDREN  AND  INDIVIDUALS  WITH  INTELLECTUAL  
DISABILITIES  OR AUTISM  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
MARCH 29, 2023  
 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members 
of the Health and Human Services Committee.  
 
I am Ray N agel, the Executive Director of Independence Association, a non -profit 
organization that serves children and adults with Intellectual Disabilities and 
Autism since 1966.  I am testifying against this proposed bill because of the 
language that was added as Section V .  
 
I would have testified in favor of LD 1003 but for the addition of Section V, the 
“no reject, no eject” addendum to  the bill.   
 
No-Reject  
 
The “no reject” portion of this bill directly violates the tenets of the Home and 
Community Based “Global Rules ” recently adopted by OMS  in 2021 .  The Global 
Rules clearly indicate that residents within any group home have input as to who 
they feel would b e a “good fit” and become a housemate.  Moreover, the dynamics 
of any group home are unique to that home. Not every group home can support  
every person referred. The mix of residents within any given group home impacts  
the ability of the provider to meet t he unique needs of any referral.  Providers 
know who they can support, and along with the residents in that home, should be 
the ones who determine who is eligible for admission.   
 
No-Eject  
 
The “no eject” portion of the bill fails to recognize the ability  of the provider to 
actually support an individual who they admitted to the hospital. No provider  
2022 - 2023  
OFFICERS  
 
David Cowing  
Chairperson  
Eric Uhl  
Vice Chairperson  
Richard Estabrook  
Secretary  
Charles Frizzle  
Treasurer  
 
DIRECTORS  
          Ed Blanchard  
Deborah Dionne  
Vicki Durrell  
David Eldridge  
Kenneth Faulkner  
John Gagnon  
Thomas Handel  
Toni Kemmerle  
       Melissa Knutson  
Hank Pfeifle  
     Kathy Rickards  
 
Executive Director  
Ray Nagel  
 
Mission:   To assist  
adults and children  
with disabilities in  
obtaining full and  
inclusive lives in 
their chosen 
communities.  
 
 
3 Industrial Parkway , Suite 1  - Brunswick, Maine 04011  
Ph. 207 725 4371 - Fax 207 725 1416 - Toll Free 877 653 4760  
www.independenceassociation.org  
wants to discharge an individual previously supported. Each day that individual is out, is a day the 
provider is not paid.  The primary reason for a discharge is because the provider cannot support the 
individual to the level required by the Person -Centered  Plan.  There are many reasons for an 
inability to support a person they once agreed to support.  Individuals who are aging in place often 
exhibit symptoms as sociated with dementia to include physical aggression . Aging residents 
typically require full support of the individual’s activities of daily living , to include lifting, 
transitioning, and other labor -intensive tasks.    
 
Despite the nation emerging out of the public health emergency, the staffing crisis is still in effect. 
My agency has maintained a 25 -35% staffing shortage since before the pandemic. Complex 
residents stress a system already stressed by severe personnel shortages .  Lastly, DHHS does not 
have a safety net in place to assist providers with individual s who have complex behavioral needs.  
 
Failure of a Crisis System  
 
Over the last 12 years , the crisis system in Maine has continued to deteriorate to the point that it is 
considered a ‘non -entity’.  Currently, with 8 -crisis beds in a system that serves over 6,000 
individuals, providers have given up contacting Crisis Services because they are ineffective  and 
largely unresponsive .  Forcing a staff member to work with an individual  who could possibly 
injure them is unwise if not dangerous.  Licensed and unlicensed group homes supporting adults 
with Intellectual and developmental disabilities cannot be differentiated from any other home 
within any residential a rea.  There are no holding areas, or safe spaces, nor do we can use four-
point mechanical restraints , or a chemical restraint like a hospital.  
 
I fully understand why Maine hospitals would endorse this bill, but the ability of providers to 
accept or disch arge individuals without input is dangerous to both the individual and the staff.  
Maine needs to adopt a strong system -wide approach to addressing the needs of all people served 
by OADS.   
 
I urge you not to pass this bill.  
 
 
Ray Nagel, MBA  
Executive Dir ector  
rnagel@iaofmaine.org  
207.504.5817  
 
