 
 Testimony of Todd Goodwin, CEO, John F. Murphy Homes, Inc. 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testifying In Opposition To 
LD1003 Proposed Amendment  
An Act to Increase Access to Behavioral Health Services for Children and Individuals with 
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism    
March 29, 2023 
 
 Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Todd Goodwin. I serve as CEO of John F. Murphy 
Homes, Inc., a large provider of disability services based in Auburn, Maine. We serve both 
children and adults.  
  
 I am testifying in opposition to the proposed amendment to LD1003. However, I do 
support the bill as originally printed. My remaining comments speak to my opposition to the 
amendment. My comments also specifically contemplate settings serving adults with 
intellectual disabilities or autism. 
 
 I have reviewed testimony provided on behalf of DHHS by OCFS Director Dr. Todd 
Landry. I share his concerns with a range of very real practical matters that must be fully vetted 
and understood across stakeholders for a statutory “no reject, no eject” policy to help improve 
the system as opposed to introducing more chaos and confusion. 
 
 Dr. Landry’s reference to definitional issues is critically important. I offer two examples 
to illustrate the point.  
  
 First, the amendment language does not define the term “residential facilities.” We all 
have a general idea of what this may mean, but there are a variety of terms in the larger lexicon 
that may or may not be applicable. Does “residential facility” mean every single type of setting 
that offers every permutation of service available in the system? If not, why not? Etc. This alone 
is a large variable to consider. 
 
 Second, the amendment language is not specific as to the set of circumstances 
governing the “no reject” portion of “no eject, no reject.” Would this bill prohibit a provider 
from rejecting all referrals or just referrals from a hospital? If the former, the State’s current 
design of the service referral process has no real mechanism to identify a rejection. If the latter, 
are rejections prohibited only under a circumstance where a hospital is clearing a member for 
return to the place from where they came or are rejections prohibited for any provider to 
whom a hospital reaches out regardless of where the member came from? 
 
 I would also note the inherent contradiction between principles embedded in the 
State’s recently adopted Global HCBS Waiver Person-Centered Planning and Settings Rule (the 
“Global Rule”) and the notion of a “no eject, no reject” policy for adults with intellectual 
disabilities or autism. In short, the Global Rule requires that service recipients in group home 
 
 settings have meaningful involvement in choice of roommates. If two people in a three-person 
group home prefer not to have a given third person move in owing to real or perceived clinical 
contraindications, is their involvement per the Global Rule simply a farce if the provider needs 
written permission from DHHS to deny a referral?  
 
 Lastly, it is common knowledge that the State’s crisis service system for adults with 
intellectual disabilities or autism is woefully inadequate and broken. Providers bear this brunt 
every day, even before faced with the difficulty of responding to highly risky behavior that 
necessitates removal from a setting. Adding a “no eject, no reject” policy absent substantive 
resource infusion is good in theory, disastrous in practice.    
 
 Please vote no on this amendment. I would be happy to address any questions you may 
have.   
 
  
 
 Respectfully submitted, 
 Todd Goodwin 
 todd.goodwin@jfmh.org  
 
