LD 1656—Ought to Pass  
An Act to Allow Student Representation Within the Governance of the University of Maine 
System 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
April 23, 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs, greetings. My name is Benjamin Doherty and I am a current 
third-year undergraduate at the University of Maine. I urge you to support LD 1656 to increase 
the student voice within the University of Maine System Board of Trustees. While I am the 
current Board of Trustees Representative of the University of Maine Student Government, my 
views are my own and do not reflect that of any organization or student group at the University.  
 
I have spent my entire college career seeking to better student’s lives and campus 
experiences.  I first attended Central Maine Community College and was elected the student 
body president there.  When COVID-19 swept through Maine, I moved the usual on campus 
activity budget into a food insecurity fund to help students out of work.  I transferred to the 
University of Maine during the pandemic and joined the student government almost 
immediately.  The professionalism of the organization instantly impressed me.  Everyday I strive 
to represent students as part of that organization and I wish I could do more.   
 
The students of the University of Maine system are more than qualified to hold voting 
roles on the Board of Trustees.  They are hard working, forward thinking, and sympathetic to the 
situations of other students.  The current voting student on the Board of Trustees is not enough.  
Students from the entire system deserve representation, from each campus, including 
undergraduate and graduate, all across the state.  Students now pay a significant portion of the 
system’s operating budget and they deserve a voice in how that money is spent and directed.  
Students deserve a vote, a voice, and seat at the table.   
 
I am happy that I attend the University of Maine, and I hope that you will support LD 
1656 to ensure that all students in the University of Maine System get a voice and a seat at the 
table. 
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin Doherty 
Old Town, ME 
University of Maine Class of 2024      
