LD 1656—Ought to Pass 
An Act to Allow Student Representation Within the Governance of the University of Maine System 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
April 23, 2023 
Hello, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the distinguished Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs. My name is Keegan Tripp, and I am currently a Political Science student at the 
University of Maine. And I am Julian Ober, and I am also a Political Science student at the University of 
Maine. We are here in support of LD 1656 to allow the addition of student voice within the University of 
Maine System Board of Trustees, and we urge you to support this initiative as well. 
When it comes to making decisions on behalf of a body, the individuals making those decisions 
should reﬂect that body. When the UMaine System Board of Trustees votes on key issues such as budgets, 
system policy, and all other topics that impact the students of the system, they are missing the ﬁrst hand 
experience of what it is like to be a student attending campus today. While our current student 
representatives can attend every other meeting the BOT holds, they lack a true voice at the table to 
express their concerns. This creates a disconnect between system leadership and the bodies they serve. 
Allowing for us students to have a say in our education is important as we are the largest stakeholder in 
terms of we contribute almost half of the UMS budget through tuition and fees. Originally, when the BOT 
was established, the state covered all tuition. Now we make up over 40% of the budget, which is more 
than the state contribution, and yet we still have almost zero say in how our money is spent. 
We’ve seen many cases of student initiative across the system in the forms of movements like 
Divest UMS, the student governments at each institution, and student organizing on community and state 
issues such as this. We are confident as both students of the University of Maine Orono and campus 
leaders that student motivation for representing their campus will be met with enthusiasm. Students have 
proven time and time again that they are ready to step up to the plate, if only you’d give them the chance 
to do so. Trust should go both ways, and the only way to achieve that is for the state to trust it’s students 
to help in key decisions and change our public system for the better. 
We are both extremely grateful to be students of the University of Maine System, and we hope that 
you will take our support for LD 1656 and vote to increase the representation on the UMS Board of 
Trustees. 
Sincerely, 
/h/Ll/iﬂﬁ/\ (\&Jl)\/Q)(i 
Keegan Tripp and Julian Ober 
Orono, Me 
University of Maine Students
