Lucca  Hamina
Orono
LD 1656
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, an opportunity for the 
State of Maine and the Unversity of Maine system has come up in this legislature. I 
am of course referring to LD 1656, An Act to Allow Student Governance within the 
University of Maine System. This Act would add a voting student member to the 
Board of Trustees for each campus and school that is a part of the University of 
Maine system in order to ensure that the voice and quality of life are taken into 
account. In the past, the University of Maine system has lobbied against Student 
Workers' interests, consistently paid graduate student workers wages too low to live 
off of, and has allowed for the worsening condition of dorms on campus. All of this is
underscored by the fact that students pay the most out of any single group in funding 
the University system and yet we have no vote on the Board of Trustees. At this time 
I would like to address some of my personal experiences with the University of Maine
that I feel highlight these issues. I transferred to the University of Maine Orono back 
in 2021 and when I did I was met with a campus with a nice-looking exterior and 
complaints about by students on the interior. Roads with consistent potholes, people 
slipping on frozen and salted sidewalks, and exit signs hanging from the ceilings of 
dorms with their wires exposed. All of these things are not secrets that were kept 
away in remote corners of the campus, they are a common complaint by much of the 
student body, and yet little is done about them and the University does very little to 
communicate with their student body about these issues and even if they are aware of 
them. Having a student voice that is intimately aware of what it's like to live on 
campus will make sure that awareness is kept in conversations about how the 
University runs so that these issues can be addressed sooner and with more 
on-the-ground information. I truly urge all members of this committee to support LD 
1656, Thank you so much for your time and consideration.
Lucca Hamina

