l'\/lcfilrle 
) 1~’l.1l§"Jl ’l' (,l‘ 
Univ<:-Nsi isles; 
/, 
UNlVER$ll'Y OF MAINE SYSTEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System Presented by UMS Board of Trustees Chair 
Trish Riley, In Opposition to LD 1656, An Act to Allow Student Representation Within the 
Governance of the University of Maine System, April 24, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs: l am Trish Riley, chair of the University of Maine 
System (UMS) Board of Trustees (BOT), testifying today in opposition to LD 1656, An Act to A/low 
Student Representation Within the Governance of the University of Maine System. 
The System's BOT values student voice. 
lt was because we heard from our students — who were passionate, persistent and informed— 
that Trustees voted last year to divest from fossil fuels. At the time, News Center Maine reported, 
“Students that are a part of Divest UMS say they were shocked when they heard of the board’s 
commitment and said most student-driven divest groups don’t usually get through to their boards." 
Students and Trustees have multiple means to communicate and connect. Our 16-person Board 
includes one student, nominated by the Governor and confirmed by this esteemed Committee, 
who serves a two-year term as a full-voting member, engaged in all aspects of the BOT’s work 
including executive sessions and committee responsibilities. In our experience, it has not always 
been easy to recruit and retain students for that seat. Potential nominees are put forth by our 
universities ’ student governments, and typically, there are just a handful of candidates put forward 
for the required background checks and then the Governor ’s consideration. 
For example, in August 2021, the student Trustee resigned just seven months into her term as the 
demands of her Board duties were unsustainable given her nursing degree program and need to 
work for renumeration. The student seat went unfilled until September 2022 when you confirmed 
Dhivya Singaram, our first student Trustee from the University of Maine School of Law, whose 
perspective as a student and her professional experience prior to law school has brought 
important insight to our deliberations. Trustee Singaram estimates she spends as much as 28 
hours each month on her BOT-related responsibilities, including review of information packets in 
advance of our bimonthly two-day Board meetings, which can be as detailed as 600 pages. 
Additionally, each UMS university has an undergraduate Student Representative to the BOT and 
the University of Maine, the University of Southern Maine and Maine Law also have graduate 
student representatives to the Board. These Student Representatives participate in Board 
meetings, and also the bimonthly Academic &lStudent Affairs Committee, at which they are 
invited to participate in all discussion and additionally have a standing agenda item that provides 
them opportunity to raise any issues and provide input, though they often do not. Among the 
duties of Student Representatives include advocating for the best interests of the students who 
are enrolled at their respective campuses and maintaining effective systems for communication 
with their student bodies and the BOT. In the event of a Chancellor or Presidential vacancy, it is 
often from these Student Representatives that we draw student participants to sen/e on the 
search committee. Trustee Singaram works closely with the 10 Student Representatives and 
serves as their liaison on the Board. 
University of Malne- University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent- University of 
Maine at Machias- University of Maine at Presque Isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
Finally, the BOT hosts public comment sessions at the start of each Board meeting. lt is through 
this forum that we heard again and again from our students about the case for divestment. 
As you consider this bill, which would grow our Board to 25 members, l think it is important to 
remember the Trustees ’ duties as the governing and planning body of the university with the 
further responsibility of preparing and approving the System’s operating and capital budgets. UMS 
is a complex organization with an annual budget of more than $600 million and nearly 5,000 
regular employees. The duties of Trustees, outlined below, reflect that and require significant time 
commitments to conduct: 
- Support and enhance the system and the mission of the system; 
- Provide sound financial management of the system; 
- Exercise prudent stewardship of the assets of the system; 
- Evaluate the Chancellor and presidents appointed by the Board of Trustees; 
~ Plan strategies for programs and allocation of resources that most effectively serve the 
educational needs of the citizens of this State; 
- Develop and maintain a strong system of accountability to the public for performance 
results of the system; 
- Visibly advocate higher education as a means to strengthen the economy and communities 
of the State; and 
- Establish mechanisms for review and approval of system programs. 
Given the gravity of this responsibility for the state’s largest education, research, and economic 
development enterprise, the existing statute requires the Governor to consider professional 
education and experience, as well as geographic and other aspects of diversity, when making 
appointments. 
The caliber of our Trustees and their deep background in areas relevant to the Board’s work was 
on full display earlier today, when you considered the latest three appointments, among thema 
former Department of Labor Commissioner, a successful small business owner and community 
leader who has sen/ed on the Board of Visitors for one of our small campuses, and the founder of 
a healthcare technology start-up that has attracted international investment and who formerly 
chaired the Board of Visitors for our R1 flagship. Even for highly accomplished Trustees like 
these, it takes considerable time to become well-versed in the myriad matters confronting the 
Board, which is why terms are five years and many members are reappointed to serve for a full 
decade. 
LD 1656 creates two-year terms for nine new student Trustees, and changes the nomination 
process for the existing student Trustee, taking away the Governor and Legislature's appointment 
and confirmation authority. It also means that 40% of our Trustees would not be subject to the 
appropriately rigorous vetting process, including background checks and some disclosures, 
currently required for all Trustees. 
Students would need college experience before taking on their Board responsibilities but would 
also need to have at least two years remaining at their university so they can complete their term 
as a student. In addition to academic and student affairs, student Trustees would also need 
expertise in audit, facilities and technology planning, finance, investment, human resources and 
Page 2 of3
labor relations, and strategic planning in order to be appropriately assigned to Board committees 
with jurisdiction in those areas. 
We anticipate that the continuous process of orientating and on-boarding nine new Trustees every 
two years would create considerable turnover and disruption to the Board and its committees, 
which often work some issues over the course of multiple months, like the budget or consideration 
of a new academic program or major capital project, or even years, like the strategic plan. 
Further, the bill calls for students to be selected by their university's student body or student 
government, and thus, requires them to represent that interest group. Trustees, however, have 
responsibility for the entire System, even if they are proud alums of one if its institutions. By its 
very charter, the independent BOT you confirm must balance the interests of all constituencies of 
the System including students, faculty, staff, administrators, alumni, partners, policymakers, 
donors and the public, as well as the various functions of the entire enterprise including education, 
research, public sen/ice and economic development.- 
As noted, our experience shows that students understandably have limited bandwidth to fully 
participate in Trustee business given their appropriate priority for their academics and 
extracurricular activities and the need for many of them to additionally earn income to support 
themselves and their families. For this reason, the Student Representatives we spoke with felt 
strongly that student Trustees must be fairly compensated, especially if they are expected, as all 
Trustees are, to attend our in-person meetings year-round, including during summer and school 
breaks. However, paying some Trustees, even recognizing the compelling need for students to be 
so supported, may raise other issues and does not resolve the concerns l have noted. 
Students are the heart of our mission. We are grateful for Sen. Tipping's commitment to UMS, 
including his championing of a bill to provide tuition waivers to make our public universities even 
more affordable and accessible to l\/laine students. We appreciate the Committee's support of an 
amended version of LD 512, which would make UMS tuition~free for Pell-eligible Mainers. He is 
right to recognize that tuition and fee dollars now underwrite a greater share of the UMS operating 
budget than State appropriations, and thus students and their families have an important stake in 
the operations of their universities. 
The Trustees look fon/vard to both working with the Legislature to increase State investment so 
that students shoulder less of the burden of paying for their public education, and with our 
students to ensure their important perspectives appropriately inform our management of the 
University of Maine System. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. l welcome your questions. 
Page 3 of3
