An Act to Improve Family Economic Security Under the T emporary Assistance for
Needy Families Program
February 16, 2023
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer , and members of the
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Moriah Geer , I use she/her
pronouns, and I am a policy advocate at Maine Equal Justice and the director of our
Build HOPE project. MEJ is a nonprofit civil legal aid organization working to
increase economic security , opportunity , and equity for people in Maine. Within my work
with MEJ I have had extensive experience working with families in poverty and have
helped many access HOPE and similar programs as one of the most ef fective routes
out of poverty . Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in support of LD 80 An Act
to Improve Family Economic Security Under the Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families Program.
This bill addresses an issue in the TANF STEP  program that we have long been
concerned about. The STEP  program was created with unanimous, bipartisan support,
so that when someone on TANF earns wages their benefits will decrease more slowly
over time, rather than being abruptly cut of f. This extra support allows the family to build
a more firm financial foundation for their family , making it more likely that they will
remain out of poverty , rather than losing their employment and going back on TANF at
the first crisis. For 3 months after starting employment their entire earnings are ignored
when calculating the TANF benefit. For the next 3 months 75% of their earnings are
ignored. After that the TANF calculation will return to the usual calculation, which is
earnings, minus $108 and then minus 50% of the remainder .
This is a great program and has led to some really good outcomes for some families,
but it can be improved by the changes proposed in LD 80.  Under current law , a person
who qualifies for TANF while at a low wage job will receive the STEP  increase even
though it is not as valuable to them as it would be should their wages increase. This bill
would ensure that these families would only receive the STEP  benefit when they would
be most likely to benefit the most from it.  It would only kick in when the working family
got an increase in wages or hours and they would receive a greater benefit from the
STEP  increase. This proposed legislation would ensure that someone whose income is
www .maineequaljustice.org

low enough to be approved for TANF in the first place, would not be using up STEP
months when they would get little benefit from them. They would have to see an
increase in earnings to initiate the benefit. This would make it more likely that the
amount of funds they could save during their STEP  time would be enough to provide
that all-important financial buf fer to help them stay stable once they leave TANF entirely .
This benefits the family , but also all of us. W e all want these families to reach a time
when they have achieved economic stability and are no longer in danger of needing
state assistance.
We would suggest one small adjustment to this legislation. The way that it is currently
written the STEP  months would start as soon as any increase in wages is seen, no
matter how small. So, for example, when the minimum wage increases in the new year
then anyone earning minimum wage would have their STEP  months started, even
though they aren’t seeing a significant change in their financial stability . If the legislation
were to specify that the increase in wages must be more than a specific amount, for
example, the COLA  increase or 10 percent, then it would ensure that the individual’ s
income has seen a meaningful increase before STEP  is implemented.
For the past four years I have focused on TANF and working with TANF families in my
role at MEJ. Unfortunately , TANF monthly amounts and how they are calculated are not
something that most families understand. It’ s a fairly complicated and non-transparent
process. When I do trainings, even professionals struggle to fully understand how it’ s
calculated. When someone is receiving STEP  when they start TANF and then lose a
substantial portion of their benefit 6 months later , even though their income hasn’t
changed, it really doesn’t make sense to them. The other benefit to this change, as I
see it, is that it’ s more logical to say that someone’ s TANF has gone up temporarily
because they got a higher paying job, received a raise or increased the hours they are
working.
In closing, I would like to reiterate that we support LD 80 and believe that it could be
even stronger with the small change that I mentioned. Maine Equal Justice would
appreciate any opportunity to work with DHHS and this committee on any changes that
could make this legislation stronger and allow it to provide better stability to Maine
Families.
Thank you for your time and consideration, I am happy to answer any questions and
Maine Equal Justice can be present at the work session.
