May 15, 2023 
 
To Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
 
I am writing to you today as a concerned parent over the liberal so-called “woke” agenda that is being 
employed at our schools.  Parents are losing their God-given rights as parents and primary care-takers of 
their own children.  That is why I am in support of LD 678 requiring parental approval for changing the 
pronouns used for their children.  
I don’t understand how or why we got to this point where caretaking and actually raising children, as 
opposed to teaching them, has become the legal right of schools.  Will the teachers and administrators 
who are pushing these harmful rules pay for the medical costs and years of therapy that are incurred by 
the parents whose rights have been stripped by these agendas?  
Children under the age of 18 largely have no idea who they will be as they progress through adolescence 
and into adulthood.  Today’s children are greatly influenced by social media such that who they are 
becomes even more clouded.  We, as parents, teachers, and administrators, should help to guide them 
to make good decisions, while allowing them to be the children they are, and not encourage or force 
them into life-changing decisions for which they are not equipped to make.   
It is not for the school to allow or encourage my child to change their pronoun, which is essentially 
encouraging them to be transgender.  That is a parental concern, right and decision. Nor is it in the best 
interest for an outside-of-the-family entity to override such a decision a parent makes for their child.  
When children are bullied, or just different from others, they often want to be anyone other than 
themselves.  What better way to be someone completely different than to identify as the opposite sex.  
Rather than forcing parents to accept a child’s new choice of pronouns, why not get to the root cause of 
why these children may want to be someone other than who they are? But this is largely for the parent 
to address and resolve. The school needs to be attentive to who is being bullied and who is doing the 
bullying – not to change their pronouns.  
The left’s push to remove parents from schools and in the critical decision-making being made for their 
children’s well-being is breathtaking.  This bill at least acknowledges that it is not the schools’ role in 
teaching our children.  It is the parents’ responsibility to take care of their children and make those 
decisions for them, until such time as they are capable of making them for themselves.  And, as long as 
children are living with their parents, I would suggest that parents should be in control.   
I support this bill as a single mother of a child who struggled with ADHD in school and was bullied by 
other girls in middle school.  With my advocacy and guidance, I am proud to tell you she is a very 
successful adult.   
Thank you for considering my testimony. 
Carolyn Brodsky  
12 Crescent Avenue 
Windham, ME 04062 
