 
 
May 1 3, 2023  
 
Testimony re: LD 678: “An Act to Require Parental Approval for Public School Employees to Use a Name or Pronoun 
Other than a Child's Given Name or Pronoun Corresponding to the Gender on the Child's Birth Certificate ” – OUGHT 
NOT TO PASS   
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments in strong support of LD 678. My name is Chris McLaughlin, and 
I am a licensed clinical social worker with over 22 years of experience providing behavioral health services to children and 
families across a variety o f treatment settings here in Maine. For all of those years, I have worked directly in some capacity 
with transgender and gender diverse youth and their parents and families. For two decades, I have provided training to 
schools, community organizations, and  healthcare facilities around the unique needs of transgender and gender diverse 
clients. I am also honored to be the Executive Director of the Maine Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers 
(NASW -ME). A large part of my job at NASW -ME is to r epresent the interests of Maine’s social workers as they endeavor 
to meet the behavioral health needs of Maine people across all settings and ages, from Fort Kent to York and all places in 
between. On behalf of our over 1,000 members here in Maine, I’m hon ored to share thoughts on this important proposed 
legislation.  
  
We are in firm opposition to LD 678. NASW -ME, along with our national organization and countless other behavioral 
health professional organizations across Maine and the United States, underst ands just how important it is to show respect 
and affirmation for a youth’s personal pronouns and chosen name. Conversely, we also understand how dangerous it is to 
blatantly disregard the identity of these young people. It can be a big step for someone, e specially a young person, to share 
their pronouns. Disregarding them can lead to feelings of invalidation and distress. New data from The Trevor Project 
(2023) from a study of more than 28,000 LGBTQ young people (aged 13 –24) across the United States found that 
transgender and nonbinary young people who reported that all of the people they live with respect their pronouns reported 
lower rates of attempted suicide. It's crucial to respect their courage and their identity by using the pronouns and chosen 
names  they've shared. Respecting names and pronouns for youth has several positive outcomes for students:  
  
- Affirmation of Identity: When you use the correct pronouns and names, you're affirming the youth’s identity and 
acknowledging their sense of self. This i s especially important for young people who are still in the process of 
understanding their identity and establishing their place in the world.  
  
- Respect and Dignity: Everyone deserves to be treated with respect and dignity. Using the correct pronouns and names 
is a basic way of showing respect. It sends the message that you see and accept them for who they are.  
  
- Inclusion and Belonging: When you respect a young person’s pronouns and chosen names, you contribute to an 
environment where people feel included , safe, and valued. This can make a significant difference, particularly for 
young people who are navigating their way through societal norms and expectations.  
  
- Reducing Harm and Discrimination: Many transgender and nonbinary youth face discrimination, ha rassment, and 
violence because of their gender identity. By using correct pronouns and names, we’re standing against such harmful 
behaviors and attitudes, and creating a safer space for all.  
  
- Promoting Understanding and Empathy: Respect for pronouns can l ead to greater understanding and empathy, 
breaking down barriers and stereotypes about gender. It helps to facilitate conversations about individuality, diversity, 
and respect.  
  
- Educational Opportunities: By using and respecting a youth’s chosen pronouns and names, we are also setting an 
example for others. This can serve as an educational opportunity for those who may not understand the importance of 
pronouns, which can further foster an environment of respect and acceptance.  
  
In an ideal world, this tra nsition to updated pronouns and names would be done in lockstep with families, parents, and 
guardians. NASW -ME strongly believes that when school teams and behavioral health providers partner together with 
families, the outcomes for youth are more successf ul. However, having submitted testimony to this committee multiple times 
during this session and hearing the public comment associated with bills related to transgender and nonbinary youth, it’s cle ar 
to me that this is sadly not the world we live in curre ntly, even here in Maine. For many LGBTQ+ youth, school is their "safe 
place". It’s where they can be comfortable being their authentic selves and safely explore feelings related to sexual orienta tion 
and gender identity. While educators, counselors, and s chool social workers try hard to help youth prepare themselves to share 
these pieces of themselves with family members, this isn’t always able to happen, especially when queer youth are living in 
homes that are not ready to affirm them.  
  
NASW -ME is frankly concerned for the wellbeing of our state’s young people in light of the growing number of anti -
LGBTQ+ and misguided "parental rights" bills that have come forth this session. Trust me when I say that our state’s young 
people are watching . The same Trevor Project research referenced earlier also found that nearly 1 in 3 young people said that 
their mental health was poor most of the time or always due to the anti -LGBTQ+ policies and legislation that are currently 
sweeping the country. At t he time I am writing this testimony, the Human Rights Campaign (HRC) has identified more than 
520 anti -equality bills related to the lives of LGBTQ+ people that have been introduced across the United States. More than 
50 of these hateful and harmful bills have already been enacted this year. We must work together to keep Maine above this 
fray and elevate our state to be a role model for our country by showing how we care for and provide for ALL of our children.  
The American people are asking for better. In recent HRC polling, 64% of all likely voters think there is "too much 
legislation" aimed at "limiting the rights of transgender and gay people in America," including 72% of Democrats, 65% of 
Independents, and 55% of Republicans.  
  
I urge this committee to take action to protect the lives of transgender and non -binary youth  by vo ting “Ought Not to Pass ” on 
LD 678 . I want to thank you all for your work on this issue. Please do not hesitate to reach out to NASW ME for any support 
we can offer, including any social work representation and participati on in any future work sessions for LD 678.  
 
Thank you again,  
 
 
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW  
Executive Director  
Maine Chapter – NASW  
 
 
References:  
 
https://www.thetrevorproject.org/survey -2023/  
 
Alvarez, B. (2022). Why pronouns matter. NEA . https: //www.nea.org   
 

