LD 678 "An Act to Require Parental Approval for Public School 
Employees to Use a Name or Pronoun Other than a Child's Given Name 
or Pronoun Corresponding to the Gender on the Child's Birth 
Certificate" 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary 
Committee. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony in support of 
LD 678 “An Act to Require Parental Approval for Public School Employees to Use a Name or Pronoun 
Other than a Child's Given Name or Pronoun Corresponding to the Gender on the Child's Birth 
Certificate.” 
As a parent, taxpayer, and veteran, I am appalled we must testify in support of a bill to ensure a 
parent or guardian isn’t blindsided over their child’s name or nickname. Yet, as we have seen in recent 
months and years, parental oversight of their child’s wellbeing, education and upbringing has been 
belittled and outright rejected in the name of “wokeness.” 
Transparency builds trust and the parents and guardians deserve and have the right to know what is 
being taught to their children, including whatever names they go by. This shouldn’t even be a question, 
let alone a concern. Yet here we are. 
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 678 “An Act to Require Parental Approval for 
Public School Employees to Use a Name or Pronoun Other than a Child's Given Name or Pronoun 
Corresponding to the Gender on the Child's Birth Certificate.” 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)  
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 678
LD 678 "An Act to Require Parental Approval for Public School Employees to Use a 
Name or Pronoun Other than a Child's Given Name or Pronoun Corresponding to the 
Gender on the Child's Birth Certificate"
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the 
Judiciary Committee. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am 
submitting my testimony in support of LD 678 “An Act to Require Parental Approval 
for Public School Employees to Use a Name or Pronoun Other than a Child's Given 
Name or Pronoun Corresponding to the Gender on the Child's Birth Certificate.”
As a parent, taxpayer, and veteran, I am appalled we must testify in support of a bill 
to ensure a parent or guardian isn’t blindsided over their child’s name or nickname. 
Yet, as we have seen in recent months and years, parental oversight of their child’s 
wellbeing, education and upbringing has been belittled and outright rejected in the 
name of “wokeness.”
Transparency builds trust and the parents and guardians deserve and have the right to 
know what is being taught to their children, including whatever names they go by. 
This shouldn’t even be a question, let alone a concern. Yet here we are.
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 678 “An Act to Require 
Parental Approval for Public School Employees to Use a Name or Pronoun Other 
than a Child's Given Name or Pronoun Corresponding to the Gender on the Child's 
Birth Certificate.”
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 
