 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Alyssa Goodwin, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 *Resident Board Representatives  
**
Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff  
 Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 www.maineaap.org
  
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO:  LD 678:  An Act to Require Parental Approval for Public 
School Employees to Use a Name or Pronoun Other than a Child's Given Name or Pronoun 
Corresponding to the Gender on the Child's Birth Certificate  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Committee on Judiciary,  
my name is Mahmuda Ahmed.  I am a resident of Glenburn, an active pediatric endocrinologist in 
Bangor, and an active board member of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  I 
am writing today to express my opposition to LD 678: A n Act to Require Parental Approval for Public 
School Emp loyees to Use a Name or Pronoun Other than a Child's Given Name or Pronoun 
Corresponding to the Gender on the Child's Birth Certificate . We ask that you vote Not to Pass on 
this bill.  
 
As we have discussed with many of the previous proposed legislation, c onfidentiality and independent 
consent is extremely important for adolescent health and safety. Less than  40% of LGBTQ adolescents 
live in LGBTQ- affirming homes.2 These  youth are unable to have supportive environments at home 
and can experience this only at  school. The Legal Guidance on Transgender Student Rights  clearly 
outlines that trans -youth students have equal rights to educational opportunities , the right to transition 
at school  with expression of said gender and the right not to be compelled to provi de personal or 
medical information to school officials. It also outlines that school officials must not disclose personal 
information about the transgender  student without the student’s consent3. Students have the right to 
control the disclosure of the hig hly personal and confidential information  from others including other 
students, parents/guardians, or other school personnel.  
 
Not all children who experience gender dysphoria have a safe home life and disclosing this sensitive  
information to non -affirming parents/guardians could lead to unsafe situations including attempted 
conversion, violence,  or threats of homelessness. The process towards familial acceptance and 
understanding can be challenging and unfortunately parental acceptance is  not always attained . During 
this tumultuous period, students can still live in their affirmed gender with fully reversible social transition.  
 
Gender dysphoria is a well -recognized medical diagnosis with established and effective treatment s. 
The first aspect of trea tment ; social affirmation  allows adolescents to make decisions about their own 
gender in the safety of their school, with the discretion to maintain privacy. These youth need to  be 
given the respect to choose their affirmed name and pronouns in the safety of their school  without 
requiring parental permission. This time will allow them to better understand and explore their gender and take ownership of their bodies  promoting a sense of well -being  and affirmation . 
 
We believe this amended bill discredits youth and places them in potential risk for unsafe circumstances in their home. T his bill will lead to undue distress and further dysphoria for these 
adolescent  youth and is not designed to prioritize what is in the best interest of the se students. These 
students should have the right to choose  their preferred  name and pronoun without parental approval . 
We urge you to oppose this bill and vote Not to Pass on LD 678 . 
 
Respectfully,    
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD , FAAP  
 
 
1 Sofya Maslyanskaya, Elizabeth M. Alderman; Confidentiality and Consent in the Care of the Adolescent Patient.  Pediatr 
Rev October 2019; 40 (10): 508 –516.  
 
2 The Trevor Project. 2023 U.S. National Survey on the Mental Health of LGBTQ Young People . 
https://www.thetrevorproject.org/survey- 2023/assets/static/05_TREVOR05_2023survey.pdf    
 
3 NATIONAL EDUCATION ASSOCIATION –  LEGAL GUIDANCE ON TRANSGENDER STUDENTS’ RIGHTS, Lily Eskelesen Garcia, 
Rebecca Pringle, Princess Moss, Eric Brown, Kevin Gilbert, Maury Koffman, Shelly Moore Krajacic, George Sheridan, Earl 
Wiman, John Stocks. June 2016.  
  
