70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, I am Mike 
McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic League of Maine 
envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom flourishes, families thrive, and life 
is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including in governance. 
I am here to testify in extremely strong support for LD 678 -An Act to Require Parental Approval for 
Public School Employees to Use a Name or Pronoun Other than a Child's Given Name or Pronoun 
Corresponding to the Gender on the Child's Birth Certificate sponsored by Representative Smith. This bill 
prohibits a public-school employee from using a name or pronoun to address or refer to a student that 
does not match information provided on the student's birth certificate without written permission from 
the student's parent or legal guardian. 
 
At the Christian Civic League, we believe it is the fundamental right of a parent to direct the upbringing 
of their child, including their associations, their care, their education, their healthcare, and anything 
related to the identity of that child. A school, teacher, or social worker doesn’t have the right to 
unilaterally determine whether they believe a parent is “fit,” or to make a judgment call on what role a 
parent should play in the life of their child. A primary part of a parent's role is to guide their children 
through challenging times--physical, emotional, and spiritual--and to raise them up to be strong men 
and women that will impact our world for the good. There is no one better positioned to guide our 
children than parents. Anything less is failing our kids.  
 
We see the idea of sneakily allowing children to use make believe pronouns to then feel accepted as 
leading to many future mental health issues in a similar way to how we know pot can easily lead to 
harder drugs. Of course, people denied that was the case with pot and likely now will deny when adults 
encourage and supporting children to lie to their parents. Now in testifying a week ago on a bill I 
listened to “the other side” rise to accuse, it seemed, every parent in America as abusive and sick. On 
this side, we don’t treat every parent as guilty and every kid as weak and in need of help, a help many of 
these people who rise are eager to sell to you for a price. It is not difficult to look at the chart of 
transgender self-reporting. See the historical data and then see the most recent few years. The recent 
and amazing spike is why so many use the words “grooming” to describe professionals’ behavior. 
 
But there is good news. This pronoun plus craze has happened in Europe as well. It is trending down 
now big time as governments as closing programs that operate on minors. Even better, though sadly, 
are some amazing lawsuits occurring. As I study this, often, a 23-year-old realizing she was had by “the 
adults.” She still has the issues she had before grooming because we all do and we simply need to 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 survive and grow out of it. The 23-year old’s are suing everyone and winning. Medical people, 
counselors, policy makers.  
 
 
A great study looked at teenagers and found most were uncomfortable with their bodies, by age 25 – 
75% were married to the opposite sex and had kids. Stop this political grooming that serves agendas. 
Please follow common sense, science and history to deny educators protection from lying.  
Or at least share the list of other secrets schools can keep from a parent? 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration today.    
 
 
 
 
