 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Alyssa Goodwin, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 *Resident Board Representatives  
**
Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff  
 Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  LD 678:  An Act to Require Parental Approval 
for P ublic School Em ployees to Use a  Name or Pronoun other than a C hild’s 
Given Name or Pronoun Corresponding to the Gender on the Child’s Birth 
Certificate    
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Judiciary,  my name is  Rosamund Davis, MD . I am a resident of 
Hallowell, Maine and a n active member and pediatric champion for the Maine 
Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.   I am a pediatrician living and 
practicing in my home state of Maine, and I am vehemently opposed to this bill.   
 
Dozens of medical societies, including the American Academy of Pediatrics, 
have published statements in support of providing gender affirming care for 
children and youth. These societies are comprised of physicians at the top of 
their field who carefully review evidence -based medical literature on gender 
affirming care prior to making their recommendations. They are unequivocal in 
their support of gender affirming care becaus e the evidence shows that it leads 
to improved mental health and quality of life, as well as a decrease in suicide 
rates. A part of gender affirmation includes being part of a community that 
uses your preferred pronouns and name, regardless of whether they 
correspond with those assigned at birth.  
 
Not all children are born into a home where their gender is affirmed by their 
family members. Given that gender affirming care (from medical treatment to 
social support) is recommended by medical societies, it wo uld be gravely 
misguided for a bill written by a lay person to be signed in to law when it goes 
against the recommendations made by medical professionals and their 
societies.   
 
I ask that as you consider this bill, you think about the wellbeing  of our school 
children, not the emotional comfort of those who wish gender nonconforming 
children didn’t exist. Please do not vote in favor of this bill that needlessly 
harms children.   
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
Sincerely,   
Rosamund Davis, MD   
 
  
