 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 678 
 
AN ACT TO REQUIRE PARENTAL APPROVAL FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL EMPLOYEES TO  
USE A NAME OR PRONOUN OTHER THAN A CHILD ’S GIVEN NAME OR PRONOUN 
CORRESPONDING TO THE GENDER ON THE CHILD'S BIRTH CERTIFICATE  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen  and members of the Judiciary  Committee. I am Victoria Wallack , 
director o f communications and governm ent relations  for Maine School Management Association, testifying 
on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boa rds Association and Maine School 
Superintendents Association , in opposition to L.D. 678 . 
 
Our position is based on two  important factor s. 
 
The federal Civil Rights Act bans sex discrimination in public schools and that  ban includes protection for 
gender no nconforming students. We believe it is discriminatory to refuse to address a student by a name he or 
she has requested because of their gender identification . 
 
The U.S. Department of Education, in its policy on “Supporting Transgender Youth in School ” recommends 
that support should include local  policy  that respec ts gender identitie s such as  “using  the name a student goes 
by, which may be different from their legal name, and pronouns that reflect a student’s gender identi ty”. 
 
It is as important to us that  with or without the federal law,  Maine public schools and their staff support all 
students who come through our doors and adopt policies and practices that support all student s. 
 
School Board Policy ACAA reads : 
 
Harassment of student s because of race, colo r, sex, sexual orientation, gender  identi ty, religion, ancestry or 
national origin or disability is prohibited. Such conduct is a violation of Board policy and may constitute 
illegal discrimination under state and federal law . 
 
Our two associations also di scussed another more common occurrenc e. Students have their given name at 
birth. Often, either through parents,  friend s or the student themselves, they will ask to be called a nickname or 
name shortened from their given name at birt h. Steve instead of S teven,  Jonesy instead of Kerry,  Huck instead 
of Hudso n, Addy instead of Adalyn, Sam instead of Samanth a, and the list could go on… and these are just  
within our own famil y. L.D. 678 would prevent and make it unlawful to use any name other than  what is on 
the child’s birth certificate . A very important part of public schools is the relationship that is developed 
between students and teacher s, and the name used  should be one that coincides with the wishes of the student .
 
 With this said, depending upon the ci rcumstances, efforts will also be made to connect with parents of the 
student  in an attempt t o both understand and work collaboratively  should there need to be  common 
understandin g of a request for a name use that is different from that on the student’s bi rth certificate . 
 
We believe it is important to follow the law, and as important to treat all our students with respect, and that 
includes  respecting their wishes as to the name  or pronoun  they choose to be referred to while in school . 
*MSMA/DW SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/NSBA Code: ACAA
Page 1 of 4
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION[Note: This revised sample policy recognizes the Maine Legislature’s 2022
enactment of LD 598, “An Act To Prohibit Discrimination in Employment and School
Based on Hair Texture or Hairstyle,” amending the Maine Human Rights Act .]
HARASSMENT AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT
OF STUDENTS
Harassment of students because of race, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
religion, ancestry or national origin, or disability is prohibited. Such conduct is a
violation of Board policy and may constitute illegal discrimination under state and federal
laws.
For the purpose of this policy, “race” includes traits associated with race, including hair
texture, Afro hairstyles, and protective hairstyles, including braids, twists, and locs.
School employees, fellow students, volunteers, visitors to the schools, and other persons
with whom students may interact in order to pursue or engage in education programs and
activities, are required to refrain from such conduct.
Harassment and sexual harassment of students by school employees is considered
grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including discharge. Harassment and sexual
harassment of students by other students is considered grounds for disciplinary action, up
to and including expulsion. The Superintendent will determine appropriate sanctions for
harassment of students by persons other than school employees and students.
A. Harassment
Harassment includes, but is not limited to, verbal abuse and other offensive
conduct based on race, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
religion, ancestry or national origin, or disability. Harassment that rises to
the level of physical assault, battery and/or abuse, and/or bullying behavior
arealso addressed in Board Policies JICIA – Weapons, Violence and
School Safety and JICK – Bullying.
B. Sexual Harassment
Sexual harassment is addressed under federal and state laws/regulations.
The scope and definitions of sexual harassment under these laws differ, as
described below.
*MSMA/DW SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/NSBA Code: ACAA
Page 2 of 4
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION1. TITLE IX SEXUAL HARASSMENT
Under the federal Title IX regulations, sexual harassment includes the
following conduct on the basis of sex which takes place within the
context of the school unit’s education programs and activities:
a. “Quid pro quo” sexual harassment by a school employee:
Conditioning a school aid, benefit or service (such as a better
grade or a college recommendation) on an individual’s
participation in unwelcome sexual conduct;
b. “Hostile environment” sexual harassment: Unwelcome
conduct based on sex that a reasonable person would
determine is so severe, pervasive and objectively offensive
that it effectively denies an individual’s equal access to the
school unit’s education programs and activities; or
c. Sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence and
stalking as these terms are defined in federal laws.
2. Sexual Harassment Under Maine Law
Under Maine law, sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome
sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or
physical conduct of a sexual nature in the following situations:
a. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of a student’s educational
benefits;
b. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by a student is
used as the basis for decisions on educational benefits; or
c. Such conduct has the purpose and effect of substantially
interfering with a student’s academic performance or creates
an intimidating, hostile or offensive environment.
C. Reports and Complaints of Harassment or Sexual Harassment
All school employees are required to report possible incidents of
harassment or sexual harassment involving students to the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator. Failure to report such incidents may
result in disciplinary action.
*MSMA/DW SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/NSBA Code: ACAA
Page 3 of 4
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATIONStudents, parents/legal guardians and other individuals are strongly
encouraged to report possible incidents of harassment or sexual harassment
involving students to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.
The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator is also available to
answer questions and provide assistance to any individual who is unsure
whether harassment or sexual harassment has occurred.
All reports and complaints of harassment or sexual harassment against
students shall be addressed through the Student Discrimination/Harassment
and Title IX Sexual Harassment Procedures (ACAA-R).
Legal Reference: Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. §12101 et seq., as
amended; 28 C.F.R. § 35.107)
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504) (29
U.S.C. § 794 et seq., as amended; 34 C.F.R. § 104.7)
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 USC § 1681, et
seq.); 34 C.F.R. Part 106
Clery Act (20 U.S.C. §1092(f)(6)(A)(v) - definition of sexual
assault)
Violence Against Women Act (34 U.S.C. § 1092(f)(6)(A)(v) –
definition of sexual assault; 34 U.S.C. § 12291(a)(10) – dating
violence; 34 U.S.C. §12291(a)(3) – definition of stalking; 34
U.S.C. §12291(a)(8) – definition of domestic violence)
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 USC § 2000d)
Maine Human Rights Act, 5 MRSA § 4551 et seq.
20-A MRSA § 6553
MHRC/MDOE Joint Rule Chapter 94-348 and 05-071, ch. 4
Cross Reference: ACAA-R – Student Discrimination/Harassment and Title IX Sexual
Harassment Complaint Procedures
AC – Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
ACAD – Hazing
GBEB – Staff Conduct with Students
JFCK – Student Use of Cellular Telephones and Other Electronic
Devices
JICIA – Weapons, Violence and School Safety
JICK – Bullying
Adopted: ________
*MSMA/DW SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/NSBA Code: ACAA
Page 4 of 4
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATIONPLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a
starting point for a board’s policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board’s policy serve
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful
analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and
suitability to the individual school system.
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and
are not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board’s own legal counsel.
