1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Hearing Date: May 8, 2023 
  
LD 1838 – “An Act to Create the Empowerment Scholarship Account Program” 
LD 1860 – “An Act to Create the Educational Opportunity Account Program” 
 
 
 
 Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education 
and Cultural Affairs Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, 
Associate Commissioner for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services.  I am providing testimony at the request of the Administration 
Neither For Nor Against LD 1838, “An Act to Create the Empowerment 
Scholarship Account Program,” and LD 1860, “An Act to Create the Educational 
Opportunity Account Program.” 
This analysis is limited to the bill as it affects taxation and Maine Revenue 
Services.  The bills propose to exclude deposits made by the Maine Department of 
Education in certain education accounts from the Maine taxable income of a parent 
or legal guardian of a participating student or a participating student. 
Generally, educational grants, scholarships, and other similar funding 
received by a student, or the parent or legal guardian of a student are not subject to 
federal or state income tax to the extent the benefits are used to pay qualified 
educational expenses.  Based on Internal Revenue Service Publication 970: Tax 
Benefits for Education, qualified education expenses include tuition and fees 
required to enroll and attend an eligible educational institution and course related 
expenses (fees, books, supplies and equipment) that are required of all students.  
2 
 Expenses that generally do not qualify as qualified education expenses include 
room and board, travel, research, clerical help, and equipment and other expenses 
not required for enrollment or attendance.     
If the bill is intended to prescribe State tax treatment that differs (or 
potentially differs) from federal tax treatment, the Administration would like to 
note the following technical concerns that apply to both bills, otherwise, the tax 
provisions should be removed from the bills. 
• The bill should be amended to include an application date. 
• The bill should be amended to specifically address the tax consequences of 
account withdrawals, including any earnings on the account. 
• The bill should be amended to include an income subtraction modification 
under 36 M.R.S. § 5122(2) to the extent the income is included in federal 
adjusted gross income.  
• The bill should be clarified to address the tax consequences or recapture of 
refunds or rebates for goods and services purchased that cannot be credited 
directly to the educational account.   
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is not available at this time.   
Assuming the bill applies to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, 
and the bill is amended to enact an income subtraction modification in 36 M.R.S. § 
5122(2), one-time computer programing costs of $11,000 are required to add an 
additional line on Form 1040ME, Schedule 1S, to update check stub messages and 
notices, to make federal tape changes, and to perform systems testing.   
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS can be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
