TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 131 
”An Act to Clarify and Correct Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Laws" 
SPONSORED BY: Senator Black of Franklin 
DATE OF HEARING: April 19, Z023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Tim Peabody, Deputy Commissioner of the Department 
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf ofthe Department, in support of L.D. 131. 
The proposals within this bill were brought forward by the agency and supported by the 
Governor. I am going to explain the changes to fish and wildlife laws in order by section within 
the bill. 
Sec. 1. This section repeals an annual report to the Legislative Committee on deer management 
because this information is already provided within an extensive resource management report 
written annually by the department, which can be given to the committee each session. 
Sec. 2. This section modifies the Black Bear Research Fund. Currently it can only be used to fund 
research on black bears, but it cannot be used to conduct bear management activities such as 
conflict response. Allowing this fund to be used for both research and management activities, 
will ensure the Department has adequate funding for all of its program needs and 
responsibilities related to black bear management while minimizing the need for general funds 
to manage bears. 
Sec. 3. Clarifies when an officer informs a person of the consequences of refusing to comply with 
a chemical test, that it shall be, "after a person's refusal to submit to a chemical test" . This 
change is reflective of the current training at the Maine Criminal Justice Academy. 
Sec. 4. The change requested to add a reference to subsection 11-A is no longer necessary and 
will be further clarified in Section 6 of this bill. This original request is based on my testimony for 
Section 5. The Department during work session will request a strikethrough of a portion of line 
38 and 39 of this bill. 
Sec. 5. In response to State v. Weddle, 2020 ME 12, this bill repeals Maine Revised Statute, Title 
12, section 10703, subsection 11, which was found to be unconstitutional in that it required 
blood to be taken without consent and without probable cause to believe a person was
impaired by alcohol or drugs at the time the person's blood was taken. This is specific to 
hunting, watercraft, snowmobile, and ATV incidents resulting in serious injury or death. 
Sec. 6. We would respectfully ask that this section of the bill be removed this new language is 
covered within paragraphs 1-10 ofthe current statute (12 MRS §10703). 
Sec. 7. A person who is an enrolled member of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, the Penobscot Nation 
the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians or the Aroostook Band of Micmacs who presents 
certification from the respective reservation chief or governor or the Aroostook Micmac Council 
stating that the person is an enrolled member of a federally recognized nation, band or tribe 
listed in this paragraph is exempt from the taking the trapping course. lFW implemented a 
specific bear trapping course in 2022 and this proposal makes it clear that Members of the 
federally recognized “Indian” tribes are also exempt from this course. The term ”lndian" was 
added to be consistent with other statutory references to the Maine Tribes. 
Sec. 8. This language explains and provides clarity on how a super pack licensee applies for an 
antlerless deer permit. Since the new antlerless deer permit lottery system has been 
implemented this provides clear steps on how super pack license holders can apply for or 
purchase some type of antlerless deer permit. Previously superpack license holders were 
confused when they had to pay for a permit and when the permit was included in their license. 
Sec. 9. ls connected to Section 8 (superpack) which l have just described it changes the 
paragraph title to "Deer harvest authorizations" and amends a reference to subsection 2-A. Asa 
side note, LD 189 which was "An Act to Include an Expanded Archery Permit in the Super Pack 
License Issued by lFW" was voted out of committee earlier this session and impact the same 
section of law. This is a reminder to those working on the 2 bill drafts to make sure that the 
sections are implemented in a way that won't be in conflict. 
Sec. 10. This section repeals an annual report to the Legislative Committee on moose 
management because this information is already provided within an extensive resource 
management report written annually by the department, which can be given to the committee 
each session. 
Sec. 11. This provides clarity that members of federally recognized nations, bands or tribes in 
Maine are not required to complete the new bear trapping education course as previously 
presented in Section 7 of this bill. 
Sec. 12 and 13. Corrects the cost of a resident combination hunting and fishing license and the 
resident combination archery hunting and fishing license because there is a conflict between 
two sections of Title 12 regarding the cost of a combination license. IFW charges $43 fora 
combination hunt/fish license, that is the correct cost. Section 11109 provides that it costs $43 
while section 12501 has an incorrect cost of $42. 
Sections 14-16. Removes reference to specific types of personal flotation devices from boating 
safety statutes. The U.S. Coast Guard conducts a compliance check on all states and the removal 
of the reference to specific types of life jackets from statute is required for Maine to be in 
compliance with federal Coast Guard law. We have often referred to life jackets as either Type l, 
ll, Ill, IV or V but they will now simply be referred to as personal flotation devices. Specific types 
will now be referenced in rule which essentially adopts the Coast Guard requirements for PFDs.I
Sec. 17. This removes the provision requiring a person under 16 years of age to be accompanied 
by a parent or guardian in an ATV training program because many are offered online versus in 
person. It was not practical to require parental presence for online safety training. This will allow 
for a parent to make the decision rather than a prescription in law. 
Sec. 18. This section creates a specific effective date oflanuary 1, 2024 for section 8 of the bill as 
it relates to clarifying information on the steps a person takes to receive an antlerless deer 
permit with the super pack license. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
