MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Opposition of L.D. 1208,  
An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Right To Know 
Advisory Committee Concerning Time Estimates for Responding to 
Public Records Requests
April 3, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished Committee on 
Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the Chief of the Cumberland 
Police Department. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of 
Police Association in opposition to section two of LD 1208.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and personal 
relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in law 
enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police training 
and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for equality of law 
enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the prevention and detection 
of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics; and to promote the 
profession of law enforcement as an integral and dedicated force in today's society 
sworn to the protection of life and property. 
The bill summary states that,  
This bill implements the recommendations of the Right To Know 
Advisory Committee to amend provisions in the Freedom of Access Act 
concerning time estimates for responding to public records requests by: 
1.Clarifying that an agency or official must specify the estimated 
time frame within which an agency or official will comply with 
a request for public records; and 
2.Clarifying statutory language to better describe the scope of the 
fee charged by an agency or official for searching for, 
retrieving and compiling a requested public record. 
3.The bill also increases the cost threshold for when an agency or 
official must inform a requester  of  the  estimate  of  the  total  
cost  before  proceeding  with  a  request  for  public records.    
Under  current  law,  an  estimate  of  the  total  cost  is  required  
when  the  cost  is estimated  to  be  greater  than  $30.  The  bill  
requires  an  estimate  of  the  total  cost  to  be provided when 
the cost is estimated to be greater than $50, to be consistent 
with Public Law 2021, chapter 375, which increased the hourly 
fee for staff by an agency or official from $15 to $25 time that 
may be charged.  
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
We are in opposition to section two of the bill because it removes law 
enforcement’s ability to recoup costs other than time.  Frequently when we process 
requests for numerous records, it is necessary for us to transmit those records on 
storage media such as a flash drive. This media can be relatively expensive for an 
agency over the course of the year and when considering the volume of requests 
we receive. In addition, this language would prohibit law enforcement from 
recovering costs which may be incurred if it is necessary to utilize third party 
software or services to redact protected healthcare or other confidential information 
from an audio or video recording prior to release. As more agencies adopt body 
worn cameras and in-car camera systems, the frequency of need for this type of 
redaction is also increasing. Some audio and video recording systems have 
imbedded redaction capabilities, but some do not.  
We get numerous requests for public records requests and these requests take time 
and resources to respond to appropriately. We are not trying to deter the public 
from accessing this information, but we also do not think that it is reasonable for 
the agencies to bear the cost of these requests.  
We respect the process that the Right to Know Committee went through to reach 
these recommendations, so we are not taking a position on the other pieces of this 
bill.  
So, for these reasons, we ask that you strike section two of LD 1208 in the work 
session. And, on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to 
thank the committee members for your work on this Committee.  
