 19 Community Drive • Augusta, Maine 04330 • (207) 622-7501 • Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORSâ   12781773.1 
Testimony in Support of LD 388  (“An Act to Require the State and Municipalities to Reimburse Landlords for Unpaid Rent During Eviction Moratoriums”)  J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  May 19, 2023  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations and we represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports LD 388. The bill would help avoid financial losses that property owners would incur during eviction moratoriums.    Rental housing needs are best met through private investment, and ensuring protection for both parties during times of uncertainty ensures a healthy inventory of housing units. Property owners faced hardships during times of uncertainty as shown by the pandemic. The current tenant programs are sufficient, but we also need to support property owners who are providing housing for Maine and this bill is a step in the right direction.   Property owners who lease their units are operating Maine businesses, many of which are family-owned. Property owners who provide rental housing need to be able to generate revenue from their business to at least match expenses (property carrying costs and administration) for the business to continue to be viable. This bill would allow property owners to continue receiving their business revenue during eviction moratoriums and as a result, continue providing housing opportunities that benefit the individual and collective needs of our state.    For these reasons, we respectfully encourage you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 388. Thank you for your time and consideration.   
