LD 388 
To Chairpersons Teresa Pierce, Traci Gere, and the members of the Housing Committee: 
My name is Bruce Blackmer from Dedham, Maine. 
l am on the Executive Committee of the Greater Bangor Apartment Owners and Managers 
Association, GBAOMA. 
I am also a member of the Legislative Council working closely with, Attorney and Lobbyist, Dan 
Bernier representing landlords and property owners in, but not limited to, Waterville, Augusta, 
Portland, South Portland, Lewiston, Auburn, and Bangor areas. 
I have been a landlord since 1972. l have owned a 50-unit trailer park , multi-unit, and single- 
family homes. At one time, l managed 65 units. l have mostly provided affordable housing to 
low-income tenants. 
I am speaking in opposition of this Bill, LD 388 
While LD 388 sounds like a good solution. The logic is somewhat backwards. Some tenants did 
not pay their rent because they knew they could not be evicted. They still had jobs, they received 
income, and they had money to purchase the items they wanted. They chose not to pay their 
rent because they knew with the eviction moratorium in place, and they did not have to, PAY TO 
STAY. This bill would reward a bad tenant for bad behavior. 
LD 388 should be amended to say, "lf the only reason for eviction is the tenant not paying the 
rent due to no money, then help with the rent would be acceptable" . Most landlords value good 
tenants. If a good tenant is having a temporary ﬁnancial crisis, most landlords will work with the 
tenant until the tenant is back on their feet, they want to keep a good tenant. However, if the 
landlord is dealing with a bad tenant, then the eviction and writ of possession should be issued 
automatically on the 32"“ day after a 30-Day Notice was given. l guarantee if you make tenants 
accountable for their actions, there would be less bad tenants and less evictions. 
I am here to ask you to oppose LD 388 as it is written. -Q42/252' ¢<*i\F>¢4l5"l /"7 §*¢~%*‘ »‘$7”"/5 
Thank you for allowing me to voice my opinion. l would be happy to answer any questions. 
Bruce Blackmer 14 Enterprise Drive Dedham ME 04429 
email: _ai1tsblacl<1@gr3jiail.com phone: 207-735-56587
