 
 
P.O. Box 488  
Yarmouth , ME  
04096  
info@mainepreservation.org  
207.847.3577  511 Congress Street, Suite 502  
Portland, ME  
04101  
 
info@portlandlandmarks.org  
207.774.5561  
 
 
  
 
April 25 , 2023  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
131st Maine Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
To Whom it May Concern:  
 
Maine Preservation is a statewide nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting and 
preserving historic places, buildings, downtowns, and neighborhoods, strengthening the 
cultural and economic vitality of Maine communities.  
 
Founded in 1964, Greater Portland Landmarks' mission is to ensure that Greater Portland 
preserves its sense of place for all and builds vibrant, sustainable neighborhoods and 
communities for the future.  
 
Together we write to express strong support for bond measures L.D. 91 2 “An Act to 
Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Restore Historic Community Buildings” and L.D. 
1163 “An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Capital Improvements for Arts 
and Cultural Facilities.” The rehabilitation of historic community buil dings  like librarie s, 
town halls, and repurposed  churches , and  supporting arts and cultural facilities ( often 
located historic buildings ) is central  to maintaining a sense of place and critical  to the 
cultural , economic,  and civic health of Maine communities .  
 
Maine Preservation provides technical assistance and grant guidance to nonprofits and 
local governments that steward historic buildings, giving us firsthand knowledge of the 
significant need for capital improvement funds for rehabilitation projects, enhancing 
accessibility, and improving energy efficiency and climate resilience. For the past four 
years we have administered small, capital improvement grants totaling $450,000 to 
historical societies, art galleries, and theaters with a maximum individual award of 
$10,000. During that same time, we received letters of interest from over a hundred 
nonprofits, stretching from Wells to Madawaska, with requests to support capital 
improvements nearing $1.5 million.  
 
  
Studies s how that investment in historic preservation supports small business and good -
paying jobs, improves property values, keeps money circulating in local economies, and 
catalyzes additional investment . The rehabilitation of historic buildings can be labor -
intensive, creating high -paying jobs . In a soon -to-be-finalized economic impact analysis of 
historic preservation in Portland, it is estimated that these projects create 218 direct jobs 
and an additional 217 indirect and induced jobs every year.  
 
The Maine Historic Preservation Commission’s “Heritage for the Future  2021 -2026 
Edition ” statewide historic preservation plan calls for , “Consistent funding for existing 
grant programs, the availability of assistance to address the learning curve for applicants and awardees to successfully utilize funding, and the resources needed to implement new 
or one -time grant programs provide additional challenges .” The plan also highlights that 
74% of individuals surveyed indicated that increasing funding for preservatio n projects 
and expanding the capacity of potential users  should be  the focus of the preservation 
community for the next five years . Financial investment in historic cultural, arts and 
community spaces will be a critical step forward in meeting t hese goals .  
 
For these reasons, Maine Preservation  and Greater Portland Landmarks  support passage 
of L.D. 912 and L.D. 1163 , so that Mainers have the opportunity to support the places and 
spaces significant to them and their communities.  
 
Sincerely,  
  
 
 
Tara Kelly, Executive Director   Sarah Hansen, Executive Director  
Maine Preservation     Greater Portland Landmarks  
 
 
 
 
 
  

