Christopher Brownawell
Farnsworth Art Museum, Rockland, ME
LD 912
Chair Rotundo, Chair Sachs, and honorable members of the committee,
Thank you for this opportunity to testify in support of LD 912 and LD 1163. My 
name is Christopher Brownawell and I am the Director of the Farnsworth Art 
Museum in Rockland, Maine. As Director of an art museum with two historic 
structures, I value the commitment to historic preservation demonstrated in these two 
bills. 
The Olson House, a National Historic Site in Cushing, Maine, offers the incredible 
opportunity to connect with midcoast Maine’s deep artistic traditions and explore the 
ways that historic sites inspire some of the nation’s greatest artists. The subject of 
more than 300 works of art by Andrew Wyeth, the Olson House is one of the most 
recognized structures in all of art. Sadly, due to structural issues and ongoing 
preservation work, the house is currently closed to the public. 
The Museum also owns The Farnsworth Homestead, which is listed on the National 
Register of Historic Places. Built in 1854 by William A. Farnsworth, it is an excellent 
example of Greek Rival architecture and was the home of Lucy Farnsworth, the 
museum’s founder. 
The Museum contributes to the well-being of our communities and the people who 
live in them by inspiring creativity and a sense of connectedness that can help people 
find a voice for self-expression, increase their ability to overcome adversity, and open
their hearts to the experiences and perspectives of others. The Farnsworth contributes 
to community development and economic progress as a major tourist destination and 
anchor of an energetic arts district. In response to community needs, the Museum has 
recently shifted to a more community-focused approach. Studies link museum visits 
to higher levels of civic pride, health, self-esteem, a sense of connectedness, and 
reduced symptoms of anxiety and depression. We are working with community 
partners to support local artists and promote social cohesion and cross-cultural 
understanding, providing workshops for adults and youth and professional 
development for teachers. 
Investment in our cultural infrastructure is paramount to the preservation and survival 
of our state’s historic sites. Investment in Maine’s historic and cultural facilities is an 
investment in the health and well-being of its people. 
Thank you,
Christopher Brownawell 
Director, Farnsworth Art Museum

