Regarding LD 912 
To: Honorable Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and esteemed members of the Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs Committee 
From: Lois Kilby—Ches|ey 
My name is Lois Kilby-Chesley, and I reside in Durham, ME. I am in support of LD 912. I represent the 
Friends ofthe West Durham Methodist Church, a non-profit organization with the goal of restoring our 
formally abandoned Church. lam also a member of the Durham Historical Society and chair of the 
Durham Historic District Commission, a Town appointed committee. 
The West Durham Methodist Church is an historic Methodist church at 23 Runaround Pond Road in 
West Durham, Maine. Built in 1804 and significantly restyled in 1867, it is a fine example ofGreek 
Revival architecture with added ltalianate features. The congregation for which it was built grew out ofa 
Methodist revival meeting held at the site, and it was one of the first Methodist congregations in the 
state, and reportedly the oldest remaining currently standing. The building was listed on the National 
Register of Historic Places in 2003. 
Decades of neglect have led to significant decay to the building. Since receiving ownership of the Church 
from the Town of Durham, for the last three years our group has struggled to obtain the grants 
necessary to preserve, restore and repair the building. Costs are estimated to be at least $200,000. .A 
private foundation gave us our ﬁrst grant in 2020 which replaced the roof, repaired the rafters and 
began the process of repairing the foundation. A second and third grant provided money to restore the 
windows. All together we have raised about $70,000. We continually look for grant opportunities and to 
fundraise so we can continue our progress. Funds are limited and we recognize our non-profit is one 
among many. Without additional grant opportunities in the near future, this building will continue to 
deteriorate, with the possibility of becoming too far gone to try to rehabilitate. For the community of 
Durham the loss would have immense impact on preserving our history. 
LD 912, is described as: 
Providing funds to restore historic community buildings, with funds being issued contingent on a 50% 
local match requirement from either private or nonprofit sources, and with the process to be 
administered by the Director of the Maine Historic Preservation Commission. 
The $25,000,000 General Fund bond would be a huge asset to small non-profits such as ours as we 
struggle to preserve important buildings from Maine's past. I encourage you to vote for LD 912. Thank 
you for this consideration. lam happy to answer any questions you may have at any time, to the best of 
my ability._ 
Lois Kilby—Chesley 
31 Runaround Pond Road, Durham, ME 04222
