. I HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES ‘*1 "1 '~‘ 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
. AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Michael Brennan TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
49 Wellington Road 
Portland, ME 04103 
Phone: (207) 939-6462 
Michael.Brennan@,legislature.maine.gov 
April 26, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Michael Brennan introducing 
LD 1163, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Capital 
Improvements for Arts and Cultural Facilities 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Aﬂfairs 
Good moming, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. I am Michael Brennan, andI 
represent House District 115, which includes a portion of Portland. I am here to introduce LD 
1163, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Capital Improvements for Arts 
and Cultural Facilities. 
In my community, and in each of yours, there are many arts and cultural venues that are at the 
heart of our civic infrastructure. These are the performing arts centers, the playhouses and 
theaters, and other local venues where the town congregates. Drive through many of our 
communities and you will pass the wom out theaters and arts centers. What most of these 
structures have in common is a need for repair and rehabilitation, and a local community group 
that cannot afford to do it. In fact, many of them need upgrades to meet ADA requirements and 
ensure that everyone in the community is welcome without extra effort. Others need basic repairs 
such as roof replacements to ensure their viability. These organizations have been hit especially 
hard by COVID-19. 
We all know what the need is in our own communities. A few years ago, the Cultural Emergency 
Resource Coalition provided a disaster planning and recovery session. Over 1,100 nonproﬁt 
organizations participated. Now, obviously, not all of them need critical structural repairs but it 
gives you a sense of the potential need. 
There is currently no program available to meet this need. Many states, and most of the New 
England states, have annual appropriations to address this problem; we do not. The successful 
implementation of this bond proposal will hopefully pave the way to a modest ongoing program. 
The only restriction I have included is to limit the program to nonproﬁts. I envision a program 
designed to meet the needs of a wide variety of organizations. Some may be able to provide 
matching funds; some may not. Some may need a small grant; some may need major 
construction. 
District 115: Part of Portland
I understand that some people do not support issuing bonds in the current economic environment 
and that state agencies will not provide testimony. That is a broader discussion that this 
committee and our leadership will undertake. However, if there is a bond package, this should be 
a priority. 
The arts and cultural sector is an important economic factor in our state. These structures provide 
the underlying, basic infrastructure which knits our state together. I urge your support for this 
bond. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I am happy to answer any questions. 
District 115: Part of Portland
