1 
20474784.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Opposition to L.D. 1576,  
An Act to Update the Laws Governing Electronic Device Information 
as Evidence
May 22, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey. I am the Chief of the 
Cumberland Police Department, and the President of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association against LD 1576.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill amends the provisions of law relating to portable electronic device 
content information by: 
1. Replacing the term "portable electronic device" with the term "electronic 
device" and redefining the term; 
2. Replacing the term "content information" with the terms "electronic 
communication information" and "electronic device information"; 
3.    Adding  definitions  of  the  terms  "electronic  communication"  and  
"subscriber information"; and 
4.  Clarifying  the  circumstances  in  which  a  government  entity  may  
obtain  certain electronic communication information or access electronic 
device information pursuant to a search warrant.  
As we stated in LD 1883, the Maine Chiefs do not believe that statutory changes 
are necessary for search warrants. The body of law dealing with the Fourth 
Amendment in the United States Constitution and Article 1, Section 5 in the Maine 
Statute Constitution has been properly balanced by the courts to ensure that 
individuals continue to have a reasonable expectation of privacy and to ensure that 
the governments’ need to protect the public.  
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 
20474784.1 A number of the sections of this bill would change the circumstances in which law 
enforcement may obtain information with or without a warrant.  The courts have 
been the leader in interpreting the constitution and structuring the circumstances in 
which a search warrant should be obtained. We should allow them to continue to 
balance the rights of the individual and the rights of the community to be safe. We 
are deeply concerned that the passage of this legislation would make it more 
difficult to investigate crimes such as child pornography, and to rapidly respond to 
and mitigate the danger of threats posted online to commit acts such as school 
shootings.  
On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank the 
committee members for your work on this Committee. And we would ask that 
you oppose LD 1576.  
