May 19, 2023  
To: Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable members of the Judiciary 
Committee  
From: Christopher D. Guay  
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1576, “An Act to Update the Laws Governing Electronic 
Device Information as Evidence”  
 
Good morning, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the 
Judiciary Committee. My name is Christopher Guay , and I go to school at the University of 
Maine School of Law. I am writing  as a student and concerned citizen to urge you to vote 
“Ought to Pass” on LD 1576 , “An Act to Update the Laws Governing Electronic Device 
Information as Evidence.”  
 
Generally speaking, the  Fourth Amendment of the  Constitution protects American citizens  from 
unreasonable searches and seizures by  the government. One important exception to this 
generalized protection is the Third -Party Doctrine , which provides that  information shared with a 
third -party is not subject to the same Constitutional protections , with the exception of location 
data. Those  Constitutional protections are fundamental to our democracy and should be protected 
as such. The Third -Party  Doctrine nega tes those  protections from government  interference.  
 
Every day, Mainers interact with countless third-parties when going about their daily lives. In 
order to use the Internet or use the ir phone s, Mainers almost invariably share information with  
third -parties. Information that third -parties  gains during th ese every day interactions  can then be 
obtained by the government (so long as third -party compan ies cooperate). As such, the loophole 
created by the Third -Party Doctrine affects Mainers deeply and opens them to unreasonable 
intrusions upon their personal live s.  
 
Likewise, with the knowledge that their information is not safe under the Third -Party Doctrine, 
Mainers may hesitate to fully express themselves, which has a chilling effect on free speech  to 
society’s detriment . For example,  individuals are less like ly to express  unpopular political 
opinions when the government has the capability to access those opinions at any time.  
 
In addition  to the Constitutional conflicts, unreasonal intrustions on privacy, inevitability of data 
sharing in the modern age, and th e possible chilling effect the Third -Party Doctrine has on free 
speech , the following reasons further demonstrate  why you should vote “ Ought to Pass” on LD 
1576:  
• LD 1576 ensures that Mainers’ personal information remains private  and free from 
government in terference without a warrant;  
• LD 1576 would ensure that an independent judge would ascertain the necessity and 
justness  of any action to obtain personal information stored with a third  party, just as 
they would with personal information stored on a persona l device ; 
• LD 1576 would put Maine in line with the trend towards limiting the application of 
the Third-Party Doctrine as shown in Carpenter v. United States ; and  
• LD 1576  ensures that Mainers are protected  in a world that continues to become 
increasingly online.  
 
I have always believed strongly in the need for protections against government interference of 
private thoughts and words. When someone uses the Internet, they do not expect that the 
government wi ll be able to simply ask a company for their private informatio n, but that is  the 
reality of  what the government can do right now  and what the government can do right now in 
the state of Maine . As such, Maine should take action to ensure that private infor mation remain s 
private by voting “ Ought to Pass” on LD 1576.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
Christopher Guay  
