May 19, 2023  
To: Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable members of the Judiciary Committee  
From: J. Shinay  
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1576, “An Act to Update the Laws Governing Electronic Device 
Information as Evidence”  
 
Good morning  Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable members of the Judiciary 
Committee . My name is J. Shinay , and I am a resident of Portland . I am writing today as both a student at 
the University of Maine School of Law  and a concerned citizen  to testify in support of LD 1576, “An Act 
to Update the Laws Governing Electronic Device Information as Evidence .” For the following reasons, I 
urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1576.   
First, the goals of LD 1576 are supported by  a plain understanding of the text o f the  Constitution . The 
Fourth Amendment of the Constitution  provides  American citizens the right “to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures .”1 This language  protect s more than  
mere physical property ; Fourth Amendment  protections  also prevent intrus ions by the government into  the 
external information about an individual that comprise who that individual is as a “person. ” Although the 
Found ers likely intended this language to  constitutionally protect  offline  personal information , in the 
modern era  this same  persona l information is almost entirely stored externally online . Thus, digital  data 
represents analogous  “personal ” information  that should rightly be  covered under the Fourth Amendment . 
As such, Mainers  should have a right to protect this online information from unreasonable searches and 
seizures  by law enforcement , as we would in an offline context,  in the absence of a warrant.  Given the 
fundamental nature of th ese rights  under the Constitution , we must act now as a State to ensure  the ongoing 
protection  of our online da ta from unreasonable search and seizure by the government.   
Second, LD 1576  woul d place Maine at the national forefront of  State action to protect  privacy issues  in 
the modern era. Despite the existence of the “Third -Party Doctrine ,” the Supreme Court has empowered 
the individual states to act to  further  protect the privacy rights of their respective citizens . In the landmark 
case of Carp enter v. U nited States , the Supreme Court declined to extend the Th ird-Party Doc trine and 
recognized that at least one form of personal data, mobile phone location data, was protected under the  
Fourth Amendment .2 Although the court declined to extend this precedent to all perso nal data , Chief Justice 
Roberts  was clear that stat es should take up the mantle  of further protecti ons, stating: “Legislation is much 
preferable to the development of an entirely new body of Fourth Amendment case law .”3 Assuming this 
burden and  acting accordingly, California and Utah have both passed broad legal provisions to protect the 
externally stored data of their citizens  by requiring judicial oversight and authorization over the process  of 
law enforcement obtaining such information , subje ct to certain exceptions related to emergency situations.4 
Maine should  follow  the precedent set by California and Utah  and enact  LD 1576 , ushering in further Furth 
Amendment protecti ons as urged by Chief Justice Roberts.   
LD 1576 “Ought to Pass” for the following  additional legal and policy  reasons:  
 
1 U.S. Const. A mend . IV.  
2 Carpenter  v. United States , 138 S.Ct. 2206 (2018) . 
3 Id. 
4 See Utah Becomes First  State to Require Warrant for Data Held by Third -Parties , EPIC  (Apr. 1, 2019), 
https://epic.org/utah -becomes -first-state-to-require -warrant -for-data-held-by-third-parties/  (last accessed May 19, 
2023); Nicole A. Ozer, It’ s Time to Protect Digital Privacy in California , ACLU  NORCAL (Feb. 8, 2015), 
https://www.aclunc.org/blog/its -time-protect -digital -privacy -california (last acce ssed May 19, 2023).  
• LD 1576 updates the language of the current statute, modernizing the statute and bringing the law 
into focus with the modern day as societal dependency on  strong privacy law continues to evolve;  
• LD 1576 provides clarification for situations in which a warrant would be required fo r law 
enforcement t o obtai n electronic communications and information, reducing ambiguity for law 
enforcement while ensuring protections for Mainers;  and 
• LD 1576 ensure s that the government and law enforcement entities consult an independent judge 
to obtain a warrant to search and obtain Mainers’ personal information from third parties , creating 
a fair oversight and review  process  in the search for evidence of a crime or otherwise.  
Finally, while a plain understanding  of the law urges me to support th e passing of this bi ll, I am also 
compelled to support it for personal reasons. I am a born and raised Mainer who, like many of us, deeply 
values my privacy and the protection of my personal property. One of the things I respect  most about this 
state is the ability for  Mainers to find  seclusion  and peace  in a loud and crowded world . Unfortunately,  like 
many of us  I am increasingly required to engage with online enterprises and services for almost every  part 
of my daily life , often without  any meaningful choice or alternative . Although I accept this cost of living in 
modern society, I do not feel that we as Mainers should be required to sacrifice  our values of privacy  and 
peace of mind  simply because  of a modern system that neces sitates the s haring of personal data. I ndeed , 
the State should feel  obligated to protec t these long -held values through legislative actions like that seen 
before you today.  
Mainers  use the Internet  daily  to carry out  important personal  activities  and bus iness.  The use of the Internet 
and third -party services on the Internet has become necessary to function in modern societ y, making the 
sharing of personal  data over the internet unavoidable . As this trajectory towards further integrat ion of  our 
lives  with the Internet  continue s, the amount of information third parties hold about Mainers will also 
continue to increase . As it stands, o ur laws and protections apply to a n almost exclusively offline  context , 
meaning that such laws are inade quate to protect  the digital property of  Mainer s. This leaves Mainers  
increasingly vulnerable to warrantless searches by law enforcement  and risks continual violations of 
Mainers ’ constitutional right s.5 By enacting LD 1576, Main e law will rightly reflect th e complexities  of the 
modern digital world while simultaneously reinforcing constitutional rights by ensuring that police obtain 
a warrant before accessing Mainer’s digital information held by third parties.  
For these reasons, I respectfully urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1576. Thank you for your time 
and consideration.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
J. Shinay  
 
5 See Nicole A. Ozer, It’ s Time to Protect Digital Privacy in California , ACLU  NORCAL (Feb. 8, 2015), 
https://www.aclunc.org/blog/its -time-protect -digital -privacy -california  (last accessed May 19, 2023).   
