May 19, 2023  
To: Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable members of the Judiciary Committee  
From: Seth Perruzza  
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1576, “An Act to Update the Laws Governing Electronic Device 
Information as Evidence”  
 
Good morning , Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Judiciary 
Committee, my name is Seth Perruzza. I am a resident of Portland , and I am writing today as a student of 
the University of Maine School of Law to testify in support of L D 1576, “An Act to Update the Laws 
Governing Electronic Device Information as Evidence,” and to urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on this 
bill.    
The Fourth Amendment states, “The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and 
effec ts, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but 
upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, 
and the persons or things to be seized.”1 This provision protects more than merely the property of 
Americans; it protects the external personal information and effects that comprise who Americans are as 
people. Similarly, o ur data reveals critical information about us , including information about our sexual 
orientation, our spending practices, our friends and families, and private  conversations . This data is a part 
of us and our “persons,” and we should have a right to protect this information from unreasonable searches 
and se izures in the absence of a warrant.  Furthermore, i f any of this information were maintained offline, 
law enforcement would be required to obtain a warrant to be able to access it. The format of our personal 
information should not impact our rights. Mainers  have a right to be free from unreasonable and 
unwarranted searches and seizures, both online and offline.  
The Third -Party Doctrine has been established by case law, but states are empowered to enact legislation 
to limit intrusions upon the rights of their  respective citizens. In Carpenter v. United  States , Chief Justice 
John Roberts provided, "Legislation is much preferable to the development of an entirely new body of 
Fourth Amendment case law."2 California and Utah have both taken this advice and passed broad legal 
provisions to protect essentially all data held by third parties by requiring judicial oversight and 
authorization over the process, subject to certain exceptions related to emergency situations.3 Maine should 
follow the precedent set b y Utah and California and heed the advice of Justice Roberts, enacting legislation 
to protect Mainers from unwarranted searches and seizures of their data.  
As our lives continue to become further intertwined with the internet, the amount of information thi rd 
parties store about us continues to increase, and it is becoming unavoidable. As it stands, our laws are stuck 
in the Dark Ages and apply to a context that is almost exclusively offline, leaving Mainers  increasingly 
vulnerable to warrantless searches by  law enforcement.4 By enacting LD 1576, we are choosing to update 
Maine’s privacy protections to reflect the modern digital world while simultaneously reinforcing 
 
1 The text of the Fourth Amendment.  
2 See Utah Becomes First State to Require Warrant for Data Held by Third -Parties , EPIC  (Apr. 1, 2019), 
https://epic.org/utah -becomes -first-state-to-require -warrant -for-data-held-by-third -parties/  (last accessed May 19,  
2023) ; Nicole A. Ozer, It’ s Time to Protect Digital Privacy in California , ACLU  NORCAL (Feb. 8, 2015), 
https://www.aclunc.org/blog/its -time-protect -digital -privacy -california (last accessed May 19, 2023).  
3 Id.  
4 See Nicole A. Ozer, It’ s Time to Protect Digital Privacy in California , ACLU  NORCAL (Feb. 8, 2015), 
https://www.aclunc.org/blog/its -time-protect -digital -privacy -california  (last accessed May 19, 2023).   
constitutional rights by ensuring that police obtain a warrant before accessing Mainer’s dig ital information 
held by third parties.  
For these reasons, I respectfully urge this Committee to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1576. Thank you for 
your time and consideration.  
Seth Perruzza  
