May 31, 2023 
Good morning Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Transportation 
Committee, 
My name is Amy Regan Gallant and I am testifying today as a private citizen and constituent of South 
Portland, on behalf of myself and my husband Bryan, in support of LD 456, An Act to Support the Use of 
Bicycles.  
Here is Bryan’s testimony.  
My name is Bryan Gallant and I am a resident of South Portland. I’ve been working in the bicycle 
industry for two decades and am an avid cyclist. In September 2016 I was biking in the West End of 
Portland and a driver turned left in front of me onto Clark Street. I was going in the direction of traffic, 
wearing a helmet, and despite my slow speed, a crash was unavoidable. I was able to move myself and 
my bicycle to the side of the road and call the police to respond.  
And here is mine. 
My name is Amy Regan Gallant and I am a resident of South Portland. I used to bike a lot. In the summer 
of 2008, I was traveling south on Broadway in South Portland and was hit by a car taking a left turn onto 
Cole Street. I hit the hood and the windshield, landing on the road in front of the car. My first thought 
was I have to move before I get run over. It was terrifying. I saw the car coming towards me and can see 
it even now as I share this experience with you. There was nothing I could do to stop. I was wearing a 
helmet which was damaged, and was transported by ambulance to the hospital. I tried to return to work 
and ultimately had to take time off to heal.  
I have never been comfortable on a bicycle since. When I’m on the road I find myself shrugging up my 
shoulder to try to shield my body from oncoming traffic. Even yesterday I was walking on the sidewalk 
with a colleague in Yarmouth and a vehicle was turning and my heart dropped into my stomach thinking 
she was going to be hit, even though the car was just turning into a gas station.  
Please consider our experiences and vote in support of this bill. Both crashes could have potentially 
been prevented if the drivers had an understanding that they needed to wait until the cyclist passed 
before taking a left turn in the same way they would for another car and/or as the statute currently 
requires for right turns.  
Thank you, 
Amy and Bryan Gallant 
1208 Highland Avenue, South Portland 
  
