TESTIMONY OF JAMES MCKENNA OF APPLETON, MAINE LD 456– Ought to Pass An Act to Support the Use of Bicycles  Joint Standing Committee on Transportation Tuesday, May 31, 2023, 10:00 a.m.  Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Committee on Transportation:  My name is James McKenna. I am a resident of Appleton, Maine. I am the victim of a nearly deadly bicycle crash who urges the passage of LD 456.   As I understand it, the legislation proposed by Senator and Chairman Chipman supports the use of bicycles by clarifying the language of two important safety statutes found within the Motor Vehicle and Traffic Code (Title 29-A):   1. the “left turns” statute (section 2060(2)); and 2. the  “crash reporting” statute (section 2251).  This legislation is relevant to me because on September 3, 2018, while I was safely, lawfully, and responsibly riding my bicycle downhill in Lincolnville, Maine, a driver made an unsafe decision to suddenly turn left into my path of bicycle travel. As a result of the driver’s dangerous decision, I was forced to brake and swerve to avoid what likely would have been a fatal impact. While I managed to avoid a motor vehicle on bike collision, I was thrown from my bike and suffered a head injury, an orthopedic injury, and other bodily harm as I landed on the asphalt surface of the roadway.  Amending section 2060 to explicitly require drivers who intend to turn left at any intersection to look for and yield the right-of-way to bicycle traffic approaching in the opposite direction is an excellent way to remind motorists that bicyclists are to be expected on all portions of the roadway and deserve due consideration. I believe that my crash could have been prevented had there been more specific language about left hand turns near bicyclists in the statute in 2018, and had the driver who turned left in front of me been given more specific instruction about the duty in  driver’s handbooks, public safety announcements, and other materials put out by the State of Maine.    Similarly, the amendment to the crash reporting statute proposed by Senator and Chairman Chipman is imperative because in crashes like mine, where there is no contact between a motor vehicle and a bicyclist, law enforcement officers are sometimes unclear about their obligations to generate a crash report. Eliminating ambiguities in the law to ensure that bicyclists and other vulnerable road users are offered the protection of a crash report when they or their property suffers any type of damage is not just logical, but it is fair and is good 
public policy. This is especially so given that bicyclists are often unable to advocate for a crash 
report and the protections it affords after a crash due to injury, death, language barriers or 
other factors.   Thank you for your consideration. I hope that you will vote “ought to pass” on LD 456. 
 
May 31, 2023
