TESTIMONY OF SUSAN MORRIS PORTLAND, MAINE 
LD 456– Ought to Pass 
An Act to Support the Use of Bicycles 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Tuesday, May 31, 2023, 10:00 a.m. 
 
Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Committee on 
Transportation: 
 
My name is Susan Morris. I am a resident of Portland, Maine. I am also the victim of a 2020 
motor vehicle operator v. bicyclist crash who is here to testify in favor of LD 456: An Act to 
Support the Use of Bicycles. 
 
The legislation proposed by Portland Senator/Chairman Chipman is important to me because it 
improves the language of two important safety statutes found within the Motor Vehicle and 
Traffic Code (Title 29-A). 
 
First, the proposed changes to section 2060 make it clear that drivers who are approaching an 
intersection and preparing to turn left must look for and yield the right-of-way to lawfully riding 
bicyclists who are or closely approaching the intersection.  In my experience, this amendment is 
necessary because there are those who still may believe that the law does not require drivers 
to yield to cyclists—only motor vehicles.  In fact, the driver who could have killed me was never 
charged or cited for turning left towards me when I was traveling straight and had the right-of-
way. 
 
Second, the proposed change to section 2251 makes it clear that State of Maine Crash Reports 
are required to be written up by law enforcement officers following most bicycle crashes, 
regardless of the amount of physical harm or property damage caused to a cyclist.  Sadly, in my 
case, even though I was nearly struck by a large vehicle coming at me, and although I broke my 
wrist swerving and crashing to avoid being hit, no State of Maine Crash Report form was filled 
out by law enforcement officers or entered in the State of Maine Crash Reporting Database.  
The rationale behind this decision is unclear to me, but I do believe that a more explicit statute 
addressing when crash reports are required would offer better guidance to all law enforcement 
departments in the future. 
 
Thank you for your consideration. I hope that you will vote “ought to pass” on LD 456. 
 
