 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 110 (Opposed )  
 
TO:   Senator Ben Chipman  
          Representative Lynne Williams  
          Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 110, A n Act to Prohibit L eaving a Child Under 10 Year s of Age Alone in a Motor 
Vehicle 
 
DA: March 2, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony opposed to LD 110 as drafted .   
 
 The bill would require the S tate to prove that the conditions under which the child is left in a 
vehicle  “present a substantial  health or safety risk. ”   The particular conduct  addressed by the bill  
likely also  falls within 17-A M.R.S. § 554(1) (C), endangering the we lfare of a child .   Th at 
particular provision of endangering provides , “(1) A  person is guilty of endang ering the welfare of a 
child if that person: …(C) Otherwise reckless ly endangers the health, safety or welfare of the child 
by violating a duty of care or protection.   Violation of this paragraph  is a C lass D crime. ”     
 
 The intent of the bill may be to prohibit less -culpable conduct subje ct to a lower civil 
standard of proof than the type of conduct that falls within the criminal endangering statut e and 
requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt .  If so, the civ il violation should  be drafted  to enable the 
public , law enforcement and the courts to distinguish between the two prohibitions .      
 
   
 
 
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
