1 
MaineHousingI 
t 
MAINE STATE HOUSING AUTHORITY 
Testimony of 
Erik C. jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations 8: Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
Before 
The ]oint Select Committee on Housing 
In support of 
LD 1422: An Act to End Homelessness and Assist Students Who Are Homeless by 
Establishing a Housing Voucher Program and Providing Site-based Housing 
Services 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the ]oint Select Committee on 
Housing, I am Erik Jorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations and 
Communications at the Maine State Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am 
submitting this testimony in support of LD 1422 
An Act to End Homelessness and /liszltt Student: I/V/90 Are H orne/em @/ Ertab/zkbing a Homing 
T/one/yer Progmm and Providing Sire-based Homing Services. 
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes 
since 1969. We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to 
address the problems of unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. 
We are authorized to issue bonds to finance single family mortgages for ﬁrst time 
homebuyers and for affordable multi-family housing. 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, 
including rental subsidies, Weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, 
the low-income housing tax credit program, and homeless grant programs. We 
receive state general fund revenue for homeless programs and receive a dedicated 
portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing Opportunities for Maine 
(HOME) Fund.
1
LD 1422 is a very speciﬁc bill that surgically addresses the problem of student 
homelessness. This problem is small in terms of numbers involved, but it could not 
be more acute for the people touched by it. In the original version of this bill, 
Representative Brennan included a “housing first” component; We understand that 
this part has been struck, leaving just the student homelessness section intact. 
The way we see this program Working would be for a school-based McKinney-Vento 
Coordinator to engage with a housing navigator in order to find a home fora 
homeless family with a child in school. If both the McKinney-Vento Coordinator and 
the navigator were to certify that the family could, in fact, move into a particular unit 
but for a portion of rent, this program could provide rental subsidy to the landlord for 
a determined amount of tirne. \While procedural details would need to be Worked out, 
We think that this is doable, given the finite number of students who are experiencing 
homelessness in Maine. Unlike broader rental assistance programs, this would bea 
highly targeted. 
\X/hile We support this concept, We should point out the problem of funding critical 
support services using short-term resources. This bill Would rely on a one-time 
appropriation of rental assistance, which, barring additional legislative action, will end. 
As we have all seen so painfully with the end of ERA, the end of any benefit program 
always creates a “cliff” for people who are reliant on a program for something as 
critical as housing. We don’t think that’s a disqualification, but urge the committee to 
consider that if they choose to move this bill forward.
2
