Testimony of Vera Institute of Justice Submitted in Support of HB 1422  
April 1 4th, 2023 
 
My name is Lindsay Rosenthal, and I am the director of the Vera Institute of Justice’s initiative to End Girls Incarceration (EGI). I thank the legislature for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of this bill, which is a positive step towards solving the crisis of youth and young adult homelessness in Maine.  
 Vera works to end mass incarceration, protect immigrants’ rights, ensure dignity for people behind bars, and build safe, thriving communities. EGI works to zero out the country’s confinement of girls and gender expansive youth. Through partnerships in jurisdictions in several states, including Maine, EGI  aims to support the well-being of young people in their 
communities, address the root causes of their incarceration, and permanently close the doors to girls’ juvenile detention and placement facilities.  
 From 2018 to 2020, Vera worked with the Maine Department of Corrections (DOC) towards ending girls’ incarceration statewide by working to keep girls and other young people in the community and provide appropriate services. Our work in Maine has given us a view into the problems facing many young people in the state, including homelessness and housing instability, as well as issues like mental health needs  and commercial sex trafficking  that might drive young 
people into homelessness.  
Far too many young people in Maine do not have safe and stable housing.1 To address the crisis , 
youth homelessness stakeholders in Maine—including youth with lived expertise, service 
providers, representatives from intersecting systems, and many others—engaged in a year -long 
collaborative planning process that produced a strong statewide vision and plan for addressing 
youth homelessness. The result is captured in “Maine’s Coordinated Community Plan to Prevent 
and End Youth and Young Adult Homelessness,” which  was published in the 2021 report , Hope 
and Opportunity for ME (H.O.ME). The report lays out a plan to ensure that youth and young adult homelessness in Maine is rare, and  brief  when it occurs, by meeting young people with 
both housing resources and an array of wraparound services to promote well-being during a pivota l developmental stage in their lives.
2 
 
However, e ven with recent increased state and federal support  to address Maine’s housing crisis, 
not enough resources are available to realize the H.O.ME plan. The youth homelessness crisis 
continues, and  the lack of safe and stable housing is both a cause and a consequence of youth 
incarceration for Maine’s most vulnerable young people.3 Place Matters recently issued a report 
summarizing findings from the first year of implementation of  DOC ’s Regional Care Teams  
(RCT) , which were set up to help support diversion and release from Long Creek Youth 
Development Center .4 They found that housing was a need for 50 percent  of youth referred  to 
RCT , making it the most commonly identified need.  
 
Vera also completed a landscape analysis of available housing resources for minors, including 
interviewing providers about capacity and priorities for service expansion.5 The landscape 
analysis concluded that Maine has many dedicated providers serving youth experiencing 
homelessness, as well as strong leadership from young people with lived expertise, but there 
simply aren’t enough housing units/beds and other services available to meet current needs. 
Vera’s analysis also reinforced  that the lack of housing capacity contributes to the problem of 
youth incarceration in Maine.  
 
Housing vouchers are a viable  solution to this problem. By allowing recipients to seek housing in 
the private housing market, vouchers allow people to circumvent public/affordable housing 
shortages , making this an immediately effective strategy. Further, by virtue of enabling 
recipients to find  and select  their own housing, vouchers will also offer youth and young adults 
experiencing homelessness much-needed flexibility to seek housing that either allows them to 
stay near schools and support systems, or to look further afield from any  danger they might be 
currently experiencing.  
 
Decades of extensive research  have demonstrated the effectiveness of housing vouchers in 
reducing homeless ness and housing instability, among other benefits.6 One review calls voucher 
expansion “ the single most important step policymakers can take to help families afford 
housing.”7 The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) Family Options  
study looked at 2,0000 families experiencing homelessness over 18 months, and it found housing 
vouchers to be more effective in stabilizing families  than  other forms of assistance, including 
temporary rental assistance, temporary housing, and shelter.8 
 
While there is limited research on the effects of housing programs on minors experiencing 
homelessness separate from their families, the existing research on families  shows that vouchers 
are especially beneficial to children.9 Studies show that children whose families receive housing 
voucher s have improved educational outcomes, health outcomes (and costs), social behavior, and 
future employment and income.10 
 
HB 1422 has many merits  as written . We applaud the choice to use the educational definition of 
“homeless student,” per section 13- A of the Maine educational code.11 This broad definition will 
allow the bill to do the most possible good for Maine’s youth. Further, research demonstrates 
that vouchers are especially effective when paired with supportive services, so we are pleased 
that this bill provides funding for suc h services.12 
 
Finally, we recommend that the state plan to educate landlords on the voucher program in 
anticipation of possible discrimination in the rental market against youth attempting to secure 
housing with these vouchers.13 
 
There are few housing options available to minors in need. Providing vouchers, as well as more 
supportive services, would be an excellent step in solving Maine’s crisis of youth and young 
adult homelessness.  I urge you to support HB 1422 and would welcome the opportunity to 
discuss the matter further.  
 
Thank you,  
Lindsay Rosenthal 
Initiative Dire ctor 
End Girls’ Incarceration  
LRosenthal@vera.org 
 
1 Chloe Teboe, “Maine Youth Experience Homelessness Amidst Affordable Housing Shortage ,” News Center 
Maine (WCSH), June 8, 2022, perma.cc/3XBD -9457 ; “Midcoast Maine Sees Rise in Youth Homelessness,” 
WGME, March 22, 2022, perma.cc/X48Q -BL3X ; and  Vanessa Paolella, “Homeless in Maine: Rising Number of 
Homeless Teens Face Grim Future,” Sun Journal , March 5, 2023, perma.cc/BUC8 -E8JH . 
2 Maine State Housing Authority, New Beginnings, Maine Continuum of Care, Main Statewide Youth Action 
Board, and Maine Department of Health and Human Services, H.O.M.E: Maine’s Coordinated Community Plan to 
Prevent and End Youth and Young Adult Homelessness  (Augusta, ME: MaineHousing, 2021), perma.cc/F667 -D3JU .  
3 “The Undeniable Link Between Incarceration and Homelessness,” Housing Up, August 23, 2022, perma.cc/K7R3 -
LFHZ . 
4 Mara Sanchez, Erica King, Jill Ward, et al., Regional Care Teams Fi rst Year Review: Cross Systems Collaboration 
to Improve Positive Youth Outcomes  (Portland, ME: Place Matters, 202), perma.cc/K8UZ -STT9 . 
5 Vera Institute of Justice , “Addressing Housing Instability as a Pathway to Incarceration for Minor Girls and 
Gender Expansive Youth in Maine ,” Memo to Juvenile Justice Advisory Group, January 2022.  See also Maine 
Housing, et al , H.O.M.E, 2021.  
6 Fischer, “Research Shows Housing Vouchers Reduce Hardship,” 2015. See also  Ingrid Elle n Gould, “What Do We 
Know About Housing Choice Vouchers ?,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 80 (2020), 
doi.org/10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2018.07.003 . 
7 Will Fischer, Sonya Acosta, and Erik Gartland, “More Housing Vouchers: Most Important Step to Help More 
People Afford Stable Homes,” CBPP, May 13, 2021, perma.cc/9PJH -4TQR . 
8 Daniel Gubits, Marybeth Shinn, Stephen Bell, et al., Family Options Study: Short -Term Impacts of Housing and 
Services Interventions for Homeless Families  (Washington, DC: HUD, 2015) , perma.cc/556E- YHH2 . 
9 Some early studies include Jean Zhuo Wang, Sebastian Mott, Olivia Magwood, et al., “The Impact of Interventions 
for Youth Experiencing Homelessness on Housing, Mental Health, Substance Use, and Family Cohesion: A 
Systematic Review ,” BMC Public Health 19 (2019), perma.cc/N752 -2ZTR ; and Justina Zhane Bethune, 
“Combating Youth Homelessness: A Comparative Case Study of NYS Housing Vouchers and Supporting Housing Models for Homeless Youth,” Master’s  thesis, Cornell University, 2022, 
perma.cc/X8KC -84Z7 . Importantly, the 
latter concludes that  longevity is  the most important component to successful voucher programs, highlighting the 
need for guaranteed long -term funding.  
10 For an overview of these benefits, see Fischer, “Research Shows Housing Vouchers Reduce Hardship,” 2015; and 
Community Preventative Service Task Force, Social Determinants of Health: Tenant -Based Housing Voucher 
Programs  (Washington, DC: CDC, 2020), perm a.cc/TS4V -LBGR . For health benefits, see Ramona K. C. Finnie, 
Yinan Peng, and Robert A. Hahn, et al., “Tenant -Based Housing Voucher Programs: A Community Guide 
Systematic Review,” Journal of Public Health Management and P ractice 28, no. 6 (2022), perma.cc/YQ77 -STDT . 
For lower healthcare costs, see  Craig Evan Pollack, Amanda L. Blackford, and Shawn Du, et al., “Association of 
Receipt of a Housing Voucher With Subsequent Hospital Utilization and Spending,” JAMA 322, no. 21 (2019), 
perma.cc/K7YK -C2DY . For improved school performance, see  
Amy Ellen Schwartz, Keren Mertens Horn, and Ingrid Gould Ellen, et al., “Do Housing Vouchers Improve 
Academic Performance? Evidence from New York City,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management  20, no. 1 
(2020), onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pam.22183 ; and Sarah Gold, “Housing Assistance and Children’s 
Educational Attainment: A Longitudinal Study ,” Doctoral thesis, Rutgers, 2018, perma.cc/Y63K -BS33 . 
11 Maine Legislature, Maine Revised Statutes, “Title 20 -A, Chapter 13: The Student Information Privacy Act,” 
perma.cc/A5J6 -LD9U . 
12 Fischer, et al., “More Housing Vouchers,” 2021; and  Bethune, ““Combating Youth Homelessness,” 2022.  
13 For rental discrimin ation in Maine, see Dan Neumann, “‘People Feel Unheard’: Lawmakers Search for More 
Answers to Maine’s Housing Crisis ,” Maine Beacon, January 28, 2022, perma.cc/C5KU -8EN3 . For rental 
discrimination nationally, see Kristian Hernández, “Biden Wants to Offer More Housing Vouchers. Many Landlords 
Won’t Accept Them.” Pew Trusts, May 12, 2021, perma.cc/77K7 -898H . 
 
 
