                                      
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.or g 
 
April 14 , 2023    
 
Senator  Teresa  Pierce , Chair  
Representative Traci Gere, Chair  
Committee on Housing  
Cross Building, Room 216  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
Re:  LD 1422: An Act to End Homelessness and Assist Students Who Are Homeless by 
Establishing a Housing Voucher Program and Providing Site -based Housing Services.  
Dear Senator Pierce, Rep. Gere, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Housing : 
My name is Mary Bonauto and I am the Senior Director  of Civil Rights at GLBTQ Legal 
Advocates & Defenders, a litigation and policy organization addressing issues affecting the 
LGBTQ people across communities  in Maine, regionally, and nationally . GLAD, t ogether with 
organizations well -known to you  - the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine and Disability 
Rights Maine  - thank you for the opportunity to support LD 1422 and Representative Brennan for 
bringing forth this bill.   
We appreciate both the enormity of the housing crisis and this Committee’ s steps to 
innovate solutions. LD 1422 is such an innovative bil l and would provide essential support for 
young people to attain a measure of housing stability  and all of the goods that flow from that .  
Some of the young people who would benefit from this program are justice -involved . A different 
committee is in the process of considering an issue addressed in the 130th Legislature1:  whether 
to place “juveniles” in secure juvenile detention (currentl y Long Creek) for “care” —without 
regard to whether they pose a risk to themselves, to others, or to public safety —because no suitable 
parent or other person can supervise them at home.  (LD 148, sec. 1) .2   
In other words, the idea is to place young people in a secure correctional facility because 
they are in fact or effectively homeless.  Some of these youth  are or have been in the care and 
custody of the Maine Department of Health and Human Services, which  assume s that role for the 
purpose of providing care that DHHS thought was otherwise lacking.  Some of these young people 
are rejected from their families, particularly transgender and gender  nonbinary youth.  In addition, 
the child and family may well have been struggling with a constellation of issues ranging from 
 
1 P.L. 2021, c. 398, Pt. KKK, §1.   
2 LD 148 would also authorize detention to prevent a young person “from committing juvenile crimes 
or criminal offenses if released, whether conditionally or unconditionally.”  (sec. 4)  
 
2 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.or g parental stresses with mental health, substance use, or separation, to community factors like 
economic hardship and racism, to individual mistreatment or abuse of a child .  
Whatever the reason for  a young person’s homeless, it is no way to grow up.  LD 1422  is 
well timed because the power of housing vouchers to keep young people in community  has already 
been demonstrated throught  the “Regional Care Team” (“RCT”) model . The RCT model began as 
an intervention  during Covid to remove young people from and prevent them from entering Long 
Creek  and remains a live resource  today .3   
According to the RCT Dashboard, t o date t he “Regional Care Team” model has made 203 
referrals and has repeatedly succeeded in fi nding solutions to meet a young person’s needs and/or 
their family’s in order to keep them safely in the community .4  Housing and family supports were 
the two issues that topped the list of supports needed .  According to  the Place Matters project, the 
pioneers of this model, housing was the most common need , and rental assistance and short -term 
hotel costs (funded with unspent covid money) were the most common supports  in the first full 
year of the intervention in 2021 .5  The RCT collaborations identified needs going forward, too, 
such as “using existing housing vouchers [for] justice -involved youth, ” as well as developing more 
transitional  living and supportive housing programs, and support ing youth under 18 to be able to 
live independently. ”6 Significantly, e ighty -three percent of the young people  referred in July 2020 
to July 2021 that year have remained in the community while the remainder have been confined 
or returned to Long Creek for further criminal conduct.”7   
 
3 This is an ongoing collaboration of the Place Matters team at USM with the Maine Center for 
Juvenile Policy and Law with essential participation from :  the Departments of Corrections, Health & 
Human Services’s Office of Child & Family Services, Education and Labor;  community organizers 
addressing housing and homelessness;  DRM ( disability advocacy );  wraparound services (from 
Wings and The Opportunity Alliance) : and Regional Corrections Administrators and Juvenile 
Community Corrections Officers from each of  the three DOC regions.  
4 Regional Care Team Data Dashboard, available at: 
https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=eyJrIjoiNzJiNWIwMzYtY2EyMC00ZTM2LTg2NWEtYjZhNDQ2
MGM2ODc5IiwidCI6IjM2Nzk0NjU4LWYyMTktNGFkNC1hZjdiLTFiNjhkMTkwMDQ0MyIsIm
MiOjN9&pageName=ReportSectiona774d7bde0d7eed03d15 .   
See also Mara Sanchez, Erica King, Jill Ward & Jillian Foley, Regional Care Teams First Year 
Review: Cross Systems Collaboration to Improve Positive Youth Outcomes e (hereinafter Place 
Matters RCT Report), available at  https://placemattersmaine.org/wp -
content/uploads/2021/12/RCT_Report_WEB1.pdf ; Erica King, Jill Ward, Jillian Foley & Emma 
Schwartz,  Second Year Review: Cross Systems Collaboration to Improve Positive Youth Outcomes e 
(hereinafter Place Matters (2023), available at: https://placemattersmaine.or g/wp -
content/uploads/2023/03/RCT_2022_final_WEB.pdf  (hereafter “ Second Year  RCT Report”).  
5 Other needs included: connections with case management, counseling and medical care, technology 
including laptops, hotspots and cell phones, facilitation of a new foster care placement, funds for 
clothing, driver’s education, art supplies and for security  equipment to keep youth safe in the 
community.   
6 Place Matters .  RCT  First Year Report at 9.  
7 Id.  (Young people presented with multiple needs:  40% Housing, 40% Family or Relationships; 
38% Safety or Supervision; 36% Educational Needs; 33% Mental Heal th Support or Treatment; 33% 
3 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.or g We strongly urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1422.  It is an important intervention 
for young people’s safety, stability and education.  There are vehicles in Maine, including the 
RCT structure, that could use these resources to keep young people conne cted. Thank you.  
Sincerely,  
Mary Bonauto, Sr. Director Civil Rights GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders  
Atlee Reilly, Legal Director Disability Rights Maine  
Carol Garvan, Legal Director, American Civil Liberties Union of Maine  
                       
GLAD  
257 Deering Ave., #203  
Portland, ME 04102  
 
Prosocial Needs; 31% Transportation; 23% Employment or Job Skills; 17% Substance Use Disorder 
or Treatment; 15% Legal Assistance; 10% Medical or Health Related Needs).  
 
 

