State of Maine 
State Board of Education 
 
Testimony of Edmond Morin, Chair of the Career and Technical Education 
Committee of the Maine State Board of Education. 
 
L.D. 1942, 131st Maine Legislature, First Special Session-2023:  An Act to Ensure 
Equity in Career and Technical Education Staffing Support Ratios Across Varied 
Regions of the State. 
 
Date:  May 24, 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. 
 
My name is Edmond Morin.  I’m a member of the Maine State Board of Education 
and Chair of the Board’s Career and Technical Education Committee.  On behalf of 
the State Board, I am testifying in support of L.D. 1942. 
 
As an advocate for access to quality career and technical education, the State 
Board of Education believes this bill is a crucial step forward in promoting fairness 
and opportunities for all students across Maine.   
 
In its 5-year Strategic Plan for Career and Technical Education the State Board has 
as a goal reducing systemic barriers to CTE.  We believe L.D. 1942 addresses one 
such barrier.   
 
In a CTE Systemic Barrier report dated  June 30th, 2022, prepared by Educate 
Maine for the State Board of Education’s CTE Committee, it’s stated several 
participants reported that rural CTE regions and centers struggle to meet the class 
size guidelines of 13 which can have negative funding repercussions.   
 
L.D. 1942 addresses this issue by seeking to ensure equitable staffing support 
ratios across different regions of the state.  By establishing consistent and fair 
staffing levels in CTE programs, the bill aims to provide students with equal access 
to high-quality instruction and resources, regardless of their geographic location.  
Allowing schools with fewer than 1,000 students to have one full-time CTE 
employee for every 8 students rather than 13, will help level the playing field for 
students in underserved areas, allowing them to benefit from the same 
opportunities and resources as their peers in more populated regions.  
 
The State Board of Education supports L.D. 1942 as a means to ensure equity in 
CTE staffing support ratios across varied regions of Maine.  By implementing 
consistent staffing levels, this bill will help create a more equitable educational 
system, provide equal opportunities for all students, and ultimately contribute to 
a stronger and more prosperous workforce for the state.  I urge you to consider 
the positive impact this legislation will have on Maine’s students and to support 
its passage.   
 
The State Board will be available for any workshops on this legislation.  
 
 
 
