  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce In Support 
of   
L.D. 1942 An Act to Ensure Equity in Career and Technical Education Staffing Support Ratios 
Across Varied Regions of the State 
  
Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner and I 
represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association 
made up of both large and small businesses, here to provide you with my 
testimony in support of LD1942 
 
The business community is pleased to see the growth in career and technical 
education programs over the past several years. The expansion of these programs 
has done well to help the state reach certificate of value and education attainment 
goals. As a member of the MaineSpark Coalition, the Maine State Chamber values 
efforts to expand the size and skills of Maine’s future workforce. Reducing 
barriers to this type of educational experience is a top priority for the Chamber and 
its business community members. While these programs have expanded, there are 
areas of the state that have difficulty meeting current student-teacher ratios. This 
difficulty is based on population, not demand for the program. This legislation will 
give schools, regardless of location, the ability to continue programs that are 
drivers for their local economies. Technical education and career readiness in 
many fields, including healthcare, are essential to the future success of Maine’s 
rural communities. 
 
Current student-teacher ratios can put CTE programs at risk when areas 
have small dips in population, even for short periods of time. When a program is 
discontinued it can be a difficult and expensive task to reimplement when the 
population returns ratios back to accepted levels. This risk is very real in rural 
areas and can make it difficult for schools plan on future investments, develop 
curriculum that continues to meet industry standards, and generate a reliable 
pipeline of talent for the businesses and organizations that fuel local economies. 
 
This legislation would help save critical CTE programs, help to level the 
field regardless of geographic location, and keep decisions about the validity and 
future of CTE programs at the local level. I ask that you please support this bill 
and consider the many positive outcomes that will result from this change in ratio 
structure. 
 
   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.   
 
    
  
  
