llﬁllir 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
' BMHDS Tele hone: 207 622-3473 Fax: 207 626-2968 
suc eouc/mom ADVOCATES ASSOCIATION . 
PU _ WebSlt6' wWw'mSn1aweb'c0'n I I 
Maine SchoolSuperintendentsAssocimirm 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF 
L.D. 1942 
AN ACT TO ENSURE EQUITY IN CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION STAFFING 
SUPPORT RATIOS ACROSS VARIED REGIONS OF THE STATE 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in support of L.D. 1942. 
School Boards and superintendents support this bill because it allows for reasonable stafﬁng ratios for Career 
and Technical Education classes in smaller CTE Regions and Centers to assure more students will have access 
to programs that lead to meaningful career paths. We need those students to stay in Maine and help ﬁll job 
vacancies that will increase as people retire. 
Those retirements already are having an effect and Maine needs to continue work to support the development 
of replacement workers with 215‘ century skills. 
A report commissioned by the Maine Connectivity Authority said the state is expecting to have a shortfall of 3 ,240 
Workers in broadband jobs. 
We also face a shortage in the health care industry at the same time our population is aging into retirement. Maine has 
one of the highest percentages in the country of people older than 50 and one of the lowest percentages of those between 
18 to 49. 
Career and Technical Education prepares our students to ﬁnd meaningful work after graduation in ﬁelds that support 
Maine residents and provide good paying jobs for these students. We need to support our CTE teachers and schools. 
The proposed student to teacher norm for CTE is 13-to-l in larger CTE catchment areas and 8-to-l in smaller 
catchment areas (under 1,000 students). As it stands now, if schools are only getting an allocation for half a staff 
member for student counts less than 13, they will have an increasingly difficult time ﬁnding instructors who need full- 
time work. As a result, programs will not continue, students will not be able to enroll in these classes, and the desired 
workers will not be produced. 
MSSA and MSBA urge you to vote OTP on L.D. 1942. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
