“ ii€»=.=\ <3?
, /<" 
=»= vs. -:=;$J=n 
I ».:<“~.' 
-"i-.1' 
. ili£~ir.~. 
.2, 
‘E555?-"“ 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 1942 
An Act to Ensure Equity in Career and Technical Education Staﬁing Support Ratios 
Across Varied Regions of the State 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Wednesday, May 24, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Troy Jackson. l serve as President of 
the Maine Senatel and proudly represent Aroostook County in the Legislature. l am here today 
to support LD 1942, An Act to Ensure Equity in Career and Technical Education Staffing Support 
Ratios Across Varied Regions of the State. 
l would like to start my testimony by clearly admitting that l am not an expert on the Essential 
Programs and Services (EPS) funding formula. l do know the intent behind it is to ensure that 
all students have an equitable opportunity and it is based on student needs. The Career and 
Technical Education (CTE) cost model is a subset of the EPS formula and relies on data for 
enrollment, staffing, facilities, and expenditures. LD 1942 deals specifically with the student-to- 
staffing ratio. 
My understanding is that the current EPS formula restricts CTE programs to a ratio of 13 
students to one full-time instructor. This means that smaller, rural CTE centers who have fewer 
students in their enrollment areas are at a disadvantage. To make matters worse, if a school 
needs to reduce staffing because of this restriction, it is especially hard to fill part-time 
positions. This in turn decreases the likelihood of keeping these programs active. Meaning 
fewer opportunities for kids. 
LD 1942 is an attempt to fix this situation and improve opportunities for students. It takes into 
consideration smaller districts, with fewer students. Students who deserve CTE programs and 
services. The bill simply requires the Department of Education to adopt routine technical rules 
that would differentiate and make the staff-to-student ratios between schools with less than 
1,000 students more equitable. It would take into consideration variables that are outside the 
students, staff, and districts control. 
State House (207) 287-1500 * Cell (207) 436-0763 * Fax (207) 287-5862 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Seiiator./acksonl @gmail. com * Web Sire: legislature. mair1e.g0v/senate
Therefore, l ask you to please join me in supporting the needs of all students regardless of the 
size of the school's population. These kids deserve the opportunity to learn, grow, and become 
proficient in the courses offered through CTE programming. They are our future and they need 
yourhdptonmketmsared ﬁy 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I will attempt to answer any questions you may 
have.
