 
 
 
Senator Nicole Grohoski,  
Representative Joseph Perry 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta ME 04333 
 
March 27, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation,  
 
The Appalachian Mountain Club appreciates the opportunity to submit comments regarding LD 
341 An Act to Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage Housing Construction.  
 
AMC is the nation’s oldest conservation, recreation and education organization, with the 
mission to foster the protection, enjoyment and understanding of the outdoors. We have 6,600 
members in Maine and own 100,000 acres of forestland in Piscataquis County which we 
manage for multiple use, including sustainable forestry, backcountry recreation, and 
environmental education. Our Maine land holdings are enrolled in the Tree Growth tax 
program.  
 
We recognize the challenges Maine is facing in housing, and we appreciate Rep. Ducharme’s 
wish to address the issue. Like many employers, AMC has found that housing costs discourage 
qualified applicants from joining our organization. Yet we respectfully suggest that LD 341 is not 
the best approach to solving the housing crisis.   
 
More than 50 years ago, lawmakers determined “It is declared to be the public policy of this 
State that the public interest would be best served by encouraging forest landowners to retain 
and improve their holdings of forest lands upon the tax rolls of the State and to promote better 
forest management by appropriate tax measures in order to protect this unique economic and 
recreational resource.” 
 
Those words were prescient. Maine’s forest lands have a critical role to play in addressing the 
two most pressing issues of our time: climate change and biodiversity loss.  
 
Maine’s forested lands sit at the heart of the largest, most intact temperate forest in the world. 
They absorb 60% of the state’s carbon pollution per year, and a recent study finds that they 
could hold 20% more with the right management practices. They harbor 139 rare plants and 
 
animals, 21 of them globally rare. They make up the largest Globally Important Bird Area in the 
continental United States. Because our forests are large and unfragmented, they allow species 
to move, thrive, and adapt to changing temperatures.  
 
Yet our forests face numerous challenges, from invasive insects and disease, to increased 
drought and forest fires, to development pressure. Presently we lose an estimated 10,000 acres 
per year to development.  
 
We should strive to keep our forests as forests to mitigate climate change and prevent further 
loss of biodiversity. For five decades, the Tree Growth Tax Law has been an important tool in 
doing just that.  Landowners who enrolled their property in Tree Growth have paid lower 
property taxes in return for that public benefit while realizing economic return from harvesting. 
 
LD 341 would lower the penalty for withdrawing property from the program, undermining the 
stability that has been key to the program. By encouraging single family housing units in 
previously forested areas, it would fragment the forest and promote sprawl.   
 
We ask you to vote Ought Not to Pass.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Eliza Townsend 
Maine Conservation Policy Director 
 
