 
19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622 -7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®   
12781773.1  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 341 (“An Act to Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax 
Law to Encourage Housing Construction”)  
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
 
April 6, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation , my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. 
We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association 
established in 1936 with over 6,500 membe rs statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s 
economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved 
in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes 
industry affiliates, such as lenders, clos ing agents, title agents, appraisers, building 
inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association 
of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports LD 341. The bill reduces the penalty of 
removing land from the Maine Tree Growth program if the land is used to build a single -family 
home on the property within two years.  
 
We support this bill because it elimin ates an obstacle for the construction of residential 
housing. Maine’s housing shortage will not be solved without more supply. Opportunities to 
remove barriers to development  should be carefully considered . The Tree Growth program 
is an incentive against development – not a prohibition . This bill  properly ma intains  
environmental protections while encouraging housing supply . It is a  balanced approach 
keeping property owner protections intact and encourag ing private investment, which 
contributes to e conomic stability and self -sufficiency.  
 
The scope of this bill is specific so as to minimize the environmental impact of the 
development: it eliminates the penalty for a single -family home not a large  scale 
development. W e support the bill’s approach to addressing the need for housing while 
balancing environmental protections  and preserving Maine’s tree growth.  
 
For these reasons, we support LD 341 and respectfully urge you to vote ought to pass. Thank 
you for your time and consideration.  
 
 
