March 30, 2023 
T11eNatur € 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director COHS€1"VEtI1Cy 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine Mame 
l<aitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.0rg A. 
A Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
RE: LD 341 - An Act to Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage Housing 
. Construction 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and I am the Government Relations Director for 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to testify in 
opposition to LD 341 - An Act to Amend the Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage 
Housing Construction. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on-the-ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate. i 
The Nature Conservancy strongly supports the Tree Growth Tax Law program and 
advocates for maintaining it. We believe this bill makes unnecessary and harmful 
changes to this important program. LD 341 proposes to reduce the penalty for 
withdrawal of land from classification under the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law if the land 
is used for the construction of single-family residential housing and the conditions 
required for building construction are met within 2 years of withdrawal. 
Given that the Tree Growth Tax Law is intended to keep land forested and available for 
the harvest of commercial forest products, and that the penalties in the Tree Growth 
Tax Law for withdrawal of lands from Tree Growth are essential to its success, we view 
LD 341 as directly opposed to the integrity of the Tree Growth Tax Law.' 
it is important to consider any changes to Tree Growth alongside the history and . 
context of the program. The Legislature enacted the Tree Growth Tax Law in 1972 to 
help landowners maintain their property as productive woodlands, and to broadly 
support the state's wood products industry. Under the program, forest land is assessed 
on the basis of its current use, and not its highest and best use. This structure is 
designed to provide an adequate incentive to keep land forested, to manage the land 
on a sustained yield basis, and not to fragment and develop the land. 
Since its inception it has become one of Maine's most important tools to encourage 
sustainable forestry and has served to enhance recreational opportunities and to 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, Maine 04011 nature.orggmaine_
protect wildlife habitat. The program fits a wide variety of needs and uses — from small 
landowners managing their wood lots to large landowners managing hundreds of 
thousands of acres; and for a variety of uses including harvesting for saw logs, pulp, 
veneer-grade products, wildlife habitat, maple syrup, hardwood and softwood pulp 
construction materials, and many more. 
In addition, as recently as 2018, the Maine Legislature convened a Study Group to 
review the Tree Growth program based on a set of comprehensive questions from the 
Taxation Committee. The Study Group, led by the University of Maine's School of 
Forest Resources, examined nearly every aspect of the Tree Growth program. Its 
membership included the Maine Woodland Owners Association, the Maine Municipal 
Association, the Maine Forest Products Council, The Nature Conservancy, the Maine 
Farm Bureau and the Association of Consulting Foresters. (The Bureau of Forestry was 
also appointed by the Taxation Committee but declined to participate at the time) The 
group met nine times and held a public listening session in the summer and fall of 2017 
to review information, seek feedback and identify actions to improve implementation 
of the Tree Growth Tax Law. 
The report and recommendations examined compliance issues, minimum lot size, 
penalties, the role of the Bureau, the role of local assessors, and technical assistance 
opportunities. in the end, the Study Group did not suggest any legislative changes, but 
focused more on increasing education and outreach. 
For these reasons, we urge the Committee to oppose LD 341, An Act to Amend the 
Maine Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage Housing Construction. Thank you again for 
this opportunity to participate in this process. l am pleased to answer any questions 
you have now or in the future.
