 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  (MMA)  
 
In Opposition to  
LD 341, An Act to Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage Housing Construction   
 
March 30, 2023  
 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee.  My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in opposition to LD 341 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s Legislative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest.   
Reducing the penalties for the very generous tax breaks provided to property owners 
enrolled in the Tree Growth program, in the name of housing, without the data illustrating that 
such an incentive would result in the development of needed units  in various areas of the state is 
of significant concern.   
For example, will the development of single -family housing only meet the needs of the 
region?  What are the limits?  How many acres of land currently reserved for the appropriate 
harvesting of t rees will be removed from the program in any given year?  What are the impacts 
on this heritage  industr y?   
What are the costs of pushing development into more rural areas?  What impacts will 
these changes have on demands for public wat er and sewer , the provision of fire, law 
enforcement and emergency medical services  or the maintenance of local roads ?   
Additionally, how will the development of forested land conflict with other conservation 
and environmental policies ?  More specifically , how does a policy that encourages development 
in rural areas impact other state level policy priorities seeking to protect the state from the 
adverse impacts o f climate change ? 
While municipal officials understand that the development of housing is a top priority for 
the state and our communities, it must be accomplished in a t houghtful manner, with solutions 
based on data and need.  To date, the implemented solutions have not been developed with the 
use of much needed data, or with the provision  of the technical assistance and financial resources 
municipalities  require  to implement state goals .  More poignantly , state level support for loc al 
planning and growth has  been largely absent since the State Planning Office was abolished just 
over a decade ago.  
When it comes to housing policy, it appears that the proverbial cart has been placed 
before the horse.  As an example, MaineHousing is jus t now in the process of conducting a 
housing gap study to collect the data necessary to determine the type of housing and number of 
units needed in three separate regions of the state.  However, nearly a year ago the Legislature  

enacted a law placing sig nificant demands on municipalities to support the develop ment of  
housing, once again without data or assistance, although both were promised.   
To ensure that housing solutions deliver intended outcomes, municipal officials strongly 
urge the state to wait for the data before determini ng how best municipalities can help  implement 
state-initiated housing development goals. Failing to do so will simply result in the misuse of 
limited state and local resources.  
It is for this reason that municipal officials oppose the proposal found in LD 341.    
Rather than quickly moving forward with the proposal , municip al officials ask that you 
first collect and analyze data and implement the solutions that support state level goals and yield 
intended outcomes.   
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  If you have any 
questions about the Assoc iation’s position on this bill, please do not hesitate to contact me at 
kdufour@memun.org  or 1-800-452-8786.  
 
