 
 
 
Testimony in Opposition to  LD 341,  
An Act to Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage Housing Construction  
March 30 , 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and  members of the Committee on Taxation, I am Melanie 
Sturm, the Forests and Wildlife Director at the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM), and I 
appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in opposition to LD 341 . 
 
NRCM is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization that advocates for protecting, restoring, and conserving 
Maine’s environment, now and for future generations. For more than 60 years, NRCM has been 
protecting the places and way of life that make Maine so special. We have more than  25,000 members 
and activists statewide.  
 
NRCM has concerns with this bill , and the proposed amendment  doesn ’t assuage  these concerns,  nor do 
we believe tweaks to the language could  improve the bill because  its basic premise  is flawed . LD 341 
seeks to reduce  the penalty for withdraw ing land from classification under the Maine Tree Growth Tax 
Law if the land is used for the construction of a single -family home. It would u ndermine  the purpose of 
the Tree Grow th Tax Law to keep forests as forests , which provide a wide range of benefit s to Maine 
people , communities, and the environment . Since 1972, t he Tree Growth Tax Law has help ed Maine 
lando wners maintain their property as working fore sts, preserving  many benefits of th e forests , 
including  their  recreational  and scenic  qualities, economic benefits , and use as wildlife habitat . Maine 
Won ’t Wait , the state ’s four-year climate action plan,  recognize d the importance of forests  in capturing 
and storing carbon . Protections for Maine ’s for ests, a  massive carbon s ink that helps mitigate  climate 
change , should be strengthened not weakened . 
 
The Tree Grow th Tax Law is one of the few incentives  in Maine  for landowners  to maintain their  fores ts. 
By reducing the penalty for taking land out of Tree G rowth , LD 341 would strip away  the mechanism 
that keeps  landowners a ccountable . This could lead to gaming o f the system  where by a private 
landowner or develop er could enroll their land  in Tree Growth  for the tax reduction  with the intent to 
sell later since t he gains f rom selling for development would more than compensate for the penalty.  
 
While we appreciate one goal of the bill – to addres s the lack of housing  in Maine  – this isn ’t the right 
approach to solving that pr oblem.  New housing should be near  service centers to avoid sprawl , not on 
10-acre or larger plots of land. Sprawl has  numerous negative ef fects  on the environment, 
municipal ities, and public health , and dense  or multiunit  housing shoul d be promoted over  single -family  
homes.  Portland already has some of the  worst sprawl in the country.  This bill is coming at a time o f 
unprece dented development pressure , espec ially in southern Maine , with  10,000 acres  of forest  lost 
annually to development.   
 
I respectfully urge the Committee to vote Ought  Not to Pass on LD 341. Thank you for your time and 
consideration of this issue, and I would be glad to answer any questions you may have.  
