1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 30, 2023 
  
LD 341 – An Act to Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage 
Housing Construction 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 341 – 
An Act to Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage Housing 
Construction. 
This bill raises both significant technical concerns as drafted, and significant policy 
issues in its approach of tying the Tree Growth program to efforts to address the 
State’s housing shortage.  The Administration’s view is that adding complexity to 
the longstanding Tree Growth program – with its balance of policy objectives, 
compliance steps, and administrative costs – may not be well-served by 
complicating that balance, at least in the manner currently proposed by this bill.   
Additional policy concerns are as follows.  First, the language of the bill does not 
limit the parcel size eligible for reduced penalty.  For example, a taxpayer could 
withdraw an entire 15,000-acre parcel from the Tree Growth if they build a house 
on one acre of the withdrawn property.  Similarly, a taxpayer could withdraw a 
large parcel from Tree Growth primarily for commercial or other types of 
development and pay a lower penalty as long as they used “a portion of the land” 
for single-family residential housing.  In addition, if land in the Tree Growth Tax 
2 
 Law program is sold to a person who intends to build a residence on that land, but 
subsequently sells that land to a second buyer who does not build a residence, that 
second buyer may be unknowingly subject to a supplemental penalty. 
I will note that the new language may result in a taxpayer paying a penalty that is 
less than the minimum established by the Maine Constitution, article IX, section 8.  
The existing penalty option in 36 M.R.S. § 581(3)(A) reflects the constitutional 
penalty and allowing the option of a lower penalty may violate the constitutional 
requirement.  The Office of Attorney General should be consulted on that point. 
Turning to technical concerns, the phrase “the conditions required for building 
construction” is unclear and should be defined or clarified.  In addition, the bill 
should clarify whether an owner may reinstate withdrawn land in the Tree Growth 
Tax Law program within two years of withdrawal if no residential housing is 
constructed.  Finally, the two-year time limit and the requirement to determine 
whether the conditions for construction are met, along with the potential for 
supplemental penalties, adds complexity and administrative costs to the 
municipalities to track and review these properties.   
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
