Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against  LD 341 
 
“An Act to Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage 
Housing Construction ” 
 
March 30 , 2023  
 
Pat Strauch, Executive Director  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry  and members of the Committee on  
Taxation , my name is Patrick Strauch,  and I am here today to present testimony on 
behalf of the Maine forest Products Council neither for nor against  LD 341, “ An Act to 
Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage Hous ing Construction.”   
 As proposed, this bill would reduce the penalty for withdrawal of land from 
classification under the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law (TG TL) if the land is used for the 
construction of single -family residential housing and the conditions required for 
building construction are met within two years of withdrawal . 
While the Council has routinely expressed concerns with attempts to change or alter the 
longstanding TGTL, and this would certainly be a departure from the status quo, we appreciate Representative Ducharme’s introduction of this legislation and his objective to stimulate economic development while preserving the integrity of the program.   Since 1971, the statutory description of TGTL has said : 
 
• “It is declared to be the public policy of this State that the public interest would be best 
served by encouraging forest landowners to retain and improve their holdings of forest lands 
upon the tax rolls of the State and to promote better forest management by appropriate tax 
measures in order to protect this unique economic and recreational resource.”  
 
• “Therefore, this subchapter is enacted for the purpose of taxing forest lands generally 
suitable fo r the planting, culture and continuous growth of forest products on the basis of their 
potential for annual wood production ...” 
In large part, this program has been successful in maintaining active forest management which 
supports our ecofriendly wood industry, creates more vigorous and adaptable forests, and 
pushes back against the loss of forestland due to development.  
Most of my members are concerned with any attempts to change the TGTL, particularly when 
unrelated concepts are proposed to the program (e.g. land recreation requirements, Sunday 
hunting, etc.). 
 
2 
 This bill is viewed by some members to be incompatible with the proposed public policy purpose of the program and  they 
have concerns about outright support of the bill.  
There are some who are willing to listen to the perspectives of the sponsors and assess the merits of the proposal.  For 
example, questions posed by the industry include:  
• Will this proposal strengthen the TGTL by allowing limited development with a ONE -TIME  two Acre 
lot creation provision?  
• Does the legislation provide relief for individuals interested in ongoing forest management but requiring 
economic relief?  
• Should the opportunity be limited to family members, thereby encouraging an ongoing connection to the 
forestland base?  
• Recent  turnover of nonindustrial land post COVID has brought in new  landowners with limited 
knowledge of forest stewardship. Does this legislation encourage retention of large, forested parcels by 
providing some economic relief for these new owners ? 
Thank you for your consideration and for the opportunity to speak on this bill . I would be happy to answer any 
questions the committee may have.  
 
 
