Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeﬁ Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Melrose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Ernest Carle 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Mulliken Court PO Box 836 e Augusta, ME 04332-0836 i-%¥Telephone:207~626-0005 Email:info@mainewood|andowners.org s Website: www.mainewoodlandowners org XAINE 
>@Dui.ua COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Tom Doak 
Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
In Support of 
LD 341 
“An Act to Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law 
to Encourage Housing Construction ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation, my name is Tom Doak, I am the Executive 
Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today in support of LD 341, “An 
Act to Amend the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law to Encourage Housing 
Construction. ” 
The bill allows removal from the Tree Growth Tax Law certain property that is 
intended to be used for a single-family residential dwelling. I had the opportunity 
to work with Representative Ducharme as he was preparing this bill and 
understand he has submitted a sponsor’s amendment to the bill that addresses 
many things we discussed. 
I am not an expert on housing or housing construction needs. However, asa 
licensed professional forester and former Director of the Maine Forest Service, I 
am very familiar with the Tree Growth Tax Law program. In my current role of 
working with family woodland owners, it is the number one request for assistance 
I receive. 
The law has been around since the early 1970’s and while for years it seemed like 
every session there were proposals to change it (mostly for the worse), this 
Committee has been very prudent in its approach to adjustments to this very 
important program.' 
My organization has long been skeptical of making many changes to the Tree 
Growth Tax Law. But there are opportunities occasionally that are worth 
considering, particularly if the Committee decides as a matter of policy that these 
changes would help address housing issues in Maine. I believe this bill as 
amended has been narrowly tailored with its sunset provision and minimum lot 
size such that the impact on the Tree Growth Tax Law wou1dn’t be overly 
burdensome. 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - lRC 501(c)(3)
The Tree Growth Tax Law is intended to encourage woodland owners to keep their land as forest 
land. To qualify, and remain in the Tree Growth Tax Law program, a landowner must: 
¢ Have at least ten forested acres capable of growing commercial forest products; 
0 Agree not to develop or change the use of the property to a non-forest use; 
0 Pay a professional forester, licensed in Maine, to prepare a management plan that meets 
the standards spelled out in statute; 
0 Pay the forester to update that plan every ten years; 
0 Pay a forester to certify that the land is being managed consistent with the forest 
management plan and submit that certiﬁcation to the tax assessor every ten years; 
Q Sign an attestation on initial enrollment in the program, and every ten years 
thereafter, that the primary use of the land is to grow trees to be harvested for commercial 
use. 
Other provisions of the Tree Growth Tax Law program: 
\/ When the program was created in the early 1970s, all forestland parcels of 500 acres 
or more were required to enroll; 
~/ The land is subject to an audit by the assessor at any time; 
~/ The program runs with the land. Upon sale or transfer of the property, the land 
remains covered by the program unless the new landowner removes the property and 
pays the penalties; 
\/ The landowner knows the terms when he or she enrolls, but once in the program, the 
terms can change and there is no “out” clause without substantial penalty; 
/ There are substantial penalties for withdrawing land from the program It is not 
uncommon for the penalty to be much higher than the total reduction in taxes the 
landowner received while in the program. 
This bill would essentially reduce the penalties for withdrawing a portion (the minimum lot size 
in the community) of a parcel enrolled in the Tree Growth Tax Law program if the land 
withdrawn was used for single family housing within two years. 
There are currently two ways to calculate the penalties for withdrawing land from the Tree 
Growth Tax Law program and the landowner must pay the higher of the two:
l. The Maine Constitution requires a minimum penalty of the taxes that would have been 
paid on the land over the last ﬁve years if it were not enrolled in the program, minus any 
taxes paid under the program - essentially ﬁve years back taxes and interest. 
2. A formula based on the difference in valuation per acre of the land enrolled in the Tree 
Growth Tax Law program and that same land. 
In reality, the 2“d method is almost always substantially more than the ls‘ method, and that is 
intentional. The penalties for taking land out of the program are purposely high to keep people 
in the program as it was created in part to ensure adequate wood supply to the forest products 
industry. 
This legislation would provide that the penalty for withdrawing land which meets the conditions 
outlined (limited to minimum lot size, must be used for a single family dwelling etc.) would be 
based upon the lesser of the two methods of calculating penalties, instead of the greater. This 
change would make it more likelyl feasible to make land currently enrolled in the program 
available for housing. 
Landowners enrolled in the Tree Growth Tax Law program and the forest products industry, 
sometimes for different reasons, are always a bit nervous about any legislation that tinkers with 
the program as there have been some proposals in the past that would undermine it in substantial 
ways. And my organization is not advocating removing lands from the program. But if the 
Committee feels this is a way to deal with housing issues then the way the amendment is 
structured would, in our view, have very limited impact on the purpose of the Tree Growth Tax 
Law program. 
If the Committee goes forward with this, I have a couple of minor clariﬁcations and one possible 
more substantial suggestion: 
Because the Maine Constitution sets out the minimum penalty, the penalty for removing a lot 
that qualiﬁes under this legislation should be option #1. 
It is important to note that this bill would require that after withdrawal of the minimum lot size 
the remaining parcel must s_til l contain at least l0 forested acres to meet the Tree Growth Tax 
Law requirements or the entire parcel must be withdrawn. In the event that removal of a lot 
reduces the remaining acreage to less than ten, it would make sense to clarify whether the 
reduced penalty would still be applied to the minimum lot size or whether the entire parcel would 
be subject to current penalty provisions. 
I do think sun-setting this legislation, as is proposed, is a good idea. It would provide an 
opportunity to review its effectiveness. The sunset provision does limit removals to one lot per 
year until January 1, 2029. If there is concern about the proposed provision of being able to 
remove one lot amiually, the Committee could consider limiting a minimum lot removal to one 
per existing enrolled parcel.
