Anita Stewart
Portland Stage
LD 1163
I’m Anita Stewart, the Artistic Director of Portland Stage. Thank you for allowing me
to speak in support of  “An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Capital 
Improvements for Arts and Cultural Facilities” (HP0735)  presented by 
Representative BRENNAN, of Portland and co sponsored Senator ROTUNDO, and 
Representative GATTINE, MEYER, DOUDERA, DODGE, BRIDGEO, and PERRY.
As a public facing organization, Portland Stage places the community we serve at the 
forefront. In the course of a season, we typically serve around 50,000 individuals 
from across the state. Some of our subscribers travel 125 miles each way to attend 
productions in our space.  
With robust Education Programs in schools across Maine serving up to 10,000 
students each year, we work with schools in 9 counties, from Kennebunk to Mars 
Hill, Harpswell to Fryberg and Topsham to Lewiston. We are an active part of the arts
education programs in the state and we use theater as a way to promote literacy, 
creativity and collaboration. Our partnerships with schools in this arena helps 
positively impact Maine students and the state’s future workforce.
Now more than ever, our society needs places that invite us to view the world from 
another’s perspective, building empathy and a sense of belonging.  That is  what we 
do. We are a vital part of our community and a part of what makes Maine a great 
place to live.
As a not for profit, we reinvest our resources to support our mission. Approximately 
70% of our yearly income goes directly to the artists, crafts people, technicians, 
educators, and staff (nearly 250 individuals) who do this work in our community.  
The remaining 30%  pays utilities, building maintenance, insurance, taxes and 
marketing. We make the most of every dollar we earn. So accessing resources for 
major capital improvements  is a challenge.  
.
We are deeply committed to ensuring that everyone in our community can access our 
productions and programs regardless of ability to pay. With three pay what you can 
performances for every production, we partner with multiple social service agencies 
and the public libraries to provide regular free or low cost access to all our 
productions and programs. Our limitation with providing access primarily lies with 
the physical structure of our facility and the need to make changes that will better 
serve our community takes resources above and beyond our yearly budgets. 
Currently, Portland Stage is in the midst of a capital campaign focused on 
accessibility and visibility. In addition to  a marquee that will provide a gateway into 
Portland’s Arts district, we are installing a large, accessible elevator that will run from
the basement where we store props and costumes to the fourth floor where staff 
works. It will allow a more diverse group of patrons to access our theater spaces and 
greatly increase Portland Stage’s ability to hire individuals with mobility challenges. 
In support of this campaign, we have been reaching out to individuals in our 
community. But having the ability to make a case for support to the state would be an 
extraordinary opportunity for an organization such as mine. 
The arts in Portland generate over $50 million in household income to local residents, 
and deliver $8.6 million in local and state government revenue (AFTA 2017). In a 
pre-pandemic world, arts organizations across the state of Maine added over $1.5 
billion to the economy each year. Performing arts venues such as Portland Stage are 
known to generate spending by patrons who park, dine, and shop, in addition to 
seeing a show, and we expect that this project will not only lead to growth in Portland
Stage’s audience base, it will also positively impact the economic viability of other 
local businesses.
Helping us improve  our facilities is helping Maine improve the quality of life for its 
citizens. I ask that this committee strongly support this act that would allow 
governments funds to be used to improve the arts and cultural sector infrastructure.   

