Deirdre Nice
Friends of the St. Lawrence Church
LD 1163
Good Morning Chair Rotundo, Chair Sachs, and honorable members of the 
committee, thank you for this opportunity to testify in support of LD 1163.
My name is Deirdre Nice and I am the Executive and Artistic Director of St. 
Lawrence Arts in Portland, Maine.
I write today as a strong supporter of LD1163. Bricks and Mortar grants are far and 
few between for our arts and cultural facilities as most granting organizations provide 
grants for programming but the buildings in which those programs call or home. St. 
Lawrence Arts is unique in that we have both an historic structure which is both a 
Portland Landmark and on the National Register of Historic and we are beginning to 
build a modern building next to the current theater which enable our organization the 
ability to forever maintain the historic theater.  
If this bond were to pass and we had the opportunity to receive funds through the 
granting process, it will help transform our organization in one that supports itself 
through earned revenue and support our three part mission of   
 *Arts and Culture - creating an affordable and accessible venue for diverse offerings 
of performance arts - theater, dance, music, film, workshops and more;
   * Neighborhood and Community - adding activity, entertainment, cultural 
enrichment, social interaction, renovation and investment that serve both the 
surrounding neighborhood of Munjoy Hill as well as the residents of Greater 
Portland; and
   * Historic Preservation - rehabilitating this local and national landmark with the 
adaptive reuse of an arts center.then 
22 years ago, when St. Lawrence opened in 2021, there were not restaurants on this 
end of Munjoy Hill. Our theater generated a need for other investment on the hill and 
for our East End Neighborhood, and not we count Rosemont Market, two coffee 
shops, 3 restaurants and more all of which have greatly benefited our local economy.  
It was the renovation of the historic parish hall that was then followed by other 
investment in Munjoy Hill, which has been completely transformed. 
There is so much private development occurring that it is important for every 
community to preserve and create space for the greater community, and not have 
every lot bought up by developers and holding space for the cultural infrastructure 
and historic preservation can provide and making our community a place people want 
to start small businesses and raise families, increase tourism, mitigate isolation among
old populations by having cultural and artistic opportunities in their communities and 
of course have opportunities for younger generations to have pride in the communities
in which they live. 
Thank you for this opportunity to give testimony in support of LD 1163
  

