Denise Scammon
Franco Center
LD 1163
Chair Rotundo, Chair Sachs, and honorable members of the committee, thank you for 
this opportunity to testify in support of LD 912 and LD 1163. 
My name is Denise Scammon and I am the marketing and development director at the
Franco Center, a Maine 501(c)3 nonprofit in Lewiston, Maine. Our nonprofit’s 
mission is “to honor and preserve our Franco-American heritage, and welcome our 
neighbors from diverse cultures through live performances, celebrations, and 
education.” 
I support LD 1163. Our nonprofit’s venue is the former St. Mary’s Church which was 
built in 1907 to serve the French Canadian immigrants who came to Lewiston to work
in its mills and factories. The former church is historically significant for many 
reasons and yet funding from grants for its repairs is becoming more difficult to 
acquire as the competition for this type of funding is being sought by more and more 
equally qualified entities each year. 
Our Lewiston location is in one of Maine’s most low-income neighborhoods. Our 
mission work is important to this neighborhood and the local creative economy. 
People attending events at our venue bring activity and commerce to this 
neighborhood. By hosting subsidized cultural events at our venue, we can reach more 
of the community. We recently hosted 260 school children at a magic show with 
subsidized tickets. We feel a responsibility to cultivate an appreciation for live 
performances in children and so the grant we got to subsidize those tickets was a 
success!  
We have been visited by tourists from out of the country, most recently Quebec, but 
also from France. Also, TF1, a news station in France, sent reporters from their 
Washington D.C. office to interview our board members and others who speak 
French. The focus of that interview was why the French language is important in 
Maine. Three other media outlets followed suit.  
Acting as stewards of this aging Gothic-style former church is a very important task 
for our board members and staff. More funds are needed to invest in our historically 
significant building to keep it standing for another 100 years. 
