Mark Bessire
Portland Museum of Art
LD 1163
LD 1163 – An Act To Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Capital 
Improvements for Arts and Cultural Facilities 
Thank you for your consideration of LD 1163 
The State of Maine has a vitally important and impactful group of cultural 
organizations that serve our citizens on a daily basis and provide economic strength 
through employment and support the Hospitality and Tourism sector.  We are 
thankful that during the pandemic we were included in the allocation of funds to help 
us continue to serve our communities in difficult times. It was an important 
acknowledgement about who we are as a people, and what makes our region so 
unique. During this period, we brought people together and helped them overcome the
isolation and anxiety that Covid brought to us all. It is time to invest in the sectors 
future before deferred maintenance goes beyond repair. 
Despite the Portland Museum of Art’s contribution to the economy and employment, 
including  $29.8 million in total output, $8.7 million in direct labor income which 
supported an additional $4.2 million in indirect and induced impacts, and $12 million 
in direct tourism-related expenditures, art and cultural institutions like ours are still an
afterthought in terms of state funding. Everybody loves the work we provide to serve 
our communities, but takes our impact for granted when we are not included in 
meaningful state-wide discussions for state funding, the way other industries are. This
is a mistake, as the cultural, social, and economic impacts of the arts define our 
tourism-based economy and regional identity. 
As our public sector services shrink, many non-profits are feeling the pressures on our
communities’ expectations and needs, but most of us are still serving our constituents 
in dated and dilapidated infrastructure. As a sector, we’ve found ways to do more 
with less, ensuring people’s needs are met—but we can’t do it much longer. Our 
infrastructure is becoming a barrier for accessibility, as well as technology and labor. 
As we lead in promoting equity and diversity in our society, we struggle to keep pace 
with our communities needs. 
I’d encourage you to take the time to travel around our state and experience the 
deferred maintenance throughout the sector. Due to our missions and non-profit 
status, each dollar we raise—in a climate that is more competitive than ever—is going
to serve the people of Maine through programs and engagement. Infrastructure needs 
will never rise to the top when organizations are doing their best just to stay afloat. 
Funders for the arts are focused on programs and people—what we need is state 
support for our facilities that transform communities, economies, and lives.  
Please support this bill to enable our sector to receive fair and appropriate 
consideration. If we do not act soon the deferred maintenance may go beyond repair. 
Mark HC Bessire, Judy and Leonard Lauder Director 
Portland Museum of Art 
