295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1360  
"An Act Requiring Training Regarding and Screening for Adverse 
Childhood Experiences " 
Sponsored by Representative Gramlich   
April 21, 2023  
 
Good morning  Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer , and esteemed  members 
of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and  Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community based mental health and substance use treatment providers , 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance 
advo cates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 1360, “ An Act 
Requir ing Training Regarding and Screening for Adverse Childhood Experiences .” 
This bill requires a health care provider to receive training on adverse childhood experiences and resources in the State for survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault as part  of the provider's requirements for licensure and screen all 
patients 18 years of age or older for adverse childhood experiences at annual physical exams and at the time behavioral or reproductive health services are provided.  There is a myriad of reasons  why this is an important  proposal. I will 
share just a couple with you today. But, should you want to read more, I have included links to resources in my testimony.  
 Studies have shown that exposure to childhood trauma is a dose -dependent risk 
factor for a wide range of learning,  behavioral, and health problems in childhood  
and adulthood. Patients with a history of ACEs are more likely to engage in unhealthy behaviors such as overeating, physical inactivity, and smoking. These patients have been shown to d isproportionately experience alcoholism, 
substance abuse,  and depression.  Individuals with a history of childhood trauma 
are also more likely to have sleep disturbances, obesity, diabetes, ischemic heart disease,  chronic obstructive airway disease,  and can cer as an adult. As a result, 
these patients are also at increased risk of early mortality.
1 
 However, a recent study
2 revealed that physicians ’ familiarity with and clinical use 
of the ACE questionnaire was low  and that m ost physicians surveyed reported no 
personal history of childhood trauma. Of physicians reporting a history of childhood trauma, women were disproportionately affected. Physicians in this study reported a lower prevalence of ACEs than the population they serve.  
                                                           
1,2 Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) and Community Physicians: What We’ve Learned. Brian R Stork, MD, FACS, Nicholas John Akselberg, 
Yongmei Qin, MD, MS, and David C Miller, MD, MPH  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
According to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services (SAMHSA) guide, SAMHSA’s Concept 
of Trauma and Guidance for a Trauma -Informed Approach, “with appropriate supports and 
intervention, people can overcome traumatic experiences .” That is why physicians – in addition to 
behavioral health professionals need to understand trauma and address it as an essential part of health service delivery. SAMSHA further states that “ Our response to trauma is most effective when 
multiple agencies and organizati ons provide coordinated, trauma -specific assessment and 
treatment. ” 
 In conclusion, screening for ACEs is an important tool to help improve health outcomes for Mainers.  I urge committee members to vote ought -to-pass on this important proposal. I’d be happ y to answer 
any questions you have for me. Thank you.  
 For more information on health and Adverse Childhood Experiences:  
 1. Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, et al. Relationship of childhood abuse and household 
dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in adults. The Adverse Childhood Experiences 
(ACE) Study. Am J Prev Med. 1998 May;14(4):245 –58. 
 2. Richards M, Wadsworth ME. Long term effects of early adversity on cognitive function. Arch Dis 
Child. 2004 Oct;89(10):922– 7.  
 3. Burke NJ, Hellman  JL, Scott BG, Weems CF, Carrion VG. The impact of adverse childhood 
experiences on an urban pediatric population.  Child Abuse Negl. 2011 Jun;35(6):408 –13 
 4. Kerker BD, Zhang J, Nadeem E, et al. Adverse childhood experiences and mental health, chronic 
med ical conditions, and development in young children. Acad Pediatr. 2015 Sep -Oct;15(5):510– 7. 
 
5. Wade R, Jr, Cronholm PF, Fein JA, et al. Household and community -level Adverse Childhood 
Experiences and adult health outcomes in a diverse urban population. Child Abuse Negl. 2016 
Feb;52:135 –45. 
 
6. Hughes K, Bellis MA, Hardcastle KA, et al. The effect of multiple adverse childhood experiences on health: A systematic review and meta -analysis.  Lancet Public Health. 2017 Aug;2(8):e356 –66. 
 7. Felitti VJ. The origi ns of addiction: Evidence from the Adverse Childhood Experiences Study . 
[German] Pract Child Psychol Child Psychiatry. 2003 Oct;52(8):547– 59.  
