divs- F, STATE OF MAINE 
.- BOARD OFLICENSURE lN MEDICINE in "Y‘+‘*’l‘~1 
; CHAIR 
137 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA. MAINE Dennis E. Smith, JD 
()4 3 3 3-0 1 37 EXECUTIVE o1REcToR Maroulla S. Gleaton, MD 
Janet T. Mills _ 
GOVERNOR T|mothy E. Terranova 
ASSISTANT Executive umacron 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 1360 — “An Act Requiring Training Regarding and Screening for Adverse Childhood 
Experiences ” 
Dear Senator Baldacci and Representative Meyer: 
The Maine Board of Licensure in Medicine (“BOLIM”) licenses and regulates allopathic physicians and physician 
assistants in Maine. BOLIM is composed of 11 members: 6 physicians Who actively practice medicine; 2 physician 
assistants who actively render medical services; and 3 public members. BOLll\/l ’s mission is to protect the public 
by ensuring its licensees are ethical, professional and competent. It fulﬁlls this mission by licensing, regulating, and 
educating physician and physician assistants. 
In general, BOLIM does not require continuing medical education (“CME”) in any speciﬁc subject area. BOLIl\/I 
relies upon the professionalism of its licensees to identify and complete Cl\/[E relevant to their speciﬁc medical 
specialty and the speciﬁc patient population they treat. BOLll\/I believes, in general, that requiring speciﬁc CME for 
all licensees runs the risk of unnecessarily burdening them with mandated education unrelated to their medical 
practice. Therefore, BOLIM generally does not support mandating speciﬁc Cl\£l-E. . 
Currently, the only mandated CME is that enacted by the Maine Legislature in 2015 requiring 3 hours of opioid- 
related CME for licensees who prescribe opioids. This legislation was enacted in response to the ongoing opioid 
epidemic. 
BOLIM offers the following comments neither in support of nor against LD 1360: 
- The bill enacts a new chapter in Title 22, which is normally administered by the Department of Health and 
Human Services but only applies to certain professional licensees and therefore, Would more appropriately 
be located in Title 32. 
omen LOCATION: 161 CAPITOL STREET, AUGUSTA, ME 
PHONE: (207) 287-3601 wwW.maine.gov/md FAX: (207) 287-6590
April 20, 2023 
Page2 
~ There is no deﬁnition of adverse childhood experiences. 
- The components and length of the required training are not speciﬁed. 
' It is unclear Whether this is a requirement for initial licensure, renewal of licensure, or a one-time 
requirement. 
- It is unclear whether failure to receive the required training is grounds for disciplinary action or denial of 
licensure. 
' It is unclear whether a failure to conduct the required screening(s) is grounds for disciplinary action or 
denial of licensure. 
- The requirements of training and screening also apply to all licensees in all specialties not just those serving 
in areas of medicine where childhood trauma is relevant to diagnosis and treatment (i.e. primary care; . 
family medicine, pediatrics; obstetrics and gynecology; psychiatry). For example, Why would the training 
be relevant to the practices of anesthesiologists, gastroenterologists or surgeons? 1_ 
BOLIM contracts with an entity to provide free online CME for its licensees (and any other types of licensees). 
Through the contract, BOLl1\/I produces three courses per year. The courses cover current topics affecting the 
practice of medicine in Maine. BOLIM could, with a better understanding of the issue to be addressed, createa 
CME course regarding this subject for the following year and promote it as a resource for all licensees Without the 
need to mandate that all licensees complete the training. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments regarding LD 1360. 
Sincerely, 
g?»/— 
Timothy Terranova 
Assistant Executive Director 
OFFICE LOCATION: 161 CAPITOL STREET, AUGUSTA,ME 
PHONE: (207) 287-3601 www.maine.gov/md FAX: (207) 287-6590
