 
90 Bridge  St. Ste 401 Westbrook,  ME 04092  · americanrootswear.com  · info@americanrootswear.com  · 207-854-4098  
 
366-21 
 
Testimony of Ben Waxman, Owner of American Roots, in Support of LD 1756, "An Act to 
Protect Employee Freedom of Speech " 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor & Housing 
Committee , my name is  Ben Waxman. I’m the co -owner of American Roots, a manufacturing 
company based in Westbrook that makes quality clothing and apparel with every component 
part being American made. We employ sixty -five people at our factory in Westbrook.  I testif y 
today in support of LD 1756.  
 
American Roots started with a dream that we could start a factory, employ Maine people, and 
make quality products right here in the United States, right here in Maine.  We believed we could 
do this and treat people well at every step of the way. We are doing just that. We manufacture 
our clothing and apparel with 100% American made products. Our employees are unionized. 
Our employees are family, and we have a great relationship with the union.  
 
We are a value driven busines s, and we want other businesses to follow that model. My wife 
and I started this business because we believed we could bring American manufacturing back, 
put Maine people to work and make a high -quality product that people felt proud of.  We’ve 
done that.  
 
Our workers took jobs at American Roots because they wanted to make a decent living, provide 
for their families, and make a product they felt good about. Every employee should have that 
right.  As a business owner, I’m supportive of LD 1756 because I don ’t think it is an employer’s 
place to force their politics or their religion on their employees.  That’s a matter of personal 
conscience.  
 
The bill before you grants some very modest protections to workers. It allows employees to 
refuse to attend mandatory meetings about topics of politics or religion and simply do their job 
without fear of termination or discipline. As I understand it, if an  employer wanted to hold a 
meeting telling their employees to vote for Rep. Drinkwater or vote for Rep. Roeder, they can 
still do that.  An employee just has a right to not attend that meeting and instead to just do their 
job.  
 
I also believe that workers  should have the freedom to join a union if they want to. That’s an 
American right.  And, again, all this bill does is give workers the right to not attend an anti -union 
meeting and simply do their job.   
 
Maybe I’m old fashioned, but that seems very reaso nable and fair to me. For all of these reasons 
I encourage you to support LD 1756.  
 
Sincerely, Ben Waxman, CEO / Co -Founder American Root  

