 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN OPPOSITION -  LD 1756 ‘An Act to Protect Employee Freedom of Speech’  
 
Dear Senator Tipping, Chair, Representative Roeder, Chair, and Members of the Committee on Labor and Housing , 
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association.  
The Maine Grocers & Food Produce rs Association is a business trade association representing more than 200 businesses 
within Maine’s food community; Main Street businesses including independently owned and operated grocery stores 
and supermarkets, food and beverage producers and processor s, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, and 
supportive service companies.  
 
Similar legislation  that passed in Connecticut just last year is now facing litigation.1  The lawsuit’s premise is that the 
plaintiffs’ claim that the ban violates free -speech and equal -protection rights under the Constitution.  In our review, LD 
1756  appears  to violate federal preemption as it relates to the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA ) which has exclusive 
authority over workplace interactions,  has constitutional issues , and attempts to regulate a topic area in which  the US 
Congress has intended to leave unregulated .  
 
While we are opposed to this legislation, in particular, it goes too  far as to not provide  necessary  safeguards . Violations 
could occur when religious or political matters are  simply  discussed not specifically the primary purpose  of the meeting.  
This proposal causes  significant heartburn as it will result in unintended consequences where employers will question 
whether or not they can hold meeting s specific to company values or diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) 
initiatives and we are fearful it will be misconstrued  by employees  trying to  determin e whether or not they must attend  
certain meetings . We have concerns that both employers and employees may misinterpret  what they deem to be 
political or religious  context and it sets the stage for unintended employee and employer tension .  
Maine co ntinues to struggle as a state in which it is attractive to do business. Maine’s economy ranks the 8th lowest in 
the nation ( Source: WalletHub 2022 “ Best and Worst State Economies ”) and our business climate ranks 3rd worst (Source: 
Forbes 2022 “Best States for Business” ).  Maine’s 10 -year Strategic Plan specifically notes that Strategy F is to “Maintain 
a Stable Business Environment.”  LD 1756 will not aid in improving Maine’s poor rankings nor make us more attractive to 
do business  and we stand oppose d to measures that do not evidently move the state forward towards improved 
economic development.  
We ask the Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1756 to not further complicate the delicate balance of employee 
and employer workplace conduct and varyi ng interests. T hank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.   
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  
 
 
1 https://www.cbia.com/wp -content/uploads/2022/11/2022.11.01 -001-Complaint.pdf  
 May 9 , 2023  
