 
 
 
May 9, 2023 
 
To: Sen. Michael Tipping and Rep. Amy Roeder, co-chairs 
 Members, Committee on Labor & Housing 
 
From: David R. Clough – Maine State Director 
 
Re: LD 1756 – An Act to Protect Employee Freedom of Speech 
 
This statement opposed to LD 1756 is on behalf of the thousands of small business owners in Maine who 
are members of the National Federation of Independent Business.  Member businesses collectively span 
a wide range of economic activities; provide jobs and paychecks to about 30,000 people; and, help form 
the economic backbone of hundreds of communities and the state.   
 
• LD 1756 prohibits employers from taking or threatening to take adverse action against an 
employee who “declines to attend or participate in an employer-sponsored meeting … or listen 
to a communication from the employer” if the activity is to communicate the employer’s 
opinion about religious matters, political matters or decisions to join or support a labor union. 
• An exception is made for communication of legally required information “but only to the extent 
of the lawful requirement” as well as communication “that is necessary for such employees to 
perform their lawfully required job duties.” 
• Employers may conduct meetings where attendance is voluntary. 
• LD 1756 also creates a private right of action by an aggrieved employee. 
 
It is our understanding that only three states have a passed law similar to what is envisioned in LD 1756 
and that the issue has led to significant litigation.  Connecticut passed a law in 2022 that employer 
groups including NFIB are challenging in federal court, for example. 
 
LD 1756 would create constraints on the ability of thousands of small employers in Maine to discuss 
legislation that could impact the operation and viability of the business, along with the job security of 
their workforce, including how regulations and union organizing efforts may affect the small business.  
The legislation also would create new legal traps for small employers – most of whom do not have 
human resource professionals – and subject them to costly lawsuits even if the small employer is found 
to have properly complied with the law. 
 
Small employers struggle every day to operate successfully, meet customer needs, take care of 
employees, pay bills, repay bank loans, meet payroll, respond to competitive pressures, set 
aside money for updating equipment, and think about ways to survive the challenging and ever-
changing economic environment.  LD 1756 would add to this struggle and undermine the ability 
of small employers to be strong and succeed.  
 
Thank you for being mindful of Maine small business owners.  We strongly urge you to vote Ought Not 
to Pass on LD 1756. 
 

