 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1756: 
An Act to Protect Employee Freedom of Speech 
 
Matthew Ginsburg 
General Counsel 
American Federation of Labor & Congress of Industrial Organizations 
 
mginsburg@aflcio.org  
 
Public Hearing 
Labor and Housing Committee 
 
May 9, 2023 
  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
  
On behalf of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-
CIO), I submit this written testimony in support of Legislative Document 1756 (“LD 1756”), An 
Act to Protect Employee Freedom of Speech.  
 
I am General Counsel of the AFL-CIO, and prior to my appointment, I served as an Associate 
General Counsel at the AFL-CIO for over 12 years and, prior to that, as an attorney at a union-side 
law firm in Chicago. I also clerked for Judge Diane P. Wood on the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Seventh Circuit and was a Skadden Fellow at the Chicago Lawyers’ Committee for Civil 
Rights Under the Law. I have practiced in the areas of labor and employment law for over 16 years. 
 
In this testimony, I will address two legal objections that opponents have advanced – (1) LD 1756 
is an unconstitutional restriction on employer speech; and (2) the National Labor Relations Act, 
29 U.S.C.§§ 141 et seq. (“NLRA”) preempts states from regulating speech in the workplace. I will 
defer to proponents’ testimonies with respect to the obvious merits of this proposed bill which 
bans employers from forcing employees to listen to an employer’s religious and political ideology 
in the workplace. 
 
I. LD 1756 Does Not Conflict with an Employer’s First Amendment Rights 
 
First and foremost, LD 1756 does not restrict employer speech. Under this bill, employers may 
still speak with their employees on religious and political matters as defined therein. The bill 
regulates conduct (not speech) by prohibiting an employer from discharging, disciplining or 
otherwise penalizing or threatening an employee who declines to attend or participate in an 
employee-sponsored meeting or declines to listen to an employer-communication that 
communicates the employer’s opinion on religious or political matters unrelated to their work. See 
§600-B.2. This regulation of conduct or the threat to engage in such conduct is permissible under 
the First Amendment.1 
 
Additionally, employers have no legitimate free speech claim to hold captive audience meetings 
at the workplace because such captive audience meetings unlawfully interfere with employees’ 
constitutionally-based freedom not to be coerced into ideological listening. The United States 
Supreme Court has made clear that the First Amendment permits regulation of such “captive 
audiences.” “The First Amendment permits the government to prohibit offensive speech as 
 
1 It is a well-established First Amendment principle that “expression may be limited when it 
merges into conduct.” R.A.V. v. St. Paul, 505 U.S. 377, 414 (1992) (White, J., concurring). 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 intrusive when the ‘captive’ audience cannot avoid the objectionable speech.”2 Thus, the option of 
averting the eyes or closing the ears is simply not practically available.3  
 
In Erznoznik v. Jacksonville, 422 U.S. 205, 209 (1975), the Court explained: 
 
[W]hen the government, acting as censor, undertakes selectively to shield the public 
from some kinds of speech on the ground that they are more offensive than others, 
the First Amendment strictly limits its power.  Such selective restrictions have 
been upheld only when the speaker intrudes on the privacy of the home . . . or the 
degree of captivity makes it impractical for the unwilling viewer or auditor to avoid 
exposure. 
 
In fact, the Court has expressly recognized that “States can choose to protect [this right to be let 
alone] in certain situations.” Hill v. Colorado, 530 U.S. 703, 717 n. 24. See also Frisby v. Schultz, 
487 U.S. 474, 484 (“the State may legislate to protect” unwilling listener). The First Circuit has 
also found that the government has leeway to address the problem of captive audience.  See Newton 
v. LePage, 700 F.3d 595, 603 (1st Cir. 2012) (where the Courts found that the government has 
some leeway to take into consideration the problem of the captive audience and complaints [] 
received for those who viewed the art work while visiting government offices for other reasons). 
See Close v. Lederle, 424 F.2d 988 (1st Cir.1970) (no First Amendment violation from the removal 
by the University of Massachusetts of certain offensive but not obscene art work from a corridor 
frequented by students). 
 
Accordingly, this legislature is well within its authority to pass LD 1756 as it limits employer 
conduct (not speech) and protects employees’ liberty interest in being free from coerced listening 
to an employer’s political and religious speech, on pain of discipline or discharge. 
 
 
II. LD 1756 Is Not Preempted by Federal Labor Law  
 
Opponents may argue that this bill is preempted by the NLRA because it bans workplace captive 
audience meetings discussing the merits of union representation. This, however, is not the case as 
federal labor law does not prohibit states from adopting laws that protect workers’ constitutional 
freedom not to listen to employer’s religious and political speech. 
 
2 Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474, 487 (1988) (resident inside home). See also Bethel School 
Dist. No. 403 v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675, 684 (1986) (children in school); Lehman v. Shaker Heights, 
418 U.S. 298, 305-08 (1974) (Douglas, J., concurring) (passengers on a bus). This is because 
“[w]hile [a person] clearly has a right to express his views to those who wish to listen, he has no 
right to force his message upon an audience incapable of declining to receive it.” Id. at 307. The 
Court has held that the First Amendment permits “protection of the unwilling listener.” 
3 See Smolla and Nimmer on Freedom of Speech §§ 5.025.02- 5.035.03 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 A. Doctrine of Federal Preemption 
The doctrine of federal preemption is based on Article VI, clause 2 of the United States 
Constitution (known as the Supremacy Clause). When Congress acts, its power is preeminent 
over inconsistent laws of the states. However, “’[c]onsideration under the Supremacy Clause 
starts with the basic assumption that Congress did not intend to displace state law.’” Id. (quoting 
Maryland v. Louisiana, 451 U.S. 725, 746 (1981)). By enacting the NLRA, Congress sought to 
create a national, uniform body of labor law and policy. “The purpose of the Act was to obtain 
‘uniform application’ of its substantive rules and to avoid the ‘diversities and conflicts likely to 
result from a variety of local procedures and attitudes toward labor controversies.’”  NLRB v. 
Nash-Finch Co., 404 U.S. 138, 144 (1971) (quoting Garner v. Teamsters Union, 346 U.S. 485, 
490 (1953)). Furthermore, the Court has recognized that it “cannot declare pre-empted all local 
regulation that touches or concerns in any way the complex interrelationships between 
employees, employers, and unions; obviously, much of this is left to the States.” Metropolitan 
Life Ins. Co. v. Massachusetts, 471 U.S. 724, 757 (1985) (quoting Motor Coach Employees v. 
Lockridge, 403 U.S. 274, 289 (1971)). 
 
Accordingly, LD 1756 falls within the following well-recognized exception to federal labor law 
preemption: 
 
i. Maine Has Authority to Establish Minimum Working Conditions 
States and local governments are generally free to legislate to set minimum employment standards. 
These can include minimum or living wage laws, maximum hours legislation, minimum insurance 
requirements, and workplace safety norms (subject to the requirements of the federal Occupational 
Safety and Health Act). Because such laws guarantee that all workers (either across the entire state 
or municipality or among those workers employed in a particular sector) receive certain benefits, 
they give workers something for which they might otherwise have to negotiate in collective 
bargaining “for free,” without them having to make any concessions at the bargaining table.  
Employers sometimes argue that such protective laws are preempted under the so-called 
Machinists doctrine, which holds that the federal National Labor Relations Act intended that 
negotiations between unions and employers be subject to the “free play of economic forces.”4 
Under this doctrine, laws that would seek to increase or decrease a union or employer’s leverage, 
for example, in a strike, are typically preempted by the NLRA. The employers’ argument tends to 
be that minimum standards laws are impermissibly meant to benefit unions.  
The Supreme Court has rejected this type of argument twice. First, the Court held that a 
Massachusetts law requiring all employer health-insurance plans to include minimum mental-
health coverage was not preempted.5 Second, the Court held that a Maine plant-closing law that 
required employers to provide laid-off employees with a one-time severance payment was also 
 
4 Lodge 76, Intern.  Ass'n of Machinists v. Wisconsin Empl. Rel. Commn., 427 U.S. 132 (1976) 
5 Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Massachusetts, 471 U.S. 724 (1985) 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 permissible.6  The Court reasoned that such laws affect union and non-union employees equally, 
do not encourage or discourage collective bargaining, have only “the most indirect effect on the 
right to self-organization,” are not “designed to encourage or discourage employees in the 
promotion of their rights collectively,” and do not “even inadvertently affect these interests 
implicated in the NLRA.”7 
 
Likewise, the proposed bill is permissible minimum conditions legislation as it applies to all Maine 
workers and protects them from being disciplined for declining to attend meetings where they are 
subject to indoctrination on issues unrelated to job performance.  
 
III. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, the proposed bill is constitutional and not preempted by federal labor 
law. Therefore, Maine should adopt this legislation and join the growing list of states that have 
affirmatively protected employees’ rights from being disciplined or discharged for refusing to 
listen to employer’s religious or political ideology. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
/s/ Matthew Ginsburg 
Matthew Ginsburg            
 
 
6 Fort Halifax Packing Co. v. Coyne, 482 U.S. 1 (1987) 
7 Metropolitan Life, 471 U.S. at 755 
