Alan Sparn
Sweden, Maine
LD 497
“Senator Bennett, Representative Millett, and honorable
members of the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife: my name is
Alan Sparn, I live in Town of Sweden on Stearns Pond and I am here today to testify against 
the approval of LD 497 to prohibit the use of Personal Watercraft (PWC) on Keyes and 
Stearns Pond in the Town of Sweden.  
I am aware that the Town of Sweden voted at the town meeting in March of 2022 to 
prohibit PWC on Keyes Pond and take no issue with this part of the legislation 
remaining; my opposition is to the improper adding of Stearns Pond to the bill.  Keyes
is a small quiet pond that I have enjoyed summers for the past 40 years.  It has a 
residents agreement that no motorized boats over 5 HP are allowed and as confirmed 
by the head of the Keyes pond Environmental Association has never seen the use of 
PWC for the past 40+ years.
Stearns Pond on the other hand is a very different situation with no limitations on 
motorized boats or PWC.  Firstly, my understanding of Maine General Law is that the
town needs to have a public meeting to vote on restricting PWC on Stearns.  No such 
meeting has taken place.  This issue was hurriedly scheduled as a public hearing on 
March 11th with significant opposition from property owners on the pond so it could 
be placed on the Town agenda for March 25th.  Therefore due process has not been 
followed to have this included in the bill.
Secondly, Stearns is a larger pond that has no restrictions on either power boats or 
PWC since I have owned property on the pond for 23 years.  In my experience, 
property owners that possess motorized boats and PWC have operated them 
responsibly for many years and I see no reason to prohibit them from continuing their 
enjoyment of this activity.
If an issue of abuse arises, it is the responsibility of the Oxford County Sheriff and/or 
the DIFW Game Warden to enforce any violation that may occur, to my knowledge 
there are no records of issues or violations that have been registered.  
My understanding of the approval to add Stearns to this bill requires the town to 
provide a report on the usage of the pond as well as a means to enforce a ban if 
imposed.  Neither of these have been addressed by the Town of Sweden.
Further, adding Stearns Pond to the bill via a request of a private citizen that is not a 
resident of the town or pond again is violation of the required process.    This was 
admitted by this person at the town meting on the 11th of March.  How is this 
allowed?  
Again, Keyes Pond followed due course with a town vote and I have no issue with 
this remaining on the bill.  The failure of due process with including Stearns Pond in 
the Bill should not affect any ruling taken on Keyes.
Respectfully submitted 
Alan Sparn
Sweden Maine
