Andrew L. Black  
80 Idlewood Drive  
Cumberland, Maine 04021  
  
 March 1 9, 2023  
  
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
IFW@legislature.maine.gov
  
  
RE: LD 497 “ An Act to Prohibit the Use of Personal Watercraft on Keyes 
Pond and Stearns Pond in the Town of Sweden ” 
  Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and Members of  the Committee:  
  Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of  LD 497 .  My family 
is fortunate to o wn a camp on Keyes Pond , and we recognize how important this bill 
is for protecting the many ways in which the people of Maine enjoy these waters.   
 
Thank you, too, for considering this issue during the last Legislature and for 
passing a resolve that provided a framework to ensure that enacting this 
prohibition  was the desire of the residents of Sweden and in the best interests of 
the State of Maine.  As you are aware, a fter considering L.D. 349 “An Act to 
Prohibit the Use of Personal Watercraft on Keyes Pond in  the Town of Sweden”  at 
the last session, this Committee  recommended the approval of a Resolve that 
directed the Department of IF&W to examine issues related to the operation of 
personal watercraft statewide and explicitly asked the Department to “monitor 
whether the Town of Sweden votes to support prohibiting personal watercraft on Keyes Pond.” Resolves, 2021, ch. 45.  The Governor signed the resolve on June 11, 
2021.  
 
The Town of Sweden responded accordingly.  The Town’s Bo ard of Selectmen voted 
to place an article to address the issue on the warrant for the 2022 annual Town 
meeting.  Then i n February 2022,  prior to the annual meeting,  the Town held a 
public hearing  on the issue.  Owners of lakefront property, residents , non-
residents , and the Keyes Pond Environmental Protection Association all 
participated.  All were given an opportunity to speak and share information and opinions. The topics and concerns shared included that there was no prior history 
of personal watercraft operat ion on the lake, the small size and pervasive  
shallow ness of the lake,  the general lack of motorboats on the lake, and the 
2 
 frequent use of the lake by  non-motorized watercraft, fishermen, and long-distance 
swimmers .   
 
On March 26, 2022, the Town of Sweden held its annual town meeting. Article 33 
on the Town Warrant read as follows: “To see if the Town will recommend that the 
Maine State Legislature prohibit the operation of personal watercraft on Keyes Pond in Sweden, Maine.” The citizens of the Town of Sweden voted unanimously in 
favor of this article.    
 
I would like to highlight some of the reasons that this  Committee should 
recommend that this bill  ought to pass , at least with respect to Keyes Pond : 
 
1. Keyes Pond is a local pond. The residents  of Sweden and those who own 
property on this small , out-of-the-way lake are essentially the only users of 
Keyes Pond.  A few fishermen  from outside Sweden occasionally visit. 
Sweden’s only Town Beach is located on Keyes Pond. It is the essence of a 
small, quiet lake .  The people of Sweden value these qualities  and have 
demonstrated through their unanimous vote that they believe that the operation of personal waterfront would be incompatible with the  way people 
use Keyes Pond .  Accordingly, t his Committee should credit the opinion of the 
citizens of the Town of Sweden as representing what i s best for Keyes Pond.  
 
2. LD 497  preserves the status quo  on Keyes Pond . As far as anyone can tell, no 
one has ever operated a personal watercraft (i.e., a jet -ski) on Keyes Pond.  
And no one who currently owns property on the lake owns or intends to purchase a personal watercraft. The purpose of th is bill is  purely 
preventative. In recent years, there has been an influx of visitors to Maine 
lakes, many of whom bring increasingly larger and faster motorized 
watercraft , including jet -skis, and they sometimes operate them without 
regard to the traditional uses of the water body.  P assing LD 497 would  
simply  preserve the status quo on Keyes Pond ; it would not deprive anyone of 
an activity they have enjoyed  in the past . 
 
3. Cost of enforcement would be de minimis . When the Committee considered 
LD 349 in 2021, one concern was the potential cost of enforcement  of this 
prohibition.  Common sense suggests that such a cost would be de mi nimis 
because a violation would be an obvious event as opposed to a judgment call.  Signage and posting of the law on the Town website should be sufficient to educate the public on  the law  and ensure compliance .  Unlike laws that 
prohibit unsafe operation, a law that prohibits operation outright requires no 
judgment to determine whether a violation has occurred. People typically  
avoid engaging in activities that are outright prohibi ted—any violation would 
be obvious and indefensible.  The types of watercraft laws that require 
intervention by law enforcement are generally those that are not so black -
3 
 and-white.  For example, laws pertaining to illegal speed and unsafe 
operation are oft entimes open to reasonable debate.  Complainers and alleged 
violator s share different opinions. The result is that law enforcement gets 
called to settle the debate.  No such debate exists when there is an outright 
prohibition.   
 
For these reasons, I ask  you to recognize the will of the people and recommend the 
passage of LD 497.  If , for some reason, this Committee has reservations about the 
inclusion of Sterns Pond in this bill, I encourage you to amend the bill, so that it can at least move forward with re spect  to Keyes Pond.  
 
Thank you for allowing me to provide comment  and participate in the legislative 
process.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
/s/ Andrew L. Black  
 
