March 21, 2023
Re:  Support of LD 497 (HP 314)
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,
I strongly support LD 497.  Having been on the Select Board for the 
town of Sweden and on the board of a local environmental 
organization, I can understand the tension between protection of the 
environment and that of development.  However, there are unique 
factors relating to personal watercraft (jet skis, PWC) that are very 
significant.
1.  Water quality is related to property values and thus municipal tax 
revenue.  A University of Maine study found that property values 
drop with a decrease in water quality1.   Obviously, income for 
local communities depends on clean, quiet, and healthy lakes for 
all to enjoy.
2. Personal watercraft’s (PWC’s) unique ability to operate in shallow 
water produces increased vibration and wake induced erosion 
that can harm shallow flora and fauna.  Detrimental turbidity, 
which is a major water quality indicator, can be generated.      
3. PWC’s are good fomites for spread invasive water species, 
including variable leaf milfoil.
4. Older PWC’s with a 2 stroke engine can emit up to 30% of their 
fuel uncombusted into the water and air causing injurious 
chemical pollution that can include toxic and carcinogenic 
benzene2.   
5.  Noise generated by personal watercraft is harmful to fauna such 
as fish and birds, and also can be very disturbing to humans.  
Noise generated by PWC’s are different from that of motor boats 
because PWC’s continually leave the water.  There is no muffling 
effect of water when airborne and the noise can be magnified up 
to 15dBA.  Each time a PWC reenters and hits the water, a noise is 
generated that has been described as an explosive “whoomp”3.  
Also, constantly variable noise, such as generated by PWC, has 
been documented to be far more disturbing than a constant noise 
of equal intensity.
6. Both Stearns and Keyes Pond both have several outstanding 
environmental resource values that need to be preserved4.  
There is Loon habitat and nesting sites on both ponds that have 
been consistently occupied for several years.  
7.  A questionnaire, in preparation for our Comprehensive Plan 
revision, was sent to all property taxpayers.  It showed 
overwhelming support for “prohibition of watercraft (jet skis)” on 
our ponds.
            24.  Should the town recommend that the Maine legislature prohibit  the 
                      operation  of personal watercraft (jet skis only) on its ponds?
                      
                    

             
Currently, there are approximately 60 bodies of water protected from 
PWC’s by Sec. 1. 12 MRSA §13071-A, sub-§4, ¶A. 
LD 497 provides a reasonable and a commonsense approach to 
preserving the environmental and economic value of Sweden’s iconic 
ponds.  Please support LD 497!
Respectfully,
Bruce Taylor                                                                                                                                              
Sweden  04040
1. MR421:  The effects of Water Clarity on Economic Values and Economic 
Impacts of Recreational Uses of Maine’s Great Ponds.  University of Maine.
2.https://dbw.parks.ca.gov/?page_id=28770.  
3. Noise Costs of Jet Skis in America: A Report for the Noise Pollution 
Clearing House.  Karmanoff & Shaw. 
4. Town of Sweden, Sweden Critical Resources Map.        
Swedenmaine.org/wp-content/uploads/2081/06/Appendix_A_Maps2.pdf
