TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND 
FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST L.D. 497 
“An Act To Prohibit the Use of Personal Watercraft on Keyes Pond and Stearns 
Pond in the Town of Sweden” 
Sponsored By: Representative MILLETT of Waterford. 
Cosponsored by: Senator Bennett of Oxford 
DATE OF HEARING: March 22, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountaine, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Lt. Jason Luce of the Maine Warden Service and 
speaking on behalf of the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, neither for nor against to 
L.D. 497. 
This bill adds Keyes Pond and Steams Pond in the Town of Sweden in Oxford County to the list 
of water bodies in the State on which the operation of personal watercraft is prohibited. 
Keyes Pond is approximately 1 mile long and 1/3 of a mile wide and encompasses approximately 
190 acres. 
A check of our records management system revealed no complaints relating to personal 
watercraft operation or misuse on Keyes Pond or Steams Pond. 
In 2013, one of our wardens documented an information request where someone was inquiring if 
there were any motorboat restrictions on the pond. 
In 2019, the local warden (Warden Tim Coombs) attended a Keyes Lake Association meeting and 
no issues around personal watercraft operation were brought to his attention at that meeting. 
Warden Coombs indicated that the lake association acknowledges a “self-imposed ” 10 Hp 
restriction on the pond which results in few larger motorized watercraft being operated on the 
waterbody. At one point in 2021 Warden Coombs received a complaint of a boat over 10 Hp 
being operated on the pond and he informed the complainant that there was no such prohibition. 
During the past year (2022) Warden Coombs has patrolled the pond for boating activity and has 
not seen a single PWC. Warden Coombs has also patrolled Steams Pond and has indicated that he 
has seen a few PWC’s but has not seen them operate in violation of current laws and rules.
Camp Tapawingo on the western shore, does support summer camp activities which employ the 
use of a ski boat. 
Title 12 Section 13071-A lists a series of waterbodies which prohibit the use of personal 
watercraft, there are 33 of them. Additionally, Rule Chapter 10 of the Maine Land Use Planning 
Commission lists additional waterbodies which prohibit the use of personal watercraft. There are 
approximately 270 of them. 
The following is additional legislative history information: 
In 1999 L. D. 2346 was enacted which provided the legislative process for prohibiting the 
personal watercraft on the 33 bodies of water in Title 12. The L.D. essentially allowed fora 
municipality or municipalities to petition the Commissioner to restrict the operation and types of 
watercraft on great ponds within the municipality. If a municipality chooses to prepare 
recommendations for such waters, it shall take into consideration the use to which those waters 
are put, the depth of the water, the amount of water-borne traﬂic on the waters, wildlife and 
environmental values, noise, traditional uses of the water body and the safety of persons and 
property. These recommendations may be submitted only aﬁer a public hearing and must include 
a description of the resources the municipality or municipalities will use to enforce or assist in 
the enforcement of those regulations if enacted. For any municipality whose legislative body is 
the town meeting, recommendations may only be considered and approved during the annual 
town meeting held pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 30-A, section 2525. The 
Commissioner was then directed to submit a report of the municipality recommendations to the 
appropriate Legislative session for Legislative approval. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
