I 
Michele Bolle 
74 Pine Point Road 
Sweden, Maine 04040 
603-568-6638 
mi_chelebolle/a ‘ vahoocom 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
c/o legislative Information Ofﬁce 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
IFW-Yﬁlegislaturemaingov 
Re: LD 497 An Act to Prohibit the Use of Personal Watercraft on Keyes Pond and Stearns Pond in the 
Town of Sweden 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Committee, 
Thank you for the opportunity to allow me to submit testimony in opposition to LD 497 An Act to Prohibit the 
Use of Person al Watercraft on K eyes Pond and Stearns Pond in the Town of Sweden. In 2010 I purchased 
property 50 feet from the shoreline of Steams Pond. As planned, upon my retirement, in 2019 I became a full 
time/year-round resident of Sweden. 
Living on the shore of Steams Pond I am acutely aware of the year-round activity that takes place on the pond. 
Stearns is an active, vibrant pond which oifers seemingly endless opportimities for recreation. Summer being the 
most active. Watercraft on Steams Pond comes in various fonns, from the self-propelled kayak, paddleboards, 
rowing shells, canoes to the motorized ski boats, outboard and inboard boats of varying sizes, pontoon boats, 
skiffs, and many bass boats. Very occasionally a PWC will be seen. Currently on Steams Pond there is only1 
seasonal resident, lam aware of, who owns a PWC. She is a long-time elderly summer resident who is unable 
any longer to get in her kayak for her daily early morning paddles. This past year she purchased a PWC so she 
could continue to enjoy the pond despite her inability to kayak. 
I have never owned a motorized watercra ﬁ and have no desire to. I kayak, paddleboard, row a shell and swim and 
have never felt unsafe due to others with motorized watercraft. 
From a process stand this bill and hearing are premature. The town of Sweden residents have not yet voted at 
their Annual Meeting to prohibit PWC on Steams Pond as pursuant in: 
Public Law 1997 c. 739 states: for any municipality whose legislative body is the town meeting, 
recommendations may only be considered and approved during the annual town meeting held pursuant to the 
Maine Revised Statutes. 30-A, section 2525. 
Most taxpayers in Sweden are completely unaware of LD497. The initial mention of LD497 in any public Select 
Board meeting was on February 14, 2023, months after the bill was in process. The how and why Steams Pond 
was added to a bill regarding Keyes Pond was confusing to all. The Select Board had assured the concemed 
meeting attendees that discussion regarding Steams would be at the next Select Board meeting Tuesday February 
28. 2023.
This meeting was cancelled on the town website and through email from the Select Board approximately 1 hour 
prior to the meeting due to a Winter Stonn Advisory in effect. Unbeknownst to all who had read the cancellation 
notice the Select Board retracted the cancellation of the meeting and held it. A public statement was placed on the 
town webpage, just prior to the meeting, which stated: 
“Sorry for the confusion, there will be a VERY abbreviated Select Board Meting this evening, 2/28 for the 
purposes of signing the A/P warrants, and obtaining a version of the Town Warrant to be signed by all 3 select 
persons for inclusion in the annual town report. We realize there is a lot of interest re: personal watercraft on 
Steams Pond. Any and all discussion of this and all items on the rest of today ’s agenda will be tabled to our next 
Select Board Meeting, date TBD In spite of what they had just posted on the town website the Select Board 
discussed and voted to add a warrant article to the annual town meeting agenda to prohibit PWC on Stearns 
Pond. 
Despite that public notice that any discussion of Steams Pond would be tabled to the next meeting the Select 
Board discussed the issue and voted to place a warrant on the annual town meeting agenda to prohibit PWC on 
Steams Pond. With pushback from taxpayers, due to the public statement, the vote was recanted. 
Within the next day or two the town website indicated that a Select Board meeting was scheduled for Saturday, 
March 4, a day that a Nor’easter was being predicted and with a Winter Stomi Advisory already in effect. Many 
reached out to the Select Board requesting the meeting to be reschedule and they refused. Meeting was held 
Saturday March 4 during a Winter Storm Warning and the Select Board took a 2nd vote to add a warrant article to 
the Annual Meeting to prohibit PWC on Steams Pond without ever having any discussion or input from the 
taxpayers of Sweden. 
The town did schedule a Public Hearing on the Steams Pond for Saturday, March ll, 7 days away. Notice of the 
hearing was placed on town website. A Public Notice for the hearing ran in the local paper, March 9, 2 days prior 
to the Public Hearing. As reference at the February 14 Select Board meeting the Select Board indicated: 
“A Public Hearing should be held 30 days before the Annual Town Meeting for Stearns Pond. There wasa 
suggestion that the public Hearing be held in the summer, to enable summer residents to attend, ” The Public 
Hearing was scheduled JUST 14 days prior to Annual Town Meeting. This quick Public Hearing set up and lack 
of sufﬁcient notiﬁcation to ALL taxpayers prohibited many, especially seasonal property owners, the inability to 
know or participate in the hearing. Consensus of attendees at the Public Hearing on March ll was in opposition 
of LD497. 
With no justification of an issue with PWC on Steams Pond or information provided to the public on why or how 
Steams Pond was placed on a bill many are left wondering is this being rushed and pushed thru? Why are there 
not discussions being had of altematives to a complete banning of PWC? 
I feel the extreme measure of LD 497, which would completely prohibit the use of personal watercraft on 
Steams Pond, is unjustified at this time. 
Thank you again for allowing me to present my testimony, your time and consideration regarding LD497. 
Michele Bolle
