KEYES POND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSOCIATION 
Sweden, Maine 
March 16, 2023 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
IFW@legislatu_re_._ma_ipe.gov 
RE: LD 497 An Act to Prohibit the Use of Personal Watercraft on Keyes Pond 
and Stearns Pond in the Town of Sweden 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 497 An Act to 
Prohibit the Use of Personal Watercraft on Keyes Pond and Stearns Pond in the Town 
of Sweden. 
As the President of the Keyes Pond Environmental Protection Association (“KPEPA”),I 
am honored once again to ask this committee to support legislation that would add 
Keyes Pond in Sweden to the long list of lakes on which “personal watercraft ” (i.e., jet 
skis) are prohibited. I am not taking a position on whether Stearns Pond should also 
be added. KPEPA is a Maine non-profit corporation that has been in existence since 
the early 197 Os. In addition to waterfront landowners, KPEPA’s membership includes 
community members who enjoy fishing and swimming on Keyes Pond. 
As you know, at the last Legislative session, this Committee considered L.D. 349 “An 
Act to Prohibit the Use of Personal Watercraft on Keyes Pond in the Town of Sweden.” 
Ultimately, you recommended, the Legislature passed, and the Governor approved a 
Resolve that directed the Department of lF&W to examine issues related to the 
operation of personal watercraft statewide and explicitly asked the Department to 
“monitor whether the Town of Sweden votes to support prohibiting personal watercraft 
on Keyes Pond.” Resolves, 2021, ch. 45. 
The citizens of the Town of Sweden followed your directive and responded witha 
singular voice. The Town’s Board of Selectmen voted to place an article to address the 
issue on the warrant for the 2022 annual Town meeting. On February 26, 2022, the 
Town held a public hearing to allow input and sharing of information about the issue. 
At the public hearing, the physical attributes and characteristics of the lake were 
discussed along with the appropriateness of operating personal watercraft on this 
mostly shallow lake of only 192 acres. On March 26, 2022, the Town of Sweden held
its annual town meeting. Article 33 on the Town Warrant read as follows: “To see if the 
Town will recommend that the Maine State Legislature prohibit the operation of 
personal watercraft on Keyes Pond in Sweden, Maine.” I am thrilled to report that the 
citizens of the Town of Sweden voted unanimously in favor of this article. 
The citizens of Sweden have patiently followed the procedure you laid out. And after 
thorough and thoughtful consideration, they have decided that the best interests of the 
public would be served by keeping the peaceful waters of Keyes Pond free of personal 
waterfront. On behalf of KPEPA, I ask you to respect the judgment of the people of 
Sweden and vote this bill out of committee “Ought to Pass.” And if you reach a different 
conclusion with respect to Stearns Pond, I respectfully ask that you amend the bill so 
that the bill can continue to move forward with respect to Keyes Pond only. Thank you 
for allowing us to participate in the democratic process. 
Sincerely, 
/s/ Monica Bigley 
President 
Keyes Pond Environmental Protection Association
2
