Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Re: LD497
March 20, 2023
Dear Senator La Fontaine, Representative Landry and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
We are Robert and Cornelia Santomenna, and we are strongly in favor of LD 497. 
We have, for almost 40 years, owned property in the Ridlonville neighborhood of 
Sweden, with a camp and more recently a year-round home. We also own a parcel of land on 
the shore of Stearns Pond.
LD 497, if enacted, would prohibit the operation of personal watercraft (“jet skis”) on 
Stearns Pond and Keyes Pond in Sweden.  The Keyes Pond prohibition was passed by Sweden at 
last year’s annual Town meeting.  The Stearns Pond prohibition was the subject of a public 
hearing on March 11 and will be voted on at the annual Town meeting on March 25, just a few 
days after this hearing.
Stearns Pond may be classified  by the State as a “great pond”, but it is not a big pond - 
definitely not big enough for the operation of personal watercraft.  It measures about a mile at 
its greatest length and just over ½ mile at its widest point.  Please see the attached image. The 
Pond sits in a hollow, flanked by steep hills, and the sound reverberates.  Our house is about ¼ 
mile up the hill and we can hear the jet skis buzzing around the Pond.  It is not a pleasant noise 
even from that distance! 
 
We echo the testimony of others saying that jet ski operation is a threat to the safety of 
traditional activities like swimming, kayaking and canoeing – and, there are children’s camps on 
both Stearns and Keyes Ponds where these activities take place every summer day. 
Supporters of jet ski operation might say, “Get over it! This the modern world - 2023 not 
1973.”  But it is the peace and tranquility of Stearns Pond, and small, rural ponds like it, that 
bring folks to the shore – not the shriek of a jet ski whizzing by your beach or cottage.  
It is the environmental effects of jet skis on Stearns Pond that raised our concern to the 
level of asking the Town and the legislature to address the issue.  Jet skis tend to operate 
around the perimeter of the Pond where the water is shallow and wetland vegetation grows.  It 
is in those places that wildlife flourish – that provide habitat for nesting loons, fish nurseries 
and other aquatic life.  Also, it is the portable nature of jet skis and their operation in shallower 
waters that raises the threat of milfoil contamination brought from other water bodies.
Fortunately, Keyes Pond has not experienced the disturbance of jet skis as yet, and it 
should never have to.  We have experienced it on Stearns.  Although no one has been injured to 
this point, the loons are still nesting, and so far we have avoided the contamination of milfoil, 
we urge you to help us prevent such disasters in the future by advancing LD 497 for both 
Stearns and Keyes Ponds.
Respectfully,  Robert and Cornelia Santomenna

