March 19, 2023  
RE: LD 497 An Act to Prohibit the Use of Personal Watercraft on Keyes Pond and Stearns Pond 
in the Town of Sweden  
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife : 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 497 , An Act to  Prohibit the 
Use of Personal Watercraft on Keyes Pond and Stearns Pond in the Town of Sweden.  
We full -time and seasonal residents of Sweden sent the letter below to  our Board of Selectmen, 
asking that the prohibition of personal watercraft on Stearns Pond be placed on this year’s 
Town Meeting Warrant. The Board agreed to do so, and that meeting will occur on March 25. In 
addition, the Board held a public hearing on t he issue on March 11.  We are encouraged by the 
Town’s unanimous endorsement at last year’s Town Meeting  of such a prohibition on Keyes 
Pond.  
At the public hearing on March 11 , we heard from a representative of the Lakes Environmental 
Association, who explained that scientists have now documented a further concern about 
personal watercraft such as Jet Skis, of which we had been unaware. Apparently they are far 
more subject to spreading milfoil contamination than boats, because the milfoil gets up inside the craft and cannot easily be washed away —even if there were public means to wash the hull 
(which do not exist at Stearns Pond). Since such personal watercraft often get moved from lake 
to lake, the threat of milfoil contamination is significant. Please add t his concern to those 
expressed in our letter below, and we hope you will see fit to advance this legislation  
concerning these two much- valued  Sweden  ponds , Keyes and Stearns . 
Thank you for your consideration,  
Tom Goodkind and Lucy Marx  (on behalf of those full -time and seasonal residents below)  
 
Dear Members of the Sweden Board  of Selectmen ,                                    December 30, 2022  
We are writing you as legal residents and seasonal homeowners with homes in the Ridlonville 
neighborhood as well as owners of land on Stearns Pond.  
We believe that Stearns Pond is a valuable asset of the Town and a treasure for those who live 
around or within the influence of the pond.   It is a peaceful and tranquil place, enjoyed by 
many. The pond provides habitat for fish, loons and herons, as well as other birds and wildlife.   It is a favorite for fishermen (winter and summer), paddlers and swimmers, as well as 
those who simply like to sit on the shore and appreciate the natural environment of the pond.  
With this in mind, we are concerned about the operation of personal watercraft (“jet skis”) on 
the pond.   Noisy jet skis running around this relatively small pond at high speeds are a definite 
threat to wildlife, particularly nesting loons.   Loons  have for years been nesting on the shores of 
the pond, and we have been so pleased to observe loons with their young, and to hear their calls in the morning and evening.  
In addition to the effect on wildlife, the speed and excessive noise of jet ski oper ation is a threat 
to the safe and peaceful use and enjoyment of the pond by residents and others on or near the 
shore of the pond.  
For these reasons, we ask that an article be included in the warrant for Sweden’s 2023 annual Town meeting requesting that the legislature prohibit the operation of personal watercraft on Stearns Pond.  
 Any proposed municipal regulation of watercraft requires action by the state legislature. The 
discussion and vote of the Town meeting is an essential step in securing legislativ e action.  
A suggested form of warrant article is attached which is modelled on the article in last year’s warrant respecting Keyes Pond, which was passed   by vote of the Town  
We believe this is in the best interests of the Town and all who treasure what Stearns Pond has provided for centuries: the safe enjoyment of traditional activities on the pond and a protected habitat for wildlife.  
If the Selectboard determines that a public hearing prior to the Town meeting would be 
beneficial, to provide an opportuni ty for additional open discussion of the proposal to prohibit 
the operation of personal watercraft on Stearns Pond, we request that such a hearing be 
scheduled.  
Thank you for your consideration.   Respectfully,  
Robert and Cornelia Santomenna  
rsantomenna@comcast.net  
 Lucy Marx and Tom Goodkind  
lucymarx9@gmail.com 
 
Andrew Marx and Katherine Mulvihill  
andrewmarx@mac.com 
 Mary Sohl  
mary@mainerealestate.me  
 William Centamore  
wmcentamore@gmail.com 
