Maine Human Rights Commission  
# 51 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333 -0051  
 
Physical location: 19 Union Street, Augusta, ME 04330  
Phone (207) 624 -6290   ■    Fax (207) 624 -8729  ■   TTY: Maine Relay 711  
www.maine.gov/mhrc  
 
Amy M. Sneirson                                      Barbara Archer Hirsch  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR   COMMISSION COUNSEL  
  
May 12 , 202 3 
 
The Honorable Anne Carney , Senate Chair  
The Honorable  Matthew Moonen , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State Hous e Station  
Augusta, ME 04333   
 
Re:  LD 18 33: An Act To Amend the Definition of “Educational Institution” Under the Maine Human 
Rights Act to Include Single -sex Educational Institutions  
 
Dear Sen ator Carney , Rep resentative  Moonen , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary : 
 
The Maine Human Rights Commissio n (“Commission”) is Maine’s  quasi -independent, neutral, apolitical State 
agency1 charged with enforcing our state anti -discrimination law, the Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S. §§ 
4551,  et seq . (“MHRA” or the “Act”) . The Commission is statutorily charged with the duties of  investigating, 
conciliating, and at times litigating discrimination cases under the MHRA  and the Maine Whistleblowers’ 
Protection Act (“WPA”) ; promulgating rules and regulations to effectuate the MHRA  & WPA ; and makin g 
recommendations for further legislation or executive action concerning infringements on human rights in 
Maine.  5 M.R.S. § 4566(7), (11).  With those duties in mind, the Commission is pleased to provide this 
testimony in favor of  LD 1833, An Act To Amend  the Definition of “Educational Institution” Under the Maine 
Human Rights Act to Include Single -sex Educational Institutions . 
 
This Bill would amend the definition of “educational institution” to remove an antiquated and overly  broad 
exemp tion from the MHRA applicable to private “single -sex” schools .  While this exemption  made sense at 
the time the MHRA’s education provisions were enacted, it is no longer appropriate,  and should now be 
eliminated.  
 
Background: MHRA Coverage of Discriminatio n in Education  
 
Recognizing a “basic human right to a life with dignity” , see 5 M.R.S. § 4552, the Maine Legislature enacted 
the MHRA in 1971 to “prevent discrimination in employment, housing or access to public accommodations” 
on account of a protected tr ait.  In 1983, the Legislature added Subchapter V -B to the MHRA to prohibit 
discrimination in education.  Me. Pub. L. 1987 c. 578, § 3.  However, it prohibited only discrimination on the 
basis of sex.  Id.  “Educational institution” was defined as “any public sc hool or educational program, any 
public post -secondary institution, any private school or educational program approved for tuition purposes if 
 
1 The Commission itself is made up of five Commissioners, appointed by the Governor for staggered five -year terms.  By 
statute, there can be no more than three Commissioners from any political party.  5 M.R.S. § 4561.    

MHRC Testimony, LD 1833         Page 2 of 2 
 both male and female students are admitted and the governing body of each such school or program.”  Id., § 
2.  Ex cluding schools that admitted only male or female students (“ single -sex schools ”) from this definition 
made sense , since the only applicable protected class was sex.  
 
Over time, the Legislature added protected classes to Subchapter V -B, including disabilit y in 1987, national 
origin in 1989, race in 1991, and sexual orientation in 2005.  The definition of educational institution, 
however, was largely ignored, except that in 1995, the Legislature amended the definition to ensure that 
single -sex schools approv ed for tuition purposes were “educational institutions” for “purposes related to 
disability discrimination”.  Me. Pub. L. 1995 c. 393, § 4 ; see also 5 M.R.S. § 4553(2 -A). 
 
In 2021, the Commission submitted a Bill, sponsored by Senator Craig Hickman, entitl ed “An Act to Improve 
Consistency Within the Maine Human Rights Act.”  See L.D. 1688  (2021).  Among other things, that Bill sought 
to clarify the protected classes covered by Subchapter V -B of the MHRA, since it was inconsistent with other 
parts of the MHR A (for example, it prohibited discrimination on the basis of race, but not color).  This Bill was 
passed by the Legislature, signed by the Governor, and became effective on October 18, 2021 . 
 
LD 1833 Is Necessary to Complete the Update of the Education Provisions of the MHRA  
 
As is sometimes the case with updating laws in a piecemeal fashion, it appears that the 2021 legislation 
overlooked the definition of “educational institution”.  As discussed above, while a blanket exemption from 
the Act m ade sense when the Act prohibited only discrimination  in education  based on sex, that time has 
long since passed.  Plainly put, there is no reason for single -sex schools to be permitted to discriminate on the 
basis of race, color, ancestry, national origin , religion, and/or sexual orientation or gender identity , even if 
they were exempt from the prohibition of discrimination based on sex.  Moreover, given that there are no 
single -sex schools in Maine, the exemption applies to no entity in the state, making this an ideal time to 
remove the exemption, since it will not interfere with any existing educational program.   
 
Conclusion  
 
 Thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony in favor of LD 1833.  The Commission would be 
pleased to discuss these issues with you at your convenience, including at the work session on this matter.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
       /s/Barbara Archer Hirsch  
 
       Barbara Archer Hirsch  
       Counsel for the MHRC  
