Wednesday, April 19, 2023 
To: Committee on Health and Human Services 
Re: LD 592 
Dear Members ofthe Committee, 
My name is Brenda Harrison. I am a lifelong resident of Maine and have lived in 
Scarborough for my whole life. I'm sorry I cannot testify in person but I cannot miss the 
time away from work. I want to tell you about my son's addiction with opioids. My son 
broke his femur in a snow mobile accident 23 years ago and had to have a metal rod put in 
his leg to hold it together. The original rod let go 3 months after it was put in because the 
screws broke, a replacement rod was put in. The replacement rod also did not work, and 
that rod was replaced 8 months later with a plate. That plate lasted 3 months it broke when 
he went back to work. A second plate was put in and that plate lasted 4 months when he 
went back to work, a third plate was put in, this plate was call a high performance wave 
plate and that plate finally lasted and his leg finally healed. 
It was a nightmare and he was in tremendous pain from the beginning. Between the pain 
and the hardship of being out ofwork for almost three years, he suffered emotionally and 
physically. During the six surgeries the doctor prescribed him opioids. He became addicted 
and it ruined his life. 
He fights every day trying to avoid following down that dark path, he is off the opioids now, 
but it is an on going struggle. This situation has kept him from living the life he should have 
had. He still lives with a lot of pain. Unfortunately, my son will never be completely without 
pain but he found that chiropractic treatment to be very helpful at managing his muscle 
pain from having his leg opened up six times but Mainecare does not cover it and beinga 
cash patient is expensive. 
The chiropractic treatment actually lessened the pain. I don't understand why Robbie can 
see a physical therapist for the same problem and it is covered but he can't see the 
chiropractor. The physical therapist treatment just does not help the muscle pain the same 
way that the chiropractor treatment did. I don't care who the provider is, I just want my 
son to have less pain. The pain never goes away completely, there are good days and bad 
days and when the pain is there he cannot afford to see the chiropractor. He needs relief 
from the pain. Iftwo providers both have the same training to treat the same condition it 
doesn't make any sense why Mainecare covers one but not the other. 
Please vote to pass on LD 592 
Sincerely, 
Brenda Harrison 
191 Spurwink Rd 
Scarborough, Maine 04074 
207.939.5890
