 4-19-2023 
 
To: Members of the Joint Standing Health and Human Services Committee 
Re: LD 592, An Act To Amend the Law Governing MaineCare Coverage of Chiropractic 
Treatment 
Dear Members of the Committee, 
Thank you Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the joint standing 
committee on Health and Human Services.  My name is Dr. Daniel Myerowitz.  I am a resident 
of Holden and a lifelong resident of the State of Maine.  I am a third generation Doctor of 
Chiropractic, and I am now in my fourteenth year of practice.  I am the immediate past president 
of the Maine Chiropractic Association, and I’m proud to be testifying on behalf of my patients in 
favor of this bill, which passed the 129th and 130th legislatures before twice being left unfunded 
during appropriations due to other priorities. 
“Loving service is my first technique.”  Those words hang in the halls of Parker University, my 
alma mater.  We learn over nine spinal manipulative techniques while in school, but those words 
mean my first and foremost technique as a Doctor of Chiropractic is to provide the best care I 
can for every person I treat.  Beyond all else, they are not just a patient, but a person.  It is not 
my job to merely treat a patient, but to care for them.  I never imagined all of the roadblocks and 
complications that would present themselves in my journey to help sick people get well, 
especially those who need help the most.   
Currently, MaineCare coverage is restricted for Doctors of Chiropractic to only spinal x-rays, 
spinal manipulation, and examinations.  We are restricted from all other services that are well 
within our scope of practice and that we utilize on a daily basis.  This includes physical 
modalities, therapies, exercise and movement education, and all treatment for extremities.  These 
are services that are covered under the vast majority of commercial plans, and they are generally 
covered by MaineCare when performed by a physical therapist, medical and osteopathic 
physicians, but not by a chiropractor.  This results in additional visits to other providers for 
services that could be performed at the same time in one office setting unnecessarily 
complicating patient care and increasing system costs. 
This bill, when passed, will result in the following: 
1) The MaineCare patient population will have greater access to safe, effective, and low cost 
care. 
 
2) Patients with ankle or knee dysfunction that is directly affecting their low back will no 
longer be required to see another provider at the expense of another visit, another day off 
from work, and further transportation costs.  This is the patient population that can least 
afford the expense of lost time from work.  The system also benefits from the reduced 
cost of additional visits to other providers. 
 
3) Doctors of Chiropractic would be able to utilize additional treatment methods (i.e. 
traction, soft tissue techniques, and electrical stimulation) that can greatly enhance the 
chiropractic adjustment.  This would allow for potentially faster results and fewer visits 
overall.  Again, these services are already within our scope of practice and are covered 
when performed by other providers. 
 
4) This bill will incentivize more chiropractors to enroll in MaineCare thereby greatly 
relieving the strain on a system that is experiencing a significant provider shortage, 
especially in rural areas.  In the past, I have noticed patients with MaineCare coverage 
traveling from as far away as Machias to come to my office in Holden, which is a 90 
minute drive.   
Other states, most notably Missouri, have opened full access to chiropractors for their Medicaid 
population with the expectation of reduced health care costs as a result.  We would be happy to 
provide the committee with some of the data that influenced their decision for the work session. 
I thank you for your time and urge you to vote in favor of LD 592. 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Daniel Myerowitz D.C., Dipl. Ac (AACA) 
Immediate Past President, MCA 
 
 
