Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
April 19, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
Re:  LD 592 – An Act to Amend the Law Governin g MaineCare Coverage of Chiropractic Treatment 
Senator Baldacci, Representati ve Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services: 
This letter is to provide information on LD 592, An Act to Amend the Law Governing MaineCare Coverage 
of Chiropractic Treatment . This bill requires all chiropractic services that are within the scope of practice 
of chiropractic  doctors  and  performed  by a licensed  chiropractic  doctor  to be reimbursed  under  the 
MaineCare program. Under current federal law, the Department of Health and Human Services is required 
to reimburse for only chiropractic evaluation and management examinations. 
This bill conflicts with federal regulations that  limit what Medicaid can cover for chiropractic services. The 
U.S. Code of Federal Regulations states:  
§ 440.60 - Medical or other remedial care provided by licensed practitioners.
(a) “Medical care or any other type of remedial care provided by licensed practitioners” means any
medical or remedial care or services, other than physicians' services, provided by licensed
practitioners within the scope of practice as defined under State law.
(b) Chiropractors' services include only services that -
(1) Are provided by a chiropractor who is licensed by the State and meets standards
issued by the Secretary under  § 405.232(b) of this chapter; and
(2) Consists of treatment by means of manual manipulation of the spine that the
chiropractor is leg ally authorized by the State to perform.
As such, additional MaineCare covered chiropractic services would not qualify for federal matching funds 
and would have to be paid for entirely with state dollars.  We do not believe it would be a wise use of 
Depart ment time to pursue a state plan amendment that conflicts with federal regulations.  
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If you have 
any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
Sincerely,  
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

