 1 
 
131st  Legislature  
Senate of 
Maine  
Senate District 29 
 
    
Senator Anne Carney  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0003  
Office (207) 287 -1515  
 
 
Testimony of Senator Anne Carney introducing    
LD 74, An Act to Update the Responsibilities of the Clean -up and  
Response Fund Review Board  
 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
January 30, 2023  
 
Chairs Brenner and Gramlich and esteemed members of the Committee on E nvironment 
and Natural Resources, I am pleased to be before you today to introduce LD 74, An Act 
to Update the Responsibilities of the Clean -up and Response Fund Review Board. The 
purpose of th is bill is to ensure that the Clean -up and Response Fund Review  Board 
duties set out in statute under 38 MRSA §568-A are carried out in an efficient and timely 
fashion.  
 
One of the ways Maine addresses pollution from oil spills is through the Maine Ground 
and Surface Waters Clean -up and Response Fund. 38 MRS §551 . The Fund provides 
compensation to persons suffering property damage or economic harm as a result of a 
discharge of oil into coastal or inland waters.  
 
The primary role of the Clean -up and Response Fund Review Board is to monitor income 
and disbursements from t he Fund. 38 MRS §568 -B. The Clean -up Board has also been 
responsible for hearing appeals from insurance claim -related decisions of the 
commissio ner and the State Fire Marshal under  38 MRS §568 -A. Assigning this appellate 
role to the Clean -up Board, however, has inadvertently caused sign ificant delays in 
resolution of those appeals. The State has had difficulty retaining qualified individuals  to 
serve on the Clean -up Board and filling vacancies on the board. The Clean -up Board  has 
been unable to convene a quorum, and therefore has not conducted an official meeting in 
over 4 years . 
 
This bill aims to do three things to ensure the Clean -up Board’s ability to meet its 
obligation  to monitor income and disbursements from the Fund while also ensuring that 
claimants receive timely resolution of a ppeals.  
 
 2 Most significantly, LD 74 shifts  responsibility for appeals hearing s from the Clean -up 
Board  to the Board of Environmental Protection so that the status and make -up of the 
Clean -up Board  will not impact the ability of Fund applicants to have thei r appeals heard 
in a timely manner . Second, LD 74 modifies the appointment process and tenure of 
existing Clean -up Board  seats by allowing members to continue to serve for up to a year 
after the member’s term expires or until a replacement is found . Third, LD 74 allows for 
a new Clean -up Board  chairperson to serve a two -year term and  reduce s the frequency of 
board meetings to twice a year , instead of four times a year.  
 
These changes will improve the ability of the Clean -up and Response Fund Review 
Board to effectively perform its duties . The changes will allow a more timely and 
efficient resolution of appeals from Clean -up Board  decisions by allocating appellate 
hearings to the Board of Environmental Protection.  
 
Thank you for your consideration today. I am happy to try to answer any questions, 
though Susanne Miller, Director, Bureau of Remediation and Waste Management for t he 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection will present testimony today, and is more 
knowledgeable and better able to answer your questions.  
  
 
 
 
Anne Carney  
State Senator, Senate District 29  
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough  
  
