TESTIMONY of Megan Diver                
Vice President
Maine Energy Marketers Association
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
Environment and Natural Resources
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST LD 74
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee. My name is Megan Diver, I am the Vice President of the Maine Energy Marketers 
Association (MEMA).
MEMA is a trade association composed of approximately 300-member companies and over 5,000 direct 
and 5,000 indirect people working in energy delivery and servicing businesses delivering heating oil, 
biofuels, motor fuels, propane, pellets and kerosene and offering service and installations on the 
equipment that operates these fuels. In addition, our members own and operate 70% of Maine's 1,300 
convenience stores in Maine and employ approximately 10,000 Maine people and sell more than 1 
billion gallons of gasoline and diesel fuel each year. Our members also sell more than 90% of all the 
propane sold in our state every year. We provide education and training to the heating, ventilation, air 
conditioning, weatherization, and energy auditing trades for hundreds of Maine citizens annually 
through our courses at our own state of the art training facility MEMA Technical Education Center 
(MTEC) in Brunswick. MEMA has recently started offering a CDL Class B Theory Training with tank and 
hazmat endorsements as a member benefit, MEMA saw the need in our industry to recruit more CDL 
drivers and worked through 2022 to create this new education program for members, MEMA worked 
closely with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles on this. 
MEMA has been involved in legislation relating to the Review Board in the past because the Fund is 
important to underground storage tank facility owners that make up many of MEMA’s members. The 
Fund is used as the primary mechanism for Maine’s underground storage tank owners to meet federal 
financial responsibility requirements.
 
The Review Board helps provide oversight of the Fund which is part of the State’s UST Insurance Fund 
Program.   The Fund provides for the investigation, mitigation and removal of discharges or threats of 
discharge of oil from storage facilities, including the restoration of contaminated water supplies; and 
guarantees the prompt payment of reasonable damage claims resulting from an oil spill.   This program 
saves individual small business gas stations from having to obtain private insurance for environmental 
cleanup activities and third-party damages to satisfy the federal financial responsibility requirements. 
Without the Fund program, these small business owners could be significantly impacted causing many 
to go out of business.
 
MEMA’s members have historically had some representation on the Board. Currently MEMA is seeking 
to have one or more members fill some of the vacant seats on the Board, as the Board’s purpose is 
important for its members and we believe it is important to have those in the industry participate in the 
Board since they are the ones in the field on a daily basis.
 
Because the Review Board has not met in several years, MEMA has not been able to provide any 
recommendations regarding the Fund’s income, disbursements, or fee structure to ensure it remains 
healthy and sustainable. 
 
MEMA supports having a fully seated and active Board.  MEMA has been working with Maine DEP for 
the past year to make this happen, although MEMA members would prefer the Board operate as it is 
currently, we understand this change proposed by DEP is necessary to do so. 
Thank you.
