 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 4 (NFNA)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 4, An Act to Update the Department of Corrections Laws Regarding Operation and 
Administration of Jails, Women’s Services and Juvenile Detention  
 
DA: February  13, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in neither for nor against LD 4.   In their discussion of Section 5 of LD 4, CLAC members 
made the following observation, and offer it to the Committee as an informati onal point.    
 
 This bill addresses only restitution paid through the Dept. of Corrections  (DOC) .   The 
individual who is sentenced to a term of incarceration in a DOC  facility and/or to a period of 
probation supervised by a DOC corrections officer  and wh o owes court -ordered restitution would be 
affected by this bill .    A sentencing court may instead order that restitution is to be paid through the 
prosecutor’s office (District Attorney or Office of A ttorney General ).  This bill does not address that 
other path of court -ordered restitution.    
 
 CLAC does not have sufficient information to develop a recommendation regarding how a 
similar process might work in these other contexts.   LD 4 was submitted by the DOC specifically to 
address that agency’s statut es and processes , so it makes sense that this bill addresses only 
restitution ordered to be paid through DOC .   
 
 
 
 
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
