   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
1 
 
TESTIMONY OF  
 
RANDALL A. LIBERTY, COMMISSIONER  
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
 
In Support to  
 
LD 4 An Act to Update Provisions of the Department of Corrections Laws Regarding Operation and 
Administration of Jails, Women's Services and Juvenile Detention  
 
 
Before the  
Criminal Justice Public Safety Committee  
February 13, 202 3 
 
 
Senator Beebe -Center and Representative Salisbury and other distinguished members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections 
providing testimony in support of LD 4.  
 
Thank you Representative Pluecker, former member of the CJPS, for sponsoring this bill.  
 
This is a departmental bill making several updates and corrections to stat utes that impact the MDOC.  
 
In sections 2, 3, and 4 the bill seeks to clarify the role of the County Corrections Professional Standards Council 
which was created in the passage of LD 1654 last session. The intent was for this County Corrections 
Professiona l Standards Council to be the only body in statute with the ability to adopt rules  and advise the 
Commissioner of Corrections about rules the Department adopts governing the jails. However, inadvertently the 
new statute did not include a repeal provision f or a pre -existing body, called the County and Municipal 
Detention Facility Advisory Committee.  
 
As you can see section 2 repeals the County and Municipal Detention Facility Advisory Committee. Thus, 
allowing section s 3 and 4, which will ensure all the func tion of that committee be transferred to the newly 
created County Corrections Professional Standards Council, as was the intent of the statute change last session 
led by former House Chair Charlotte Warren.  
 
Switching gears now, section 5 is related to lo ttery winnings. The proposal requires the Department of 
Corrections to work with the Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations to ensure that any 
resident/client in our purview who is owed lottery winnings and also has court order ed victim restitu tion 
responsibilities, does not collect their lottery winnings until the victim restitution has been taken care of. Any 
monies beyond what are owed to the victim will be distributed to the resident/client.  
The intent is to ensure that victims are provided  their court ordered restitution. This setoff is mo deled after other 
statutes requiring lottery winnings be set off  against child support obligations, tax liabilities, etc. This setoff  will 
not apply to juveniles.  
 
   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
2 
 
The Department is also proposing an amendment to go with this section to ensure  that the mention of court -
ordered victim restitution in the below statute has teeth .    
 
Title 5, §378 -A is amended to read as follows :  
 
§378 -A. Setoff of claims against lottery winnings; priority  
If the bureau is required under state law or court order to set off a person's lottery winnings against a 
claim of an amount due and more than one claim is made against the lottery winnings, the bureau shall 
set off against the winnings as many claims as po ssible in the following order of priority:  
1. Liquidated child support debts. Liquidated child support debts owed to or through the Department of 
Health and Human Services pursuant to Title 19 -A, section 2360;  
2. Liquidated tax liabilities. Liquidated tax  liabilities pursuant to Title 36, section 185, subsection 3;  
3. Unemployment compensation debt. Unemployment compensation debt pursuant to Title 26, section 
1051, subsection 8;  
4. Court -ordered restitution obligations. Court -ordered restitution obligations  when the amounts due are 
identified by a district attorney's  office  pursuant to Title 34 -A, section 1214 -B; 
5. Fines, surcharges and assessments owed to State. Fines, surcharges  and assessments imposed by any 
of the courts and owed to the State pursuant to Title 14, section 3141 -A; and  
6. All other claims. All other claims in the order of their receipt.  
It should be noted that, despite restitution being mentioned in Title 8, sect ion 378 -A, there is no actual authority 
for the Bureau to set off winnings against victim restitution, as Title 8 just lists priorities IF there is a setoff 
requirement in another statute, something which does not currently exist with respect to victim res titution.    It is 
this requirement which section 5 of the bill adds.    
 
Switching gears again, section 6 and 7 are related to MDOC’s accreditation process. Section 6 would repeal 34-
A Section 1215 , which  reflects  the MDOC’s current process for seeking accr editation. We purpose repealing 
section 6, the current language, in favor of stronger accreditation language, as described in section 7.  
 
Currently we’re required to “seek accreditation [o f] correctional and detention facilities by a nationally 
recognized correctional accrediting body and … maintain any accreditation obtained.” Only the American 
Correctional Association (ACA)  fits this description . 
 
Our proposed language will require operational reviews at least every three years by multiple entities, not j ust 
the ACA.  The challenge with being limited to the ACA is that many of its standards do not align with best 
practices specific to mental health and behavioral health, among other areas. As this committee is learning, 
Maine’s Department of Corrections is  a leader nationally in correctional best practices, with states, counties, 
and federal agencies highlighting our correctional model as a model to be replicated. Our intention with the 
   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
3 
 
language changes in section 7 is to allow us flexibility to seek accred itation and recommendations from 
organizations specializing in mental health, behavioral health, food services, etc.  
 
In section 8 of the bill, we are asking the legislature to put into statute  a chief administrative officer for 
women’s services, just like we have in statute  a chief administrative officer, also called a warden, of the male 
correctional facilities.  The Department has two facilities for women, the Women’s Center which is located on 
the grounds of the Maine Correctional Center but is run autonomously by the Director of Women’s Services, 
and the Southern Maine Women’s Reentry Center located ½ mile from the Maine Correctional Center and  is 
also managed by the Director of Women’s Serv ices.  The person in this position of Director is for all intents and 
purposes the chief administrative officer for two women’s facilities but  the position  doesn’t exist in statute. This 
bill will fi x the problem of this discrepancy. Note our language  is only for DOC statutes, not county jails.  
 
Finally, the rest of  the bill, section s 1, 9 - 22 recognize that i n 2018 Mountain View Correctional Facility ceased 
serving juveniles and that the chief administrative officer of the Mountain View Correctional Facility, who is 
also the chief administrative officer of the Downe ast Correctional Facility, has the same responsibilities as the 
chief administrative officers of the other adult correctional facilities with medium or higher security housing 
units and, therefore, like them, should be called a warden.  
 
This concludes my te stimony.  
 
I will answer any questions.  
 
Thank You,  
 
Randall A . Liberty , Commissioner  
Maine Depa rtment of Corrections  
