TESTIMONY OF BRIAN WHITNEY, PRESIDENT OF THE MAINE TECHNOLOGY INSTITUTE, 
REGARDING LD 1318, “RESOLVE, DIRECTING THE MAINE TECHNOLOGY INSTITUTE TO REVIEW 
TARGETED TECHNOLOGY SECTORS AND INDUSTRY CLUSTERS ” 
Senator Curry , Representative Roberts , and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business (IDEA) , my 
name is Brian Whitney,  and I am the President of the Maine Technology Institute , our state -
funded , public -private partnership tha t helps catalyze  innovation in Maine .  I am here today to 
testify neither for no r against  Senator Bennett’s Reso lution , LD 13 18, “Directing the Maine 
Technology Institute to Review Targeted Technology Sectors and Industry Clusters .” 
MTI appreciates Senator Bennett’s  proposal to review the effectiveness and relevancy of the 
state’s targeted technology sectors to determine whether the laws governing the sectors and 
clusters should be amended .  As a former  chair of the Joint Select Commi ttee on R&D back in 
the 118th Legislature , Senator Bennett enjoys a un ique perspective as that committee , followed 
by the complementary work of a similar Joint Select Committee in the 119th Legislature, really 
created the framework for the R&D programs that exist today, including the seven targeted 
technology sectors.  
 
Given that more than 20 years have passed since the designation of the targeted technology 
sectors , it is appropriate for the state to take a look  at how Maine’s tech sectors and clusters 
are evolving and performing  to ensure we are capitalizing on our assets and opportunities  to 
grow a more robust technology -based econom y. 
 
That said, the beauty of the current seven targeted technology sectors is t hat they are broad 
and inclusive  and, as I have noted previously to this committee, not defined in statute .  This lack 
of a statutory definition of what is and isn’t information technology , for example, has allowed 
MTI and other partners in the innovation ecosystem to keep up with  the rapid  pace of change 
in that particular sector.  The same goes for the other six.  
 
It is important to note that a  bunch of great work has occurred over the past five to ten years 
examining Maine’s technology drivers and associated  growth opportunities. In 2014, MTI 
commissione d a comprehensive study by Battelle, the world’s largest non -profit independent 
research and development organization , to assess the tech sectors and clusters in the state .  
That report highlighted eight high -performing tech  clusters in Maine: Biopharmaceuticals ; 
Finance and Business Support Services ; Agriculture, Aquaculture, Fisheries and Food 
Production ; Alternative Energy and Turbines ; Boatbuilding and Related Industries ; Engineering 
and Scientific/Technical Services ; Environmental Services ; and Forestry -related Products.   Those 
eight high performing clusters all aligned well  with our existing seven  technology sectors . 
 
In 2015, FocusMaine  hired a global consulting company to conduct an in -depth analysis of 
global trends and market opportunities  in Maine and determined agriculture, aquaculture , and 
biopharmaceuticals were our state’s globally competitive and high -growth areas of 
opportunity.  Again, all three of those focus are as are aligned with three of our seven targeted 
technology sectors.  
 
In 2019,  the state released its 10 -year economic development strategy and that report 
recommended that we capitalize on the growth of clean, renewable energy sources; 
sustainable aquacult ure, fishing  and farming t o meet the growing demand for a traceable food 
supply ; and continued growth of bio -based alternative products that emerge from the 
intersection of wood supply, bioplastic, and advanced building material technologies .  These 
strategic areas of fo cus all align perfectly with our existing targeted technology sectors.  
 
And, within the n ext month or so, the Maine Innovation Economy Advisory Board will be 
presenting  its recently completed five-year Innovation Action Plan to you.  That plan highlights 
the following high -growth target sectors as opportunities and strengths  for Maine : aerospace ; 
artificial intelligence; bio -based alternatives like advanced building products, algae and algal 
products, bio-manufacturing, biochemicals ; human health including biomedical research and 
healthy aging;  and renewable energy .  Those high growth target sectors also match up well with 
our existing , inclusive targeted technology sectors.    
 
So, there is a good body of work from which we can draw if you determine that the Resolution 
is worthy of passage.  Given that it is not overly prescriptive , I am confident that , if asked , MTI 
can conduct a review, with public input , and report back to you with our findings and 
reco mmendations.   The December 6 deadline presents a challenge given the many competing 
current priorities of the organization, including the deployment of more than $70 million in 
Maine Jobs & Recovery Plan funding, the administration of two federal grants, and 
implementation of new funding and support programs, in addition to our core business, but we 
will do our best to meet it.    
 
Thank you for your time and consideration, I am happy to address any questions or concerns 
you may have.  
 
