11>‘ _i 
Richard A. Bennett 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 18 pg Augusta, Maine 04333~ 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard Bennett 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business 
LD 1318, “Resolve, Directing the Maine Technology Institute to Review Targeted Technology 
Sectors and Industry Clusters ” 
April ll, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: I am Senator Rick Bennett 
of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate. 
I am pleased to sponsor LD 1318, “Resolve, Directing the Maine Technology Institute to Review 
Targeted Technology Sectors and Industry Clusters. ” 
In 1997, I was pleased to be appointed by then Senate President Mark Lawrence to a committee 
tasked with conducting a deep review of Maine’s research and development initiatives and the 
signiﬁcant funding disadvantage our state had in this area to many other jurisdictions. The Joint 
Select Committee was truly bipartisan and many fruitful and worthwhile initiatives came from 
that Committee. Two of these include the Maine Economic Improvement Fund and the Maine 
Technology Institute, which continue to vigorously drive economic development today. 
Now more than a quarter century later, the Maine Technology Institute has undeniably madea 
positive impact on Maine’s economy. MTI has invested over $280 million in nearly 2,950 
distinct projects across Maine’s 16 counties. MTI funding has generated over $1 billion in 
private sector matching investment and these investments have resulted in new jobs, new 
technologies, expanded Maine’s economy, and accelerated business growth. Iremain 
extraordinarily impressed with the MTI board’s and President Brian Whitney’s continuing 
leadership and innovation in thinking to the future. 
With MTI’s success, I think it is important to pause and reevaluate to ensure our goals and 
initiatives are properly focused to meet the current and future needs of Maine. In particular, LD 
1318 directs MTI to review the targeted technology sectors and the industry clusters to invitea 
conversation about whether the laws governing the sectors and clusters should be amended. 
MTI’s current Technology Sectors are biotechnology, composites & advanced materials, 
environmental technologies, forest products & agriculture, information technology, marine 
technology & aquaculture, and precision manufacturing. A lot has changed in the past 26 years. 
Reviewing these sectors will enable MTI to make sure they are focusing on the most 
advantageous sectors to advance Maine’s economy. 
I ask for your favorable consideration and thank you for your attention. 
F ax: (207) 287-1527 * TTY (207) 287-1583 * Message Service 1-800-423-6900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
