Uflll./€‘l'SliLl€S 
UNIVERSITY OF M/\lNE SYSTEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System 
Presented by UMS Director of Government & Community Relations Samantha Warren 
Regarding LD 1318, Resolve, Directing the Maine Technology Institute to Review 
Targeted Technology Sectors and Industry Clusters, April 11, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: My name is 
Samantha Warren and l am the Director of Government Relations for the University of Maine 
System (UMS), offering testimony to inform your consideration of LD 1318, Resolve, Directing the 
Maine Technology Institute to Review Targeted Technology Sectors and industry Clusters. 
As you heard earlier this session from Joan Ferrini-Mundy, the President of the University of 
Maine and our System’s first Vice Chancellor for Research and Innovation, the State invests in 
commercially promising public university research and development (R&D) through the Maine 
Economic Improvement Fund (MEIF). 
l want to recognize the foresight of the sponsor of the bill before you, Senator Bennett, who 25 
years ago, along with a bipartisan coalition that included Senator Lawrence, established MEIF in 
recognition of the unique role of UMaine R&D in driving and diversifying private sector growth. It 
has been an investment that has paid incredible dividends for Maine. 
Today, MEIF generates at least a 6:1 return for Maine and creates the capacity at the now- 
R1 UMaine and across our System to prepare our state’s knowledge and technical 
workforce, and help hundreds of companies each year to develop new products and 
processes necessary to stay competitive in a global economy and support good-paying 
Maine jobs. Thanks to the ongoing MEIF investment supported by the Legislature, our small 
rural state is home to researchers and innovators of international importance and impact, 
working here and around the world to solve “wicked problems" of local relevance, like how to 
adapt heritage industries for changing markets and climates, manage and mitigate PFAS, detect 
cancer earlier, and even 3D-print affordable housing from wood waste. 
Additional annual appropriations for MEIF proposed by Governor Mills and endorsed last month 
by the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee follow calls from Maine business and industry 
leaders for the State to triple its investment in R&D. It would enable our universities, led by 
UMaine, to prepare even more graduates to be problem-solvers and innovators in the 
Maine economy, address critical challenges confronting the state through targeted 
interdisciplinary research solutions, and work with even more companies here to create 
Maine jobs and prosperity. We hope that increase will have your support. 
Most relevant to LD 1318 is that by statute, this university activity funded by MEIF must be 
focused in the targeted technology sectors, which were identified in the late-1990s as the 
areas where R&D is considered most likely to produce significant benefits to Maine's people 
and economy. 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent - 
University of 
Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque lsle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
While the seven sectors have well stood the test of the time, there are new areas of opportunity 
emerging, like clean energy. Some sectors may also be due for modernization to reflect their 
evolution over the past two-plus decades. For example, “information technology ” may benefit 
from being broadened to include artificial intelligence, which has vast potential in Maine to 
improve our economy and way of life with diverse applications from agriculture to healthcare. 
Given this, UMS agrees a review of the sectors could be timely and would request the 
resolve be amended to explicitly include the UMS Vice Chancellor for Research & lnnovation in 
that process, which we agree should be led by our tremendous partner, the Maine Technology 
institute. Additionally, we would like to make this committee aware that the l\/laine Innovation 
Economy Advisory Board (MIEAB), chaired by VCRI/President Ferrini-Mundy, will be releasing 
a science and technology action plan for the state later this spring that will include 
recommendations on how the targeted technology sectors could be evolved to build on Maine’s 
historical comparative advantages to create new opportunities across multiple industries. The 
review proposed by LD 1318 would benefit from being informed by that action plan and MlEAB. 
We look fon/vard to participating in this process and thank the Committee for your support of 
Maine’s public institutions and our high-return research and development activity. 
Page 2 of2
