  
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office for Family Independence  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel.: (207) 624-4168 ; Toll-Free: (800) 442 -6003  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) ; Fax: (207)  287-3455 
  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 12 , 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD  1204  – An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps in the MaineCare 
Program for Incarcerated Persons  
 
Senato r Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services:  
 
This letter is to provide you with information that might be helpful to you  in your deliberations regarding LD  
1204 . The proposed legislation requi res the Department of Health and Human Services to enter into a 
Memorandum of Understanding with counties in Maine that have a county or regional jail  in order to provide 
incarcerated persons assistance with applying for MaineCare.  
 
The Department of Healt h and Human Services, Office for Family Independence (OFI) has a current 
memorandum of understandi ng with the Department of Corrections  (DOC)  to assist individuals residing in state 
prisons with applying for MaineCare .  Under this memorandum of understanding  the DOC  connects 
incarcerated individua ls who are scheduled for release with necessary resources to apply for MaineCare.  In 
addition, they provide OFI with a month ly report of current MaineCare members who are scheduled for release 
so that full MaineCare coverage , which had previously been adjusted  to a limited MaineCare benefit  due to 
incarceration, can be reinstated at release.    
 
The Department has previously attempted to engage  with regional and county jails to establish  similar 
processes.   The reason for why these attempts did not result in similar agreements with the jails is not clear to 
the Department.    
 
The Department recognizes that  unlike residents of state prisons, individuals residing in local jails are  generally 
incarcerated  for shorter timeframes, which could result in a greater volume of individuals needing assistance 
applying for MaineCare on a weekly or monthly basis  and may require different roles and responsibilities of 
both OFI and  the jails  if a memorandum  of understanding was  crafted .  The Department is willing to work with 
county and regional jails to ensure eligib le individuals have access to healthcare coverage.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward.  If you have any 
further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Anthony Pelotte, Director  
Office for Family Independence  

