ll 
ai ' ' ' ° 
. Maine Sheriffs ’ Associatlon 
ﬁg “One Team, One Mission”
T 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President 
Sheriff Scott Nichols, 15‘ Vice-President, Sheriff William King, 2"“ Vice-President — Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary— 
Sheriff Todd Brackett, Treasurer — Sheriff Troy Morton, Immediate Past President— 
Sheriff Joel Merly, Past President-at-Large - Mary—Anne LaMarre, Executive Director 
April 12, 2023_ 
L.D. I204 — An Act To Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps 
in the MaineCare Program for Incarcerated Persons 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Dale P. Lancaster, I am the sheriff of 
Somerset County and the President of the Maine Sheriffs Association. I am here today on their 
behalf. 
The ﬁfteen county and regional jails in Maine are quite different than the correctional facilities 
operated by the state and it’s important to understand the distinction between the two and how 
passage of L.D. 1204 will impact our jails. Maine’s county jails are often referred to as the 
emergency rooms of the penal system. When an individual is taken into custody, they’re 
frequently suffering from substance use disorder, intoxication, or mental health issues. Maine 
jails immediately identify the needs of this individual and design a plan for meeting those needs. 
This differs from the intakes at state facilities as their intakes are detoxed and already enrolled in 
programming. 
The Maine Sheriffs conducted an informal survey of medical costs in current jail budgets with 
Cumberland reporting over $3,000,000 in medical costs, $1,400,00 in my own county, and 
Aroostook budgeting close to $1,000,000. When you consider that when a MaineCare recipient 
becomes incarcerated, their beneﬁts are suspended during their incarceration, it becomes evident 
immediately that these costs become the responsibility of county property taxpayers. 
Most individuals that come into our facilities receive treatment and counseling and are released 
without being sentenced to a state facility. We would argue that this population is among the 
most vulnerable in the State. Remember, once they became incarcerated, their MaineCare is 
suspended. We are releasing these individuals back into the community without health care ata 
time when they’re most in need. The passage of L.D. 1204 will ensure that those individuals 
already identiﬁed as MaineCare recipients will not have their healthcare coverage interrupted, 
removing the gap in which many will be looking to continue those services initiated in Maine’s 
jails. 
Speaker Talbot Ross has amended the language of this bill to mandate that the state submita 
state plan amendment which, if approved, would allow all MaineCare recipients to retain their 
healthcare coverage while they’re incarcerated. This is an important shift as currently; Maine 
jails are struggling with skyrocketing health care costs. This change would not simply cover 
inmates’ healthcare, but we believe the coverage would allow for greater services. All Maine 
jails provide medically assisted treatment or MAT. We know that there are a variety of 
medications to treat substance use disorders, however, we also know some of the preferable
medications are too expensive for county jail budgets. As a result, many jails use daily dose 
medications for those inmates when we know a monthly injection to support addiction control 
has signiﬁcant success in preventing relapses. Additionally, access to monthly injections for 
inmates battling substance use disorder would provide the added and unintended beneﬁt of 
reducing the workload of our already over-burdened staff members as they would administer 
once-a-month injections rather than daily administration to hundreds of incarcerated persons. 
We anticipate there will be those in opposition to this bill as the misperception of added costs is 
examined but it’s important to remember that we’re discussing individuals that are already 
enrolled in MaineCare. Our argument is that they’ve already been approved for this coverage, we are asking that they retain this vital coverage during their incarceration. 
Maine Sheriffs applaud Speaker Talbot Ross for acknowledging that we can and must do more for those individuals who need healthcare at a most critical time. Maine Sheriffs unanimously 
support L.D. 1204 and we urge the esteemed members of this committee to unanimously vote 
Ought To Pass on L.D. 1204. 
Thank you for your consideration and it would be my pleasure to answer any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President 
Maine Sheriffs Association
