JAMES I. COHEN One Portland Square 
PARTNER Portland, Maine 04101-4054 
icohen@verrill-law.com Main 207-774-4000 
207-253-4708 
April 12, 2023 
Sen. Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Rep. Michele Meyer, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 1204, An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps 
in the MaineCare Program for Incarcerated Persons 
Dear Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyers, and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee: 
On behalf of the Coalition to Ensure Fair Access to Opioid Addiction Treatment, we are pleased to 
provide testimony in suggort of LD 1204. 
About us. Our Coalition is comprised of all thirteen OTP clinics licensed by the State of Maine to offer 
medication-assisted treatment services utilizing methadone. Our Coalition serves thousands of Mainers 
with opioid use disorder from clinics located throughout Maine, approximately 70% of whom are 
MaineCare eligible. 
LD 1204. Members of our Coalition are on the front lines of Maine's opioid epidemic. At any one time, 
there are more than 4,500 Mainers receiving medication assisted treatment utilizing methadone in 
clinics throughout the State, a form of treatment considered the “gold standard" of care for opioid use 
disorder. 
To be effective, individuals must receive medication on a daily basis. If there are gaps in medication, an 
individual will go into withdrawal which can trigger a range of adverse consequences, including relapse 
and overdose. We therefore work extremely hard with our patients to ensure continuity of care, and 
this mutual effort helps keep a high percentage in recovery. lt is also notable that individuals in 
treatment are far less likely to commit a crime or be incarcerated, which is a tremendous benefit to 
society. 
However, we are mindful of the fact that individuals with opioid use disorder, when untreated, are more 
likely to be incarcerated, and once incarcerated, such individuals are in need of treatment. For 
individuals eligible for MaineCare, incarceration strips them of this medical coverage. It also leaves them 
without coverage upon discharge, which is a time of tremendous risk for individuals with a history of
OTP Coalition — Letter re LD 1204 
April 12, 2023 
Page2 
opioid use disorder. It is sadly all too common for such individuals, upon release, to relapse, overdose, 
and die. 
For this reason, steps to ensure that MaineCare eligible individuals do not lose their coverage as a result 
of incarceration is critically important. Not only will coverage improve the opportunities for such 
individuals to receive needed treatment while incarcerated, but it will also increase the likelihood that 
such individuals can receive treatment upon discharge — reducing their risk of overdose death. 
Conclusion. For the reasons noted above, we support the proposed amendment to LD 1204 that would 
direct the State to apply for a waiver from the federal government to preserve i\/|aineCare coverage for 
individuals who are incarcerated. Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments, and if you 
have questions or need any other information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Sincerely, 
James I. Cohen 
Counsel to OTP Coalition 
cc: Gordon Smith, Director of Opioid Response, State of Maine 
Katherine Coutu, State Opioid Treatment Authority, State of Maine
