Maine 
PR1 5 ON DVO CACY 
g Coalition 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and honorable members of the 
health and human services committee, 
My name is Jan Collins, l am assistant director of Maine Prisoner 
Advocacy Coalition(M PAC) and l am a member of the Franklin County Jail 
Board of Visitors. I am here to support LD 1204 An Act to improve the 
Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps in the MaineCare 
Program for incarcerated Persons 
l am sure that you have heard from many individuals testifying that jails 
have become default mental health and substance use disorder centers, 
never by choice, and always as a result of the lack of community 
resources to meet these public health crises. 
Jail administrators have also talked about how they do not have the 
resources to treat these individuals. ln fact many individuals will get much 
worse while incarcerated. Nationally, suicide was the single leading cause 
of death for people in jails, accounting for almost 30% of deaths. 
Someone in jail is more than three times as likely to die from suicide as 
someone in the general U.S. population. Last year in l\/laine we had record 
numbers of individuals die from suicide and overdose while incarcerated. 
The toll of individuals who died soon after release is many times higher. 
Currently a federal medicaid exclusion clause limits coverage of 
incarcerated individuals to inpatient facility care. That means that all 
medical costs are paid for by the jails and county taxpayers at a time when 
more and more high need individuals are finding themselves incarcerated. 
Simultaneously, the state limits increases in county jail budgets to 4%.
lt is easy to see why counties are struggling. 
The lack of medicare coverage is a public health crisis. As an example, 
individuals in jails and prisons have high rates of hepatitis, if it is not 
treated while the person is in custody, we will likely see more spread in the 
community. 
Because of lack of insurance coverage and adequate health care in jails, 
conditions that would be easily treated in early stages, like cancer, often 
go undetected or untreated, leading to higher personal and societal costs 
later. 
A medicaid waver would save lives and save money. 
Please give your full support to LD 1204 An Act to improve the Health of 
Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps in the MaineCare Program for 
Incarcerated Persons 
Sincerely, 
Jan M. Collins 
However, federal and state law and policy limit the Medicaid-covered services that an individual 
can receive while incarcerated. See MaineCare Beneﬁts Manual: l0-144 C.M.R.cl1. 101, 
Chapter I, Section l.04(B) (“For inmates involuntarily conﬁned in a public institution, state or 
federal prison, jail, detention facility or other penal facility, who are MaineCare members, 
MaineCare will pay only for covered inpatient medical institution sen/ices provided to the 
imnate while an inpatient in a hospital, nursing_home. ICF/IID Intermediate Care Facility for 
Individuals with Intellectual Disability 0l‘_LL1V6l1ll6 psychiatric facility. MaineCare will not pay for any other services. ”); see also 22 M.R.S. § 3174. Other medical services for incarcerated 
individuals are provided by the institutions in which they are held; for example, by the 
Department of Corrections for persons in state facilities. 
Bureau of Justice Statistics - New BJ S report reveals staggering number of preventable 
deaths in local jails 
https: f ,/ www.prisonp0licy.org f blogf 2020 _/ 02/ 13 / jaildeaths /'
