Testimony of Lani Graham, MD, MPH 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1204 
An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps in 
the MaineCare program for Incarcerated Persons 
Presented by Speaker Talbot Ross 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee, April 12, Z023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee, my name is Lani Graham. I am a former 
Chief Public health Officer for Maine. I serve on the Public Health 
Committee (PHC) of the Maine Medical Association (MMA) and am here 
representing the Maine Medical Association. I live in Freeport. 
I had not intended to testify on this bill as I have other priorities and LD 
1204 as originally presented, while worthy, did not rise to the top of my 
list. However, I was alerted this morning that an amendment has been 
presented by the sponsor, which requires the Department of Health and 
Human Services to apply for a waiver that would allow the incarcerated 
in Maine to become eligible for MaineCare prior to release. This 
proposal, which I have yet to see, skyrocketed the bill to the top of my 
list. I hope my informants were correct. 
You have likely heard some of the background on this amendment from 
the sponsor but let me tell you a bit about the history of physician 
interest in this waiver. I started working on the idea last fall whenI 
learned that nine or ten other states, as diverse as Kentucky and 
Vermont, were already enjoying the benefits of the waiver. Since that 
time, California has jumped in with an even more expansive waiver. I 
brought the matter up to the PHC of the Maine Medical Association in 
October and all the physicians in attendance supported the idea of 
Maine DHHS applying for a waiver. One reason given was that, rather 
than providing medical care, staff in physician offices had to spend 
valuable time that should have been spent on medical care, helping 
recently released persons apply for MaineCare. Another reason given 
was that people with substance use disorders often had not been 
properly treated prior to release, making resuming care for that chronic
illness more difficult. Another reason given was that these incarcerated 
people often had difficult problems that required prompt attention, but 
those released had little understanding about attaining health care. 
After a relatively short discussion, the Committee urged staff at the 
MMA to contact Maine DHHS about applying for the waiver. 
Since that time, I personally have contacted the Sherriff's Association 
and the Commissioner of the Maine Department of Correction to 
encourage support for a Maine application for this waiver. It seems 
like a win for everyone. Those returning to the Community will be 
healthier and ready to return to a better life, those staffing the jails and 
prisons can more easily get needed care for those they are holding, 
physicians will be able to provide better and more immediate care to 
those who need it, and federal dollars will help support the effort. 
I am aware that Maine could apply for a limited waiver with a focus on 
substance use disorders or a more general waiver. I hope that Maine 
will follow the example of California and other states that have applied 
for the general waiver. But I understand that this will be up to the good 
judgment of the Maine Department of Health and Human Services. 
Thank you for your attention and I would be pleased to answer any 
questions you might have.
