295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1204  
“An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by  
Closing Coverage Gaps in the MaineCare Program  
for Incarcerated Persons " 
Sponsored by Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross  
April 12, 2023  
 
Good afternoon  , Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed Health and 
Human Services Committees members .  My name is  Malory Shaughnessy and I am the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance 
is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s community based 
mental health and substance use treatment providers , providing services to over 80,000 
Maine m en, women, and children . The Alliance advocates for the implementation of 
sound policies and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to s peak in support of LD 1204, “ An Act to 
Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps in the MaineCare 
Program for Incarcerated Persons .” Individuals who have been incarcerated have higher 
rates of morbidity and mortality than the general p opulation. As a population, people in 
prison exhibit a high burden of chronic and  noncommunicable diseases (e.g., 
hypertension, diabetes, and asthma), as well as communicable diseases (e.g., hepatitis, 
HIV, tuberculosis), mental health problems, and substa nce use disorders.  
 
According to the American Academy of Family Physicians , a representative sample of 
individuals released from correctional facilities noted that most had at least one physical 
health, mental health, or substance use problem, and nearly 40% of men and more than 
60% of women in this population had multiple health conditions.1  
 
Upon reentry into society, prompt and continuous management of these conditions 
often falls by the wayside as individuals who have been incarcerated face challenges 
enrolling in health insurance coverage, finding a primary care physician, making health 
care appointments, and refilling prescriptions.   When  formerly incarcerated individuals 
reenter their communities, they are at high risk of exacerbating existing conditions – 
particularly addiction and mental health issues – that were often integral to their criminal 
legal system involvement in the first place .  
 
It is also my understanding that the sponsor of this bill, Speaker  Talbot  Ross , will  be 
offering an amendment that would require  the Department of Health and Human 
Services to submit a state plan amendment  to the United States Department of Health 
and Human Services, Cente rs for Medicare and Medicaid Services  that would allow  
access  to federal funding for medical care provided to incarcerated persons eligible for 
MaineCare in county and regional jails beginning 90 day s before discharge.  
 
The Alliance wholeheartedly endorses this amendment.  
                                                           
1 American Academy of Family Physicians. Incarceration and Health: A Family Medicine Perspective . Accessed on 
04/0 9/23. https://www.aafp.org/about/policies/all/incarceration.html   
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
This waiver  would reduce the costs of healthcare currently placed on the shoulders of property taxpayers 
who fund our county jails and bear the costs of providing healthcare to incarcerated persons while they 
reside in those facilities for that  90-day period . It will also improve the health of incarcerated persons by 
insuring that needed medical care, including treatment for substance use disorders and oth er physical 
and mental health challenges will be fully covered, and  will have continuity  when they transition back to 
their communities. Doing this increases their chances for succes sful reentry into those communit ies. 
Successful reentry benefits all of us and successful reentry is more likely when serious health issues can 
continue to be treated immediately upon release from our county  or regional jails.  
 
Ensuring that these Mainers experience the best treatment while they are residents in a county or 
regional jail, and have a continuation in their coverage as they are released is the right thing to do. I ask 
that you vote ought to pass on LD 1204. Thank you and I’d be happy to answer any q uestions you have 
for me.  
