 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ.  
 
LD 1204 – Ought to Pass  
 
An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage 
Gaps in the MaineCare Program for Incarcerated Persons  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
 
April  12, 2023  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, greetings. My name is 
Meagan Sway, and I am policy director for the American Civil Liberties Union of 
Maine, a statewide organiza tion committed to advancing and preserving civil 
liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
members, I urge you to vote ought to pass .  
 
Maine law already requires that incarcerated people whose incomes are too low to 
afford  private health insurance receive publicly funded healthcare. 22 MRS §3174 -
CC (“Medicaid eligibility during incarceration ”). Maine law also already requires 
the Department of Health and Human Services (“DHHS”) and Department of 
Corrections (“DOC”) to enter  into a memorandum of understanding (“MOU”) to 
ensure that incarcerated people continue to receive healthcare. Id.  
 
But the DOC is not the only state agency that oversees our correctional facilities. 
County governments play a significant role in overseeing jails, which house 
approximately 40% of incarcerated people in Maine. That is why it is important for 
counties, not  just the DOC, to do everything they can to ensure that people in their 
custody receive healthcare .  
 
If enacted, t his bill would require the Department of Health and Human Services 
(“DHHS”) to enter into a memorandum of understanding (“MOU”) with the coun ties 
that have a jail in order to provide people in the jail’s custody  with assistance in 
applying for MaineCare services .  
 
Jails can save lives by following the law, as an interruption in healthcare benefits  
might mean the difference between life and dea th. As of last year, 61 percent  of 
people  incarcerated in Maine suffer ed from a substance use disorder, and 45 percent 
  
 
2 
 with opioid addiction.1 One study  found that those who leave incarceration are 40 
times more  likely than the general public to overdose in their first week out.2 By 
helping e nsur e that people leaving incarceration have health care , this bill will help 
people stay alive , and stand a better chance at reenter ing society successfully.   
 
We urge you to vote ought to pass.  
 
 
1 WABI News Desk, Maine corrections officials tout wholistic approach to addiction treatment after prison 
renovation, WMTW, Sep. 21, 2022, available at  https://www.wabi.tv/2022/09/21/maine -corrections -officials -tout -
wholistic -approach -addiction -treatment -after -prison -renovation/ .  
2 Shabbar I. Ranapurwala et al. “Opioid Overdose Mortality Among Former North Carolina Inmates: 2000 —2015” , 
American Journal 0fPublic Health 108, no. 9 (September 1, 2018): pp. 1207 -1213.  
