 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate  
 
DATE:  April 12, 2023 
 
SUPPORT – LD 1204 , An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing 
Coverage Gaps in the MaineCare Program for Incarcerated Persons 
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, I am the Public Health and 
Government Affairs Associate with the Maine Medical Association and I live in Windham. The 
MMA’s core priorities include promoting the health of all Maine people, which is why we 
appreciate the opportunity to submit the following comments in support of LD 1204’s proposed 
amendment to direct the DHHS to apply for a Medicaid Section 1115 waiver to provide 
MaineCare to recently released incarcerated individuals.  
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
 
Mainers who reenter the community have significant physical and behavioral health needs and 
are at higher risk of injury and death, particularly in the days and weeks directly following their 
release. Providing services prior to release ensures individuals have access to the care they 
need to treat and rehabilitate as they reenter the community.  
 
Many states  have submitted Section 1115 demonstration requests to provide State Medicaid 
services to justice-involved individuals: Arizona, California, Kentucky, Massachusetts, 
Montana, New Jersey, Oregon, Utah, Vermont, and Washington. The requests all focus on 
reentry into the community and improving health outcomes.  
 
Nearly two-thirds (64%) of individuals in jail and more than half (54%)  if individuals in state 
prisons report a mental health concern. Recently released individuals have a risk of death 12.7 
times higher than that of other residents. Incarceration is definitively linked to poor health, and 
upon release, individuals have trouble in maintaining good health.  
 
States spent $8.1 billion on prison health care in the fiscal year of 2015, according the Pew 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 Research . There have been incredible advancements in the quality of health care provided to 
those incarcerated, but correctional facilities are increasingly becoming a setting in which 
individuals with serious health conditions are diagnosed. For many of those individuals 
receiving care while incarcerated, there lies a gap in coverage upon release for necessary 
continued treatment and ultimately a higher chance of not receiving the health care they need. 
States lose that $8.1 billion investment on these individuals health by not ensuring access to 
care upon release.  
 
In 2020, Kentucky’s Medicaid 1115 waiver was approved to provide SUD treatment services 
for individuals while they were incarcerated. The Kentucky Legislature acknowledged in budget 
legislation that the inability of inmates to access Medicaid-covered SUD services while 
incarcerated and after their release leads to high recidivism rates and jail and prison 
overcrowding. The United States has the largest incarcerated population and one of the 
highest recidivism rates  in the world.  
 
Supporting the health outcomes of our incarcerated Mainers is a worthwhile public health 
investment to lower the costs of healthcare overall by reducing the number of emergency visits 
and lowering the costs of health provided in prisons by addressing the social determinants of 
recidivism. The Maine Medical Association thanks the committee for all your efforts on these 
important issues and for considering our comments in support of LD 1204. We are happy to 
provide additional information or answer any questions. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mikenzie Dwyer 
(mdwyer@mainemed.com )  
 
 
 
