STATE OF MAINE 
_, E , HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2:‘ SPEAKERS OFFICE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
Tera (207) 237-1300 
RACHEL TALBOT ROSS 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
Wednesday, April 12th, 2023
4 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting 
LD 1204, An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing 
Coverage Gaps in the MaineCare Program for Incarcerated Persons 
Before the Joint Select Committee on Health & Human Services 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Rachel Talbot Ross and 
I proudly represent House District 118 which consists of the Portland neighborhoods of 
Parkside, Bayside, East Bayside, Oakland and the University of Southern Maine Campus. 
I also have the distinct honor of serving as the Maine Speaker of the House. 
I am honored to present LD 1204, An Act to Improve the Health of Maine 
Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps in the MaineCare Program for Incarcerated Persons, 
to you this afternoon as a continuation of my steadfast commitment to health equity and 
access to healthcare for all who call our great state home. I am encouraged because this 
bill has strong bipartisan support and is also supported by the Maine Sheriffs Association. 
As Maine voters have afﬁnned, access to healthcare is not a partisan issue. 
Most people who enter our county and regional jails are eligible for MaineCare. 
However, once they are incarcerated, while they retain that eligibility, they no longer 
receive beneﬁts under MaineCare for medical care other than for hospitalizations. Those 
costs are instead the responsibility of the county jails that have no choice but to pass 
those bills to the owners of property in those counties. Those costs exceed 1.4 million 
dollars a year in Somerset County alone; a county with a population just over 50,000 
people. Many other Maine counties have much larger populations and accordingly higher 
jail populations with greater healthcare costs. Those costs are signiﬁcant as is the 
resulting burden placed on property tax payers. 
Moreover, when incarcerated persons are released from county facilities, there is 
often a gap between that release and being eligible for the payment of needed medical 
care by MaineCare. The gap in coverage under MaineCare upon release from county 
correctional facilities can be catastrophic and the human toll high. Incarcerated people 
District 118: Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Bayside, East Bayside, Oakdale and 
the University of Southern Maine Campus
returning to their community face a slew of challenges, including life-threatening health 
risks. Stress surges as these individuals seek housing, access to healthcare, and reconnect 
to family and the fabric of social life. Some are simultaneously struggling with mental 
illness and addiction that are difficult to manage when there is a gap in treatment. The 
potential for peril is particularly acute in the period immediately after release for those 
with substance use disorders. That gap in care can result in sickness, overdose, and death, 
or re-incarceration. If care is interrupted, even for a short period of time, the chance of 
relapse is increased and could lead to another incarceration where healthcare costs repeat 
and escalate upon reentry thus increasing human suffering and further burdening the 
property tax payers funding those costs. 
LD 1204 addresses these issues in two important ways. The bill as originally 
drafted requires the Department of Health and Human Services to enter intoa 
memorandum of understanding with all counties in this State that have a county jail ora 
regional jail to provide a person who is incarcerated in one of those facilities with 
assistance in applying for and renewing MaineCare services. This assistance will help to 
prevent gaps in needed medical care, to which the released person is legally entitled, and 
reduce the harms previously described. 
In addition, as amended, this bill requires the Department of Health and Human 
Services (DHHS) to submit a Section 1115 waiver request to the United States 
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
(CMS) to waive certain restrictions for incarcerated individuals under federal Medicaid 
law. If DHHS submits and is granted a Section 1115 waiver, Maine may be able to access 
federal funding for medical care provided to incarcerated persons enrolled in MaineCare 
for a time period approved by CMS prior to their release date. This will not only improve 
health outcomes, but also reduce the costs of healthcare currently placed on the shoulders 
of property taxpayers who fund our county jails and bear the costs of providing 
healthcare to incarcerated persons in their counties. 
California has already been approved for a partial Section 1115 waiver for this 
purpose and Arizona, Montana, Utah, Kentucky, New Hampshire, and Vermont are 
among fourteen states with pending proposals to similarly change their policies. As 
United States Secretary of Health and Human Services Xavier Becerra said when 
discussing the Section 1115 waiver granted to California, “[t]his is the ﬁrst time in 
history Medicaid will be providing coverage to justice-involved individuals before 
they’re released. It is a step forward in closing gaps in services this under-sewed 
community experiences, and I encourage other states to follow Califomia ’s lead.”
Ultimately, this bill will improve the health of incarcerated persons by ensuring 
that needed medical care, including treatment for substance use disorders and other 
physical and mental health challenges that they were receiving while in our county and 
regional jails, will still be accessible when they transition back to their communities. This 
also increases their chances for Sl.1CC€SSfL1l reentry into those communities and increases 
their chances for a brighter future. Successful reentry beneﬁts all of us and successful 
reentry is more likely when serious health issues can continue to be treated immediately 
upon release. 
In summary, LD 1204 as amended will enhance healthcare provided to individuals 
while incarcerated in county and regional jails, and when they are released. It will also 
reduce the property tax burden placed upon property owners for healthcare costs incurred 
in those correctional facilities should Maine be approved for a 1115 waiver. It will lead to 
more cases of successful reentry to the larger society thus lifting not only formerly 
incarcerated people but the State of Maine as a whole. 
I urge you to support LD 1204. Thank you very much for your time and attention 
this afternoon. I am happy to answer any questions you have.
131st Maine Legislature 
An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps in the MaineCare Program for 
Incarcerated Persons 
L.D. 
An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps in 
the MaineCare Program for Incarcerated Persons 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sec. 1. 22 MRSA §3174-CC, as repealed and replaced by PL 2019, c. 492, §2, is amended to read: 
§3174-CC. Medicaid eligibility during incarceration 
1. Establish procedures. The department shall establish procedures to ensure that: 
A. A person receiving federally approved Medicaid services prior to incarceration in a correctional facility, 
countlgail or regional jail does not lose Medicaid eligibility as a result of that incarceration and receives 
assistance with reapplying for benefits if that person's Medicaid coverage expires or is terminated during 
the term of incarceration; and 
B. A person who is not receiving federally approved Medicaid services prior to incarceration ig__a 
correctional facility, countyjail or regional jail but meets the eligibility requirements for Medicaid receives 
assistance with applying for federally approved Medicaid sen/ices. 
2. Presumptive eligibility. If a MaineCare provider determines that a person who is incarcerated ii_1 __a_ 
correctional facility, county_jail or regional jail who does not have Medicaid coverage is likely to be eligible for 
sen/ices under this section, the provider must be reimbursed for sen/ices provided under this section in 
accordance with 42 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 435.1101. 
3. Memorandum of understanding with Department of Corrections. The department and the 
Department of Corrections shall enter into a memorandum of understanding in order to provide an a person 
who is incarcerated peesen in a correctional facility with assistance in applying for benefits under this section 
and section 3104, subsection 17. 
4. Memorandum of understanding with counties. The department shall enter into a memorandum of 
understanding with counties in this State that have a countyjail or a regional jail in order to provide a person 
who is incarcerated in a countyjail or a regional jail with assistance in agplying for benefits under this section. 
The provisions of this section apply even if Medicaid coverage is limited during the period of incarceration 
in a correctional facility, countyjail or a regional iail. Nothing in this section requires or permits the department 
to maintain an incarcerated person's Medicaid eligibility if the person no longer meets eligibility requirements. 
5. Request for Federal waiver. No later than 12 monthysy after the effective date of this Act, the 
Department of Health and Human Services sha,I,l_reg_uest a waiverjn accordance with 42 Code 0f_ Federal 
Regulatggn, Subpart G, Section 1115 waiver to_the,,Un,ited States Department of Health and Human 
Services, Centers for Medicare and_Medlcaid Services. 
SUMMARY 
This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services to enter into a memorandum of 
understanding with counties in this State that have a county jail or a regional jail in order to provide a person 
who is incarcerated in a countyjail or a regional jail with assistance in applying for MaineCare services. This 
bill also requires the Department of Health and Human Services, within 12 month of the effective date, to 
apply to the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services for a waiver for services for residents of county or regional jail facilities prior to their release. 
LRO034, item 1 - 131 st Maine Legislature, page1
