Maine County Commissioners Association 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.0rg 
LD 1204, An Act to Improve the Health of Maine Residents by Closing Coverage Gaps 
in the MaineCare Program for Incarcerated Persons 
i 
April 12, 2023 
Chair Baldacci, Chair Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony on this bill, and we are pleased to report that our Board is in unanimous suggort of this bill, as 
amended. 
About MCCA. Brieﬂy, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efﬁcient, and 
credible manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is 
governed by a board with representation from each participating county. 
Discussion. Our Association has reviewed LD 1204 in its original form and we understand that the bill’s 
sponsor is planning to amend the bill to direct the State to apply for a waiver with the federal government 
to permit imnates in correctional facilities, including county jails, who are MaineCare recipients to retain 
their eligibility for such beneﬁts while incarcerated. 
By way of background, when an inmate who is otherwise eligible to receive Medicaid beneﬁts is 
incarcerated, that person loses their Medicaid beneﬁts as a result of federal law. As a consequence, the 
medical costs for such individuals fall onto the operators of correctional facilities, which include county 
jails operated by county govermnent. For years, state and local governments around the country have tried 
to change this law, and even as we speak, there are efforts underway in Congress to modify the law. But 
to date, no change has occurred. As a result, county jails in Maine end up spending millions of dollars 
each year to provide medical services to hundreds if not thousands of individuals whose medical costs 
could otherwise be paid for substantially by Medicaid. Some of these costs are indirectly borne by state 
taxpayers who share in the operating costs of county jails, but the bulk of these costs fall onto local 
property taxpayers. 
Our Association supports the important goal of ensuring that incarcerated persons — including those in 
county jails — have the opportunity to retain their MaineCare eligibility while incarcerated. Not only does 
this work to ensure the health and safety of individual while they are incarcerated, but it also reduces the 
risk to such individuals when they are released who oﬁen have a gap in medical coverage until 
MaineCare eligibility is restored. Accordingly, we write in strong support of LD 1204, as amended.
Comments of MCCA re LD 1204 
April 12, 2023 
Page2 
Conclusion. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in support of this bill, and if you have 
questions or need additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Respectfully submitted, 
4%4,?/:.T»1.Z/ 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel
