HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
p 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Mana Abdi TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
176 Blake Street, Apt2 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
Mana.Abdi@legislature.maine,gov 
May 2, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Mana Abdi introducing 
LD 1748, An Act to Reform the School Budget Referendum Process by Limiting 
the Circumstances in Which Referenda Occur 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Good afternoon Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Mana Abdi, and I represent 
House District 95, which includes a portion of Lewiston. I am here before you today to present LD 
1748, An Act to Reform the School Budget Referendum Process by Limiting the 
Circumstances in Which Referenda Occur for your consideration. 
This is undeniably a niche and wonky issue, but an important one that would strengthen Maine's 
democracy while saving taxpayer money. 
Currently, Maine law requires that the budgets of school administrative districts, regional school 
units and community schools are subject to a budget validation referendum process rmless the voters 
in the school unit vote to suspend the referendum requirement. The voters can suspend the 
requirement for periods of three years. 
This bill replaces that process. 
Under LD 1748, a budget validation referendum is only required if a written petition, signed by at 
least 20% of the number of voters voting in the last gubernatorial election in the municipalities in the 
school administrative unit, is ﬁled with the unit's school board within 30 days of the approval of the 
budget at a budget meeting. 
Rather than insisting that every school budget be subject to a referendum, Maine should adopta 
system whereby school budget referenda are only triggered if petitions representing 20% of the 
electorate in the school district are ﬁled within 30 days of ﬁnal passage of the school budget. 
District 95: Part of Lewiston
The reason for this is simple: school budgets are, at present, the only budgets subject to voter 
approval by state law. 
This unnecessary, additional step creates uncertainty in school budgeting, undermines the authority 
of elected school boards and wastes taxpayer money administering pointless elections few people 
bother to participate in. Democratic accountability over budgets best comes from the popular 
election of school board members, not through arcane budget votes few people are even aware of. 
Take my hometown of Lewiston, for example: 
0 In 2022, 1.3% of voters turned out to vote in the school budget referendum 
0 In 2021, the number was 2% 
0 In 2019, it was 2.3% 
0 In 2018, it was 4.3 percent 
These numbers, in Maine's second-largest city, conclusively demonstrate that school budget 
referenda often don't actually represent the will of any more than a tiny fraction of the people in the 
community. It is far better to allow the elected officials to determine school budgets, as is done for 
city budgets, county budgets and the state budget. After all, if voters don't like what their school 
board members are doing, they can elect members better suited to serve their community. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District 95: Part of Lewiston
