'§'§i'|'$'i,i 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
B94395 Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 ASSOCIAIIUN .
_ 
PUBUC EDUCAHON ADVOCATES Website‘ www',nS,naweb' com C i 
Maine SchoolSupcrintemients Axociation 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF 
L.D. 1748 
AN ACT TO REFORM THE SCHOOL BUDGET REFERENDUM PROCESS BY 
LIMITING THE CIRCUMSTANCES IN WHICH REFERENDA OCCUR 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in support of L.D. 1748. 
MSSA and MSBA both support L.D. 1748. It recommends changes based on the evolution of the Budget 
Referendum Validation (BVR) process since its inception. At this point in time, districts have made decisions 
to continue the BVR process or not. L.D. 1748 establishes a contingency process for those districts that 
continue to hold the BVR election to approve the school district budget each year. 
There will need to be a positive action each year seeking the referendum. Otherwise, the vote at the school 
budget meeting will be the official vote on the budget. The referendum would be required “if a written 
petition signed by at least 20% of the number of voters voting in the last gubernatorial election in the 
municipalities in the school administrative unit, is ﬁled with the regional school unit board within 30 days of 
the approval of the budget at a regional school unit budget meeting as provided in section 1485.” 
Superintendents and school board members of the respective associations see this as a positive step. Too often 
the school budget meetings are attended by few people, with residents knowing that they can skip that 
meeting and have a chance to vote on the budget at the BVR election - often without having knowledge of the 
components of the budget. It is thought that with this proposed language, if approved, there would be greater 
attendance and engagement at the school budget meetings where questions can be asked and informed votes 
cast regarding each cost center of the budget. 
MSSA and MSBA urge members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs to vote 
OTP on L.D. 1748. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
