E HE-ALTHCAARE ‘ 
PURCHASER 
ALLIANCE 
OF MAI Ne 
Testimony of Peter Hayes 
to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, insurance and Financial Services 
, 
In Support of- 
LD 97, An Act to Repeal the Hospital and Health Care Provider Cooperation Act 
January 31, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Hatch, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services: 
My name is Peter Hayes and i’m the President and CEO of the Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine. 
The HPA is a nonprofit that represents thegpurchasers of healthcare in Maine. Our mission is to advance 
healthcare value and support and incentivize high-quality, affordable care. We have over 50 members, 
including some of the largest public and private employers and health trusts in Maine. Collectively, our 
members spend over a billion dollars annually providing health care for nearly one quarter of the 
commercially insured population in the state. 
i’m here today to testify in support of LD 97, legislation that I believe will guard against future 
consolidation of Maine's already highly concentrated healthcare market. Hospital mergers are often 
touted as ways to improve efficiencies, lower costs, and enhance quality. But studies have found that 
prices in consolidated markets are actually higherthan in competitive markets, with one study 
estimating average prices are 12 percent higher at monopoly hospitals, compared to markets with 
robust competition} Nor do mergers necessarily result in improved quality. In fact, another study of 
hospital acquisitions found that they were ”associated with modestly worse patient experiences and no 
significant changes in readmission or morality rates/'2A 
I appreciate that the objective of COPA laws is to regulate hospital mergers so that the advantages to 
the public outweigh any possible disadvantages that could result from the ensuing loss of competition. 
But the Federal Trade Commission's 2022 review of COPA laws found that such processes —including the 
COPA statute in Maine—have done little to stop merged entities from increasing their market power, 
and instead have often resulted in consumers facing higher prices and reduced quality. Moreover, in 
exchange for participating in these largely ineffectual COPA processes, the merging hospitals are 
‘Zack Cooper, Stuart Craig, Martin Gaynor & John Van Reenen, The Price Ain't Right? Hospital Prices and Healthr 
Spending on the Privately insured, 134 Q.J. ECON. 51 (2019). Available at: 
https:[/healthcarepricingproiect.org/sites/default/files/Updated the price aint right qjgpdf.l 
2 Nancy Beaulieu, Leemore Dafny, Bruce Landon, Jesse Dalton, lfedayo Kuye & J. Michael McWilliams, Changes in 
Quality of Care after Hospital Mergers and Acquisitions, 382 NEW ENG. J. MED. 51 (Jan. 2, 2020). Available at: 
https:1/www.neim.org/doi/jpdf/10.1056/N EJMsa1901383?articleTo0ls=true.
shielded from federal anti-trust laws'and FTC review that could otherwise challenge such mergers as 
anticompetitive? 
Here in Maine, businesses and families are already facing unsustainable increases in healthcare costs 
that are leaving Mainers increasingly unable to afford care and employers searching for ways to absorb 
double digit premium increases. These rising costs have eaten into wage increases, and led to higher 
premiums, more cost sharing, and higher deductibles for Maine families. in fact, Maine currently has the 
highest individual deductibles in the country. “ We also have an extremely consolidated healthcare 
market. Repealing the COPA law will ensure that any future mergers would be subject to'FTC review—- 
not shielded from such review_—t0 ensure that they would not be anticompetitive nor subject Maine 
families and businesses to even higher costs. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share HPA's feedback on LD 97. And thank you to the Department and 
Representative Hatch for introducing this important legislation. _ 
I'd be happy to answer any questions.
\ 
3 Federal Trade Commission, FTC Policy Perspective on Certificates of Public Advantage: Staﬁ‘ Policy Paper, August 
15, 2022. Available at: https:[/www.ftc.gov§ystem/files/ftc gov[pdf/CO PA Policy Paper.pdf. 
4 Kaiser Family Foundation, Average Annual Deductible per Enrolled Employee in Employer-Based Health insurance 
for Single and Family Coverage, 2021. Available at: https:[/www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/average-annual- 
deductible-per-enrolled-employee-in-employer-based-health-insurance-for-single-and-family; -' 
coveragg/?currentTimeframe=O&sortModel=%7B%22colld%22:%22Average%2OSingle%20Deductible%22,%22sort 
%22:%22desc%22%7D.
