 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Licensing and Certification  
11 State House Station  
41 Anthony Avenue  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel.: (207) 287-9300; Toll Free: (800) 791-4080  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) ; Fax: (207) 287-5815  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
Testimony of Director William Montejo, RN  
Division of Licensing and Certification  
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
 
In Support of LD 97, An Act to Repeal the Hospital and Health Care Provider Cooperation Act  
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services  
 
January 31, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry  and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: My name is  Bill Montejo  and I am the Director of 
the Division of Licensing and Certification for the Department of Health and Human Services. I 
am here toda y to help introduce and speak in support of LD 97, An Act to Repeal the Hospital and 
Health Care Provider Cooperation Act . We would like to express our appreciation to 
Representative Perry for sponsoring this Department bill.  
 
This bill will repeal Maine’s  Hospital and Health Care Provider Cooperation Ac t, which enables  
the Department to allow for certain hospital and hea lth care provider agreements that might 
otherwise be subject to antitrust  with the intent of cost containment and improved quality and 
access of care. These agreements are codified by the  Department by issuing a Certificate of Public 
Advantage (COPA).  
 
COPAs have not been utilized frequently . DLC is aware of only two (2) recent instances in which 
health care facilities pursued COPA approvals, one in 2009 and another in 2010. Both  COPAs 
have since expired.  
 
More importantly , the Federal Trade Commission, (FTC) , issued a concerning study finding that 
COPAs improved neither quality nor cost and are “ often detrimental for patient costs, patient care, 
and healthcare worker wages .”1 Likewise, a Staff Policy Paper, published by the FTC in August 
of 2022, suggests  states avoid using COPAs  altogether .2 
 
Further,  in a recently published Fact Sheet, the FTC states that the  “FTC staff urges states to avoid 
using COPAs and invites state lawmakers to work collaboratively with competition policy experts 
 
1 FTC Policy Paper Warns About Pitfalls of COPA Agreements for Patient Care and Healthcare Workers  
Some Hospital Mergers Subject to Certificate of Public Advantage Agreements Led to Higher Prices, Reduced Quality. August 
15, 2022. Viewed on January 19, 2023 , at https://www.ftc.gov/news -events/news/press -releases/2022/08/ftc -policy -paper -warns -
about -pitfalls -copa -agreements -patient -care-healthcare -workers . 
 
2 FTC Policy Perspectives on Certificates of Public Advantage. August 15, 2022. Viewed on January 19, 2023, at 
https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/COPA_Policy_Paper.pdf  
 
 
 to minimize the harmful effects of further hospital consolidation on local patients, employers, and 
hospital employees.” 3 
 
Because of the low utilization, and the growing concerns about the ineffectiveness  and potential 
negative effects  of COPAs, the Department believes that this provision should be repealed. We 
hope you will support this proposal, and I am happy to answer any q uestions you have and will 
attend your work session if needed. Thank you for your consideration of this bill.  
 
 
3 Federal Trade Commission. Key COPA Facts. Viewed on January 19, 2023, at 
https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc _gov/pdf/Key_COPA_Facts.pdf   
 
