Testimony Before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
In Support of LD1048 
Good morning. 
My name is Bob Burr and I live in the Town of Mercer. I have been a private forest 
landowner in Maine for over 50 years, and part of the American Tree Farm system 
for more than 40 years. While I am now retired, I made my living in the wood 
products industry in Maine. I was invited to be part of the stakeholder group 
which was a result of the resolve for LD 1407 in 2021; a talented group that 
represented a broad cross section of individuals who were directly or indirectly 
involved in timber harvests. The group was charged with understanding the 
complexities of municipal ordinances regarding timber harvests, particularly as 
they relate to current state laws and guidelines. As part of the process, we 
reviewed a number of municipal ordinances from across the state. Some of these 
ordinances were written with the input of foresters or the Maine Forest Service 
(MFS), but many were not. To say that the language and intent varied widely is an 
understatement. 
In Maine, we have a love-hate relationship with municipal ordinances and state 
mandates. We don't want any ordinances or mandates that tell us what we can do 
on our land until our neighbor does something we don't like. The 
recommendations the stakeholders group made to the MFS sought to ﬁnd the 
balance between local control and a more consistent use of language in municipal 
ordinances, as well as ensuring the input of citizens, trained foresters and the 
Maine Forest Service, and preserving the rights of forestland owners across the 
entire state. The stakeholders recommendations recognize the importance of 
having one set of deﬁnitions and a clear process for timber harvests that are fair 
to citizens, municipalities, landowners, foresters, and others involved in any step 
of a timber harvest. What is not fair to any of these parties is a hodgepodge of 
arbitrary local rules, confusing forestry terms, and a lack of clarity. ..
F
I 
t
s 
II
I 
I“ 
ll‘ 
ii 
Ii
I 
Ii 
ll
. 
ti 
ii i
I 
/. 
I
n
i
I
l
As the title suggests, the language in the act clariﬁes the authority of 
municipalities to regulate timber harvesting. lt does not pre-empt municipal 
authority but lays out the use of standard forestry deﬁnitions, the process 
requirements to adopt or amend a timber harvesting ordinance, and the 
timetable to do so. It also provides for the notiﬁcation of the MFS so that all 
ordinances are consistent with current laws and directs the MFS to maintain a list 
of timber harvesting ordinances for anyone to access. 
l urge you to look favorably on LD 1048. Its passage would clarify the language of 
timber harvest ordinances and provide a base level of uniformity across the state 
which would beneﬁt land owners, loggers, and ensure that municipalities could 
successfully enforce their ordinances. Over ﬁfty years ago, the legislature enacted 
a state wide shore land zoning act that provided clear deﬁnitions to protect our 
valuable water bodies. If this act is enacted it would have a similar unifying and 
clarifying effect. 
Finally let me say what a talented and dedicated group the state has in the Maine 
Forest Service. They are an outstanding group of intelligent and hardworking 
individuals who look after the health of our forests and the people who use them 
Thank you. I appreciate the opportunity to offer my thoughts.
