     
 
207 Forestry Consulting Services, LLC  
P.O. Box 181  
New Gloucester, Maine 04260  
207-431-6153  
Paul L Larrivee, Jr. LF 3306  
 
Re LD 1048, An Act Regarding the Authority of Municipalities to Regulate Timber Harvesting  
 
ACF Committee,  
  As a f ormer regulator, current small forestry consulting business owner and m ember of the 
former LD 1407 working group I am writing in support of LD 1048 . This bill re present s the efforts of that 
work group and I am fully supportive.  LD 104 8 provide s consistency  in the conservation  of our forest 
resources that fall within municipalities . As a licensed Maine Forester for 23 years who grew up in Maine  
and works to help municipalities  with their  current timber harvesting ordinances , I make the following  
observations  on why this bill is so important to the future of the forest resource:  
• This bill clarifies the definition of timber harvesting . Often times sound fores t 
management activities are confu sed with cutting trees for development  or land use 
changes (pasture, f ields,  etc.). This  confusion at the municipal level leads to 
increased regulation  on timber  harvesting, which is not the same as cutting trees for 
development . 
• This bill provides that  a municipal timber harvesting ordinance must adopt 
definitions for forestry terms that are consistent with definitions in the Maine 
Revised Statutes . This is currently not the case  in man y existing municipal 
ordinances . This c onfusion between state defi nitions  and municipal definitions has 
the i mpact to severely  impact the resource.  Also, it leads to confusion and 
frustration amongst landowners . Frustrated landowners sell their land to developers 
and t he forest is gone  forever.  
• The bill provides that municipal ordinance  subject to review by the Department of 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of Forestry are limited to ordinances 
that regulate timber harvesting activities. The bill provides that a timber harvesting 
ordinance adopted on or after September 1, 1990 and prior to January 1, 2024 must 
meet the requirements of Title 12, section 8869, subsection 8 by June 30, 2027.  This 
allows municipalities plenty of time to have their  existing ordinances reviewed. I 
know of municipalities  who have timber harvesting ordinances  they are not aware of 
it. They claim to follow state rules, but have antiquated ordinances still in effect that  
are potentially danger ous to the resource and  that would be  likely unenf orceable.    
• The bill provides that a municipal timber harvesting ordinance may be adopted only 
after certification by the bureau that the municipality adopted the timber ha rvesting 
ordinance in accordance with Title 12, section 8869, subsection 8. This isn’t  a ne w 
process. When the Forest P ractices Act was enacted , this was a  outline d in the law.  
Hopefully this will remind  municipalities  will follow the steps outlined in the law . The 
bill also requires a municipal timber harvesting ordinance to be pursuant to and 
consistent with a comprehensive plan adopted by the municipal legislative body . 
     
 
207 Forestry Consulting Services, LLC  
P.O. Box 181  
New Gloucester, Maine 04260  
207-431-6153  
Paul L Larrivee, Jr. LF 3306  
• The b ill clarifies that the centralized listing of municipal ordinances maintained by 
the bureau specifically applies to ordinances that apply to timber harvesting 
activities . As a small landowner and a licensed forester, ho w wonderful it would be 
to go to one location to find all the ordinances and la ws tha t effect my  business and 
land ownership. It  would be similar to  hunting or fishing, which allow s the regulated  
community  to contact  IFW for answers. Commercial fisheries turn to DMR for law s 
and questions. How wonderful it would be to turn to the Maine Forest Service for all 
laws and to answer questi ons relat ed to forest management activities!   
 
 I understand change can be difficult and take time, however providing consistency  in the  
conservation and r egulation  of our Forest resource is long overdue . Please help landowners, loggers and 
foresters by p roviding consistent, sound forest management regulation  across the state of Maine.  
 
          Thank you for  your time and your service to the State of Maine.   
      
     Paul L Larrivee, Jr. LF 3306  
 

