Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Support For
LD 1048- An Act Regarding the Authority of Municipalities to Regulate Timber Harvesting
March 20, 2023
Sen. Ingwersen, Rep. Plueker and distinguished members of the Agriculture, Conservation, and 
Forestry Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony in support for LD 
1048, An Act Regarding the Authority of Municipalities to Regulate Timber Harvesting, on behalf of 
Maine Municipal Association which represents the interests of municipal government before the 
legislature.  The positions of the Association are determined by our 70-member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC) who are elected by the councils and selectboards in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. 
Many of Maine’s towns and cities have opted to adopt the state timber harvesting regulations and 
benefit from the department’s enforcement of the state standards as a result. Some communities have 
opted for more stringent regulations due to their unique geography and a competing regulations around 
sensitive shorelands and waterbodies. Generally, even if they are unenforceable ordinances, officials have 
take this path at the direction and in consultation with their residents. It can be challenging to separate the 
difference between forestry activity and clearing for development in the mind of adjacent neighbors and 
affected parties. 
Municipal officials benefit from a strong communication and technical resource partnership 
between state regulatory bodies and when those activities are under resourced, this adds to the frustration 
at the local level. Officials feel that having a centralized information source for timber harvesters and 
forestry professionals who may or may not be connected to the community in which they undertake 
operations, is a sensible path to offer clarity of expectations for everyone. Where ordinances are 
problematic, they equally benefit from the technical support that the bill seems to indicate will be in place 
to amend them in ways that can address concerns and manage appropriate operations. 
That said, some municipal officials are seeking clarity around the intent of the language that in 
Sec. 1.. Some officials interpret this language “"Timber harvesting activities" does not include activities 
that result, within 5 years of the completion of such activities, in a change of land use as defined by the 
bureau by rule.” to mean that the department will not aid in enforcement of activity that uses the timber 
harvesting statute to clear in resource protection areas to create new development spaces that would 
otherwise not be possible. 
However, officials generally believe a central location for both the industry and communities will 
help all parties navigate operations in more densely populated areas. 
