State of Maine      
STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
Testimony of Fern Desjardins, Chair of the Maine State Board of Education
Neither For Nor Against: L.D. 19
An Act to Authorize the National Institute of Funeral Services to Grant Associate Degrees
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Emergency Bill
Introduced by: Representative Doudera
Date: February 2, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:
My name is Fern Desjardins, Chair of the Maine State Board of Education. I am here to speak 
Neither For Nor Against L.D. 19 An Act to Authorize the National Institute of Funeral Services 
to Grant Associate Degrees.  
The Maine State Board of Education is not against L.D. 19, but we are concerned with the timing 
of the bill.  Rule 05-071, CMR 149 clearly identifies the procedures to be followed by a 
postsecondary institution that seeks to offer any course or programs for which academic credit is 
granted or to confer a degree at the Associate level or higher in Maine.  The process starts with 
the officials of the applicant institution of higher education notifying the Commissioner of 
Education of their intent to obtain legislative authorization to confer a degree at the Associate 
level or higher at least six months prior to the start of a legislative session.  The Commissioner 
then follows the steps outlined in Chapter 149 and officials of the applicant institution of higher 
education prepare a report providing in-depth information about the institution with attention to 
organization and governance, institutional objectives, degree requirements, admission 
requirements, and a number of other areas identified in the Rule.  Once the report is received, the 
Commissioner forms a Review Committee authorized to review and evaluate the submitted 
material and to conduct on-site visits when applicable.  The committee consists of individuals 
who are representative of Maine’s institutions of higher education and 1-2 “Observers” from the 
Maine State Board of Education.  
The Review Committee prepares a draft report detailing the facts based upon their review and 
they include a recommendation as to whether the request for degree granting should be 
authorized.  Once the accuracy of the facts in the report is determined, the final report and 
recommendation are forwarded to the Commissioner of Education and President of the applicant 
institution.  Chapter 149 is clear in the next step, which is “At this time, officials of the applicant 
institution will be notified concerning their responsibility to obtain a bill sponsor and to take the 
necessary steps to get a bill drafted and filed in preparation for legislative action.”  
Here we are today faced with a bill but no Review Committee report because of a number of 
circumstances that changed the timeline for the review of the National Institute of Funeral 
Services (NIFS).  As Chair of the State Board I postponed the most recent NIFS review 
scheduled for January 20 because we lacked having a liaison, the Department of Education’s 
Director of Higher Education and Educator Support Services, to work with the Review 
Committee.  
The final step in the procedure for obtaining initial degree authorization and approval is for the 
State Board of Education to make a recommendation on the request and to transmit it to the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs and to notify the President of the 
applicant institution of the action.  
The State Board is not ready for that recommendation because we have not completed the review 
process.  A Review Committee was formed and they are well into a review of the submitted 
materials and the application of standards for evaluating requests as adopted in Rule 05-071 
CMR 170.  They need to finish that process and move forward with plans for a virtual review. 
Therefore, I ask that you allow for the additional time needed for us to follow the procedures 
outlined in Chapter 149 so that the Review Committee can carry out its responsibilities with due 
diligence.  The DOE informed me on January 31 that they have hired a Director of Higher 
Education and Educator Supports.  We hope to get the review process going soon with additional 
supports being put in place.  
You control the fate of this bill.  It is within your authority to proceed and grant NIFS the right to 
offer a degree in funeral services even if the DOE and State Board have a statutory process in 
place.  However, after the review takes place and the Commissioner forwards the final report and 
recommendation for action to the State Board of Education, the Board will ultimately take final 
action on the request by NIFS.  I think that the need for funeral services in Maine could be more 
effectively met if we worked together by following the procedures in Chapter 149 that have 
served us well.    
Again, the State Board of Education is Neither For Nor Against L.D. 19 An Act to Authorize the 
National Institute of Funeral Services to Grant Associate Degrees.  But delaying the work 
sessions and having the bill work in tandem with the procedures for obtaining initial 
authorization and approval would serve us best.  
Thank you for this opportunity to comment.
I would be happy to answer any questions the Committee may have.  The State Board will be 
available for work sessions on this bill.
