REMARKS 
by George P. Connick, Ph.D. 
to the 
Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
regarding 
“LD 19: An Act to Authorize the National Institute of Funeral Service 
to Grant Associate Degrees” 
February 2, 2023 
GOOD AFTERNOON. 
My name is George Connick and my wife and I live in Freeport, Maine. 
Let me begin with a bit of information about my background which I hope will help 
to put in context my brief remarks. 
My career in higher education spans the past 65 years and the first 32 years were 
spent here in Maine in the University System where 
I have had the privilege of serving in a number of faculty and administrative 
capacities in the University of Maine System such as: 
Director of Academic Planning for the merger of the Portland Campus and 
Gorham State College; 
Academic Vice President at the University of Southern Maine; 
President of the University of Maine at Augusta for 1 0 years; 
and President of the Education Network of Maine (the University System’s 
distance learning network) until I retired in 1997. 
Following retirement, I changed focus a bit. 
from 2000 until 2006 
I was the Executive Director of the 
American Board of Funeral Service Education, 
the national accrediting organization for the 58 funeral 
education programs in the U.S. 
Then, in 2006, I became the 
Executive Vice President of 
American Academy of Funeral Service in New York City and 
from 2019 to 2021 I served as its President 
and then I retired fully.
1
These years of higher education experience have taught me that there are 
essentially three major public policy issues involved in the planning of new 
education initiatives: 
First is ACCESS. 
Who benefits ’? 
Who is the competition? 
How will it be offered 
And dozens or hundreds of additional questions that must be 
answered. 
Second is QUALITY. 
Who defines it‘? 
How is it measured ‘? 
Who ensures it? 
Third is COST. 
What will it cost? 
Who pays‘? 
Is it worth the cost? 
The Self-Study that President Lentz has prepared documents in detail that 
these policy issues and the underlying planning and operational details have all 
been addressed. 
The fact that she has the educational background and 25 years professional 
experience asa 
Funeral Director, 
a Funeral Education Instructor, 
and a DEAN 
are precisely the qualifications one would look for to start a new funeral service 
program. 
Finally, from my experience as Executive Director of the accrediting 
association for funeral service, I can assure you that this program is needed and 
will be well-received. Maine, NH and VT DO NOT have a funeral education program 
and there are only 2 in Massachusetts and neither are easily accessible. 
Maine will be the beneficiary of an ACCESSIBLE, HIGH QUALITY, 
and COST EFFECTIVE new and needed associate degree program and 
the State of Maine won’t have to spend a dime to develop or offer it. 
I am delighted to recommend this bill for passage so this program can begin soon.
2
