Andrew L. Hart, County Administrator
E-mail:ahart@knoxcountymaine.govKnox County Administrative Office
Knox County Courthouse
62 Union Street
Rockland, Maine 04841
      
Testimony in support of LD 119, “An Act to Clarify the Boundary between Waldo 
and Knox Counties in Penobscot Bay”.  
Presented by Knox County Administrator Andrew L. Hart.  Presented to the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government, Tuesday January 31, 2023.  
Good afternoon Senator Nagle, Representative Stover, and other distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government.  I am County 
Administrator Andrew L. Hart, representing Knox County, and I reside in Camden.  I am 
speaking today in support of LD 119, “An Act to Clarify the Boundary Between Waldo 
and Knox Counties in Penobscot Bay”.  
I would like to give a brief background to the State and Local Government 
Committee regarding a previous bill in regards to the boundary between Waldo and Knox 
County.  I provided testimony to the State and Local Government Committee last year on 
March 7, 2022 on an LD for Re-Districting. While meeting with the State and Local 
Government Committee, they asked me questions about the LD regarding the boundary. 
They voted ONTP on that bill and requested both counties in conjunction with the Land 
Use Planning Commission Office and other stakeholders, collaborate and bring a new LD 
to the next Legislative Session.  
There were multiple meetings last year with Knox County, Waldo County, the Land 
Use Planning Commission Office, and other stakeholders.  Both Knox and Waldo 
Counties tentatively agreed upon a proposed map depicting the boundary between Waldo 
and Knox Counties in Penobscot Bay, subject to approval by both counties Board of 
Commissioners. The Knox County Commissioners approved the proposed map at their 
June 14, 2022 monthly Commission Meeting.
 I do want to make sure that the correct agreed upon map is referenced and is 
available going forward.  
Thank you for your consideration, I would be happy to answer any questions the 
Committee may have.
