 
 
 
 
 
127 Main Street, South Portland, ME 04106 
Phone: 800-640-7200 
Fax: 207-799-8346 
www.alphaonenow.org 
info@alphaonenow.org 
May 1, 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation: 
My name is Jill Johanning from Alpha One Disability and Aging Solutions, Maine's Center for Independent Living, 
and I am writing on support of behalf of LD 467, "Resolve, to Study Accessible Electric Vehicle Charing Stations".  
As the Maine Affiliate of the New England ADA Center, Alpha One provides public awareness and technical 
assistance for federal accessibility laws, and we work with families throughout the state to address their 
needs for community supports for independent living. It is often a challenge for people with disabilities to 
live independently in Maine when the built environments and existing policies create barriers for equal access, 
and to help Maine reach environmental sustainability goals. 
While the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) has been law for over 30 years, many communities, 
organizations, and private businesses struggle with the simple requirements and enforcement for accessible 
parking as we commonly see a lack of or poor accessible parking throughout Maine.  As technology continues to 
advance with new opportunities, like electric vehicles, there are more opportunities for programs and services in 
Maine from not being inclusive and unintentionally discriminating.  
Better training and enforcement in Maine could greatly increase the integration of good planning for all aspects 
of life in Maine to be more sustainable. It is appreciated that Maine Department of Transportation has added 
more clarification to their contracts for request for proposals (RFP) to explain the accessible EV charging 
requirements issued by the U.S. Access Board in 2022. While these changes to the RFPs will address MaineDOT 
scope of installations across the state moving forward, we will still have the lack of knowledge and requirements 
for other installations in Maine either by local towns or private businesses which is important to ensure available 
charging opportunities in all communities. If there is a new construction project, most code officials will not have 
accessible EV charging station on their radar to check during an inspection. If an existing private business 
decides to install one, there is no system for anyone to review the installation, so we will continue to have 
limited access to EV charging stations throughout Maine communities. MaineDOT direction to contractors for 
the scope, design standards, and signage will be key for other installations to follow if there is no other 
requirements out there for enforcement.  
Recently I heard from another state, that a local resident with a mobility disability who purchased an electric 
vehicle, had to sell it after they discovered that they could not use any chargers once they left their home. This 
example is exactly what this bill should prevent if Maine truly wants to have equity for all and to be more 
sustainable. I look forward to the success of the Resolve to develop design standards for accessible EV 
charging stations into regular operation in Maine’s communities. 
Sincerely, 
Jill S. Johanning, AIA 
Alpha One Disability + Aging Solutions 
