 
 
5/1/2023 
Greetings Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Transportation, 
My name is Zoe Miller, Facilitator of the Moving Maine Network, and I am submitting this 
testimony in support of LD 467. 
Increasing safety on Maine’s roads and sidewalks is a top priority for the Moving Maine 
Network. We are a multi-sector, statewide collaborative working to ensure all Mainers have 
access to transportation regardless of background, destination, or geography. We are especially 
concerned with the needs of people who are traveling outside of a motor vehicle. We know that 
many people are doing so because they cannot drive or cannot afford to have a vehicle. This 
includes people with disabilities, older adults, people with low incomes, and youth.  
This bill gives municipalities an effective, low-cost tool for slowing vehicle speeds. Slower 
speeds not only make communities more pleasant for walking, biking, and rolling with a mobility 
device, they also reduce deaths and serious injuries. There is a growing body of evidence 
showing that lowering speed limits without changing design is effective and does not lead to 
dangerous conditions. Studies by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety from 2017 and 
2013 showed similar findings in Seattle and Boston. The Boston study found that just reducing 
the citywide speed limit to 25 mph (from 30 mph) reduced speeding overall and dramatically 
decreased the instances of vehicles traveling faster than 35 mph. The Seattle study found 
speed limit reduction was associated with a 17 percent drop in the odds of an injury crash 
downtown. 
This bill also modernizes Maine’s outdated and problematic approach to speed-setting, which 
relies on the 85th percentile rule. The rule can result in speed studies leading to higher, not 
lower, posted speeds. Many states, including Minnesota and Oregon, have already moved away 
from the 85th percentile approach. This shows that it is not necessary for states to wait for the 
Federal Highway Administration’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and 
Highways (MUTCD) to be updated to make such a change. 
In closing, the Moving Maine Network supports LD 1634 because Maine deserves effective, 
low-cost tools for making roads and sidewalks safe places for all Mainers. 
 
Sincerely,  
Zoe Miller, Facilitator, Moving Maine Network 
Zoe@movingmaine.org 
