Testimony of Joseph Carleton 
Maine Judiciary Committee Public Hearing 
LD 1662 Bill "Resolve, to Study the Adoption of the Uniform Common Interest 
Ownership Act" 
May 10, 2023 
Good Morning Senator Carney and Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary 
Committee. My name is Joseph Carleton. I am an attorney with Jensen Baird in Portland, and 
reside in Kittery. I have practiced community association law for many years. I represent 
homeowner associations, developers, and individual homeowners.  
I'm here as a volunteer for the Community Association Institute (CAI), a national organization 
with about 43,000 members. It supports the adoption of the Uniform Common Interest 
Ownership Act, as does the Maine Legislative Action Committee of CAI. 
Common interest communities are real estate developments or neighborhoods subject to 
covenants, conditions, and restrictions governing ownership and use of individually owned and 
common spaces. Their basic rules are found in a Declaration recorded in the Registry of Deeds 
and in the nonprofit corporation's bylaws that govern them.  
The most familiar common interest community is a condominium. A comprehensive law governs 
Maine condominiums. It is called the Maine Condominium Act. This law details how the 
condominium is set up, what restrictions apply, what a developer can and cannot do, how 
common expenses are determined, how much each owner must be assessed to pay for them, how 
to amend the documents, disclosure requirements for prospective buyers, and many other details. 
Other types of common interest communities exist. Maine law is virtually silent on them. 
These other types are typically subdivisions with common areas such as open spaces or 
amenities. They may have duties imposed on them by the government, such as stormwater 
control. They usually have expenses that must be paid by assessments against owners.  
Since condominium and non-condominium common interest communities have very similar 
issues, a national group of experts called the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform 
State Laws has drafted a uniform act to recommend to states. That act is called the Uniform 
Common Interest Ownership Act (UCIOA). It's undergone several revisions over the years, the 
last being in 2021. It combines and consolidates the law for both condominium and 
noncondominium common interest communities. 
Seven or eight states have adopted it, including Vermont and Connecticut in New England. In 
addition, many other states have laws to protect owners and prospective owners in these 
developments. 
A Maine UCIOA would be like the Maine Condominium Act but extend its provisions to non-
condominium communities. 
Because the adoption of UCIOA would significantly change Maine law, and because of the 
complexity of the subject, I asked Senator Lawrence to submit a legislative resolve to create a  
committee, composed of interested parties, to study the issue and propose legislation for 
consideration by the second session of this Legislature.  
Here are some of the problems I have experienced with non-condominium community 
associations. 
1. Developer overreach. The project developers draft community association documents. They 
are typically designed to sell units and do not necessarily protect buyers. Developers can, if they 
wish, draft documents allowing the developer to control the association for a long time. 
2. Lack of Disclosure. Developers and other sellers do not have to disclose important information 
to prospective buyers, such as the restrictions on the property, the size of assessments, whether 
assessments against the current owner are paid up, whether there are known future expenses, and 
many other details. 
3. Board overreach, lack of accountability, and due process. Often, there need to be more 
limitations on the powers of the board of directors regarding the operation of the property, 
particularly regarding rules and rule enforcement. This is especially so since, unlike most 
nonprofit corporations, a community association's membership (and the duty to pay assessments) 
is mandatory. No owner can “opt out.”  
4. Obsolescence. Many CC&Rs, especially older ones, are badly drafted and should be updated. 
This is sometimes difficult because they have no provision for amendment. Others have no way 
to enforce the rules other than court action, which is almost always too expensive to be 
worthwhile.  
Existing Maine law is archaic, vague, and inconsistent, based on old caselaw.  
I would be happy to answer questions and expect to be available during worksession in person or 
by Zoom. 
 
