 
 
LD 1725, An Act to Strengthen Legislative Oversight of Government Agencies and Programs by 
Providing the Government Oversight Committee Access to Confidential Records  
Testimony in Opposition 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and 
Local Government;  
My name is Elizabeth Frazier and I am submitting this testimony on behalf of the Maine Society of Certified 
Public Accountants (MECPA) in opposition to LD 1725, An Act to Strengthen Legislative Oversight of Government 
Agencies and Programs by Providing the Government Oversight Committee Access to Confidential Records. 
MECPA is the state’s premier professional association for CPAs, accounting and finance professionals in public 
accounting, business, government and education. Members enjoy the benefits of a supportive community, 
professional resources, continuing education and advocacy efforts on their behalf.  
Today, we are before you to request that you consider amending LD 1725, if you are inclined to move forward 
with the proposal. We understand that the intent of this bill is to provide the Government Oversight Committee 
with greater access to confidential information to further its efforts in the investigation into the Office of Child 
and Family Services’ handling of certain cases involving juvenile welfare. However, after reviewing the specific 
language of the bill, we are concerned that it is overbroad and could unintentionally open up to the public any 
number of confidential business and tax records.  
The confidentiality of tax information is one of the pillars of our profession, and one we take very seriously. We 
are entrusted with financially sensitive information from individuals, companies, and nonprofit organizations. 
These entities all trust that their personal or organizational tax information will be kept confidential. This 
proposed law would violate the sanctity of that confidentiality by allowing the Government Oversight 
Committee unfettered access to any and all records that are “otherwise privileged and confidential.” To our 
reading of the bill, this would include tax information.  
We encourage the State and Local Government to amend the proposed bill to exempt tax information protected 
by 36 MRS § 191 and ensure that tax records remain confidential. We believe such an amendment would cure 
our concerns with this legislation. We certainly appreciate the underlying intent and look forward to working 
with the sponsor to ensure that confidential tax information is not inadvertently caught up in this effort.  
Please amend LD 1725 to exempt tax information protected by 36 MRS § 191 and ensure that tax records 
remain confidential.  
Thank you.  
Sincerely,  
Elizabeth M. Frazier 
On behalf of the Maine Society of Certified Public Accountants (MECPA) 

