 
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
 
 
May 2, 2023  
 
Senator Tim Nangle , Chair  
Representative Holly Stover , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1195, An Act to Provide That Documents Obtained by Subpoena by the Government 
Oversight Committee May Be Reviewed by Committee Members and Staff  
LD 1275 , An Act to Clarify the Powers of the Government Overnight Committee and 
Enable Committee Access to Department of Health and Human Services Documents 
Relat ed to Investigations of Child Deaths   
LD 1725, An Act to Strengthen Legislative Oversight of Government Agencies and 
Programs by Providing the Government Oversight Committee Access to Confidential 
Records  
 
Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and Member s of the Joint Standing Committee on State 
and Local Government : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share the  strong  opposition  of the Department of Health and 
Human Services (DHHS)  to LD 1195, An Act to Provide That Documents Obtained by Subpoena 
by the Government Oversight Committee May Be Reviewed by Committee Members and Staff ,  
LD 1275 , An Act to Clarify  the Powers of the Government Oversight Committee and Enable 
Committee Access to Department of Health and Human Services Documents Related to 
Investig ations of Child Deaths , and LD 1725, An Act to Strengthen Legislative Oversight of 
Government Agencies and Programs by Providing the Government Oversight Committee Access 
to Confidential Records .  
 
LD 1195 would require that the Government Oversight Commit tee (GOC) members have access 
to papers or records received in response to a subpoena.  
 
LD 1275  would provide the GOC  with access to DHHS records relating to the investigation of 
the death of a child with previous Department  involvement including any info rmation regarding 
previous Department  contact or other involvement, as well as providing that those documents are 
exempt from public disclosure.  This inclu des records of a child death (regardless of cause) when 
that child had any previous involvement with the Department, whether germane to the fatality or 
not. This is not just limited to homicides. This enables sharing of a family’s history when their 
child dies in an accidental death (for example, a car accident), when they die by suicide, or when 
the death is natural (for example, a death caused by a medical condition).  
 
LD 1725 would provide the GOC with access to any information and records that are privileged 
and confidential.  It would also exempt these documents from public disclosure.  
 
 
 
 
 
The Department  is committed to transparency and has taken unprecedented steps in the past 
several years to provide critical information about the child  welfare system to the Legislature and 
the Maine public. This includes posting dashboards, memoranda on OCFS involvement in child . 
OCFS works together with the Child Death and Serious Injury Review Panel (CDSIRP) that is 
comprised of experts from the broad child welfare system to look at both fatalities and serious 
injuries, complete in -depth reviews as they determine appropriate. Notably, CDSIR P’s reviews 
of a case are more comprehensive than just the review of the OCFS file. CDSIRP makes 
recommendations for system improvement based on their review and their knowledge of the 
system, children, families, available services, etc.  
 
With respect to on going child welfare investigations, OCFS has fully and promptly complied 
with all requests  for those records made by OPEGA, providing tens of thousands of pages of 
records. OPEGA has statutory authority to access these records with appropriate protections in 
place for the records in OPEGA’s possession. OPEGA also has the staff and capacity to fully 
review, analyze, and synthesize these records appropriately.  
 
While the Department is authorized to share child welfare case records with OPEGA, the Office 
of the Attorney General has advised the Department that it may not share directly with 
committee members  under federal as well as state law. A s explained in recent  court briefs filed 
by the Office of the Attorney General, “ the applicable federal law creates functional prohibitions 
on the disclosure of confidential information: if DHHS discloses informa tion in violation of 
these federal laws, it risks losing funding critical to the administration of its Maine Child Welfare 
Services program. ” Losing federal funding would debilitate Maine’s Child Protective Services.  
 
The reality of these records is that they reflect the personal  details  and experiences of Maine 
children and families.  Often , a child who has died has siblings who are alive and the records 
regarding previous involvement speak to the medical, mental health, substance use, and 
behavioral health needs of those children. These children have also experienced  significant 
trauma around the loss of their sibling, potentially  at the hands of a tru sted caregiver. OCFS is 
committed to preven ting further trauma  to these children by allowing their lives and that of their 
family to be on display  beyond what is neces sary for professional  evaluation and oversight .  
 
For these reasons, the Department opposes these bills. If you have any further questions, please 
feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  

