Testimony of Jeff McCabe  
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989  
Neither for Nor Against LD 1195,  An Act to Provide That Documents Obtained by Subpoena by the 
Government Oversight Committee May Be Reviewed by Committee Members and Staff  
Neither for Nor Against LD 1725,  An Act to Strengthen Legislative Oversight of Government Agencies 
and Programs by P roviding the Government Oversight Committee Access to Confidential Records  
Neither for Nor Against LD 1275,  An Act to Clarify the Powers of the Government Oversight Committee 
and Enable Committee Access to Department of Health and Human Services Documents Related to 
Investigations of Child Deaths  
  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
May 2, 2023  
 
Senator Nangle , Representative Stover, members of the Committee on State and Local Government, I’m 
Jeff McCabe, director of politics and legislation for the Maine Service Employees Association, Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. The Maine Service E mployees Association represents over 
13,000 workers across the state.  
  
We are neither for nor against LD 1195, LD 1725 and LD 1275. We understand the Legislature is seeking answers and trying to find solutions.  
  
We are here with questions. We would offer  to review any final language if that is helpful to the 
committee and we may be able to have one of our attorneys attend a future work session.  
 
We sense that the primary purpose of these bills is to provide certain access to confidential information 
in th e Office of Child and Family Services (OCFS) database within the Maine Department of Health and 
Human Services. However, we are trying to understand precisely what privileged information you are 
seeking and would be impacted by these bills. It seems there is interest in the sensitive records about 
families in the OCFS database, but can you identify particular privileged information that would be impacted by these seemingly broad bills?   
 We have the following questions.   
 What privileged documents  are legis lators seeking  access to via  these bills?        
 Would  certain identifying information be kept confidential?   
Would  certain medical information be kept confidential?   
What  would happen  if information viewed by elected official is not kept confidential?  What, if any,  
recourse would there be as it would seem  disclosing certain  information  would  be a violation of the law?  
Thank you for your  time and if the committee has questions, we are happy to work with the analyst to 
find answers.  
