MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Opposition to L.D. 748,  
An Act to Strengthen the Due Process Rights of Persons in Law 
Enforcement Custody 
Submitted by Chief Charles Rumsey  
March 8, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the 
Chief of the Cumberland Police Department. I am submitting testimony on behalf 
of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association in Opposition to LD 748.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in 
law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of 
Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill amends the Maine Civil Rights Act to provide that a person who is 
placed under arrest, in custody, under interrogation or temporarily detained by 
a law enforcement officer and who is not warned by the law enforcement officer 
of the person's privilege against  self-incrimination  and  the  person's  right  to  
the  assistance  of  legal  counsel  may institute and prosecute in the person's 
name and on the person's behalf a civil action for legal or equitable relief against 
the law enforcement officer for failure to provide such warnings.  
We are in opposition to LD 748 because the courts already provide the 
protection that this bill seeks to provide. In 1966, the United States Supreme Court 
held, in Miranda v. Arizona , that the Fifth Amendment serves to protect people 
when “their freedom of action is curtailed in any significant way.”  From that point, 
the Supreme Court has made clear that Miranda is a part of our national culture, 
and it and the Maine Supreme Court have set the rules that law enforcement must 
follow.  
LD 748 greatly expands the situations when Miranda warnings are required to 
be administered to almost all police-citizens encounters. It would require law 
enforcement to give Miranda  warnings whenever a law enforcement questions a 
subject about a crime that is likely to elicit an incriminating response. Like, if a 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
police officer goes to the home of an incident of domestic violence and questions 
the alleged perpetrator of the violence then they would need to immediately read 
the alleged perpetrator their Miranda rights. This would have a chilling effect on 
the police officers’ ability to investigate that crime.  
There is always a balance between protecting a potential victim’s right to 
closure and the potential defendant’s right to the Fifth Amendment protections. But 
this balance is already considered by the United Supreme Court and the Maine 
Supreme Judical Court. Like in creating the exclusionary rules that prevent 
evidence from being introduced if law enforcement illegally obtained that 
evidence.  
Further, LD 748 would expose a law enforcement officer to civil liability for 
the expansion of Miranda  set forth by this bill.  Our law enforcement officers 
already have a strong incentive to follow the Constitution – if they do not then the 
court will not accept the evidence obtained which can derail a case and even result 
in a person walking free.  This is all the deterrent that is needed because no one in 
the law enforcement community wants that to happen. We already have every 
incentive needed to follow the law and to abide by the Constitution.  
We want to assure you that the Courts have already achieved the goal of this 
bill and they will not hesitate to protect a defendant’s constitutional rights. 
Therefore, we believe the legislation before you is not needed.  
For these reasons, we hope that you will vote in opposition to LD 748. And, on 
behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank you for your 
work on this Committee.  
