M E M O R A N D U M
Date:   March 8, 2023
To:  Senator Anne Carney, Chair
Representative Matt Moonen, Chair
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
From:  Daniel Scott, Game Warden Colonel
Subject:  Letter regarding L.D. 748 in lieu of testimony.
An Act to Strengthen the Due Process Rights of Persons in Law Enforcement 
Custody
Dear Committee Members,
The Department is in opposition of LD 748, “An Act to Strengthen the Due Process Rights of 
Persons in Law Enforcement Custody”. 
Currently, Miranda warnings are required when police are conducting a custodial interrogation 
and is current and standard police practice used to inform citizens of their constitutional rights.  
This bill would greatly expand when Miranda warnings are required to be administered and 
provides a State civil remedy for failing to provide Miranda warnings when required under the 
bill. This bill would require Miranda warnings to be given to persons placed under arrest, in 
custody, under interrogation or temporarily detained. 
The phrase, “temporally detained” is overly broad, and could be applied to almost all police-
citizens encounters. Currently the Maine Warden Service conducts over 75,000 regulatory 
inspections of licenses, permits, and watercraft safety checks. All of these could potentially be 
considered temporary detainments and our staff may be subject to providing Miranda warnings 
prior to inspecting a hunting or fishing license or checking life jackets and other safety 
equipment in a watercraft.
There is well established Federal and State Case Law which provides sufficient procedural 
safeguards and protections for the accused that adequately address the harms this bill is seeking 
to prevent. Our current system allows an impartial magistrate to make the decision when a 
reasonable person would feel they are subject to custodial interrogation, and that magistrate 
has the authority to then exclude evidence they feel was not obtained legally. This is an 
important balance as we know every single law enforcement encounter is not the same and the 
totality of the circumstances is what is often used to determine if the government intrusion was 
out of balance with the protection of the safety of the public. 
We feel the reading of Miranda at the onset of every temporary detainment would result in 
adversarial interactions of what would otherwise likely be cordial, inquisitive encounters. 
Circumstances which are unwanted by both law enforcement as well as the pubic we serve. 
Finally, we fear that the possibility of potential civil action against law enforcement officials for 
every conversation with a member of the public will adversely change the proven effectiveness 
of the public safety community and relationship we have with the citizens of Maine. 
