TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 748 
ll I 
An Act to Strengthen the Due Process Rights of Persons in Law Enforcement Custody’ 
SPONSORED BY: Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec. 
Cosponsored by Representative BOYER of Poland and Senator: CARNEY of Cumberland, 
Representatives: ANDREWS of Paris, COLLINGS of Portland, FAU LKINGHAM of Winter 
Harbor, HASENFUS of Readfield, MOONEN of Portland, RIELLY of Westbrook, Speaker 
TALBOT ROSS of Portland. 
DATE OF HEARING: March 8, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary 
Committee. I am Dan Scott, Colonel for Maine Warden Service at the Department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in opposition to 
L.D. 748. '
’ 
Currently, Miranda warnings are required when police are conducting a custodial 
interrogation and is current and standard police practice used to inform citizens oftheir 
constitutional rights. This bill would greatly expand when Miranda warnings are 
required to be administered and provides a State civil remedy for failing to provide 
Miranda warnings when required under the bill. This bill would require Miranda 
warnings to be given to persons placed under arrest, in custody, under interrogation or 
temporarily detained. 
The phrase, ”temporally detained" is overly broad, and could be applied to almost all 
police-citizens encounters. Currently the Maine Warden Service conducts over 75,000 
regulatory inspections of licenses, permits, and watercraft safety checks. All of these 
could potentially be considered temporary detainments and our staff may be subject to 
providing Miranda warnings prior to inspecting a hunting or fishing license or checking 
life jackets and other safety equipment in a watercraft. 
There is well established Federal and State_Case Law which provides sufficient 
procedural safeguards and protections for the accused that adequately address the 
harms this bill is seeking to prevent. Our current system allows an impartial magistrate 
to make the decision when a reasonable person would feel they are subject to custodial 
interrogation, and that magistrate has the authority to then exclude evidence they feel
was not obtained legally. This is an important balance as we know every single law 
enforcement encounter is not the same and the totality of the circumstances is what is 
often used to determine if the government intrusion was out of balance with the 
protection of the safety of the public.’ 
We feel the reading of Miranda at the onset of every temporary detainment would 
result in adversarial interactions of what would otherwise likely be cordial, inquisitive 
encounters» . Circumstances which are unwanted by both law enforcement as well as the 
pubic we serve. 
Finally, we fear that the possibility ofpotential civil action against law enforcement 
officials for every conversation with a member of the public will adversely change the 
proven effectiveness of the public safety community and relationship we have with the 
citizens of Maine. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
