Q 
e3“%iw2 
'§ 
_ _t,~‘ -5.“ EA 
:. 
\;'_"1' 2 
;.,.hu_ .__,.~
. 
" 
J2»--:' r-_r =;'W
» '7 
MA 1 N\ 
Administrative Office of the Courts 
P.O. Box 4820, Portland, Maine 04112-4820 
Tel: (207) 822-0792 FAX: (207) 822-0781 TTY: (207) 822-0701 
Julia Finn. Esq. Tel: (207) 822-0767 
Legislative Analyst 'ulia.ﬁnn@courts.maine.gov 
Judicial Branch testimony neither for nor against LD 748, An-Act to 
Strengthen the Due Process Rights of Persons in Law Enforcement Custody: 
Senator Camey, Representative Moonen, members of the Joint Standing Cormnittee on 
the Judiciary, my name is Julie Finn and I represent the Judicial Branch. I would like to provide 
testimony regarding this bill: 
The Judicial Branch does not take a position on the bill but would like to comment on the 
cm-rent draft and how it may impact the Judicial Branch. 
The U.S. Supreme Court made clear in the 1966 landmark case of Miranda v. Arizona 
that the Fifth Amendment requires law enforcement ofﬁcials to advise suspects of their rights to 
remain silent and to. obtain an attomey when a person is in police custody and is being 
interrogated by law enforcement. Put another Way, the obligation to provide Miranda wamings 
is triggered only if a person is subject to interrogation while in police custody. The Maine 
Supreme Judicial Court has also long held that ensuring its citizens have freedom from self- 
incrimination is of utmost importance, and the related case law has reﬂected this public policy. 
The proposed bill creates a civil action for anyone who is arrested or in custody or under 
interrogation or temporarily detained by law enforcement and is not provided warnings. Thus, it 
appears to create an obligation to warn in many circumstances to which Miranda does not apply, 
including temporary detention without arrest or‘ 
custody or interrogation, as Well as interrogation 
without arrest or custody. Obviously this creates a much broader obligation to wam than is 
currently the law. 
Currently civil violations and trafﬁc infractions, which frequently involve temporary 
detention, do not implicate Miranda warnings. The majority of criminal charges also do not 
implicate Miranda as there is either no custody or no interrogation. Because the protections in 
this bill go beyond what the U.S. and Maine Constitutions require, we are concemed that this 
will create a civil action for thousands of people not provided wamings, resulting in a substantial 
3/8/23
1 
increase in civil cases being ﬁled, signiﬁcantly impacting court resources. To be clear, if evena 
small fraction of the people who arepcurrently charged with trafﬁc infractions and crimes without 
being wamed ﬁled suit under this section, the civil caseload in the Superior Court would more 
than double} 
Although it is difﬁcult to assess how many cases would be brought by this change and 
thus the ﬁscal impact, we will be providing our best estimate. 
Thank you for your time. 
1 
In FY 2021, there were 49,689 trafﬁc infraction cases ﬁled along with thousands more minor criminal cases. 
There were 1,872 total tort and “other civil” ﬁlings in the Superior Court. 
3/8/23l
