‘v! 
LD 748 7'An Act to Strengthen the Due Process Rights of Persons in Law Enforcement 
.‘ 
.V 
_. 
_ Custody‘ 
1‘
\ 
Testimony, of Kevin M. Anderson' 
March~8, 2023 ''
. 
Good Morning Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the 
Judiciary ’Committee, . 
_‘ 
"‘ ~A 
My name is Kevin Anderson from Eddington Maine, and I represent the Maine Law 
Enforcement Coalition. l am here to speak‘ in my current capacity as the Executive Director of 
the Maine State Law Enforcement Association (MSLEA) . The MSLEA currently represents 
approximately 400 full time, statelaw enforcement officers throughout the state to include 
Game Wardens, Marine Patrol Oﬁicers, Forest Rangers, Probation Officers, Juvenile Corrections 
Officers, amongst others. MSLEA is also proud to be a founding partner of the Maine Law 
Enforcement Coalition, which, along with the Maine Association of Police, the Maine State 
Troopers Association, as well as the Fraternal Order of Police, represents over 90% of the -full 
time certiﬁed, state, municipal and county ﬁrst responders. f7 
I am here to speak in opposition of LD 748 "An Act to Strengthen the Due Process Rights of 
Persons in Law Enforcement Custody’_’. 
It is the concern of the Maine Law Enforcement Coalition that this bill unnecessarily goes far'
- 
beyondestablished federal case law and will havean immediate effect on current Maine Laws, 
which have been informed by it.‘ 
I-
_ 
Ix _ .. 
As has been previously explained by those before me, there are clear pre-established guidelines 
that law enforcement have to follow when questioning an individual who is in custody and who 
is being interrogated. The required warnings were established over 5_0 years ago in the Miranda 
and Escabedo US Supreme Court decisions and have been become the law of the land is it_ 
relates to safeguarding the civil rights of those who have found themselves in a. custodial . 
situation ‘ With- law enforcement. The clearly established warning includes the right to counsel and 
the right against self-incrimination. The determination for when Miranda is required is a two- 
prong test. 1,) Is the person in custody,'essentially is the person free to--leaveor woulda 
reasonable person in the same position believe they are not free to leave, and 2) is the person 
being interrogated, which is to say that-the questioning narrowly focuseson that person asa 
suspect in a crime.l
A 
‘ ' 
This bill as written reaches a lot further beyond the pre-established lines of the USSC decisions 
that dictate when law enforcement ofﬁcers’ are required to advise a person of their rights.‘ 
For example, a police officer stopping a motor vehicle for a trafﬁc infraction would be required, 
on every traffic stop, which is a temporary detention, to advise the subject of -their right to 
counsel and right to remain silent, when in fact it most likely would not apply to the brief 
detention. r'
-
A Game Warden tasked with enforcing the hunting and ﬁshing laws of the state of Maine would 
be required to advise every hunter or ﬁsherman of their ﬁght to counseland right to remain silent 
prior to any regulatory check of a hunting and or ﬁshing license. Imagine how a check that was 
once ordinarily cordial and pleasant would feel for a sportsman or woman when the Warden had 
to start ever encounter with “Good morning I am a Game Warden, you have the right to remain 
silent and the right to an attorney here before any questioning. ” It is not only not necessary or in 
accordance with the established law of the-land, it creates a far different tone for the encounter 
than what is currently enjoyed by the outdoors men and woman and the Wardens. It indicates 
that the person who is subject to the encounter has is some way done something wrong when in 
fact they may not have.V 
I_ 
This scenario would apply to Marine Patrol Officers conducting regulatory boat inspections and 
commercial ﬁshing licenses on the high seas, probation ofﬁcers conducting routine meetings 
with probationers who are required to check in to ensure compliance with conditions of_ 
probation, and all other scenarios where law enforcement is conducting pro-active duties that 
they have been tasked to do by the Maine Legislature; 
Current state and federal laws are already established to protect the civil liberties of those who 
live, work, recreate andivisit this great state. LD 748 will severely affect the mannerin which 
investigative efforts, state public safety mandates and court procedures, established by clear state 
a federal case law,serve to protect the citizens of Maine. As wein public service have 
committed by oath to protect Maine and its citizens, LD 748 creates an inconsistent barrier to 
established laws, protections and practices._ 
This bill places an undo burden on Maine Law Enforcement that will do more to damage the 
relationship between Maine’s citizens and its law enforcement than it will help." 
This bill leaves Maines law enforcement open to civil litigation on nearly every law enforcement 
contact and will deter proactive law enforcement that currently keeps Maine’s communities, 
roads, waters, trails and woods, safe for all to enjoy. - 
In many of the rural cormmmities of Maine and the majority of Maine state law enforcement do 
not currently wear body worn cameras and for those who do, they are not always working when 
you need them to. Every contact a law enforcement ofﬁcer has with a citizen can turn in to a he 
said/ she said situation that could lead to law enforcement across the state ﬁghting a nonstop 
barrage of baseless lawsuits by those who have ill will toward those who protect us every day at 
their own peril. -' 
In a time'where recruitment and retention of law enforcement is at an all time low, this will 
further exacerbate the issue and drive quality candidates away from the career ﬁeld. 
On behalf of our members and future ﬁrst responders, I would urge this committee to vote this 
bill out as written, “Ought Not To Pass”- 
.. 
Thank you for your time and I will be happy to answer any questions at this time.
Sincerely, 
Kevin Anderson _ 
Executive Director, Maine State Law Enforcement Association 
Maine Law Enforcement Coalition
\
\
