CLAC MEMORANDUM/TESTIMONY - 
LDV 748 (Opposed) 
TO: Senator Anne Carney 
Representative Matt Moonen 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC) 
c/o laura.yustak@,maine.gov . 
RE: L.D. 748, An Act to Strengthen Due Process Rights of Persons in Law Enforcement Custody 
DA: March 8, 2023 
The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following 
testimony in opposition to LD 748. . 
LD 748 creates an overly broad mandate for law enforcement to provide what are commonly 
called “Miranda” warnings to citizens in situations where currently not legally required. For 
example, it would require law enforcement to advise a person of the right to counsel in situations 
where such a right has not been legally established. The proposal does not identify the 
combination of custody and interrogation as prerequisites to the wamings, in contrast to the Maine 
Law Court and United States Supreme Court caselaw applicable to custodial interrogation in 
criminal cases. The proposal would likely result in signiﬁcant confusion for all parties involved in 
routine law enforcement-citizen encounters, and conﬂicting decisions from courts addressing 
parallel civil and criminal proceedings arising out of the same circumstances. 
Failure to provide such warnings when required in the context of criminal proceedings 
results in_exclusion of evidence and thus signiﬁcant incentive to comply with the law. Particularly 
in light of this exclusionary rule, CLAC does not see the need for an additional requirement that can 
cause unintended negative consequences. 
*CLAC is an advisory body established by the Legislature. l7-A M.R.S. §§ 1351-1357. It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General. Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine Bar Counsel, and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration. In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co-Chairs of the Legislature ’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants. The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC. CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.
