 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 748 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: L.D. 748, An Act  to Strengthen Due Process Rights of Persons in Law Enforcement Custody  
 
DA: March 8, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 748.  
 
LD 748 creates an overly broad mandate  for law enforcement to provide what are commonly 
called  “Miranda ” warnings to citizens in situations where currently not legally required.  For 
example, i t would require law enforcement to advise a person of the right to counsel in situations 
where such a right has not been legally established .   The proposal  does not identify the 
combination of custody and interrogation as prerequisites to the warnings, in con trast to the Maine 
Law Court and United States Supreme Court caselaw applicable to custodial interrogation in 
criminal cases .  The proposal would likely result in significant confusion for all parties involved in 
routine law enforcement -citizen encounters , and conflicting decisions from courts addressing 
parallel civil and criminal proceedings arising out of the same circumstances.    
 
Failure to provide such warnings when required in the context of criminal proceedings 
results in exclusion of evidence and thus significant incentive to comply with the law.  Particularly 
in light of this exclusionary rule, CLAC does not see the need for an additional requirement that can 
cause unintended negative consequences.   
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
