N P0 Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
- 
(207) 774-5444 . 
nmmcnu cum LIBERTIESUNION WWW'a°'“mai"°'°'g 
Maine . 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
LD 748 Q Ought To Pass 
An Acti to Strengthen the Due Process Rights 
of Persons in Law Enforcement Custody 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede, and I am 
Policy Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to support 
» 
LD 748, legislation that would strengthen the constitutional rights of people in 
state custody. 
You have the right to remain silent. Anything you say can and -maybe used_against 
you in a court of law. You have the right to an attorney. If you cannot afford an' 
attorney, one will be appointed to you by a court of law.' 
We have all heard these words countless times. You all know that they come from 
the 1966 Supreme Court case Miranda v. Arizona, 384 US 436 (1966), where the 
‘ 
Court overturned the conviction of Ernesto Miranda because the police obtained his 
confession Without informing him of his Fifth Amendment right to remain silent 
and Sixth Amendment right to counsel. - 
In criminal legal practice today, statements that a personin custody makeslduring 
a police interrogation are admissible against that person at trial only if police told 
the person of the right to remain silent and the right to speak with an attorney 
before the interrogation started, and the rights were either exercised or waived ina 
’knowing, voluntary, and intelligent manner. In other words, the remedy for 
violations of your Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights is that a judge might exclude 
things you said from your criminal trial. This bill would add one more remedy: civil 
liability for officers who fail to honor these constitutional rights. 
If enacted, this bill would allow people Whose Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights 
were violated to sue the violating police ofﬁcers in civil court for legal or equitable 
relief. This is an especially important protection for Maine to enshrine, since the 
1 42% £1; Damn M."'
\ 
Supreme Court has recently ruled that law enforcement cannot be held liable under 
federal civil rights law for violating our Miranda rights. See Vega v. Tekoh, 142 
S.Ct. 2095, 2099 (U.S., 2022) (ruling that a Miranda violation does not constitute 
the deprivation of a right secured by the Constitution that is enforceable under§ 
1983).I 
Enacting this bill will make law enforcement think twice before dishonoring our 
constitutional rights. Indeed, enacting this bill would continue the longstanding 
trend of Maine providing stronger constitutional protections than the federal 
government. See, e.g., State u. Sklar, 317 A.2d 160, 1'71 (Me. 1974) (construing 
right-to-jury-trial guarantee in section 6 of the Maine Constitution to apply to all 
criminal prosecutions, even though federal jury-trial right extended only to serious 
or non-petty crimes); State v. Fleming, 2020 ME 120, n. 9, 239 A.3d 648 (“To the 
extent that the federal counterparts to Maine's requirement of an impartial jury, 
found in art. I, § 6 of the Maine Constitution, are deemed not to impose the inquiry 
we mandate today, we conclude that the Maine Constitution demands more;”). 
We urge you to keep Maine true to its motto, dirigo, and vote ought to pass.
\
t
\
(
\
\
2
