 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 748, An Act to Strengthen the Due Process Rights of Persons in Law Enforcement Custody 
  
March 8, 2023 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary, my 
name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland 
County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County 
Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in opposition  
to LD 748. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s 16 counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
About LD 748.  This bill amends the Maine Civil Rights Act to provide that a person who is placed under 
arrest, in custody, under interrogation, or temporarily detained by a law enforcement officer and who is not 
warned by the law enforcement officer of the person’s privilege against self-incrimination and the person’s right 
to the assistance of legal counsel may file a lawsuit against such law enforcement officer in the officer’s 
individual capacity for failure to provide such warnings. If adopted, this legislation would limit the protection 
such officers would otherwise have under the Maine Tort Claims from personal liability related to their 
employment.  
 
The apparent purpose of the bill is to remove liability protections for law enforcement officers who do not 
provide several of the elements of a “Miranda Warning.” The bill removes such liability protection regardless of 
whether the officer’s conduct was intentional or accidental.  
 
Under current law, a government employee is protected from most tort liability for their conduct in the course of 
employment. This protection is also referred to as “qualified immunity.” However, where a government 
employee engages in conduct that is “intended” to violate a person’s protected rights, that conduct is not 
protected by the “qualified” immunity doctrine. Fowles v. Sterns , 886 F.Supp. 894 (D. Me. 1995).   Rather, 
qualified immunity is limited to instances where a government employee, including a law enforcement officer, 
engages in conduct that is part of their job but where someone is injured based on conduct that falls short of 
“intentional” conduct. Negligent or simply accidental conduct by government employees is protected under the 
qualified immunity doctrine. Hamlin v. Kennebec County Sheriffs Dept ., 720 F.Supp. 804 (D. Me. 1990).  
 
The jobs of law enforcement officers are difficult ones, and hiring and retaining qualified people to fill them has 
become very challenging, particularly for rural counties and communities.  Law enforcement officers work 
under challenging and nuanced circumstances, often with their lives at risk, and the pay they receive is modest 
compared to many other professions. If LD 748 were to pass, this difficult situation of recruiting qualified law 
enforcement officers would be further exacerbated as such individuals would now face exposure to lawsuits for 
accidents or unintentional conduct related to Miranda Warnings that could cause financial and other stress to 
themselves and their families.  
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 748 
March 8, 2023 
Page 2 
 
  
The bottom line is that the current doctrine of qualified immunity provides sufficient protection to the public in 
circumstances where a law enforcement officer intentionally fails to provide a Miranda Warning where one is 
required. This bill, however, goes too far by making officers personally liable in instances where their conduct is 
accidental. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in opposition to this bill, and if you have 
questions or need additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
 
