 
 
 
 
 
Doug Johnson  
Belfast Community Co -op 
123 High Street  
Belfast, M E 04915  
doug@belfast.coop  
 
Support Maine farms by supporting a cooperative economy in Maine: Testimony in Support of 
LD 1276: An Act to Create and Sustain Jobs and Affordable Housing through the Development of 
Cooperatives and Employee- owned Businesses  
 To Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Taxation Committee,   
 
I am writing today in support of LD 1276. LD 1276 provides important tax incentives and 
resources to Maine cooperatives. This bill is especially important to Maine farmers, producers, and food cooperatives by providing tax incentives on the sale of farmland to cooperative enterprises. I urge you to support this bill.  
 I have served as the General Manger of the Belfast Community Co -op for the past seven yea rs and 
have wor ked in cooperatives for a total of 22 years.  I have witnessed firsthand the ability of 
cooperatives to transform the lives of their owners and the communities  they occupy .  I believe 
that LD 1276 will not only help grow the cooperative econo my in our state , but also will allow 
more young Mainers to stay in their communities  and contribute locally.  The b ill allows 
incentives for more local ownership  and provides opportunities for community enrichment and 
developmen t.  
 Cooperatives are businesses or enterprises jointly owned and controlled by the people who use, live, or work in that business. Profits of the cooperative are returned to its owners , therefore 
cooperative business keeps money local and helps sustain and gr ow the local economy. Maine’s 
agricultural industry has a rich history of cooperatives, which you can learn more about in this 
video series here.  
 
LD 1276 incentivizes the development of more  cooperatives in Maine by removing barriers 
for local businesses and property owners to transition to cooperative ownership. There are 
many young farmers looking to enter the industry and many aging farmers and agricultural businesses who do not have identified succession plans. LD 1276 would create a pathway for farmland more easily transferred to employee- owned or other cooperative agricultural 
businesses. These incentives would benefit both sellers and buyers, and preserve hundreds of 
thousands of acres of v iable farmland for agricultural purposes  
 
   
 
 
 
   As someone who works closely with rural farmers and producers, many of which a re young and 
enthusiastic and just starting their careers, I know the how difficult it is to make your way in the modern economy.  I also see the other end of the spectrum, where business owners who have worked for decades to build a strong following are e ntering the twilight of their careers and 
wondering what will become of all that they built.  Legislation such as LD 1276 provides more opportunities for our neighbors to succeed in a challenging economy and assists in building 
resilient communities for th e future.  
 
LD 1276 also creates the Maine Center for Employee Ownership. This resource will connect business owners to the research, technical assistance, and network they need to build a 
sustainable employee- owned business. While we have resources to support farmers  and 
producers in our state, cooperative transitions can be complicated for both new farmers and 
retiring owners both, and this Center would be an invaluable resource.  
 
For a small investment, LD 1276 will have a huge impact for Maine farmers. Maine farmers 
already thrive through collaboration, cooperation, and grit, and LD 1276 is a bill that embodies the spirit of our state and offers hope for the future of our agricultural economy. I urge you to support this bill.  
 
Thank you for your time and service to our state.  
 Sincerely,   
 
 
   
Doug Johns on 
Belfast Community Co -op 
 
 

Doug Johnson
Belfast Community Co-op
LD 1276
Doug Johnson
Belfast Community Co-op
123 High Street
Belfast, ME 04915
doug@belfast.coop
Support Maine farms by supporting a cooperative economy in Maine: Testimony in 
Support of LD 1276: An Act to Create and Sustain Jobs and Affordable Housing 
through the Development of Cooperatives and Employee-owned Businesses
To Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Taxation 
Committee, 
I am writing today in support of LD 1276. LD 1276 provides important tax incentives 
and resources to Maine cooperatives. This bill is especially important to Maine 
farmers, producers, and food cooperatives by providing tax incentives on the sale of 
farmland to cooperative enterprises. I urge you to support this bill.
I have served as the General Manger of the Belfast Community Co-op for the past 
seven years and have worked in cooperatives for a total of 22 years.  I have witnessed 
firsthand the ability of cooperatives to transform the lives of their owners and the 
communities they occupy.  I believe that LD 1276 will not only help grow the 
cooperative economy in our state, but also will allow more young Mainers to stay in 
their communities and contribute locally.  The bill allows incentives for more local 
ownership and provides opportunities for community enrichment and development. 
Cooperatives are businesses or enterprises jointly owned and controlled by the people 
who use, live, or work in that business. Profits of the cooperative are returned to its 
owners, therefore cooperative business keeps money local and helps sustain and grow 
the local economy. Maine’s agricultural industry has a rich history of cooperatives, 
which you can learn more about in this video series here.
LD 1276 incentivizes the development of more cooperatives in Maine by removing 
barriers for local businesses and property owners to transition to cooperative 
ownership. There are many young farmers looking to enter the industry and many 
aging farmers and agricultural businesses who do not have identified succession 
plans. LD 1276 would create a pathway for farmland more easily transferred to 
employee-owned or other cooperative agricultural businesses. These incentives would
benefit both sellers and buyers, and preserve hundreds of thousands of acres of viable 
farmland for agricultural purposes
As someone who works closely with rural farmers and producers, many of which are 
young and enthusiastic and just starting their careers, I know the how difficult it is to 
make your way in the modern economy.  I also see the other end of the spectrum, 
where business owners who have worked for decades to build a strong following are 
entering the twilight of their careers and wondering what will become of all that they 
built.  Legislation such as LD 1276 provides more opportunities for our neighbors to 
succeed in a challenging economy and assists in building resilient communities for 
the future.
LD 1276 also creates the Maine Center for Employee Ownership. This resource will 
connect business owners to the research, technical assistance, and network they need 
to build a sustainable employee-owned business. While we have resources to support 
farmers and producers in our state, cooperative transitions can be complicated for 
both new farmers and retiring owners both, and this Center would be an invaluable 
resource.
For a small investment, LD 1276 will have a huge impact for Maine farmers. Maine 
farmers already thrive through collaboration, cooperation, and grit, and LD 1276 is a 
bill that embodies the spirit of our state and offers hope for the future of our 
agricultural economy. I urge you to support this bill.
Thank you for your time and service to our state.
Sincerely, 
Doug Johnson
Belfast Community Co-op

