April 13, 2023 
Senator Nicole Grohoski, Chair 
Representative Joseph C. Perry, Sr., Chair 
Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, l\/laine 04333 
Re: Testimony on LD 1276, "An Act to Create and Sustain Jobs and Affordable Housing 
Through the Development of Cooperatives and Employee-Owned Businesses ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee: 
Founded right here in Maine twenty years ago, ReVision Energy is a local, employee owned, 
certified B Corporation with over 385 employees across our five branches in New England, with 
220 staff in Maine at our Montville and South Portland locations. Our mission is to lead our 
community in solving the environmental problems caused by fossil fuels while alleviating social 
injustice to ensure New England is a thriving place where our children, grandchildren, and future 
generations can enjoy a clean environment and just society. We are a construction company 
who, in 2022 alone, installed 10,000 kilowatts of residential solar and nearly 24 megawatts of 
commercial solar across the region, eliminating over 950,000,000 pounds of future CO2 
emissions. 
The employee owner mindset has been present in our work since our founding in 2003, and 
that's why, after a rigorous three-year exploration of various strategies aligned with our mission, 
Revision formally adopted the ESOP model in 2017. This decision has proved to be incredibly 
beneficial for our company and we believe our entire community reaps the long-lasting, profit- 
building benefits. Our founders felt this was the best strategy to ensure our company's long-term 
economic and environmental sustainability. We want all Maine businesses to have the support 
and resources they need in making this decision, and for that reason, we are here today in 
support of LD 1276. 
According to the ESOP Association, an oven/vhelming majority of companies that convert to an 
ESOP model report higher levels of employee motivation and productivity. This oven/vhelmingly 
positive effect on the company creates broad-based ownership among all employees and 
fosters an environment in which everyone understands his or her role in helping the company 
achieve its triple bottom line. Research has proven that employee ownership builds successful, 
competitive companies and creates equitable wealth for employees. It has been shown that 
ESOP companies pay better benefits, have twice the retirement income for employees and pay 
higher wages than non-ESOP companies. 
Erik Mitchell, a solar design specialist from Brunswick who has been with Revision Energy 
since 2008, said it best back in 2017: “You come to realize that it's notjust me, working for 
someone else to build their company—it’s all of us at Revision Energy working together to build 
this company for us—which is a really powerful thing, and we are really proud of that.” 
We think this bipartisan legislation brings forth a thoughtful approach as we can all agree that 
supporting workers, spurring economic development, and creating more Maine jobs are 
priorities here in our state. We especially support the development of the Maine Employee 
Ownership Center, which can not only grow ESOPs in the state to empower and elevate more 
of Maine's workers, but it can support our existing community of co-owners, too. 
AN EMPLOYEE-OWNED SOLAR COMPANY ~ BASED IN ME. MA 8NH
Thank you for your consideration of our perspective. We welcome further discussion, and we 
are available to address any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
Lindsay Bourgoine 
Director, Policy & Government Affairs 
Revision Energy 
207.819.5663 
AN EMPLOYEE-OWNED SOLAR COMPANY - BASED lN ME, MA 8NH
