TESTIMONY ON  
LD1276 – AN ACT TO CREAT E AND SUSTAIN JOBS AND AFFORDABLE HOU SING THROUGH  
THE DEVE LOPMENT OF COOPERATIVES AND EMPLOYEE -OWNED BUSINESS ES 
Submitted by  
Mark A. Adams, President/CEO  
Sebago Technics, Inc.  
South Portland, ME  04106  
Email:  Madams@sebagotechnics.com  
Telephone: 200 -2100  
 
 Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , Honorable Members of the Taxation C ommittee .  It is my 
pleasure and with great enthusiasm that I support the adoption of LD 1276.   Thank you for your 
service and your considerat ion of  something that I and thousands of Mainers are passionate about  
– employee ownership .  I would also like to thank Senator Reny  and all o f the bill’s co -sponsors for 
their support.   
My name is Mark Adams and I am President/CEO of Sebago Technics, a proud 100% employee-
owned engineering consulting company located in South Portland  with offices in Bath, Bridgton an d 
Sanford .  I am also here as a Past President of the New England Chapter of the National ESOP 
Association and a founding participant of the Maine ESOP Group.  But most importantly and with most relevance I am here as an employee- owner representing more than 110  employee- owners at 
our company and thousands of employee owners across the state.  
Employee Ownership is not well -known nor often not well understood.  However, at its core it is a 
very simple concept… ownership of an enterprise by those most impacted and most able to 
determine its success.  Employee owners understand th at our collective success leads to our 
individual success and vice versa.  In an ESOP the hard work of employees and the financial rewards that come from that work accrue to the employees because they own  the company.  There 
isn’t any greater incentive, any greater sense of engagement and ownership in what you do than to be working for your own benefit.  
Before I share with you more thoughts about ESOPs and in particular ESOPs in Maine, I want to offer a brief explanation of ESOPs.  Employee Stock Ownership Plans have been around for decades.  They are enabled by federal law and as such are regulated by the IRS and the US Department of Labor.  This is important to understand so as not to think they are custom creations of the more than 6,500 ESOPs in the U.S. with more than 10 million  participants.  Fundamentally an 
ESOP is a retirement plan that functions very much like a 401k.  Participant account values are tax -
deferred until they withdraw or take distributions and they receive annual statements of the value of their accounts.  The differences are that  participants don’t contribute any of their own monies, 
instead the shares are given to them by the company – more specifically the trust that owns the 
shares.  The value of the shares is independently determined annually.  When an employee retires or leaves the company, the company owes and pays the employee the then value of those shares.  Though there are obviously more administrative and sometimes complicated details this description basically captures the function of an ESOP  as a retirement plan.   
The retirement benefit and function of an ESOP is wonderful, however, many ESOPs would argue 
that the culture of ownership in an ESOP is really the biggest benefit.  Many  companies can have 
great cultures and great employees, but employee- owned companies have employees that have an 
extra sense of pride, engagement and ownership in what they do, in the services or products 
provided and in the future of their  company.  From young to not  so young, our experience is that 
employee- owners are enthused about the work they do and how their work is connected to the 
success of the company.  Employee- owners understand, and good ESOPs reinforce, that it is 
employees, not companies, who make a company suc cessful, its employees who deliver services 
and make products, its employees who have relationships with customers and it is therefore employees who should benefit from the engagement of their skills, experience, and efforts . 
 
Sebago Technics was started in 1981 by Walter P. Stinson, a graduate of the University of Maine.  He, like many entrepreneurs, began at his kitchen .  Walt worked hard and q uickly gained a well -
earned reputation, hired more Mainers and served hundreds then thousands of Maine property owners, businesses, contractors, developers and communities.  By the mid -1990’s Sebago had 
grown into a multi -discipline engineering firm provid ing civil engineering, land surveying, landscape 
architecture, CAD, environmental sciences and more.  Though Walt was more than a dozen years from retirement age he began to think about ownership succession.  He explored the common 
options, sale to another  firm (often larger and headquartered out of state), sale to one or two 
current employees or simply running the business till retirement then closing it.  But during his search he came upon Employee Stock Ownership Plans.  He sought ESOP experts and the ad vice 
of other ESOPs, such as Cianbro.  After studying he determined that an ESOP was the best choice for one compelling reason.  Walt concluded that the success of the company was due to the work of its employees and it was those employees who should benefit  going forward.  Thus in 1998, 
Sebago Technics became one of a very few ESOPs in Maine.  Today, nearly 25 years later Sebago 
Technics stands as one of Maine’s largest engineering consulting firms with tenured employees who are proud owners of not  only the company but also six figure ESOP accounts.  
 
A few years ago, Moody’ s Collision and Sebago Technics noticed that the growth of ESOPs in 
Maine was on the rise.  In fact, over the past 10 years, we estimate that the number of ESOPs in 
Maine has grown from 15 -16 to more than 60 .  ESOPs in Maine are now present in every corner of 
the state from Fort Kent to Kittery.  Maine ESOPs span  every industry from construction to 
engineering, financial services to agriculture and manufacturing to technology.  Maine  ESOP 
companies represent some of our best -known  brands and recognizable businesses.  Companies 
such as Cianbro, Sargent, Reed and Reed, Landry French , Daigle Oil, Johnny’s Seeds, Revision 
Energy, Portland Air Freight, Dennis Paper, Howell  Labs, Lanco, and dozens more.  To recognize 
the growth of ESOPs in Maine, lend support to new ESOPs,  and encourage more ESOPs , we 
created the Maine ESOP Group.  It is an informal group of small, medium and large companies with three things in common.  1. We are all Maine- based. 2. We are all ESOPs. a nd 3. We all believe in 
the power and potential of employee ownership.  We have been meeting and sharing information and resources for mor e than 5  years.  LD 1276  would be a great step to solidifying  and support  our 
efforts, rais e awareness of the ESOP model and incentiv e its further growth.  Passage of LD 1 276 
would place Maine amongst many states  such as Vermont, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and Ohio 
where state centers for employee ownership have helped grow, inform and sustain employee ownership.  
In my view, passage of LD 1 276 will support the growth of ESOPs and cooperatives in Maine and 
recognize, at the highest level in our state, that cooperatives and employee ownership is about 
redistribution of wealth.  It w ill codify that Maine businesses owned and operated by Maine people is 
the best way to secure our  collective  future.  It will formally establish  that employees should benef it 
from their work with more than just a paycheck.  In these ways it would harken back to the beginnings of business in Maine where most folks were self -employed, and their destiny and 
success was in proportion to their contributions.  
I urge your support  for LD 1276 and for the future of employee ownership  and cooperatives  in 
Maine.  As you work through your deliberation of the bill , I and other Maine ESOPs would be happy 
to share our experience and knowledge to help inform you and in  creating a broader understanding 
of the benefits of employee ownership.   
Thank you.  
 
ESOP Facts : 
• ESOPs boost employee engagement. When ESOPs are formed, shares of company stock 
are allocated to all employees, making them employee owners  who share in the rewards if 
the stock rises and the risks if the stock falls. As a result, they are more invested in  helping 
the business succeed and more likely to tackle problems, such as helping co -workers who 
are underperforming.  
• ESOPs require no out -of-pocket contribution from employees. For plenty of people, funding a 
contribution to a 401(k) each paycheck is  a struggle. For employees like these, an ESOP 
might be the only retirement plan in which they can afford to participate. 
• ESOPs help narrow the wealth inequality gap . Employees at ESOP companies tend to earn 
higher wages and have greater savings than their peers in non -ESOP companies. In 
2018,  ESOPs distributed $126.7 Billion nationally . 
• There are more than 6,500 ESOP companies nationally representing more than 10.5 million 
employee- owners. 
ESOPs provide unique benefits to the employee owners, the institutions, and their  surrounding 
communities. ESOPs have been proven to:  
• Motivate employees  
• Increase productivity  
• Improve employee retention  
• Excel at  providing employee training  
• Keep jobs local  
• Counter wealth inequality 
• Contribute to business health and longevity  
  
