Testimony by Michael Newsom, CEO, Wheelers Insurance Agency, South Paris, Maine in support  of 
LD 1276 An Act to Create and Sustain Jobs through Development of Cooperatives and Employee-owned Businesses  
Before the Committee on Taxation: Thursday, April 13, 2023
Sena tor Grohoski, Representat ive Perry, and members of the Committee, my name is Michael N ewsom and I 
am writing in support of LD 1276 An Act to Create and Sustai n Jobs through Development of Cooperatives and 
Employee-ow ned Businesses. 
Wheelers Insurance Agency was founded by my great-gr eat-grandfa ther, William Jordan Wheeler and has been 
a family business since 1864 years. The peaceful  and orderly transition of ownership from one generation to 
the next is a key issue for small  business owners like myself.  I started thinking about this issue of perpetuation 
the moment I became the owner in 2009.  
When I was a kid here in the Oxford Hills, there was a vibrant class of business owners in our community.  
Machine shops. Wood products. Manufacturing. With owners living in our community with us. They had roots 
with us, and they were concerned not just with Profits but with what  we call Quality of Life. They’re pretty 
much all gone. Now we have wage stagnation, absentee ownership, and a degraded quality of life. 
As a fifth generation owner of this business, I am as much a steward of the family legacy as I am the owner of a 
corporation. Of course,  we have sought to make money. But also to provide sustainable employment and to 
provide a sustainable service to our community’s members. In a phrase,  to create value,  not just make money.  
As a small  business owner, the market value of my business is my “retirement fund.” Currently, in our industry, 
we are seeing a huge influx of venture capital  coming into the mergers & acquisitions space, buying agencies, 
driving up the sale prices, just as banks did in the 1990’s and 2000’s. Let’s be clear: their goal is profit seeking. 
They care not a whit about our community or our employees. But when the time comes to sell my agency, they 
will offer me the highest price. If we sell to them, I expect they will lay off some employees, eliminate our pro-
family workplace culture, and maximize the profits to be had. 
To avoid this dreary future, I could consider selling the business to my employees. They’ll preserve our culture 
as a business, they’ll be its best stewards (since its success will mean their success),  and they’ll make 
investments in themselves as owners and in the community as a whole. But how much of a discount will I have 
to give the employees to ensure that they can run the business profitably? Remember,  this is my “retirement 
fund.”  
So wha t this bill does, in a nutshell, is help close the gap between the maximum value of the agency and the 
discounted v alue I woul d offer for internal  perpetuation of the company. By eliminating the state tax burden on 
this sale of the business,  you’ve made it more possible for the employees to be able to afford to purchase the 
business, which should preserve jobs, local ownership and culture, while at the same time permitting me to 
ensure my own financial security in retirement. I call that a Win-Win.  
Michael 	Newsom	
Wheelers	Insurance	 Agency		
15	Market	 Square, 	South	 Paris, 	ME	04281	
207-744-9816
mike @wheelersinsurance .com
