TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April 13, 2023 
LD 1276 — “An Act to Create and Sustain Jobs and Ajfordable Housing Through 
the Development of Cooperatives and Employee-owned Businesses ” 
- --------------- --¢ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1276, “An Act to Create 
and Sustain Jobs and Aﬂordable Housing Through the Development of 
Cooperatives and Employee-owned Businesses. ” 
This testimony is limited to the bill as it affects Maine Revenue Services. 
For taxable years beginning on or after January l, 2024, to the extent included in 
federal adjusted gross income (for individuals) or federal taxable income (for 
corporations) and otherwise subject to Maine income tax, the bill proposes two 
income subtraction modiﬁcations to: 
1) exempt up to $750,000 of gain recognized on the sale of a majority 
ownership interest in a qualiﬁed business to an employee stock ownership 
plan (ESOP) or a Subchapter S corporation owned by an ESOP, an eligible 
worker-owned cooperative, a consumer cooperative, an affordable housing 
cooperative, or a producer cooperative; and
2) exempt interest received during the taxable year with respect toa 
qualiﬁed business acquisition loan. Note that the bill also exempts such 
interest from the Maine franchise tax imposed on ﬁnancial institutions. - 
Currently, capital gains and business interest are subject to both federal and 
State income tax.
X 
This bill creates a $750,000 capital gains exclusion for sales of a business to 
an ESOP. Carving out certain types of capital gains for a tax incentive complicates 
the income tax and primarily beneﬁts upper-income households. MRS tax data 
show that since 2016, the average number of ESOP sales per year is 9. It is not 
clear whether a capital gains exclusion will incentivize these types of sales. 
The administration notes the following technical concerns: 
0 As currently written, the bill does not extend the subtraction modiﬁcations to 
trusts and estates subject to the Maine ﬁduciary income tax. . 
0 As currently written, Section 7 of the bill does not apply to the taxable 
Maine assets of a ﬁnancial institution. 
0 The bill should deﬁne a “producer cooperative ” or clarify whether it is the 
same as an “Agricultural Cooperative ” organized under l3 M.R.S., c. 85, 
sub-c. 2. 
0 The bill should clarify whether the exemption for interest received applies to 
interest received during the year of sale or whether the exemption applies to 
interest received over the life of the loan. 
The estimated revenue impact is a revenue loss of approximately $500,000 
per year.
2
i 
Assuming that the bill will be amended to extend the subtraction 
modiﬁcations to the ﬁduciary income tax, the estimated administrative costs are 
$77,000 for ﬁscal year 2025 for one-time computer programming to add two lines 
to each of the individual, ﬁduciary, and corporate income tax returns, and to add 
one line to the franchise tax return to accommodate the income subtraction 
modiﬁcations. 
A preliminary revenue estimate is an annual revenue loss of approximately 
$400-$500 thousand dollars. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
