 
  97 Main Street, Belfast, ME 04915                     207.338.6575                      mainefarmlandtrust.org  
 
 
Testimony of Shelley Megquier , Policy and Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust , before 
the 1 31st  Legislature’s  Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
April 1 3, 2023  
 
Good afternoon Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing  
Committee on Taxation . My name is Shelley Megquier , and I am testifying on behalf of Maine Farmland 
Trust (MFT ) in support of LD 1276 – An Act To Create and Sustain Jobs and Affordable Housing t hrough 
Development of Cooperatives and Employee -Owned Businesses.  
 
MFT is a member -powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support farmers, and 
advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has h elped to permanently protect 
more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. In 2022 alone, MFT 
supported 48 farm businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and grants – delivering over 680 
hours of technical assistance and $ 309,000 in business and seed grants to help businesses grow their 
profitability. Our main program areas are Farmland Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm 
Business Planning, PFAS Support, Climate Resilience, and Policy and Research.  
 
Protecting f armland in Maine is a principal part of our mission because we believe it is essential for 
ensuring that we have the land base to grow our agricultural economy, particularly as more farmers 
reach retirement age and development pressures increase across the  state. Protecting land is also a key 
natural climate solution by avoiding the greater emissions associated with developed land, by ensuring 
we have the farmland needed to support our local and regional food economy and create food security 
for our state, and by preserving the climate benefits that can result from farmers using climate -friendly 
practices on the land.   
 
Maine’s farmland is a precious and limited resource. According to the last USDA Census of Agriculture 
report, between 2012 and 2017 Maine lost 10% of its farmland – that is over 145,000 acres of 
pastureland, cropland, and woodland.1 This loss of farmland is troubling because farms provide many 
critical state and community benefits. Agriculture in Maine contributes over $3.6 billion in econom ic 
impact and supports over 27,000 jobs statewide according to an analysis by Farm Credit East.2 Access to 
farmland, whether to buy or lease, is becoming increasingly difficult for Maine farmers due to dramatic 
increases in land prices, a growing interest in farmland from non -farming buyers, the rapid pace of solar 
development on agricultural land across the state, and the PFAS (per - and polyfluoroalkyl substances) 
contamination of farmland.  A 2022 survey conducted by the National Young Farmers Coalition re vealed 
that finding affordable land to buy is the top challenge that young farmers face, and is an even greater 
challenge for farmers who identify as Black, Indigenous and People of Color  (BIPOC) . Over half of all 
respondents to this survey said they need more access to land, whether to buy or lease.3   
 
                                                 
1 In 2012, Maine had 1,454,104 acres in farmland, but by 2017 that number had dropped to 1,307,566 acres – a 
loss of 146,491 acres or 10% of Maine’s farmland. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), National 
Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) , U.S. Census of Agriculture for  2017 , Maine, 
https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2017/Full_Report/Volume_1,_Chapter_1_State_Level/Maine/
mev1.pdf.  
2 Farm Credit East, “Northeast Economic Engine: Agriculture, Forest Products and  Commercial Fishing ,” (2020), 
available at:  https://www.farmcrediteast.com/knowledge -
exchange/Reports/2020%20Northeast%20Economic%20Engine . 
3 National Young Farmers Coalition, Building a Future with Farmers 2022: Results and Recommendations from the 
National Young Farmers Survey . Available at: www.youngfarmers.org/22survey/    
Increasing farmland access by connecting farm land  owners with incoming farmers helps keep th e land in 
production, whether it be through a sa le, lease arrangement, or by support ing a farmer’s search  for 
land . Many of MFT’s programs  are focused on creating  access to farmland , including Maine  Farm Link, 
our Purchased Easement Program , our Buy/Protect/Sell program, and Farmland Access programming.  
But, if  we focus solely on private property ownership models and commercial agriculture then we  may  
fail to address the diverse needs of many farmers within Maine’s agricultural community, especially 
those who don’t currently own land, lack access to capital, or are interest ed in alternative ownership or 
production models. MFT firmly believes that many different types of tools are needed to overcome 
entry barriers and get more farmers on the land. Cooperative ownership is one of those important tools, 
and by incentivizing such owners hip, LD  1276  has the potential to be an import ant part of increasing 
access to farmland in Maine.  
 
Cooperative  ownership can provide a lot of important benefits to agricultural producers.  These benefits 
include:  
o Creating an economy of scale for smaller farms that allows them to access needed 
services or facilities, lower their costs, increase production to open new markets, 
generate more income , and increase access to capital ;  
o Sharing the cost s, burden, and risk of growing, marketing and distributing pr oducts;  
o Combining knowledge, skills, labor, and other supports;  and  
o Providing a longstanding vehicle to transition land, resources, and businesses among 
producers.4  
 
MFT has witnessed the benefits of cooperative ownership firsthand. New Roots Cooperative  Farm  is a 
producer cooperative founded by four graduates of Cultivating Community’s New American Sustainable 
Agriculture Program (NASAP). In January 2016 , MFT was able to help Ne w Roots find a 30 -acre parcel of 
the former Gendron Dairy Farm in Lewiston along with Cultivating Community, the Cooperative 
Development Institute, and Land for Good.  The four co -owners of New Roots incorporated as a 
cooperative to share land, markets, infrastructure, and resources, and this ownership structure has 
allowed them to successfully expand their operations.  The crops grown at New Roots Cooperative Farm 
go to six farmers ’ markets or the farm’s 250 CSA members, and three local food pantries. For many, New 
Roots Cooperative provide s often their only source of culturally fami liar food crops. With help from 
community members and fundraising partners, New Roots Cooperative purchased their farmland from 
MFT in 2022.  
 
Given the alarming trends around farmland loss  and barriers to accessing land , Maine needs as many 
tools as possible to ensure the transfer of land from one generation of farmers to the next . Doing so will 
ensure that farms continue to play an essential role in Maine by feeding our communities and 
stimulating our economy. LD 1276 provides important tax incentive s for establishing cooperatives like 
New Roots that will increase access to farmland and provide important economic, labor, marketing, and 
risk-sharing benefits.   
 
For all of these reasons, we hope that you will support LD 1276 to advance cooperative ownership 
models in Maine.    
 
                                                 
4 Faith Gilbert et al. (2014). Cooperative Farming: Frameworks for Far ming Together . A Greenhorns Guidebook. 
Retrieved from http://www.thegreenhorns.net/wp -
content/files_mf/1393438767FINAL_greenhorns_guidebook_PK2.pdf.   
