 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY , ESQ.  
 
Ought Not To Pass  – LD 1502  
 
An Act to Provide Consistency of Process for Maine’s Electoral Votes by 
Prohibiting Enactment of the National Popular Vote  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
 
May 17 , 2023 
 
Senator Hickman , Representative Supica , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning . My name is Meagan 
Sway , and I am Policy Director for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a 
statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties 
guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions through advocacy, education, and 
litigation. On behalf of our members, I urge you  to reject LD 1502 . 
 
If enacted, LD 1502 would prohibit Maine from joining the National Popular Vote 
Interstate  Compact so long as Maine still uses ranked  choice voting for any office in 
the state.  This would perpetuate use of the Electoral College, rather  than moving 
away from this outdated method of choosing the president  by undermining the 
principle of “one person one vote” . 
 
Alexander Hamilton  promoted the Electoral College in “Federalist 68” for deeply 
elitist reasons — he did not trust the “common people ” to select the president. Notes 
of the Constitutional Convention show the Electoral College’s unequal distribution 
of voting power was chosen  as part of a sordid bargain: Along with the 3/5 Clause, 
the Electoral College was part of a compromise to perpetuate the enslavement of 
people . States like Virginia wanted political influence commensurate with their 
total population even though they did n ot allow a large percentage of their 
population — enslaved people — to vote. Th e Electoral College is a  historical 
artifact  that should have gone the way of the 3/5 Clause.  
 
We hope Maine will soon adopt the National Popular Vote Compact  and commit the 
state’s electoral votes to the candidate for president who receives the most votes in 
the country. This compact would not go into effect until it has been adopted by 
enough states to collectively hold 270 electoral votes, a majority of the 538 electoral 
votes at stake in a presidential election.  
 
  
 
In our current electoral college system, a small number of voters — that is, voters in 
just a few states — are the ones whose votes truly matter in a presidential election. 
Voters in most states are on the sidelines, some of them writing checks, while 
candidates target their campaigns to the issues and concerns unique to only a few 
people in a few states. This is not how a democracy should function when selecting 
the highest leader in the land. Under national popular vote , each voter, in any 
state, would have an equal say — and equal sway — in electing the president.  
 
A national  popular vote  would give each citizen equal power in the election  by 
ensuring each vote has an equal impact , regardless of the state in which the  voter 
lives. Instead of voters in a few swing states deciding the outcome, candidates will 
need to speak  to – and listen to – all citizens throughout the country equally.  
 
Maine should join the National Popular Vote Interstate Compact , regardless of 
whether elected officials are chosen through a traditional plurality system or a 
ranked choice voting system. Ranked choice voting is also a system through which 
each person has one vote . Each voter is allowed to list their full preferences of who 
to vote for, but only gets one vote to do so.  As the Federal District Court of Maine 
stated  when evaluating this system , “‘one person, one vote ’ does not stand in 
opposition to ranked ba lloting, so long as all electors are treated equally at the 
ballot. ”1 
 
Our laws already provide for a way for the state to report the results of the popular 
vote when it comes to presidential elections: the Governor “shall send a certificate of 
the determ ination of the electors to the Archivist of the United States under state 
seal” and that the certificate “must state the names of the electors and the number 
of votes each candidate for President received statewide and for each congressional 
district in th e final round of tabulation under section 723 -A.”2 Ranked choice voting 
does not stand in the way of compliance with the National Popular Vote Interstate 
Compact.  
 
To give full meaning to the fundamental premise of democracy, that one person gets 
one vote, we should move away from the antiquated and obsolete  Electoral  College, 
not cling more fiercely to it. We urge you to vote ought not to pass on this 
legislation.  
 
 
1 Baber v. Dunlap , 376 F. Supp.3d 125, 140 (D. Me. 2018)   
2 29-A MRS §803  
