Testimony of Sean Parnell  
Senior Director, Save Our States Action  
 
to the  
 
Veter ans and Legal Affairs  Committee  
Maine Legislature  
 
Re: LD 1502  
An Act to Provide Consistency of Process for Maine ’s Electoral Votes by Pr ohibitin g 
Enactment of the National Pop ular Vote I ntersta te Compact  
 
May 17, 2023  
 
Chairman Hickman, Chairwoman Supica, pl ease accept my written testi mony on this legislation,  
which is offere d neither  in support of nor opposition to LD 1502 , but that I hope provides useful  
information  regarding this bill . 
 
LD 1502 proposes to bar the state of  Maine from enteri ng the National Popular Vote interstate 
compact (NPV) so long as the state uses ranked choice voting (RCV ) in a ny election. I would like 
to explain the key issue involved here , which is the problems that  Maine ’s use of  RCV would 
creat e for the operation of t he co mpact – regardless of whether  Maine is  or is not a member of  
the compact – should  NPV  ever go int o effect.  
 
RCV creates serious  problems for NPV because  the compact anticipates th at every  state will , at 
the end of the election , provide a single vote total  for each  pres idential slate , which can then be 
added into the national vote count . Under RCV, however, there are at least two vote totals for 
each p residential slate – an initial total of first r ound  votes, and then a final total, after the RCV 
process  has concluded . The compact does not provid e any guidance on which vote t otals are to 
be used  by member states  in determining the national vote count for each presidential slate , 
leaving it to the discr etion of each m ember s tate’s chief election offici al (typically, as in Maine, 
the Secreta ry of S tate).  Because the difference in first round and final round vote to tals can be 
in the tens or even hun dreds of thousands, in a close national election the choice of which vote 
totals are used in determining  the national vote count could determine the outcome under 
NPV.  
 
Lobbyists for NPV reject this analysis, claiming that Maine ’s law requiring that final -round vote 
totals appear on the state ’s Certificate of Ascertainment resolve this issue. What  this assertion 
ignores, however, is that Maine ’s law has no affect on the cho ice made by other  states that are 
in the compact . The chief election official  of another state is not req uired to obtain Maine ’s 
vote totals from the state ’s Certificate of Ascertainment  – the compact only requires that they 
obtain vote totals from an  “official statement ,” a term  that encompasses any number of other 
documents typically produced by states durin g the pos t-election tabulation and certification 
process. NPV Chairman and founder John Koza explained to the Connect icut legislature in 2014:  
 
“…the National Popular Vote Compact does not depend on any particular piece 
of paper … The “final determination” of a state’s presidential vote does not have 
to come in the form of the Certificate of Ascertainment. It could just as well be 
evidenced by, say, the offi cial minutes of the state board of canvassers or any 
other official document from the state containing the vote count.”1 
 
As part of the RCV process, Maine produces an “official state ment ” that includes both first -
round and final -round vote totals.  Maine ’s Secretary of State is required to  file with the 
Governor and make public  a report detailing vote totals for all ro unds ,2 as was done following  
the 2022 election in the state ’s 2nd Congres sional district.3 No law passed by Maine can direct 
the chief election  officer of another  state to prefer Main e’s Certificate of Ascertainment over 
this report or any ot her “official statement ” produced by M aine  when they gat her vote totals 
for inclu sion in the national vote count.  
 
One reason another  state ’s chief ele ction official might prefer to use the first -round results  
rather than those on the Cert ificate of Ascertainment would be  to avoid the erasure of 
hundreds of thous ands of votes  from the national vote count  in the event either the 
Democratic or Republican presidential slates finished behind an indep endent or th ird-party 
candid ate. For example, in 1992 Ross Perot finished in second place in Maine (and Utah), just 
ahead of Geo rge H . W. Bush. Had the state used RCV in that election, Bush ’s final vote total 
from Maine that year would have been 0, erasing more than 20 6,000 vote s from his national 
vote co unt.  
 
1 Koza, John. “Answers to Questions about Presidential Vote Counting and the National Popular Vote Bill ,” 
February 2014. Available upon requ est. 
2 Under rules adopted by the Maine Secretary of S tate in 2018, initial, final, and any intermediate vote 
totals are to be reported to the Governor and made publicly available  following the e lection.   Section 6, 
subsection 4, “Rules Governing the Administration of Elections Determined by Ranked Choice Voting .” 
Available at https://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/elec/upcoming/pdf/250c535 -2018 -230-complete.pdf.  
3 The 2022 report to Maine ’s gover nor for the 2nd Congressional district race , which includes both initial 
and final vote totals, is available at: 
https://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/elec/results/2022/Rep%20to%20Congress%20Dist%202%20RCV%20res
ults.pdf  
 
Finally, I will note that lobbyists for NPV claim that it’s not possible for there to be any conflict  
between the compact and RCV  because the nation ’s leadin g proponent  of RCV  (Rob Richie, president 
of FairVote) helped write the compact. This ignores a 2021 paper  on this issue that R ichie served as 
the lead author o f, which noted : 
 
“…as currently drafted, the [NPV compact] seems to assume a plurality system…. 
[U]sing RCV for Presidential elections in states might seem incompatible with 
[NPV]. Most fundamentally, which votes should be reported out for the purpose 
of [NPV]? Wou ld it be the first choices among all the candidates? Or would it be 
the final “instant runoff” totals after the RCV tallies are completed? If that latter 
choice were made, what if one of the two strongest national candidates was 
eliminated during the RCV t ally in a given state? ”4 
  
That paper came out in August 2021, months  after Maine changed its law regarding what 
information is to be reported on its Certificate of Ascertainment in an unsuccessful effort  to 
address the problem . Other  leaders in the area of alter nativ es to plurality voting have  also 
noted the conflict. For example, Dr. Warren D. Smith of the Center for Range Voting warns that 
there will be  a “train wreck ” if any state uses RCV while NPV  is in effect  and observes  “Different 
kinds of voting systems in different states simply were not designed to be agglomerated to yield  
one overall "popul ar vote winner "”5 Other experts in alternatives to p lurality voting have 
offered similar c riticisms.6  
 
While there may have been some recognition by the drafters of the compact that some states 
in the future may use RCV or other forms of non -plurality voting , the fact is that NPV as written 
does not adequately address the issue , which I hope you will keep in mind as you consi der LD 
1502 . I am happy to provide additional  information on this or any related topic , and I can be 
reached at (571) 289 -1374 or s ean@saveourstates.com . Thank y ou. 
 
 
  
 
4 “Toward a More Perfect Union: Integrating Ranked Choice Voting with the National Popular Vote 
Interstate Compact ,”4 p. 15 9. Available at: https://harvardlpr.com/wp -
content/uploads/sites/20/2021/08/HLP106.pd f 
5 “Warning! Voting reform trainwreck approaching – need to act now to avoid the p roblem ” available at: 
https://www.rangevoting.org/NPVtrainwreck.html  
6 See:  “Voting Reform Community Sees Major Problem with National Popu lar Vote, ” January 2023. A vailable at: 
https://saveourstates.com/blog/voting -reform -community -sees -major -problem -with -national -popular -vote  
