MWUA Mame Water Utilities Association '
' ~ ‘“ Organized 1925 
_ 15 University Drive 
AP1‘11 12, 2023 Augusta, Maine 04330 
207-623-951 1 
Honorable Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Honorable Stanley Zeigler House Chair 
J o1nt Legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, MB 04333 
Re: Testimony in Opposition to LD 1452, An Act to require the commissioners of the public utilities 
commission to be popularly elected 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony in 
Qpgsm l to LD 1452 which would require commissioners of the Public Utilities Commission 
(Commission or PUC) to be popularly elected. The work of the commissioners is described by statute 
and is “quasi-judicial ” in nature. Politicizing the process by which commissioners are established would 
undermine the fotmdation of the Commission itself, an institution that was deliberately structured to be 
nonpartisan and nonpolitical, and more importantly, judicial in nature. 
About MWUA. MWUA is a nonproﬁt association based in Augusta that provides support for water 
works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water through 
educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The 
Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
Discussion. Ultimately, the Commission ’s work is quasi-judicial in nature. The rules of practice which 
surround Commission proceedings are there to create an evidentiary record governed by due process 
protections which are intended to ultimately inform ﬁnal Commission orders. This work is highly 
technical and demands neutrality and faimess. For this reason, Maine’s PUC commissioners are 
appointed to 6-year, staggered terms where they are nominated and conﬁnned for their technical 
background and largely insulated from politics. 
Maine’s Judicial Branch is also largely insulated from politics. Judges in Maine are nominated by the 
Governor for 7-year terms, and subject to conﬁnnation. This system has worked well to ensure highly 
competent judges as well as fairness in judicial decision-making. 
LD 1425 would change the system into one where PUC commissioners are elected. This proposal cuts 
against the quasi-judicial role of commissioners by requiring commissioners to engage in the political 
campaign necessity of raising campaign dollars and rurming a successful election campaign. Imagine 
commissioners having to ask for political contributions or lawn sign locations or running TV ads. Special 
interest groups could engage in independent expenditures to elect a commissioner hoping a sympathetic 
commissioner will decide cases to their advantage. Once a successful election is concluded, the newly- 
elected commissioner would be expected to sit as an impartial decision maker over hundreds of oases, 
including cases that could include political contributors on one or both sides of an issue. Will these 
decisions be fair? Will the public question the integrity of the Commission?
'
1 
Letter from MWUA re LD 1452 
April 12, 2023 
Page2 
While there are some states that have popularly-elected public utility commissioners, these states are in 
the minority. Most states have systems like Maine where commissioners are appointed, not elected. The State of New Mexico, recently passed a constitutional referendum to end their elected commission and move to a model of three Commissioners on staggered terms which are nominated by the Governor and conﬁrmed by the state senate. New Mexico’s new model is now similar to Maine’s existing model. 
Maine’s system for appointing Commissioners to 6-year terms. where the service period runs independent of elections. is a model for a transparent, evidentiary record based, decision process. Such a process 
supports stable, long-term investment horizons to ensure adequate infrastructure and just and reasonable 
rates for utility consumers. The election process would signiﬁcantly increase the political aspects ofa 
commissioner ’s work and add signiﬁcant questions around the transparency of proceedings. 
LD 1452 removes the review and conﬁrmation process, as an elected ofﬁcial is not subject to sucha 
review. Consequently, elected commissioners may not have the technical or legal credentials 
commissioners have generally brought to the Commission in the past. 
The work of the PUC is technical and judicial in nature which necessitates commissioners be both 
qualiﬁed and behave in a nonpartisan manner to effectively carry out their statutory duties. The 
Commission does not have the ability to arbitrarily set policy in Maine; it is a judicial body that 
implements policies put forth in Title 35-A of Maine Statutes and regulates utilities in accordance with 
that Title as per §103. Policy generally comes from the elected members of the Maine Legislature, and in 
particular the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee of the Legislature, who can pass laws and 
substantive regulations directing Maine public policy. 
In addition, the bill is silent on many details that would need to be worked through regarding the 
particular procedmes and costs that would accompany elections. There is a cost associated with running 
elections which would be incurred by making the commissioners an elected ofﬁce. Finally, there would 
be additional costs associated with election campaigns and contributions to those campaigns. 
Conclusion. It is not clear what problem LD 1452 intends to ﬁx by making the commissioner rolea 
publicly elected position. Instead, the proposal raises concerns around the “quasi-judicial ” function of the 
Commission, which seems to align the Commission more with the Judicial appointment process than it 
does with the elected nature of the Legislature. 
We urge the committee to vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 1452. 
Thank you for 
yﬁur consideration, 
ce Berger, 
Executive Director, Maine ater Utilities Association 
cc: James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
