STA'l‘E 011 MAINE 
()FFi(1E or "rm; Goyﬁmsou 
.; ISTATE Htwsn S'l‘A'I‘i()N 
AUGUSTA, lV1Ai:\iE _;»-- j-»_-* 
. 
04335-0001 
JANET IVIILLS DAN BURGESS 
GOVI-3R;\iOR DIRECTOR or GOVERNOR'S 
E;\‘ERGY QFEICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act to Require the Commissioners of the Public Utilities Commission to Be Popularly 
Elected 
L.D. 1452 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and I am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governors Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in opposition to L.D. 1452. 
Current state law (Sec. 2. 35-A MRSA §105) directs the Governor to appoint the three members of the 
Public Utilities Commission, with review by the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 
jurisdiction over public utilities and confirmation by the Legislature. The proposed bill would, instead, 
have Commissioners elected by popular election on the general election date in November. 
State utility commissions, such as the Maine Public Utilities Commission, are quasi-judicial agencies that 
were created to regulate and oversee the rates charged by electric, gas, water, and telephone utilities. 
The Commission adjudicates cases, can subpoena witnesses and records, issues decisions and orders, 
initiatives investigations and rulemakings, and responds to legislative directives. Thirty-five state utility 
agencies across the country have governor-appointed Commissioners; Commissioners in Washington, 
D.C. are selected by the mayor. At the federal level, the U.S. president selects the members of the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, which plays a similar role. 
Energy markets and operations are notoriously complicated, and quickly evolving. The average American 
spends only minutes a year thinking about electricity? A popular election best lends itself to popular 
outcomes when the average voter can clearly understand differences between candidates and positions. 
Additionally, in the case of Public Utilities Commissioners, candidates that campaign on a particular 
point of view regarding utilities or with a promised outcome regarding rates may not result in a judicious 
Commission that can reliably set standards for utility service, operations, and reliability, or convey 
regulatory certainty to utilities. 
The GEO strongly recommends against this shakeup to the Commission's structure, but encourages 
continued strengthening of opportunities and access for affected parties to participate directly or to 
ensure a unique viewpoint is represented in cases of interest before the Commission. 
I 
https:/iwww.greentechmediacomlarticlesfreadfcustomers~spend-8~minutes-a-vear-interacting-online-with-them 
utiligl - S " '
1
5 
é
=
s
2
A
5
3
1
2
x
I 
i Thank you for your consideration. 
Cnuh-¢-C¢4~\ Caroline Coian, Legislative Liaison 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
