CORNERSTONE 4“-W AN EMPLOYEE--OWNED COMPANYM jjjjjjj ~~ 
April 12, 2023 ~ 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Chair 
Representative Paige Ziegler, Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in opposition to LD 1452, “An Act to Require the Commissioners of the 
Public Utilities Commission to Be Popularly Elected” 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee: 
My name is Jeremy Payne and I am a principal with Cornerstone Government Affairs Group 
here to testify in opposition to LD 1452 on behalf of our client the Maine Renewable Energy 
Association (“MREA”). 
As this committee knows, the Maine Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”) is charged with 
regulating electric, natural gas, telecommunications and water utilities operating in the state, 
which leads to oversight for more than 400 companies and districts. The regulation of these 
industries is overseen by three commissioners with the assistance of dozens of professional staff. 
The three commissioners are nominated by the governor, considered by this committee, and 
ultimately confirmed by the entire Maine Senate. They serve staggered terms of six years. 
The PUC’s role is vitally important to Maine consumers and regulated industries, and has long 
been shielded from traditional political campaigns. We believe that separation should remain— 
and the duly elected governor should be able to nominate his/her candidates for the legislature ’s 
consideration and review. If these roles were to become entrenched in typical campaigning, we 
may lose out on highly qualified individuals willing to serve in these roles. Notably, other state 
agencies do not have their commissioners elected either, and we also believe that is in the 
public’s interest. 
While other states may choose to politicize their regulatory agencies and individuals to ﬁll those 
leadership roles, the State of Maine has not and we believe that has served this state well. 
We respectfully urge you to vote ought not to pass. 
Thank you. 
V\'VVVV.CGAGROUP.COM I §;,;;;*@CGAGllOUl ’
