it e 
Richard A. Bennett‘ 
.3 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 18 Augusta, Maine 04333 ~ 1 
THE MAINE SENATE 
l3 lst Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard Bennett 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
LD 1452, “An Act to Require the Commissioners of the Public Utilities Commission to Be 
Popularly Elected” 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology: I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, andI 
have the honor of serving 14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate. I am pleased to 
introduce LD 1452, “An Act to Require the Commissioners of the Public Utilities Commission 
to Be Popularly Elected. ” 
Maine’s Public Utilities Commission (PUC) is meant to serve as the body of oversight when it 
comes to utility providers. This is necessary because utilities are granted a monopoly in their 
service areas. The PUC is needed to ensure companies do not abuse this monopoly. More than 
ever, our electricity supply, transmission and distribution and our informational networks 
overseen by the PUC are existential to our economy and critical to the lives and livelihoods of 
Maine people. In my opinion, We need a new model. 
I believe electing the members of the PUC Will add a new level of accountability to the Maine 
people. Rates have continued to rise since the pandemic and customer satisfaction is at an all- 
time low when it comes to Maine’s electricity providers. Countless constituents have reached 
out to me for answers. They Want additional oversight, and they Want decision makers to be held 
accountable. Having an elected PUC will lead to better public understanding of the issues and 
nuances relating to our electricity and other utilities. 
Public Utility Commissioners are elected in many other states including, Nebraska, Montana, 
Arizona, Georgia, Louisiana and others. I believe Maine should join those states. 
A November 2022 article written by Miguel Suazo, a lawyer with the ﬁrm Husch Blackwell, 
states, “Generally, appointed commissioners enact regulatory policy that tends to favor 
industry stakeholders. On the other hand, elected public utility commissioners tend to enact 
policies that favor consumers. For example, residential prices trend signiﬁcantly lower in 
states with elected regulators. ” 
https://www.jdsupracom/legalnews/from-elected-to-appointed-new-mexico-9917065; ’ 
The speciﬁcity of this proposal should not obscure the larger question at stake. I invite the 
committee to use this bill as a means of engaging in the broader conversation about how to 
enhance accountability at the PUC. I’m sure each of you have your own ideas. 
Fax: (207)287-1527 * IT l’ (207) 287-1583 * Message Service 1-800-423-6900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
