101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333- 0101  
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec ; tel. 2 07-624-7736 
  
       
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY  
 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows , Secretary of State  
Department of the Secretary of State  
April 12, 2023 
 
Testifying Neither For Nor Against  
  
L.D. 1452 “ An Act to Require the Commissioners of the Public Utilities Commission  
to Be Popularly Elected ” 
 Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology, my name is Shenna Bellows , and I am the Secretary of State and the S tate’s 
chief elections officer . I am speaking neither for nor against LD 1452, but wish to provide the 
committee with information regarding elections and the process for electing a statewide official.
 
 The bill, in lines 18 and 19, provides that “The 3 members of the Public Utilities Commission are elected by popular election on the general election dat e in November.”   Title 21 -A, Maine Law on 
Elections” §1(19) defines this term:  “General election” means the regular election of state and county officials occurring biennially in November.”  Therefore, a general election occurs only in an even-number yea r.  Section 3 of this bill, which establishes staggered terms for the 3 commissioner states, in 
part “the 3 members of the Public Utilities Commission elected in November 2023… (emphasis added).  This conflict regarding when an election will be held to ele ct the commissioners  must be 
resolved if the Legislature decides to move forward with this proposal.  Currently no federal, state or county officials are elected in the odd- year elections.  Although a referendum election usually is held 
in November of the odd -year, there is no statutory requirement to do so and an election would not be 
conducted if no statewide ballot measure is scheduled of be vote d upon.  
 If it is determined that the commissioners will be popularly elected, rather than appointed, we have identified some additional questions that should be considered before adding this office to a statewide ballot:  
• Will th is office be elected through a partisan primary election process (i.e., nominations  made 
the primary election) or through a purely non -partisan process with candidates only appearing 
on the General Election ballot?  
• How many signatures will a candidate for PUC C ommissioner be required to file with the 
Secretary of State to gain ballot access?  Currently, a candidate seeking a statewide office, such as Governor or U.S. Senator, needs  to file at least 2,000 signatures for a party candidate 
and 4,000 signatures for a non- party candidate.  
 
 
Shenna Bellows  
Secretary of State  Department of the Secretary of State  
 
Bureau of Corporations, Elections and Commissions  
 
 
 
Julie L. Flynn Deputy Secretary of State  
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333- 0101  
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec ; tel. 2 07-624-7736 
 • Are there any additional requirements for commissioners  – e.g., age, educational requirement 
or residency status ? 
• Will candidates for PUC Commissioner be eligible to receive Clean Election funding or 
comply with other campaign spending and reporting laws?  
 Clarification on the conduct of the initial election for commissioners  may also be required. Section 3 of 
the bill provides that the 3 initially elected commissioners would draw lots to decide which member serves a 2 -year term, which member serves a 4 -year term and which member serves a 6 -year term.  
Although it appears that the bill intends to create 3 separate offices, for this first election, would all candidates appear under the same office heading and voters would be allowed to vote for up to 3 candidates?  Would the top three vote getters be elected?  All other officers that appear on statewide ballots allow a voter to make only one selection.  Finally, if the Legislature determines that PUC Commissioners will be elected, the office and process should be added to Title 21- A so that state and local election officials will be aware of the procedures. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
