TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 482 
”An Act to Extend the Time for Youth Deer Hunting" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative WOODSOME of Waterboro 
Cosponsored by Representatives: LANDRY of Farmington, THORNE of Carmel, Senator: 
LaFOUNTAlN of Kennebec. 
DATE OF HEARING: March 27, Z023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Jim Connolly, Resource Management Director at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in 
opposition to L.D. 482. 
This bill changes youth deer hunting day to a 6-day hunting period beginning 7 days before the 
start of the regular deer hunting season. 
The Department recognizes the need to attract and retain youth hunters and while sales of 
youth hunting licenses are on the rise (we have an almost 50% increase 9,200 licenses), we do 
know that youth today have many competing interests and demands on their time. Currently, 
youth are afforded special hunting days for deer, bear, turkey and waterfowl. These days 
typically occur on a Saturday prior to the opening of the regular hunting season for these 
species. This gives youth hunters an opportunity to hunt without competition from other 
hunters. On youth deer day all youth are allowed to take one deer of either sex in any WMD 
where antlerless permits are issued with a firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow. in addition to 
youth days, currently youth deer hunters are allotted 25% of all any deer permits in a WMD 
where any deer permits are issued. This provides significant opportunity for youth hunters to 
have a meaningful and productive hunting experience. 
As you have heard many times this session, Maine's deer population is a fixed size; there area 
definite number of deer living in Maine. The size of Maine's deer population is regulated, in part, 
by the number of doe deer killed by the various forms of hunting. The Department attempts to 
control the number of doe deer killed in each Wildlife Management District within a range that 
will allow the Department to meet its deer population management objectives throughout the 
state. This means that in each Wildlife Management Districts (WM Ds) only a specific number of 
doe deer can be killed by all means of deer hunting. If this number is exceeded, the deer 
population will decline. We are concerned that in some WMDs, allowing youth to hunt deer for 
6 days may result in an excessive harvest of antlerless deer and negatively impact opportunities 
for other hunters. The Department would have to reduce the permits available to other 
hunters if this proposal were passed into law.
This bill doesn't limit where the antlerless deer may be taken so it is possible that in WMDs 
where antlerless permits have been limited or eliminated that harvest objectives will be 
exceeded. This would prevent the Department from achieving the publicly derived population 
goals within the deer management system. 
Providing new or additional opportunity to any group either in days of participation or allowable 
harvest through additional permits will always result in less opportunity for others. While that 
may be seen as a worthy goal by that group, in every case it will result in a reduction of 
opportunity or harvest by another group. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
