 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1301, An Act Regarding Transition Coordination, Prisoner Attendance at Funerals, Furloughs, 
Visitation, Education and Discretionary Accounts at County Jails 
 
April 10, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in qualified support of LD 1301. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  Among other things, LD 1301 requires county jails to employ a “transition coordinator” who is 
responsible for creating a transition plan for each inmate scheduled for release. Our Association supports the 
important goal of ensuring that incarcerated persons re-enter society as contributing and productive members 
upon their release and believe that having a transition plan for each inmate could assist them with that transition.  
 
At the same time, LD 1301 presents a new expense for counties to incur. Thus, while we are not opposed to 
implementing such a position in our county jails, it is not clear that this transition function is one to be 
undertaken by county jails as opposed to other social service organizations on the state or local level. If the 
Legislature determines that such services should be provided directly by county jails, it would be a local 
“mandate” and the Legislature would need to provide the necessary funding to employ and administer such 
transition coordinators. To the extent that the Legislature is willing to provide such funding to prohibit 
additional costs from falling on counties, we would have no objections and believe such a service could be 
valuable. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
