Maine Community £3 College System 
OFFICE 0F THE PRESIDENT 
323 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330-7131 
(207) 629-4000 I Fax (207) 629-4048 I mccs.me.edu 
TO: Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
FROM: David Daigler, President 
RE: Testimony in opposition to LD 174, An Act to Return the Name of the Maine 
Community College System to the Maine Technical College System 
DATE: February 7, 2023 
‘4-I»€p‘iw'»“iIt. *.i’.'?'.' t ::=‘.:“».‘-—'2’:.“ t_'i* .“‘J-I|HwtwC.*7ti;::,";;:-3 '-Zi:u' r‘."‘7 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs. I am David Daigler, the President of the Maine Community College System. I am 
testifying on behalf of the Maine Community College System and our Trustees in opposition to LD 174, 
An Act to Return the Name of the Maine Community College System to the Maine Technical College 
System. 
Almost exactly 20 years ago, my predecessor, President John Fitzsimmons stood before this same 
committee asking your predecessors (and then Senator Brennan) to bring Maine into alignment with 
most two-year colleges in the country and to respond to statewide concerns about the lack of affordable, 
local access to higher education. The bill had ll7 co-sponsors. The then-Senate President, Hon. Beverly 
Daggett, stated “I truly believe that the bill before us today is landmark legislation — one that has the 
potential to help thousands of citizens, in this and future generations, improve their lives and reach their 
dreams.” Representative Pat Colwell, Speaker of the House at the time, stated that, “In short, 
implementing a true community college system is an essential step in increasing higher education 
attaimnent. ” 
In 2003, Maine was one of the last states in the nation to offer its citizens access to community college. I 
would not want to reverse course now and leave Maine without a true community college system. 
Since becoming a community college system, MCCS has expanded its offerings and the people have 
signaled their support with their feet: Enrollment in the seven colleges has increased 66% since 2002, to 
16,791 in the fall of 2022. Over the years, well over 100,000 more people have pursued an education 
who may not have, had we never changed. 
In that time, Maine’s community colleges have never abandoned the trades and have grown scores of 
career and occupational programs aimed at helping students ﬁnd good jobs in the Maine economy. We 
proudly promote and develop our career and occupational programs — what most would consider 
“technical programs. ” Clearly the message is getting out — 80 percent of our degree-seeking students are 
enrolled in career and occupational programs. The rest, however, are focused on completing an 
affordable ﬁrst two years of college and then transferring to a four-year college. We offer two-year 
degrees, one-year certificates, advanced certiﬁcates, and short-terrn training in those career and 
occupational programs — and we also offer associate degrees in liberal arts and sciences for students who 
want a smart, affordable, and convenient start to a four-year degree.
But We are responsive to the needs of our entire communities — not just our students. We work closely 
with the businesses that hire our students and the colleges who accept them. Maine employers 
increasingly seek us out to give their incumbent employees skills beyond simply technical proﬁciency. 
They depend on us to give their employees skills in written and oral communication, team building, and 
so much more. Skills to both grow their business and the careers of their employees. 
At this point, the word “community ” is baked into our very identity. Returning to the narrow offerings 
of a technical college would be to reverse that growth, limit those opportunities, and shrink our colleges 
to a smaller version of ourselves. That’s the opposite of what Maine needs right now. 
Last year, the l30“‘ legislature made a landmark commitment, investing $20 million in Free Community 
College to make college tuition-free for high school graduates from the classes of ’20, ’2l, ’22, and ’23. 
That investment has brought students who had stepped away from college back into our classrooms and 
been so successful that the Governor has proposed extending it for two more years. Some members of 
this Committee and others in the legislature have offered similar proposals. Changing the name of the 
institution they attend will result in confusion and negatively impact future enrollments, especially the 
enrollments of students with ambitions to transfer to four-year institutions, like those in the University of 
Maine System. 
There were a lot of hopes and dreams pinned to What may have seemed like a simple change in our 
name 20 years ago, and it is my strong belief that, by becoming Maine’s community colleges, we have 
accomplished all that business leaders, policy makers, students and our dedicated staff had hoped for. 
All while staying true to our original mission and supporting Maine’s heritage industries -- offering 
technical skills to those in the trades. Since 2003, a lot has changed, but what has remained the same is 
our commitment to serving our communities and the students of Maine. Why would we want to reverse 
the accomplishments of the last 20 years? 
Thank you and I am happy to answer your questions.
