POSITION STATEMENT lN SUPPORT 
LD 997 Resolve, to Reduce Workforce Barriers for Mental Health Professionals in Maine 
Presented to Maine's Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state's largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of Resolve, to Reduce Workforce Barriers for Mental Health Professionals in Maine. NAMI Maine 
advocates strongly to provide mental health services to the 1 in 4 Mainers who are affected by a mental 
health challenge. We also support work to increase the capabilities ofthe state to meet the needs of all 
community members. 
Prior to the occurrence of COVID-19, Maine was unfortunately already recognized nationally as havinga 
critical shortage of mental health providers. Since the onset of the pandemic, the shortage has grown. 
The Health Resources and Services Administration, as well as Mental Health America, identify Maine as 
having significant deficits in the mental health workforce at many levels. By providing an alteration to 
the guidelines, we will be able to welcome many of our young people back to the state after receiving 
degrees in the mental health field. lt will allow students who attended private institutions to join the 
mental health field with minimal barriers. Although it is imperative, we ensure that professionals 
working with our most vulnerable individuals are appropriately trained and qualified, the current 
qualifications and certifications create undue barriers to those who may want to enter the field. 
NAMI Maine recommends that this committee continues to increase the opportunities and the 
pathways into the mental health field. Maine has developed strong technical programs, both within the 
community college system, as well as the high school training pathways. As a state, we have increased 
the abilities for young people to achieve EMS certifications, Certified Nurses Assistants training, as well 
as other state certification trainings. Providing mental health training opportunities for certifications 
would match the mental health field with other professions. Additionally, developing a pathway for 
training within technical schools would increase the understanding and abilities of the young people of 
our state in initiating professional work within this field and establishing a future for an ever-depleting 
career choice. 
NAMI Maine supports the work and initiatives of this committee in ensuring that critical resources and 
services are provided throughout the state. The creation ofa robust workforce and reducing the barriers 
to working in a rewarding, although challenging field, will increase the ability to support our 
communities. 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the NatianalAlliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) is the state's largest grassroots 
mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone 
impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state's mental 
health system through collaboration and education. 
LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
Programs www.namimaineorg/advocacy 
(207)622-5767 O HannahL@namimaine.org
