U N |\[ER$|‘|'Y QF Catherme E Cutler Institute 
12 East Chestnut St, Augusta, ME 04330 
N M N E (201)626-5200, FAX (207) s2e»5o22, TW (207) 625-5282 
S 0 www.usm.maine.edu/cutIer/ 
Testimony on Behalf of the University of Southern Maine Catherine Cutler Institute 
Presented by Jeanne Hackett, Policy Associate II 
Regarding LD 997, Resolve, to Reduce Workforce Barriers for Mental Health Professionals 
in Maine 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services: My name is Jeanne Hackett, and I am a Policy Associate II at the 
University of Southern Maine Catherine Cutler Institute. Prior to joining USM, I worked at the 
Co-Occurring Collaborative Serving Maine, facilitating professional development programs for 
the behavioral health workforce. My background also includes working as a licensed clinician at 
Jackson Brook Institute, now called Spring Harbor, treating individuals diagnosed with 
substance use and co-occurring disorders. 
As part of the Maine Behavioral Health Workforce Development Collaborative, my team and I at 
USM administer the mental health certiﬁcation programs on behalf of the Maine Ofﬁce of 
Behavioral Health (OBH) including Mental Health Rehabilitation Technician (or MHRT) I, 
MHRT/Community, MHRT/Crisis Service Provider, as well as the Mental Health Support 
Specialist training program. We also support OBH with the Certiﬁed Intentional Peer Support 
Specialist certiﬁcation program. 
It is with this expertise I am here to inform your consideration of LD 997, which affects the 
MHRT/Community certiﬁcation and as proposed, could unintentionally create barriers to 
certiﬁcation. The MHRT/ C is a knowledge competency and skills-based role, and since 
November 2021, when pathways to this certiﬁcation were updated, 288 full MHRT/C certiﬁcates 
were issued to applicants with a four-year or higher mental health related degree, enabling them 
to enter the workforce as an MHRT/C. If LD 997 had been in effect, during that time only 63 
applicants would have been eligible for certiﬁcation. I will clarify this later in my testimony but 
would ﬁrst like to provide important background on the current MHRT/C certiﬁcation process. 
There are eight competency domains an applicant must satisfy to earn the MHRT/C. These were 
developed during a years-long stakeholder process when OBH initiated a program update that 
was inclusive of providers, service recipients, academics, community members and the 
Department. The ﬁrst three domains (which include behavioral, psychological, and rehabilitation 
models; community integration and inclusion; and ethics and professional boundaries) are 
considered priorities for an individual to provide services as outlined in Chapter II, Section 17, 
Community Support Services; Section 65, Behavioral Health Services; and Section 92 
Behavioral Health Home Services. 
Presently, there are three pathways to MHRT/C certiﬁcation. 
Pathway A — Hold a degree or certiﬁcate from an approved academic program. There are 
currently 33 programs throughout Maine that have aligned their courses to cover the eight 
A member of the University of Maine System
competency domains. The applicants receive a two-year full MHRT/C certiﬁcate, 
renewable with continuing education. 
Pathway B — This is the pathway affected by LD 997. Hold a four-year or higher social 
services related degree or be a licensed social worker. The individual receives a full 
MHRT/C certiﬁcate. We conduct a thorough transcript analysis and if there are missing 
domains, the individual has two years to complete them while being employed, if 
possible. They must complete half of the requirements in the ﬁrst year, and the remaining 
in year two. They might not have any requirements completed with their degree, yet they 
will obtain a certiﬁcate. 
Pathway C — There are several entry points to receive a two-year provisional certiﬁcate 
and as in Pathway B, applicants have two years to complete the domain requirements. 
1. Hold a two~year social services-related degree 
2. Have 30 social services-related academic credits 
3. Hold a four-year unrelated degree 
4. OR Have l2 months of related adult behavioral health direct service 
experience. 
LD 997 proposes an applicant on Pathway B complete the three priority domains before 
becoming certiﬁed. The reason only 63 individuals would have been certiﬁed under this 
requirement is because we know from experience that the other 225 applicants would not have 
met the priority domains with their degrees alone. The current system enables an applicant to 
become certiﬁed without meeting any of the eight domains at the time of their application, and 
again, is given two years to complete the gap areas. 
Additionally, LD 997 proposes to eliminate remaining domain requirements that address trauma- 
inforrned care, policy knowledge, substance use, co-occurring disorders and recovery, cultural 
competence, and vocational support. Service recipients are living with serious mental illness and 
deserve competent qualiﬁed professional care. Training in these essential areas also beneﬁts the 
workers. Allowing staff to begin working, while at the same time receive training, ongoing 
support and supervision, and the opportunity for collaboration with peers, would likely improve 
retention in those ﬁrst two years of employment. 
We know that many mental health related degrees do not cover some of the key areas mentioned 
above. Also, it’s not unusual for someone with a degree to have additional requirements to 
become certiﬁed in their profession, such as nurses, clinicians, social workers, attorneys, etc. 
There are several options for individuals to complete the 30-hour domain requirements. 
1. Complete an academic course. 
2. Complete a non-academic course or training. 
3. Or use related work experience. An individual can Waive up to four domains 
with experience in adult behavioral health services. 
To make non-academic training more accessible to applicants who hold a degree or choose not to 
take academic courses, OBH funded the development of a 30-hour course for each of the eight
domains. Qualiﬁed trainers, mostly from provider agencies around the state, participated ina 
train-the-trainer session to become approved to teach the courses. There was no fee for these 
trainers to obtain and teach the curriculum. Currently there are 37 instructors. Ideally, providers 
with an approved trainer can offer these courses to their staff for no fee. 
Healthcare Training for ME is another initiative recently developed to help applicants obtain no 
cost training for MHRT certiﬁcation. There is an application process through their website. 
Additionally, some of the community colleges are offering courses at no cost for students to earn 
their MHRT/C certiﬁcation. 
In closing, I hope this illustrates a robust program designed to be accessible to a variety of 
applicants with a range of qualiﬁcations. LD 997 would not only enable untrained staff to work 
with Maine’s most vulnerable citizens, but it would create a disparity with the hundreds of 
MHRT/Cs who have demonstrated and continue to work towards competency in essential areas. 
Thank you for your consideration.
