295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
          
Testimony in Support of  LD 997 
“Resolve, to Reduce Workforce Barriers for Mental Health 
Professionals in Maine ” 
Sponsored by Representative Salisbury   
April 10, 2023 
 
Good morning  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyers, and esteemed members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services.  I am Malory Shaughnessy, a 
resident of Westbrook, and the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and 
Mental Health Services. Please accept this testimony on behalf of the Alli ance in support 
of LD 997. We thank Representative Salisbury for bringing forth this legislation once again.  
 
LD 997 addresses two consta nt barriers to hiring workforce for Maine ’s community 
mental health services. The first pa rt is designed to  align the requirements of becom ing 
a behavioral health professional  (or a BHP) across the different MaineCare services or 
programs. There are very  different requirements for these same positions across 
different sections  and programs within MaineCare Section 65 and Section 28 .  It simply 
adds complexity, creates a barrier to hiring and retaining staff, and does not make sense.  
 
Many providers that hire BHPs offer several of these services and it would ease staffing 
concerns if these BHPs could work within all programs. It would allow a provider to offer 
a fulltime position which many people are seeking. It also enables movement o f these 
staff when other  staff are out due to vacations or sickness .  
 
There is really no reason to continue to have different requirements as the work 
conducted is basically the same across these services. A BHP should be a BHP no matter 
where they work.  
 
Currently, the dashboard for children’s  behavioral health  services shows that Section 65 
Home and Community Therapy still has over  600 children o n waitlists with an average of 
6 to 8 months wait time in some  counties. One of the reasons for this growing waitlist 
was due to stagnant reimbursement rates (something which is being addressed w ith the 
new rate reform process ), but it is also due to this barrier and the i nability to hire BHPs to 
work in multiple services.  Providers across the state are also seeing turnover rates with 
these direct care essential workers of 40 -50%, and many positions advertised remain 
vacant for months to sometimes over a year.  
 
Anything w e can do to improve this situation, without reducing effectiveness of the 
programs is needed.   All of these direct care workers already have to  begin within 30 
days of hire  the specific training to become a BHP .  The curriculum overview  is on the 
following  page s.  
 
On the last pages of my testimony I have included the various different requirements 
currently to become a BHP  depending on the program .  I am also including a timeline of 
the changes to the BHP program over the years. It is important to note that in 2018 , the 
28-hour S chool Based BHP curriculum and the 35 -hour BHP curriculum were merged 
into one course and  certificate for all BHPs , regardless of the setting they are working in .  
This bill will help the rules catch up  to this merger .  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
The second barrier to hiring workforce for Maine ’s community -based agencies lies in the process to be certified 
as a Mental  Health Rehabilitation T echnician/Community Certification, or a MHRT/C.  
 
In the last session, Representative Melanie Sachs ’ bill, LD 504 , was passed. The f inal language was that “no later 
than October 1, 2021,  the Department of Health and Human Services shall amend its guidelines for the 
mental health rehabilitation technician/community certification, also known as an MHRT/C certification, 
in order to allow an individual who has completed a 4 -year postsecondary  educational degree program in 
a mental health -related field or obtained a graduate degree in a mental health -related field to receive the 
MHRT/C certification notwithstanding any other guidelines for certification .” 
 
However, agencies continue to find that in hiring staff with 4 year undergraduate or graduate degree  in a mental 
health related field, they are still only allow ed a  “provisional” certification.  They need to receive “full” 
certification  as they would be granted in most other states.  They are still subject to having to complete several of 
the 8 domains to receive certification. Some examples:  
• “Only r eceiving provisional certificate w/ a 4 -year degree that is not within the UMS System 
(this happens often, folks who graduate from small, private colleges like Skidmore, Goshen, 
Wheaton, or even  Bates , with degrees in psych ology , sociology, etc .). Typically, tho se applicants 
are granted only 1 Domain of 8! ” 
• “Applicants with a Master’s  Degree in SW or Counseling only receiving provisional certificates .” 
 
Also, those that are deemed in need of completing D omains 1-3 are mandated to complete them within 90 d ays.  
• “What makes 90 days near impossible is coursework at a university/college class is per 
semester, longer than the 90 d ays and assuming the class is available.   Options for non -
academic training shortens this time, but at a cost, and assuming available dates do not have 
overlap. Plus we have to consider impact on work schedules and meeting with clients.   This is 
true for a ll provisional certificates, even if they offer a year to complete the Domains required. ” 
 
What we are real ly asking for is a degree -based  path to full certification .  We would  also ask for a  slight  
amendment to th e language in LD 997 to strike out the last clause  “, as long as the individual has me t the 3 so -
called priority domains identified in the certification program. ” 
 
If someone has the education  and the desire to work in this field, why do we continue to place 
unnecessary  barriers in their path ? Please support LD 997 and eliminat e these particular barriers.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
Curriculum  BHP Training (35 hours)  
 
1. BHP Module 1       3 hours  
2. Professionalism       2.5 hours  
3. Working as a Team       2 hours  
4. Cultural Competency and Family Dynamics   2.5 hours  
5. Communication       3 hours  
6. Documentation       2.5 h ours  
7. Child Development       2 hours  
8. Children’s Behavioral Health     3.5 hours  
9. Autism        2 hours  
10. Trauma        4 hours  
11. Understanding & Managing Behavior    2.5 hours  
12. Principles of Instruction      2.5 hours  
 
Closing Activity, Evaluations, and Final Exam   3 hours  
 
Adult and Child CPR & First Aid Certification and completion of Bloodborne Pathogen Training 
are also required for BHP certification  
_______________________________________________  
Section 65 and Section 28 BHP requirements from the MaineCare Manual below:  
Section 65  - Behavioral Health Services  
65.06 -9.D. Provider Requirements for Children’s Home and Community Based Treatment  
 
Staff allowed to provide this treatment include a clinician and, when appropriate, a 
staff certified as a Behavioral Health Professional.  
 
To provide Home and Community Based Treatment the employee must meet the 
educational requirement and complete the required Behavioral Health 
Professional (BHP) training within the prescribed time frames, as described in 
65.06 -9(E).  
 
Educational requirement to deliver the Home and Community Based Treatment 
services can be one (1) of the following : 
1) A minimum of 60 higher education credit hours in a related field of social 
services,  human services, health or education;  
2) A minimum of 90 higher education credit hours in an unrelated field with the 
provider required to have a specific plan for supervision and training 
documented in the personnel file of the employee;  
3) A high school diploma or equivalent and a minimum of 3 years of direct 
experience working with children in a behavioral health children’s services 
program with the provider required to have a specific plan for supervision and 
training documented in the personnel file of  the employee.  
 
 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
65.06 -13.B.  Provider Requirements for Behavioral Health Day Treatment  
Staff qualified to provide this treatment include the following clinicians (Psychiatrist, 
Psychologist, LCSW, LMSW, LCPC, LMFT) and staff certified as a Behavioral Health 
Professional (BHP) who has completed ninety (90) documented college credit hours or 
Continuing Education Units (CEU’s) . 
To provide Behavioral Health Day Treatment as a BHP, the employee must meet the 
education requirement and complete the required B HP training within the prescribed 
time frames, as described in 65.06 -13.C.  
 
Section 28  - Rehabilitative and Community Support Services For Children With Cognitive 
Impairments and Functional Limitations  
28.08 -2 Staff Requirements  
 
A. Qualification Requirements for Direct Care Staff  
 
1. Direct care staff must meet the following minimum requirements : 
- Be at least 18 years of age;  
- Have a high school diploma or equivalent;  
- All direct care staff must obtain a Behavioral Health Professional (BHP) 
certification within  one (1) year of hire. OR  
3.          Provisional Approval of Providers  
Staff must begin receiving the Behavioral Health Professional training within 
thirty (30) days from the date of hire. The provisional candidate must complete 
the training and obtain ce rtification within one (1) year from the date of hire.  
 
C. Requirements for Behavioral Health Professional providing Specialized Services  
2. Behavioral Health Professional providing Specialized Services must meet all of 
the certification requirements as stated for the  Certification as Behavioral 
Health Professional or equivalent  as determined by the Department and must : 
a. Be under the Supervision of a Licensed Psychologist, Board Certified 
Behavior Analyst or equivalent as determined by the Department, a nd 
b. Be able to demonstrate specific competencies required to provide 
Specialized Services including but not limited to the basic principles of 
behavior; and  
c. Be able to apply, under the direction of the supervisor, an array of 
procedures specific to Sp ecialized Services.  
 
 
 
 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
Timeline  of BHP Training : 
• January 1997: French v. Concannon lawsuit filed. The plaintiffs asserted that Maine’s long 
waitlists  for children’s case management and home and community -based  services were in 
violation o f Medicare’s Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT) 
requirement.  (Approximately 75% of Maine’s Medicaid expenditures were spent on the most 
restrictive and costly  services for children including residential treatment and psychiatric 
hospitalization. Maine had  approximately 260 children in out -of-state residential placements - 
average length of stay was four  times longer and the cost was three times greater than in -state 
placements.)  
• December 1997: In response to LD 1744, Maine DHHS published “A Plan for Children’s MH 
Services”  for expanding home and community -based  services for children that included in -home 
behavioral  health services. https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/4495895 -PLAN.html   
• 2000: Risinger v. Concannon lawsuit fil ed. The state was required to develop a system to track. 
In response, DHHS enhanced the Enterprise Information System (EIS) to track children who 
request  behavioral health services and assure that children receive timely and consistent access 
to services.  (The lawsuit was resolved in 2007, and DHHS reached full compliance in 2008.)  
 
• These children’s behavioral health services have been regulated under various sections of  
MaineCare over the past few decades:  
o Section 65 M&N (around 2006) – Child and Family  Behavioral Health Treatment (65 
M); Community Based Treatment for Children Without Permanency (65 N)  
o Section 24 Day Habilitation Services for Children with Mental Retardation or 
Pervasive  Developmental Disorders (later absorbed by Section 28)  
o Currentl y, these services are regulated under:  
• Establishe d 2008: Section 65 Behavioral Health Services - 65 HCT and 65 
Day- Treatment  
• Established 2010: Section 28 Rehabilitative & Community Support Services 
for Children with Cognitive Impairments and Functional Limitations (both 
Standard and  Specialized; in -home and school -based), and  
• February 2020: Proposed Section 106 School Based Behavioral Health 
Services Rule  withdrawn.  
 
BHP Training & Certificate Program  
• 1998: DHHS recognized the need to train the non -licensed, direct care staff who were part of 
the team providing in -home services. DHHS hosted forums for parents, educators, and providers 
to ask,  “What knowledge and skills are required for direct care staff (later called BHPs) to 
provide quality  services ?” 
• 1999: Spurwink’s Behavioral Health Sciences Institute (BHSI) in partnership with Muskie School 
of Public Service published the first version of the curriculum - Behavior Specialist/Habilitation  
Specialist (BS/HS1).  
• 2003 -2004: Module on Trauma added.  
• 2006: Update and revision of the curriculum that included changing the certificate to Behavioral  
Health Professional (BHP), making the BS/HS1 certificate invalid. BHP Training - 50 contact hours 
and First Aid/CPR and Bloodborne pathogens training requir ed for approximately another 7 
contact  hours.  
• 2010: BHP Training & Certificate became mandatory for all direct staff billing as BHPs.  
• 2010 -2011: DOE & DHHS collaborated with BHSI to revise the curriculum, creating a separate 
School -Based BHP training (28 contact hours) for school programs intending to MaineCare for 
Section 28  and Section 65 school -based services.  
• 2012: Woodfords Family Services (WFS) was awarded the contract for administering the BHP  
Training & Certificate Program.  
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 • 2013 - 2016: WFS  surveyed stakeholders and completed a comprehensive literature review. 
Revised  the BHP curriculum to reflect current research and best practice - divided the content 
into 12  modules (instead of 10) including the addition of a module on Autism.  
• 2016: Pub lished the new 35 -hour BHP Curriculum.  
• 2017: Launched the BHP Blended Learning course (12 online modules and 7 hours of in -class  
instruction with a Certified BHP Instructor).  
• 2018: Merged the 28 -hour SBBHP curriculum and the 35 -hour BHP curriculum into  one course 
and certificate for all BHPs, regardless of the setting they are working in.  
• 2020: Launched the Virtual Classroom – 7-hour  Live Day taught in Adobe by Certified BHP  
Instructors. Revisions to the curriculum are ongoing as needed.  
