  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 10, 2023 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 997 – Resolve, to Reduce Workforce Barriers for Mental Health Professionals in Maine  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information on LD 997, Resolve, to Reduce Workforce Barriers for 
Mental Health Professionals in Maine . This resolve changes the educational requirements for 
behavioral health professionals (BHPs) providing services for children to  a minimum of 60 credit 
hours in a related field, 90 credit hours in an unrelated field or a high school diploma or 
equivalent with training and oversight as determined by the Department. It requires the 
Department to amend or establish contracts for train ing BHPs  to train individuals within existing 
resources and authorizes the Department to opt to charge individuals or their employers fees for 
training.  
 
The resolve also requires the Department to amend its guidelines regarding certification for 
mental health rehabilitation technician/community technicians (MHRT/Cs) so that an individual 
who has completed a 4 -year postsecondary educational degree program in a mental health related 
field or a graduate degree in a mental health -related field does not have to meet all 8 competency 
domains in the training contracted from the department as long as the individual has met the 3 
priority domains.  
 
This bill reflects what is in practice in MaineCare policy today; however, exact wording varies 
across sections of policy. Section 97, Private Non -Medical Institution Services , and Section 28, 
Rehabilitative and Community Support Services for Children with  Cognitive Impairments and 
Functional Limitations , requires a high school diploma and specialized training (which means 
BHP certification). There is a three -year experience requirement with the HS diploma in Section 
65, but that will change to align with o ther sections with an already -planned rulemaking. The 
BHP qualification criteria will soon become consistent across all of these services.  
 
It is unclear if the intent of this bill is inclusive of education and training requirements for BHPs 
providing spec ialized services. It is the intent of the Department to continue to require additional 
training for BHPs providing specialized services in alignment with evidenced -based models.  
 
The Office of Behavioral Heal th (OBH ) has been working to reduce barriers, in cluding 
streamlining the certification pathways for the Mental Health Rehabilitation Technician/  
DocuSign Envelope ID: E3BE7024-67DE-428C-8845-8A36E9B30FEC
 
 Community (MHRT/C ). The policy released on November 1, 2021 in response to Resolves 2021, 
Ch. 69, outlined three certification pathways : (A) a pathway for an a pproved academic program; 
(B) a pathway for a four -year or higher social services -related degree or full LSW; and (C) a 
pathway to provisional certification.  
 
LD 997 as it is written creates a barrier  (perhaps  unintentionally)  to MHRT/C certification that 
currently does not exist.  
 
Currently, applicants with a four -year or higher related degree can apply using Pathway B : they 
will be given full certification immediately and have two years to complete any remaining 
learning d omains. They must renew their certification every two years thereafter. LD 997  would 
require  Pathway B applicants to complete the three priority domains (1 -3) before they could be 
certified; had this restriction been in place between November 1, 2021 , and Ma rch 8, 2023,only 
60 of the 265 individuals who qualified under Pathway B would have been certified. This 
proposed requirement  increases rather than reduces barriers to employment.  
 
There is flexibility in the current program.  MHRT/Cs in this Pathway B cate gory are given two 
years to complete missing learning d omains  while employed. If an individual is missing domains 
in their degree, there is a Credit for Work Experience option that they can use to demonstrate a 
working knowledge of the required domain comp etencies in lieu of additional coursework. For 
example, an individual could meet up to four domains with a full year of work experience and by 
submitting the application on which their supervisor verifies the individual staff member’s 
working knowledge of those domain competencies. Eighty percent (80%) of Pathway B 
applicants are utilizing the Credit for Work Experience option to complete at least some of their 
missing domains.  Every applicant’s transcript is thoroughly reviewed by Muskie Center for 
Learnin g, OBH’s service partner for mental health certifications, and every effort is made to 
grant applicants maximum credit (including partial domain  credit) and provide suggestions for 
completing the missing domains . 
 
LD 997 proposes that individuals  with a me ntal health -related degree must complete only the 
first three (3) d omains  and not the full eight (8) competency domains  of the MHRT/C.  Without 
these fiv e (5) competency domains, individuals may not be adequately prepared to address the 
complexities of this work .  
 Domain 4 (Trauma and Resiliency) and Domain 6 (Mind – Body Connection) are 
particularly relevant and important for worki ng with individuals with co -occurring SUD  
 Domain 5 (Policy Knowledge) addresses Maine -specific policies and ensures that 
workers have awareness of relevant regulations and how to support individuals in 
effective self -advocacy within the health and human services system.  
 Domain 7 (Cultural Competency) ensures staff have the needed knowledge and 
awareness to work with increasin gly diverse populations.  
 Domaine 8 (Vocational Supports) gives MHRT/Cs the knowledge needed to assist 
individuals in goal-directed employment activity . Employment is a valuable part of 
recovery for individuals . 
 
The eight (8) competency domains were established after years -long engagement with 
stakeholder groups including providers, service recipients, academics, community members, and 
DocuSign Envelope ID: E3BE7024-67DE-428C-8845-8A36E9B30FEC
 
 the Department. A competencies sub -committee was formed to categorize and clarify 
competencies within eac h domain. The first three domains are considered priorities for an 
individual to provide services as outlined in Chapter II, Section 17, Community Support Services 
and Section 65, Behavioral Health Services.  
 
The flexibility of the  multipl e pathways to MHR T/C certification may appear complicated; 
however , they exist to accommodate as many individuals as possible entering the field. OBH is 
committed to exploring how to clarify the process and to support individuals in navigating the 
certification process.  
 
The MHRT -C language in the bill is also  confusing . The most recent update to the MHRT/C 
certification program occurred on November 1, 2021, when the Maine Office of Behavioral 
Health released a policy whereby there are two pathways to full certification: a n approved 
academic program, or a four ‐year or higher social services ‐related degree or a full LSW; and 
one pathway to provisional certification.  
 
In summary, t he proposed bill creates an additional barrier for individuals with related degrees 
who are seek ing MHRT/C certification to start work by implementing a requirement that they 
meet the Priority Domains prior to being able to be certified and beginning work . 
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If  
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
     
Michelle Probert      Sarah Squirrell  
Director       Director  
MaineCare Services      Office of Behavioral Health  
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: E3BE7024-67DE-428C-8845-8A36E9B30FEC

