, HoUSE oE REPRESENTATIVES 
it 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MATNE 04333-0002 . .~ . 
(207) 287-1400 
Suzanne Salisbury TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
134 Park Road 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Residence: (207) 899-6863 
Suzanne.Salisbury@legislaturemaine.gov 
April I0, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Suzanne Salisbury in support of 
LD 997, Resolve, to Reduce Workforce Barriers for Mental Health Professionals in Maine 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Sue Salisbury. I represent House 
District 128, which is part of the town of Westbrook. I am here today to introduce LD 997, 
Resolve, to Reduce Workforce Barriers for Mental Health Professionals in Maine. 
This bill was presented last session and was voted unanimously out of this committee but 
unfortunately died on the appropriations table. The bill was the result of conversations related to 
workforce shortages in the mental health care ﬁeld. Those conversations included proposals to 
address barriers to folks entering the profession, this resolve would implement some of those 
proposals. 
LD 977 would change the educational requirements for behavioral health professionals providing 
services for children, regardless of the setting in which the service is provided, to require a 
minimum of 60 credit hours in a related ﬁeld, 90 credit hours in an unrelated ﬁeld or a high 
school diploma with a plan for supervision and training. The same changes to the educational 
requirements apply for a behavioral health professional to be eligible to receive training to 
provide specialized services. 
The resolve also requires the Department of Health and Human Services to amend or establish 
contracts for training behavioral health professionals to train any number of additional 
individuals and authorizes the department to opt to charge individuals or their employer's fees for 
training. 
I have recently learned that there are some concerns by the University of Maine system and 
DHHS. I currently have a proposed amendment dealing with the UMS concern but have not had 
the opportunity to review the concerns brought forward by DHHS. There are several people here 
that can speak more to the bill and I am committed to working with all stakeholders to come up 
with a solution that will help more this bill forward and address the critical workforce shortage 
our mental health care industry is facing. 
District l28: Part of Westbrook
