April 25, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My 
name is Ash Hebert, I am a resident of Waterville, and I am here today to testify in 
favor of LD 1626.  
Prior to learning about this proposed bill, I admittedly knew little about the existence, 
let alone the duties assigned to Boards of Visitors in State statute. Since then, my 
search results have yielded local results that do not always provide information that is 
current, accessible to the public, and reliable for communication efforts. While it was 
not my intention, this first attempt to learn more reinforced a need, and one that this 
bill can resolve.  
Additions to existing statutes pertaining to Boards of Visitors also attempt to rectify 
communication and service barriers as amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic. For 
example, while people who have mental health challenges are By allowing each board 
of visitors to regularly inspect the facility, establish contact with people who are 
incarcerated or jailed as well as administrative personnel, and make recommendations 
on how people can be better served based on those interactions, these responsibilities 
encourage not only transparency but also accountability in a system that has 
historically lacked oversight.  
Appointing people with lived experience in jails and prisons to serve on the board is 
another way to achieve these goals as well as addressing the under-represented voice 
of lived experience in the oversight of the criminal justice system. People who have 
been jailed or incarcerated understand the facility’s operations in a more nuanced 
manner and can therefore offer deeply insightful suggestions. In healthcare we have 
seen the impact peer perspectives carry and how entire communities can benefit from 
embracing more well-rounded, representative, and adequately trained advisory 
groups. I truly believe the Boards of Visitors programs across the State will share 
similar strides after this bill is implemented.  
In closing, I urge you to pass LD 1626. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
Ash Hebert 
Waterville, Maine  
 
 
 
Resources  
After 27 years, Maine still fails to comply with the court-ordered decree to improve treatment of the 
state’s mentally ill (themainemonitor.org)  
Maine profile | Prison Policy Initiative  
Title 30-A, §1651: Examination of jails; board of visitors (maine.gov)  
Doyle C, Gardner K and Wells K (2021) The importance of incorporating lived experience in efforts to 
reduce Australian reincarceration rates. International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 
10(2): 83-98. https://doi.org/10.5204/ijcjsd.1942  
 
 
