Maine .5 ri 
PRIS §§j,AD\/C CACY 
Coalition
. 
Tuesday, April 25 2023 
Greetings Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Honorable 
Members of the Criminal Justice Committee and Public Safety Committee 
My name is Jan Collins, l am assistant director of Maine Prisoner Advocacy 
Coalition.l am here to support LD 1626 An Act to Standardize Requirements 
Between Boards of Visitors for County Jails and Department of Corrections 
Correctional Facilities and to share my experiences as a member of the 
Franklin County Board of Visitors. 
MPAC‘s mission is to support Maine's incarcerated citizens, their families, and 
friends, in their struggle with Maine's criminal justice system. Our purpose is 
to reduce Maine's use of incarceration by creating a criminal justice system 
that is ethical, humane, and restorative in nature. 
Very often this committee is asked to endorse changes in policy that have 
never been tried. This bill is not one of them. All of the provisions in this bill 
have been in practice at Franklin County Jail for years. Far from being 
onerous, they have been a great asset to the community and to the jail 
administration. 
The Board of Visitors, Sheriff and Correctional Staff work together in a spirit 
of mutual respect and support. As a result, the BOV has supported the jail 
and its staff at County Budget hearings, in the legislature and with the public 
and other community organizations. 
When the Board of Visitors receives a question or concern from the public, 
we work together to find solutions that work for everyone involved, residents 
of the facility, staff, and the community. As a result, Franklin County Jail was 
one of the first to institute medication assisted treatment(MAT) services for 
anyone at the facility who was diagnosed with opioid use disorder(OUD) and 
requested treatment. Everyone at the jail can participate in training to 
administer naloxone and receive the lifesaving medication upon release. Peer 
recovery coaches have regular access to anyone at the jail who requests 
their resources and anyone who participates in opioid recovery services at 
the jail is also provided with a follow-up appointment with a community health 
provider before release.
vve regularly visit the jail, although those visits were oh hold during the covid 
epidemic, and when we do visit we talk to people in all aspects of jail 
operations. We interview the jail administrator, talk to the sheriff, individuals in 
the control room, residents, medical staff, and other providers and volunteers 
at the facility. We also review the MDOC biennial review of the facility. 
lt is these interviews that are the basis of our report and recommendations. 
The sheriff always has a chance to respond to the report before it is 
submitted to the County commissioners. This year the sheriff had no 
additions as he felt the document captured the year well. 
The rapport that we treasure, took time to develop. l am sure that there was some wariness from staff initially. But working together to identify how we can improve the services we provide and to solve problems, has been an 
opportunity for strengthening the bonds between the jail and the community, 
and it has done just that. 
l welcome the opportunity to answer any questions about the membership of 
our committee, our meetings, or any issues that we have resolved as a result 
of working together. 
Please give your unanimous support of LD 1626 An Act to Standardize 
Requirements Between Boards of Visitors for County Jails and Department of 
Corrections Correctional Facilities 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Jan M. Collins 
Assistant Director 
Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition 
BOV Franklin County Jail 
PO Box 360, E. Wilton, ME 04284 
207.578.8419
