 
April 25,2023 
LD 1626 “An Act to Standardize Requirements Between 
Boards of Visitors for County Jails and Department of 
Corrections Correctional Facilities”. 
Good afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Honorable 
Members of the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. 
I am Kandie Cleaves, a resident of Garland, a member of the Board of Visitors for 
the Penobscot County Jail and the current Chair for the Consumer Council System 
of Maine and the Greater Bangor Area Local for the CCSM which includes all of 
Region 3.  
Today I am testifying in favor of LD 1626 “An Act to Standardize Requirements 
Between Boards of Visitors for County Jails and Department of Corrections 
Correctional Facilities”. 
While I support this bill, there are a few areas where I would like to see 
modification in the wording and requirements. These can be addressed in work 
session.  
I want to keep as much control at the county level as possible. However, the lack 
of uniformity currently around the state being required to collect information 
from those living within the system and with prior experience is horribly lacking, 
as is compliance by many, to the current requirements: This makes additional 
oversite a necessity.  
Requiring a plan to be created to allow in person interviews even during 
situations such as a pandemic should be included. During the shutdown, those 
working within the facilities still came and went for their jobs. It should be no 
different for those serving on a board or who provide other services. It is in those 
times that those residing within may need us the most.  
I have been fortunate that Sheriff Morton has made a great effort to help make 
our local board well-functioning and helps when needed or requested.  
While I am not someone with lived experience on the inside, my former husband 
spent much time incarcerated as well as many others I know and care about. I am 
though a person with lived experience around mental health issues. Having the 
right type of voices on the board can make a big difference. While former officers 
may make a good addition in some respects to a board, by helping others on it 
understand different aspects, having them be involved with the interviews feels 
counterproductive. Individuals being interviewed need the ability to feel 
completely confident and safe with board members, and that we will be watching 
out for their best interest. 
In closing I would again ask that you pass LD 1626 and that during work session 
you bring back the voices who have testified here today to help.  
Thank you, 
Kandie Cleaves 
Garland  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
