Sarah Johnson
Sanford
LD 1626
Testimony of Sarah Johnson
 IN SUPPORT OF LD 1626   
An Act to Standardize Requirements Between Boards of Visitors for County Jails and
Department of Corrections Correctional Facilities  
Presented by Senator Beebe-Center of Knox.
Before the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, April 25, 2023 
 
Senators Beebe-Center, Duson, LaFountain and Honorable Members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Sarah Johnson.  I am a Software Support Specialist and I live in Sanford. 
I am a former volunteer instructor at the York County Jail (15 years) and the 
Women’s Center at the Maine Correctional Center and Southern Maine Reentry 
Center (4 years).   I recently worked in the education department at the Western New 
Mexico Correctional Facility in Grants, NM for 4 years. 
I am writing to ask for your support of LD 1626.
BOV standardizes community access and review of the Maine Correctional System. 
This consistent oversight will help instill community confidence in the integrity of the
correctional system. Public access to the boards will promote a better understanding 
of the prison and jail system and possibly increase community interest and 
involvement. 
Organizations such as the American Bar Association and the Brennan Center for 
Justice have noted that public oversight and reporting on management and conditions 
are essential components to safe, healthy and successful prison and jail systems.  
Public boards help ensure transparency and accountability, as well as promote 
communication between residents, Corrections Officials and the public. This open 
and uniform structure can help form working relationships which would also improve 
the reentry process. 
LD1626 requires standardized training for BOV members, and members must adhere 
to all rules, regulations, policies and procedures of the Department of Corrections. 
Uniform training and implementation of the Boards of Visitors will help to safeguard 
the integrity of Maine’s prison and jail systems, as well as support and protect the 
staff, residents and citizens.
Thank you for your time and consideration of LD1626.
Sarah Johnson

