219 Capitol Street, Suite7 
\ ﬁonsuﬂaer ﬁouncii Systerrt of Maine Augusta’ ME 04330 
A Voice for Consumers of Mental Health Services
' 
1. Phone: 207.430.8300 
Fax: 207.430.8301 
Toll-Free: 877.207.5073 
www.maineccsm.org 
April 25, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and esteemed members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Simonne Maline. l am the Executive Director for the Consumer Council System of Maine 
(CCSM). I am here today on behalf of the CCSM to testify in support of LD “1626 An Act to Standardize 
Requirements Between Boards of Visitors for County Jails and Department of Corrections 
Correctional FaciIities ”. 
The Consumer Council System of Maine is a public instrumentality written into State Statute by the Maine 
Legislature to serve in an advisory capacity and to provide legislators with guidance and advice regarding 
the delivery of effective and appropriate adult mental health services from those sen/ed by them. 
The CCSM spends a signiﬁcant amount of time listening to our fellow peers around the State through our 
Local Councils and statewide forums. We have several council members who sit on their county’s boards 
of visitors. What they recount is a wide variety of differences between county jails. Some counties are 
doing much better than others who may not even have boards of visitors at all, even though they are 
required to have them. 
We talked with both Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition and Maine Prisoner Re~Entry Network about these 
issues and worked to bring them fon/vard to you today for your consideration. 
We want to see a uniformity of the language between DOC and counties. They should have the basic 
standards that are uniform and then they have room to address all the different unique issues to their 
locaﬁon. 
We feel that it is important to have individuals with lived experience of being in a correctional facility. It 
should be required for all boards of visitors. Their voice is invaluable to these conversations. 
We also feel it is important to have public information and access to their reports, meetings, and the board 
members themselves. Last fall l tried to attend a DOC board of visitors meeting in Warren. The wrong date 
was posted on the website and there was not a remote option. In the recent past if you went to the DOC 
Windham page their board of visitors had their meeting time and a zoom link posted for the public to attend 
(I just looked again and that is now gone) just like we do today at the Legislature! 
We would suggest you look at the Penobscot County website as an example of how information 
concerning Board of Visitors meetings could be shared with the general public. 
https://vvvvw.penobscot —sheriff.net/boardOf\/lsitors/603fdc281a5a216bfc4bdb55
k @€>i"8$i55 ”fi€§° Courwsii 3;»/s'tterr'a of Mﬁirwe A Voice for Consumers of Mental Health Services 
1:' 
- 
{.1 
ft» 
One of the most important pieces of this bill is the training for those that serve on Boards. No one goes toa 
job without training. Otherwise, how would they know what is required of them? We often learn these 
things through on-the-job training! 
Also, we feel these boards need to submit reports and be accountable for their work including reporting 
back to the Legislature yearly. This information is valuable to many entities. 
While we appreciate the Maine Commissioners Association thoughtful testimony, they state: 
Additionally, the average time that inmates spend in a county jail is between two and five days, which 
inhibits an inmate’s participation in impactful treatment programs prior to release... ” . We researched 
several county jail websites and found through their online census records that there were individuals still 
residing in these jails since 2022. These individuals should surely be front and center for treatment 
programs if needed prior to release. 
Boards of visitors are the only independent entity that has the capacity to let the rest of the community 
know how well or not the jail or correctional facilities are doing. They are our eyes and ears in these 
facilities that can ensure the safety and wellbeing of incarcerated residents. Let us give them every 
tool possible to be a voice for those that truly need it. 
In closing I urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1626. 
Sincerely, 
Executive Director
