 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1626, An Act to Standardize Requirements Between Boards of Visitors for County Jails and 
Department of Corrections Correctional Facilities  
 
April 25, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in opposition  to LD 1626. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
What would LD 1626 do?  Very briefly, LD 1626 proposes to take the far more prescriptive standards 
governing the boards of visitors of state correctional facilities and apply those same standards to the boards of 
visitors for county jail facilities. 
 
Background.  The Boards of Visitors of county jails and of the State correctional facilities currently have 
separate requirements and duties. A likely reason for this difference is that county jails are smaller and more 
local than the state’s prison system. Additionally, the average time that inmates spend in a county jail is between 
two and five days, which inhibits an inmate’s participation in impactful treatment programs prior to release. 
Alternatively, state correctional facilities generally have years of opportunity to impact an inmate’s character, 
lifestyle, and development of work skills.  
 
Further, the governance of county jails and the State’s correctional facilities is different. Each county jail is 
directly governed and operated by an elected sheriff and elected county commissioners. Conversely, the State’s 
correctional system is governed by a Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections appointed by the 
Governor, and by appointed wardens. 
 
Discussion of LD 1626.   Our Association appreciates the intent of the bill: transparency in the oversight of 
Maine’s correctional facilities. However, we disagree that there is a problem with the current operation of 
county jail boards of visitors, and we are concerned that LD 1626 would create such a burdensome process that 
county jails would have a difficult time finding volunteers to serve on their boards of visitors. Our specific 
concerns are noted below. 
 
The Board of Visitors for county jails generally is governed by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 1651. This bill would change 
those standards and replace them with the requirements followed by the board of visitors for state correction 
facilities under the authority of the Maine Department of Corrections. Specifically, this bill would require each 
county jail Board of Visitors to meet and tour the correctional facilities to which it is assigned at least four times 
per year, make recommendations to the sheriff regarding services or treatment for residents who have mental 
health challenges, receive annual training on a wide array of topics, and review the management of the 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1626 
April 25, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 correctional facility to which it is assigned to determine whether the management is consistent with the 
philosophy, mission, and policy goals of the facility, among other things. These requirements are extensive, and 
burdensome.  
 
Importantly, the Boards of Visitors of county jails are volunteer positions, and the responsibilities of these 
volunteer members are already significant. These members serve and volunteer their time with no compensation. 
Under LD 1626, the responsibilities of the Board members would be substantially increased, and the 
responsibilities would be immense. Our Association is concerned that this increased responsibility would add 
relatively little value given the oversight role currently performed by elected sheriffs and county commissioners, 
yet at the same time the added burdens would discourage volunteers from joining county jail boards of visitors. 
Such an outcome would work a disservice to county jail oversight.  
 
We are further concerned that this bill seeks to change the governance structure of county jails only two years 
after the Legislature adopted new standards, policies, and procedures relating to the administration and operation 
of county jails. County jails are continuing to adjust to these newly adopted standards. Our Association is 
concerned about the effect that further changing the county jail governing system at this time could have on the 
operation of county jails across the State. While we acknowledge that the current corrections system is not 
perfect, it does work very well, and county jails are continuing to adjust to newly implemented standards.  
 
Finally, we are concerned that Section 1 of bill strikes reference to jails governed by 2 or more sheriffs, which 
would uniquely impact the Lincoln and Sagadahoc Multicounty Jail Authority, which governs the Two Bridge 
Jail shared by Lincoln and Sagadahoc Counties. We see no reason to treat this jail any differently than the other 
county jails in Maine operated by a single county. 
 
Conclusion.  While our Association does not oppose the overarching intent of this bill, we are concerned that 
this bill may discourage people from volunteering to serve on county jail boards of visitors, and we are 
concerned that the standards imposed fail to recognize the important role already served by elected sheriffs and 
county commissioners with respect to our county jails.  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need additional 
information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
