April 24, 2023
Good Afternoon Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and esteemed 
members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Joint Stand Committee,  
My name is Vickie Morgan, I am a resident of Norway and I am here today to testify in 
favor of LD 1626 “An Act  to Standardize Requirements Between Boards of 
Vistors for County Jails and Department of Corrections Correctional Facilities”.
 
It is important that all County Jails in the State have a Board of Visitors.  They serve in a
advisory capicity and make regular visits to inspect the facilities and makes 
recommendations on how to better serve the individuals residing in their facilities. The 
requirements should be the same across all counties and align with the Correctional 
Facilities.
Some of the important requirements that should be put in place are as follows:
Alll the members of the Board of Vistors should have lived experience. Using myself as 
example, I relate better to someone that has had similar experiences as myself.
There should be training devoloped that all members are required to take. I serve on 
several boards and there is a huge learning curve in order for someone to become an 
effective board. This training would help them become better board members.
A list of the Members of the Board of Visitors along with there contact information 
should be made public and provided to the individuals who are residing in there 
facilities. Also, the meeting date and time along with the agenda should be posted on 
there website and a zoom option should be provided, so that the public may attend their
meetings.
Members of the board must submit an Annual Report and it should be posted on the 
website.
In closing, the Board of Visitors provides oversight of the County Jails and their input is 
extremely important in providing recommendations for improvements that might be 
made and also  they are an important resource for the people residing at their facilities.
In closing, I urge you to pass  LD 1626.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Sincerely,
Vickie Morgan
Vickie Morgan
Norway
