1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Committee on State and Local Government 
Hearing Date: May 2, 2023 
  
LD 1725 – “An Act to Strengthen Legislative Oversight of 
Government Agencies and Programs by Providing the Government 
Oversight Committee Access to Confidential Records” 
 
 Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the State and Local 
Government Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate 
Commissioner for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial 
Services.  I am providing testimony at the request of the Administration Against 
LD 1725 – “An Act to Strengthen Legislative Oversight of Government Agencies 
and Programs by Providing the Government Oversight Committee Access to 
Confidential Records.” 
This bill provides that the Government Oversight Committee may receive 
information and records that are privileged and confidential and that that 
information and those records are exempt from public disclosure.  This testimony 
is limited to the bills impact on confidential taxpayer information and Maine 
Revenue Services. 
  Pursuant to Maine Revised Statutes, Title 36, section 191, taxpayer 
information is generally confidential and may only be disclosed in specific 
circumstances. The protection of confidential taxpayer information is central to a 
well-functioning tax system, allowing taxpayers to provide sensitive information 
2 
 with confidence.  LD 1725 would create an additional avenue for disclosure of 
taxpayer information. 
During a tax expenditure review, the Legislative Office of Program 
Evaluation and Government Accountability (OPEGA) already has access to 
confidential taxpayer information.  OPEGA cannot release the confidential 
taxpayer information that it acquires to the GOC but can use it in the development 
of its reports and can release aggregated statistics.   
The Department recommends that the Committee consider whether the 
disclosure of confidential taxpayer information is necessary for the purposes of this 
bill.   
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
