Members of the Maine State Legislature, 
The Maine Association of School Nurses urges the Maine State legislature to pass LD 867, 
which would authorize schools to stock a supply of undesignated ready-to-use glucagon so that 
all children with diabetes may have equal access to a life-saving rescue therapy. 
Children with diabetes who take insulin need access to glucagon to address an event of severe 
hypoglycemia. Severe hypoglycemia, or extremely low blood sugar, is the most immediate 
danger to children with diabetes. Failure to treat a child experiencing severe hypoglycemia can 
lead to unconsciousness, critical brain damage, and can even be fatal. School nurses are trained 
to recognize the signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia and are prepared to administer glucagon 
when an emergency occurs. However, children do not always carry this life-saving rescue 
therapy on them.   
School nurses in Maine currently have access to several other rescue therapies that are kept on 
hand in the school nurses’ offices -- including epinephrine. Passing this legislation will ensure 
that children with diabetes will also be protected from episodes of severe hypoglycemia when at 
school. School nurses should have access to all rescue therapies necessary to save a child’s life – 
including those for children with diabetes. The current limitations to obtain glucagon by an 
individual prescription prohibit schools from accessing this life-saving therapy. Maine’s K-12 
schools must have access to undesignated ready-to-use glucagon to ensure that they have the 
proper tools to respond to severe hypoglycemia.
Further, we are aware that the diagnosed cases of type 1 and type 2 diabetes continue to rise 
among children and youth in the United States.1 Passing this legislation will protect the children 
of Maine and prevent the state from accumulating additional costs related to diabetes. 
As school nurses responsible for protecting and promoting student health, we believe passing this 
legislation is imperative for protecting the students of Maine.  
Sincerely,
Maine Association of School Nurses  
Contact Information: 
Angie Buker, MSN, RN, NCSN
President, Maine Association of School Nurses
abuker@aos94.org
207-399-7683
1 Dabelea  D, Stafford  JM, Mayer-Davis  EJ,  et al; SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Research Group.  Association of type 1 
diabetes vs type 2 diabetes diagnosed during childhood and adolescence with complications during teenage years and young 
adulthood.   JAMA. 2017;317(8):825-835. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.0686
