Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
Neither for Nor Against  
LD 867: An Act Regarding Undesignated Ready -to-use Glucagon Rescue Therapies in Schools  
Mallory Cook , Director of Training and Early Educator Engagement ,  
Maine Education Association  
Before the Committee  on Education and Cultural Affairs  
March  22, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs,    
 
My name is Mallory Cook (pronouns she/her/hers), and I am the Director of Training and Early 
Educator Engagement at the Maine Education Association. I am a certified English teacher and Building 
Administrator. I am writing to provide testimony on behalf of  the MEA neither for nor against LD 867:  
An Act Regarding Undesignated Ready -to-use Glucagon Rescue Therapies in Schools.  
 
The MEA understands that an increasing number of Maine students are tasked with managing diabetes 
every day. Whether our students ar e of elementary age or in secondary schools, managing diabetes can 
be incredibly complex. Advancements in technology have made it easier for students, parents, and 
nursing staff to monitor blood sugar levels; however, there are scenarios when emergency int erventions 
are necessary. For this reason, MEA supports the standing order in this bill, which allows schools to 
have undesignated glucagon therapy on hand for the treatment of severe hypoglycemia.  
 
Other aspects of this bill raise concerns for us a nd highlight a major gap in our schools. That gap is the 
absence of full -time school nurses in every school. Any parent developing a Diabetes Care Plan for their 
child is likely under the impression that a school nurse will be providing and supervising the  student and 
their diabetes management. While supervision can now happen virtually through apps like Dexcom, in 
an emergency, time is of the essence. But providing intervention in an emergency situation simply is not 
possible when a nurse is not in the sch ool full -time, or if they are working in rural areas, splitting their 
time between multiple schools. We need full -time medical professionals in every school building, every 
day.  
 
Moving forward with all parts of this bill would set a dangerous precedent, upon which educators are 
required to provide medical interventions in the absences of nursing staff. We want our staff to be well -
versed in diabetes and meeting the physiological and academic needs of our students, especially as they 
relate to their manage ment plans; however, we do not believe staff should be responsible for assessing  
 
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
the need for and administering medical intervention, which goes well beyond the day -to-day duties of 
our educators, and likely falls outside of their professional training.  
 
Having glucagon therapy on hand is important in scenarios when emergency intervention is needed; 
however, we urge the committee to consider the challenges that would arise in putting the 
responsibilities of medical professionals on our educators.  
 
Thank yo u for your time and consideration, and I welcome you to reach out with questions.  
 
