. 
Stacey K. Guerin 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 4 Augusta, Maine 04333 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Stacey Guerin 
Presenting L.D. 867, An Act to Regarding Undesignated Ready-to-use 
Glucagon Rescue Therapies in Schools 
Before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: I am Senator Stacey Guerin and I represent 
District 4, which includes all of Piscataquis County and ll communities in Penobscot County. 
I’m before you today to present L.D. 867, An Act to Regarding Undesignated Ready-to-use 
Glucagon Rescue Therapies in Schools. 
In 2018, Jennifer Jacobs, a school nurse in Illinois, put her license on the line when she broke the 
law and used another child’s prescription glucagon to save the life of a student who was 
experiencing a severe hypoglycemic episode. Her decision to do so was quickly conﬁrmed bya 
fellow nurse who assists her at Glenview Middle School — both knowing this could cost them 
their job and career. 
As a former teacher who believes all students should receive the same protections, I strongly 
believe in L.D. 867, which would allow schools to carry undesignated glucagon in K-12 schools, 
ensuring that all students on insulin are protected. Glucagon is a hormone that helps regulate 
blood sugar levels in the body, and it can be a lifesaving medication for individuals who 
experience severe hypoglycemia, which is a dangerous drop in blood sugar levels. 
According to the American Diabetes Association, severe hypoglycemia is the most immediate 
danger to children with diabetes. Failure to promptly treat severe hypoglycemia can lead to 
unconsciousness, critical brain damage, seizures, irreversible brain damage, heart problems — and 
even death. 
Maine already allows schools to carry undesignated epinephrine auto injector pens for students 
with allergies ‘ . Students with diabetes should be given the same treatment and protection. 
Allowing schools to ﬁll undesignated glucagon prescriptions will ensure that K-12 schools have 
glucagon rescue therapies on hand to save children ’s lives — and individuals administering it in 
good faith would not need to fear being retaliated against. 
' 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/statutes/20-A/title20-Asec6305.pdf
Overall, allowing undesignated glucagon in K-12 schools in Maine is a critical step in ensuring 
the safety and well-being of all students on insulin. I urge you all to prioritize this issue and take 
action to allow undesignated glucagon in Maine’s schools. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of this legislation.
