 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
In Opposition to LD 1228  An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from 
Requiring Vaccines Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization for Admission or Attendance  
 
Sponsored by: Representative Smith  
Hearing Date:  April 3, 2023  
 
Senator  Rafferty , Representative  Brenn an, and members  of the  Joint Standing Committee on  
Education and Cultural Affairs , my name is Jessica Shiminski  and I am the senior health 
program manager of the Maine Immunization Program . I am here today to provide testimony on 
behalf of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  and will be speaking  against LD 
1228 , An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from Requiring Vaccines 
Approved Under Emergency Use Authorizat ion for Admission or Attendance , proposed as 
emergency legislation.  
 
This bill prohibits certain postsecondary educational institutions from requiring a student to be 
immunized with a vaccine that is approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration und er 
emergency use authorization. As  emergency legislation , this will take effect immediately. The 
Maine CDC opposes LD 1228 and offers t he following comments for your consideration.  
The Maine CDC has taken no steps to add COVID -19 as a required vaccine for the upcoming 
2023 -24 school year and 20 -A MRSA §6359, sub -§6 clearly states that the addition of diseases 
for which immunization is required is a major substantive rule change, one that would require 
full legislative approval. The Maine CDC sees no reason to change the current legislative process 
of vaccine requirement approval for this population. We would like to remind the committee that 
certain presentations of the COVID -19 vaccine have already received full federal Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) ap proval. Prohibiting vaccines approved under emergency use 
authorization as proposed in LD 1228 will not prohibit COVID -19 vaccine.  
COVID -19 vaccines should not be preemptively prohibited from vaccine requirements as they 
are not substantively different fro m other vaccines. Maine CDC is concerned  that language 
prohibiting COVID -19 or any other emergency use authorized vaccine prevents individual post -
secondary schools from requiring this vaccine. The current rule allows for colleges and 
universities to implement immunization requirements that are more stringent than what is 
currently required by Maine law (10 -144 CMR chapter 262, Post -Secondary School 
Immunizations Rule). Students entering into  an allied health program, such as nursing, complete 
much of their schooling participating in a clinical o r a hospital setting, which may require 
COVID -19 vaccination in addition to other vaccinations. Schools must be allowed to require 
 
 these students to show proof of COVID -19 vaccine and any other vaccines currently required for 
Maine healthcare workers in order for  students to complete clinical work.    
In summary, the Maine CDC opposes LD 1228 . Good public health policy is data -driven and 
evidence -based. Maine’s immunization requirements are to ensure full protection of all Mainers 
from vaccine -preventable di sease. The evidence is overwhelming, sound, and supported by the 
professional medical community and majority of Maine voters; vaccinations are proven to be 
safe and effective for preventing the spread of disease.     
Thank you for your consideration of this  matter  and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from Committee and I will be available to participate in the work 
session.  
 
 
 
