70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Maine Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs, I am Mike McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The 
Christian Civic League of Maine envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom 
flourishes, families thrive, and life is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including 
in governance. 
I am here to testify in support of LD 1228  An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from 
Requiring Vaccines Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization for Admission or 
Attendance - Rep. Katrina Smith of Palermo 
This bill prohibits certain postsecondary educational institutions from requiring a student to be 
immunized with a vaccine that is approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration under 
emergency use authorization.  
 
Maine has invested a lot of time and money in creating an emergency preparedness network that 
includes statewide resources and (I believe) resources in every town and city in the state. I remember in 
my town of Raymond when this began, the gentleman who was our volunteer lead and the size of the 
notebook with the plan. Why would we invest so much money and time to simply leave the plan when 
an emergency strikes? In the aftermath of all this, many lost their rights given their personal belief 
system. There were clearly winners and losers chosen by the government and perhaps the media. The 
affects of these rogue decisions will be experienced and reflected on for (likely) decades. 
 
This legislation attacks one segment, forcing college age youth to perform a task to be allowed to get 
their constitutional right to an education. A clear wrong was enacted in creating barriers to education, 
this bill would help us move back to protecting the rights of Maine individuals and away from political 
agendas. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration today.    
Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your families. God bless, 
 
Mike    
 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 Mike McClellan 
Policy Director 
Christian Civic League Maine 
 
 
 
 
 
