Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education & Cultural Affairs 
Committee,  
I am testifying in support of L.D.51, L.D. 869, L.D. 1098, L.D. 1148, L.D. 1209, and L.D. 1228.  
 Upon the enactment of LD798, (which removed the right to a religious exemption of certain 
vaccines to attend a public school) I chose to remove my 2 children from public school. While the 
masses withdrew due to the Covid Pandemic, we slipped out unnoticed from a modern segregatory law.  
This law has forever changed the direction of the intentions I once had for our life in Maine. I now 
homeschool my 3 children, instead of working a dearly l oved, difficult to fill, productive job position 
from which I am greatly missed. I chat with my children about college someday, and in those 
conversations, I wonder which state we’ll be forced to move to in order to have opportunity.   
The present laws are  a form of modern -day discrimination. Our schools quote, “do not 
discriminate on the basis of race, age, color, ancestry or national origin, religion, sex, sexual orientation 
or physical or mental disability in admission to, access to, treatment in or empl oyment in its programs 
and activities.” Where once a child was being taught that segregation and discrimination is a thing of the 
past, and that acceptance and tolerance is the way of the future, and they are quickly seated for a 
product of their religious  sincerity and identity , how would the government try to convince , even a 
child, but specifically the child violated,  that the institutions and the government itself are not in 
violation of their own policy?  So it is with the children and young adults that have been affected by 
present law forbidding their access to certain institutions. The person is welcomed in every other public 
domain and yet restricted to access the very institutions trying to teach our next generations what the 
accepted “right” an d “wrong” are.  
 The side effects of this are exactly what you might think.  There is a thick stigma. Both sides of 
the health institution are feeling it. Doctors are being degraded, seen as common bullies, and patients of 
religion or sincerity are being b lacklisted, and outcasted.  Imagine not feeling good enough, or clean 
enough to just attend a simple school, and then trying to explain it to your best buddies while in a 
playgroup after school hours.  
While the people are restricted, the state wonders whe re all the workers are, where are all the 
professionals? Why can’t we fill jobs? Where are all the students? Why are our numbers so vastly 
different than years prior?  College students, after being taught to be studious, and to stand by their 
choices, made  a decision with sincerity, and that affected all the numbers in these areas. Are colleges 
trying to produce leaders or followers?  One would think they want driven, sincere, thoughtful, studious, 
considerate thinkers.  Generations of Mainers left the stat e for homes, jobs, new colleges, and simply 
education. Should Maine be a place that tells students they can learn anywhere BUT in their schools? 
Should Maine be proud of its segregation? Does Maine want to be the place people call home? A 
sanctuary for bul lies? Where some children can be left behind?  
Personally, I am a raising 8th generation Mainers. Maine is the place I’d like to show and tell my 
great grandchildren all about. Segregation should never be a reason people have to leave a state in this 
centu ry.                       
                                                             Respectfully Submitted,  
                                                                                                                  Sara Holcombe  
 
