Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education & Cultural Affairs Committee, 
I am testifying in SUPPORT of: 
*LD51 An Act To Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements;  
*LD 869 An Act to Protect Education Access by Prohibiting a Mandate for Schoolchildren for a COVID-19 
Vaccine or a Vaccine Under an Emergency Use Authorization; 
*LD 1148 An Act to Prohibit COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates for Students Enrolled in Public Institutions of 
Learning; and 
*LD 1228 An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from Requiring Vaccines Approved 
Under Emergency Use Authorization for Admission or Attendance. 
My testimony is in regards to the effect that the current vaccine requirements have had on my family. 
My oldest son is 18 and recently completed his high school education. He has been homeschooled for 
much of his education, but was attending Caribou High School and the Caribou Regional Technical 
Center when the schools shut down and went to remote learning. Due to the rural nature of our home, 
he was unable to complete his junior year at the school as our internet access didn’t allow it.  He 
finished his year at home and while looking ahead to his senior year we found out that he wouldn’t be 
able to attend school due to the fact that he has never been vaccinated.  He completed his schooling at 
home.  He is unable to continue any sort of secondary education in Maine due to the current vaccination 
requirements. 
My youngest child has been homeschooled for all of his elementary education.  He has learning 
challenges and is currently attending the Caribou Tech Center with an IEP. This plan allows him access to 
these essential, hands on courses, without vaccinations. If he didn’t have this assistance in place he 
would not be allowed to attend; and, at this point, he will also not be able to continue any sort of 
secondary education in Maine after he completes high school. 
Additionally, I have friends who have suffered greatly as a result of being forced to leave their jobs due 
to the vaccine mandates.  Some even had to move to be able to work in a different state.   
 I wholeheartedly support the above bills which would reinstate our freedom to choose what we believe 
is best for our families and give back the educational opportunities we have lost.4 
Respectfully submitted, 
Sigrid Houlette 
Westmanland, Maine 
Sigrid Houlette
Westmanland
LD 1228
Please see testimony document attached, thank you.
