Terri Hutchinson
Auburn
LD 1228
I am here in support of LD51:An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical 
Exemptions to Immunization Requirements, 1148:An Act to Prohibit COVID-19 
Vaccine Mandates for Students Enrolled in Public Institutions of Learning and 
1228:An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from Requiring 
Vaccines Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization for Admission or 
Attendance. I would also like to voice my support for all acts reinstating the right to 
choose for ourselves what medical care we need.
I don't know if you might remember the mom who drove at 1 am in the snowstorm to 
the last meeting for this topic? That was me. I've been here several times asking you 
to please not remove, and now to please reinstate our exemptions. We are NOT going 
away. We are NOT letting you just take our rights and run. 
Thanks to LD 798, my oldest was removed from school his senior year for nearly a 
month at Christmas until he felt coerced into getting the ONE vaccine he was missing.
My son missed out on a full MONTH of his SENIOR year due to a single vaccine that
has been shown in VAERS to be harmful to more individuals than it's ever saved. Yet
he felt he had no choice but to accept it in order to return to school, to return to his 
friends, and to receive his diploma. 
My middle son was denied the right to ever start school in the first place as we had 
chosen not to vaccinate him from birth due to the medical issues his brother 
encountered as a young child before we stopped his vaccines. My middle son is 
exceptionally healthy. He has never had more than a cold and has an incredibly 
wonderful immune system. What he doesn't have are friends. What he doesn't have is 
a favorite teacher. We talked about homeschooling anyway but we could have done 
that and still chosen to use the local school for gym, art, and music classes prior to LD
798 taking those privileges away. We are able to attend library programs and public 
places but not school. Not sports teams. 
As for myself, I had attempted to better my and my family's lives by going to college 
also but despite having a medical exemption to one vaccine, I could not get one for 
the COVID vaccine unless I proved that I would react to that one as well. Given my 
reaction to the other and the fact that I am already on disability due to medical 
conditions I suffer from, I was NOT willing to attempt that and further ruin my life. 
Therefore I was forced to not go back to college after the COVID vaccine came out 
despite desperately wanting to do so. I am grateful to hear that years later the COVID 
vaccine is no longer required at my chosen institution so I might finally be able to 
begin classes in person again but that is not the case for so many other schools. That 
requirement is taking away the right to further education for so many people like 
myself who cannot learn online, those who need classroom interaction to succeed. 
Please consider reinstating the right to an education in Maine for EVERYONE 
because at the moment while you may believe there are educational opportunities for 
everyone I can guarantee you there are some like myself being dropped through the 
cracks and that's not okay. Not in Maine. I never thought I would need to ask this but 
please reinstate our right to an education. 
Thank you. 
