Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee Room 437 
April 10, 2023 
Testimony of David M Whitney of Marshﬁeld in Favor of LD 1329 
david@whitneywreath.com 207 632 7117 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the Veterans and Legal 
Affairs committee. My name is David Whitney, and I am here to testify in favor of LD 1329. 
Beers created by Maine Craft Breweries are readily sought by craft beer drinkers in Mainers and 
by visitors. Many thousands of visitors enjoy craft beers while traveling throughout the state of 
Maine to sample some of the 163 individual breweries. Once in their home state, their ability to 
purchase or sample Maine beers is not currently possible. 
The passage of LD1329 will allow craft breweries from around Maine to send their beers to 
customers in their home states who are at least 21 years of age. There are currently 14 states 
which allow beer to be shipped directly to the consumer including Alaska, California, 
Connecticut, Florida, Louisiana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oregon, 
Virginia, Washington, DC, West Virginia, and Wyoming. 
My company, Downeast Packaging Solutions, located in Whitneyville of Washington County, has 
35 years of expertise in packaging, marketing, and pick, pack, ship distribution direct to the 
consumer via UPS. lt is my desire and motivation to partner with entities and to bring exposure 
to Maine Craft Breweries brands and ﬂavors by offering a subscription to craft beer enthusiasts 
so that they may sample several assorted ﬂavors each month. Each chosen beer would have 
accompanying marketing materials from the crafter of that brew. 
We believe that Maine craft beer enthusiasts would enjoy a beer subscription. We also believe 
that our marketing efforts will go a good distance to lend exposure to breweries that they might 
not otherwise receive but for travel within Maine. We believe that exposing Maine Craft Brews 
to new customers both within Maine and outside of Maine will help craft breweries increase 
their volume of beer distributed. This expansion in volume will be refreshing to these small 
businesses who are currently suffering from a lower volume of beer sold due to inﬂationary 
pressures negatively affecting their consumers. lf successfully implemented, this additional 
volume will also help the employees of our company. 
I believe that the passage of this bill will help Maine craft brewers, Consumers who love Maine 
beer, and the employees and management of Downeast Packaging Solutions. Please, vote ought 
to pass for LD 1329. 
Thank you. David Whitney
