 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
 
In Opposition to LD 1329 , An Act to Allow Delivery of Maine Craft Beer  
 
Hearing Date: April 10, 2023  
 
Senator  Hickman , Representative  Supica , and Members  of the  Joint Standing Committee on  
Veterans and Legal Affairs , my name is  Megan Scott and I am the  Substance Use Prevention 
Program Manager within the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention - Division of 
Disease Prevention. I am here today to provide testimony on behalf of the Maine CDC and will 
be speaking  against LD 1329, An Act to Allow Delivery of Maine Craft Beer . 
 
This bill allo ws a small brewery or a 3rd -party contractor of a small brewery to deliver 
containers of malt liquor produced by the brewery to a customer 21 years of age or older who 
provides acceptable identification. The Maine CDC opposes this legislation and offers th e 
following comments for your consideration.  
 
It is often overlooked just how pervasive the harms of alcohol use (and indeed, expansion to 
alcohol access) are. The U.S. CDC released a report last year showing that  an average of 140,000 
deaths are caused by  alcohol each year (more than the opioid epidemic), and that in 2019 nearly 
two thirds of those deaths were working -age Americansi. Maine’s level of alcohol use is among 
the highest in the nation,ii and alcohol is involved in nearly 40% of all roadway fat alities in 
Maine, a larger share than all but three other states.iii Broadening access to alcohol by permitting 
third party delivery services to deliver craft beer, can further  increase alcohol -related harms  at 
the hands of an entity who is not trained to do so, or named as a liable party in Maine’s current 
liquor law.  
 
What we cannot emphasize clearly enough is that infrastructure for education and enforcement 
of third -party  delivery services to safely deli ver alcohol are not in place. These delivery service  
profes sionals  are not required to take any form of responsible beverage service education which 
is available to and encouraged for  liquor license holders and alcohol severs . Education about the 
importanc e of check ing identification ( ID) is vital and  having the  skills to identify false ID and 
an understanding of how and why to assess impairment and refuse sale in the event of an 
impaired customer  are critical for anyone in the role of providing alcohol . There is no structure 
to impart why it is imperative that ID is checked at the time of delivery and that these parcels are 
not left on the doorstep  to fall into undera ged hands , or to assess the appropriately aged recipient 
for impairment. Overserving alcohol is a danger that liquor servers and sellers are warned to 
avoid . Alcohol poisoning , injury, or death can occur , harming the overserved customer and those 
 
 around  them.   
 
The implications of a third -party delivery service who is not held legally accountable by the 
Maine Liquor Liability Act (28 -A, Chapter 100) are gravely concerning. Under statute, the 
licensee, cle rk, and the manager on duty at the time of the sale of an alcoholic beverage can be 
held responsible  for up to $350,000 in damages and an unlimited amount of medical costs  for the 
life of the customer  if harm is caused by a person who is overserved. Third party delivery drivers 
are not accounted for  in this law . The liability of their decisions or of the level of education and 
enforcement available to the se delivery services  (which is currently minimal) would fall entirely 
on the shoulders of the liquor lic ensee and their employees.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC  believes the costs and dangers of what this bill allows outweighs all 
benefit, as it would require an overhaul of our liquor educational systems, enforcement, and how 
the Maine Liquor Liability Act itself is composed. In the interest of the public health and safety, 
the Maine CDC respectfully recommends LD 1329  be voted  ought not to pass.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from the Committee , and I will be available t o participate in the 
work session.  
 
 
i PBS News Hour: “Study Reveals stark number of Alcohol -related deaths among young Americans” (2022):  
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/study -reveals -stark -number -of-alcohol -related -deaths -among -young -americans   
ii Centers for Disease C ontrol and Prevention, “Data on Excessive Drinking” (2022): 
https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/data -stats.htm  
iii National Highway Traffic Safety Administration April 2022 Report  
