HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002
(207) 287-1440
TTY: (207) 287-4469
         Chad R. Perkins
                         POB 251
            Dover-Foxcroft, ME 04426
   Residence: (207) 279-0927
         Fax: (207) 305-4907
        Chad.Perkins@legislature.maine.gov
                                                                                                                                  
2 Apr 23
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: LD 582, An Act to Enhance Certain Penalties for Possession of Firearms by Prohibited 
Persons
Committee Chair Senator Beebee-Center, Committee Chair Representative Salisbury and my fellow 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety ,
   I am offering testimony in support of LD 582, An Act to Enhance Certain Penalties for Possession of 
Firearms by Prohibited Persons .
   The common denominator in violent crime is the propensity and willingness to commit violent action
by the perpetrator, not the means in which the violence was executed. And while I whole-heartedly 
believe in the Second Amendment of the Constitution of the United States and Section 16 of the 
Constitution of the State of Maine, there are those individuals who have voluntarily given up their 
rights by infringing on the rights of others by committing violent action against innocent people and 
have demonstrated that they cannot operate safely under the order of civil society.
   While the reaction to such occurrences by some is to limit the constitutional rights of our citizens, 
violating the Second Amendment of the Constitution of the United States and Section 16 of the 
Constitution of the State of Maine, a more appropriate course of action would be to strictly enforce 
existing laws that keep firearms out of the hands of individuals who have shown to be a threat to the 
law abiding Americans who are entitled to the continued protection of their individual liberties and 
inherent and inalienable constitutional rights.  
   
   
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville Township, &
Southeast Piscataquis
LD   582
Page 2
   
   While I am generally against increasing the number of felony crimes in our judicial 
system, I support the changes made by LD 582.
   I encourage the committee to consider this legislation and support it with a vote of 
‘Ought To Pass’. I thank you for your  polite consideration in this matter.
Respectfully,
Rep. Chad R. Perkins
District 31
ATT:
CF:
Committee Chair Senator Beebee-Center
Committee Chair Representative Salisbury
Criminal Justice and Public Safety  Committee Members
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis

