1 
 Written Testimony on 
L.D. 582, “An Act to Enhance Certain Penalties for Possession of Firearms by 
Prohibited Persons” 
Presented by 
Deputy Chief Christopher M. Martin 
Brewer Police Department 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
April 5, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and  distinguished members of 
the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety : 
 
I am submitting testimony in support of the passage  of LD 582,” An Act to 
Enhance Certain Penalties for Possession of Firearm s by Prohibited Persons”.   
The Brewer Police Department has investigated numer ous cases involving 
firearms possession by prohibited persons, many of which were involved in 
trafficking of illicit drugs.  In one such case, su spected drug users and traffickers 
had unlawfully obtained a firearm and had traded th at firearm in exchange for 
drugs, this handgun was later involved in a gang re lated murder in New York 
City.  In another instance, a suspected drug traffi cker was obtaining numerous 
firearms and supplying them to drug traffickers aff iliated with out of state gangs.  
Another example involved a couple that had procured  a firearm who were 
active users of illicit drugs, and after a weekend of heavy methamphetamine 
and fentanyl use one of them unfortunately succumbe d to the effects of the 
drug use.  Nearly all of our drug trafficking inves tigations have involved 
weaponry, as of late. 
The prevalence of guns in relation to drug traffick ing is alarming, and the 
increase of gun violence associated with the drug t rade has impacted Maine.  
This is true across the state, and has significantl y increased over the past 
decade. 
Our current laws treat prohibited gun possession of fenses as a minor crime, and 
this doesn’t adequately address the underlying seri ousness and risks associated 
with this criminal behavior.  Someone under the inf luence of methamphetamine 
or heroin and in possession of firearms is a signif icant risk to the general public as 
they possess a diminished capacity to make good dec isions while seriously 
2 
 impaired.  Traffickers from out of state with ties to organized crime come to 
Maine to procure firearms, often through “straw pur chases” – individuals who 
live locally who obtain the firearm on their behalf .  There is a companion bill 
coming out that will make “straw purchases” illegal  in Maine, something that 
currently doesn’t exist. 
Our state statute for prohibited persons for firear ms mirrors that of Federal 
statutes in definition and language, but lacks the seriousness in crime 
classifications that the Federal statutes do.  This  makes possessing firearms by a 
prohibited person in Maine a low risk but high rewa rd criminal venture, 
something we must address.  
We must recognize that illicit drug consumption is a money-making venture, one 
that organized crime is the profiteer.  The Mexican  Cartels control every major 
distribution hub in the United States with no other  criminal organization posed to 
challenge their dominance.  All of the fentanyl, me thamphetamine, and 
cocaine that we have here in our state came from th e distribution of the 
Mexican Cartels, which has an identified presence i n New England states.  From 
there it goes to other levels of organized crime, g angs, and is further distributed 
at the street level.   
We are seeing wholesale quantity seizures of fentan yl and methamphetamine 
by patrol officers in my area.  Pounds and kilogram s are readily available, this is 
a significant change from years past. 
Our demand is at an all time high, as illustrated b y record numbers of overdoses 
and overdose deaths.   
Supply sources, gangs, are now coming to my area to  distribute drugs to meet 
the demand.  A stark contrast from years past when our consumers travelled to 
Massachusetts to procure drugs for use and sale.  T hese gang members come 
from New York, Connecticut, and Massachusetts.  Gun  involvements and 
violence are becoming more common place.  The under lying reason is because 
its about money, making money.  Criminal organizati ons profit while our citizenry 
is at risk. 
I would also ask that an additional change is writt en into our statute that would 
exempt marijuana use.  Adult marijuana use is now l egal in Maine and our 
statute should reflect this. 
I respectfully ask for your support on this bill to  give law enforcement a much-
needed tool to combat organized crime here in Maine . 
