Maine Legislature 
Taxation Committee 
2 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
May 4, 2023 
Re: LD 1582, An Act to Clarify What Constitutes a Homestead for the Homestead Property Tax 
Exemption 
Chairpersons Grohoski and Perry, and honorable members of the Taxation Committee: 
My name is Kerry Leichtman. I am the assessor for Camden, Rockport and Rockland. On February 25, 
2021, a house ﬁre in Camden took the life of 14 year old Theodore Hedstrom. Theodore ’s father, Tom 
Hedstrom, questioned why my ofﬁce had issued a homestead exemption to his ex-wife when the building 
in which they resided was not a legal dwelling. We weren’t aware that they were living in a workshop 
that, although it was being converted to a dwelling, it was not one yet. I checked statute. Our vetting 
procedure was according to statute, but that was of little solace to anyone. 
I met with my town manager and director of planning and development to try and come up with a way to 
bolster our vetting process. The plan we came up with was to have the planning and codes department 
review each homestead application, as they are in the best position to know of any issues with properties 
in town, to ensure the occupied building is a legal dwelling. 
We now do this regularly. 
LD 1582, introduced by Rep Doudera, rearranges a paragraph that deﬁnes what is a homestead for the 
purposes of the homestead exemption into bullet points and also adds three words, “A legal dwelling, ” to 
the deﬁnition. Now the ﬁrst requirement in deﬁning homestead for the purposes of the homestead 
exemption is that the applicant be living in a legal dwelling. 
I am on MMA’s Legislative Policy Committee. When this bill was discussed there, the original wording 
was, “A legally established dwelling that meets all relevant state and local codes.” The LPC’s initial 
reaction to this bill was supportive but as the discussion wore on it was pointed out that older homes, 
although legal dwellings, would not meet all relevant state and local codes, and that the phrase “legally 
established, ” could be taken as having received a certiﬁcate of occupancy, which is a relatively recent 
requirement for new homes. 
So the line was edited down to its essence, that the residence be, “a legal dwelling. ” I ran this bya 
member of the LPC who works in planning and development and who favored the intent but, in the end, 
did not vote to support the bill. He had no problem with the rewritten version. I certainly can’t say for 
sure but I suspect had, “A legal dwelling, ” been before the LPC it would have won their endorsement. 
This is a simple but signiﬁcant additional requirement and I respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass.
