1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Thursday, May 4, 2023, 1:00 PM 
  
LD 1582 – An Act to Clarify What Constitutes a Homestead for the Homestead 
Property Tax Exemption 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
providing testimony at the request of the Administration Against LD 1582 – An Act 
to Clarify What Constitutes a Homestead for the Homestead Property Tax 
Exemption. 
This bill would result in unnecessary costs for taxpayers, municipalities, and 
the State.  The bill may require all current recipients of the exemption to complete 
a new application to verify eligibility.  Requiring all recipients of the homestead 
exemption to reapply will cause a significant amount of work for municipalities.  
Similarly, requiring municipal assessors to determine whether existing properties 
meet building or other codes will create considerable work on their part.  This 
additional work will trigger the 90% State reimbursement requirement under the 
Maine Constitution, article IX, section 21 for costs incurred by the municipalities 
to administer the changes. 
 The Administration would like to note the following technical concerns with 
the bill: 
• The term “legally established dwelling” should be defined or clarified. 
2 
 • “Relevant state and local codes” should be defined or clarified.   
• The bill should clarify who is to establish whether property is a legally 
established dwelling, and how.  Homestead eligibility is generally 
determined by the assessor, who may not be in a position to determine 
whether a property meets, for example, local plumbing codes.   
• The requirement for a homestead to be located in Maine is unnecessary, 
since Maine municipalities are not authorized to tax residential property in 
another state. 
• The placement in separate paragraphs of the requirement for the applicant to 
own the property and the requirement for cooperative housing corporation to 
own the property is unclear may lead to misinterpretation. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
