LD1582 
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen of the legislature. My name is Tom Hedstrom. I am a former US Army officer 
and Ranger. i have lived in Camden, and run my own electrical contracting business from there, for more than 19 
years. And, for the past 11 months, I have served on the Camden Select Board. Thank you for having me here today. 
I read directly to you from this proposed act: 
Part A. Requiring the property to have ”A legally established dwelling." 
I want to talk about, and emphasize, that particular provision of this act. 
For those of you who do not know, my 14-year-old son, Theodore, died in a building fire in February of 2021. 
Theodore was trapped in that building ﬁre, and I emphasize the word building, because this was not a house, as 
was often incorrectly referred to, and reported on, in the aftermath of the ﬁre. The owner of this property, at which 
Theodore died, had applied for, and received, a homestead tax exemption for that building, despite no certiﬁcate of 
occupancy ever having been issued by the town of Camden. I say again, there was a homestead tax exemption fora 
building that had no certiﬁcate of occupancy. in addition, the property owner had performed extensive amounts of 
unpermitted and illegal construction inside the building, that directly led to the death of my son. This illegal 
construction included an incorrectly and dangerously wired dryer, smoked detectors that had been Intentionally 
disabled, and the construction of an elevated pine box maze-like sleeping construction, from which Theodore had 
no escape in a black smoke environment, which was fueled by a fast-moving ﬁre, created by the off gas of illegally 
cooked drugs. 
Theodore ’s death was a tragedy that could have, and should have, been avoided. Certainly, DHHS and the police 
department failed him. His death may have, and future tragedies may be, prevented If we change how we deﬁne 
and regulate what we consider and allow as a residence. For example, if, when this property owner had applied for 
a homestead tax exemption, the town of Camden had been more empowered to research the nature of the 
property and the buildings on it, the domino effect of illegal construction and unsafe conditions that lead to 
Theodore ’s death may have been discovered and prevented. 
I am in the process of studying, learning, and writing about forgiveness. Part of that process includes truth; 
discovering and analyzing what happened, and advocating for change. Because of that, I strongly encourage you 
and your colleagues in the legislature, as a dedicated and responsible citizen of Maine, as a decorated military 
veteran, as a professional who deals with NFPA and life safety codes every day, as a policy maker for the town of 
Camden, and, especially, as a devastated and grieving father, to do everything you can to create conditions in which 
we reward safe residential building practices, and discourage and penalize those who would attempt to avoid our 
building codes and life safety codes, including by simply denying them tax exemptions. This type of policy protects 
us all, especially our most vulnerable: our elderly, disabled, and youth. 
Again, thank you for hearing me today. I am always available for questions, to provide more information, if you 
have any. 
Tom Hedstrom 
24 Mount Battie Street 
Camden, ME 04843 
§9.l31§‘1i’l.‘~?_<5_5lI§7.IQ§?3 ;’@_i_Y§££.(3;"l 
207-701-6264
