. L‘ 
-' 
._;I" -.=, 
_ __ _, 
'$'§§~ 
..'Q?; .- 
:- -- ,I 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
Vicki Doudm 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
18 Trim Street AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
Camden, ME 04843 (207) 287-1400 
(207) 542-1990 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Victoria. Doudera@legislature.1naine. gov 
May 4, 2023 
Testimony of Re121'esentatz' ve Vic/ti Doudera presemfmg 
LD 1582 An Act to Clarify What Constitutes a Permanent Residence for the 
Homestead Property Tax Exemption 
Before the Yoint Standing Committee on Fixation 
Good day Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation. My name is Vicki Doudera and I represent House District 41, 
the towns of Camden and Rockport. I am before you today to introduce LD 1582, An Act to 
Clarify What Constitutes a Permanent Residence for the Homestead Property Tax 
Exemption. 
This bill, as amended, makes a simple but important addition to the statute deﬁning the term 
“homestead. ” It simply adds to the deﬁnition that the residential property be a “legal dwelling. ” 
The amendment also changes the title of the bill, because we are not reﬁning the deﬁnition of 
a permanent residence, but rather a homestead. 
As this committee well knows, the deﬁnition of the term “homestead ” is already in statute. A 
homestead must be residential property, located i11 the state, assessed as real property owned 
by the applicant or held in a revocable living trust. It must be occupied by the applicant as 
their permanent residence, or owned by a cooperative housing corporation and occupied asa 
permanent residence by a resident who is a qualifying shareholder. Finally, a “homestead ” 
cannot be property that is used solely for commercial purposes. 
This deﬁnition is already law. If LD 1582 passes, and I hope it does, we will add to the current 
deﬁnition that a homestead is a “legal dwelling. ” 
Here is why this small change is important. 
In February of 2021, a ﬁre broke out at 7 Mount Battie Street in Camden, and a 14-year-old boy, 
Theodore Hedstrom, died in an upstairs sleeping area of a garage/workshop structure —a 
structure that was not permitted as a residence. Later our planning and development director 
District 41: Camden and Rockport
would say that no permits had been applied for to convert the workshop into a dwelling, and 
therefore the town had never issued a certiﬁcate of occupancy. He said it was unknown to him 
when the conversion from garage/workshop to dwelling had even taken place. 
Since that tragic night, I have worked with Theodore ’s father to explore ways that his son’s 
death could have been prevented. Thomas Hedstrom, who is here today, did not reside at7 
Mount Battie Street as Theodore was staying with his mother and her partner at the time. Mr. 
Hedstrom and I looked at making changes to the electrical code but it was our assessor in 
Camden, Kerry Leichtman, who proposed what has become LD 1582.l 
As you have heard, the structure in which Theodore Hedstrom perished was not a legal 
dwelling. It was a bare—bones workshop with substandard wiring, a literal ﬁre-trap, and yet 
somehow it had flown under the radar and even qualiﬁed for a homestead exemption. 
In his role as Camden’s assessor, Kerry Leichtman looked up the veriﬁcation requirements for 
homesteads in statute to make sure our town was following the process as prescribed. He 
found that the town was indeed adhering to the law, but that, in his words, the law “was not 
enough.” 
The addition of “legal dwelling ” to the deﬁnition of homestead is the ﬁx that we propose. LD 
1582 as amended no longer asks that the dwelling meet all relevant state and local codes, so as 
not to impact any older, established homes currently receiving the exemption. 
No community should have to go through what Camden went through when we suffered this 
loss in 2021, and no father should have to suffer as Mr. Hedstrom has from the loss of a vibrant, 
loving son. Adding “legal dwelling ” to the deﬁnition of homestead may not seem like much, but 
it is a positive change that could perhaps save a life in another Maine community. I urge you to 
pass LD 1582 as amended. 
Thank you, and I am happy to answer any questions. 
Wlv/P4 lQD~l'~— 
Re1)1'esentatz' oe Vicki Doudera 
District 41: Camden and Rockport
