Good afternoon and thank you for your time today. 
lam here today to speak out against LD123. While the intention behind this bill may be well- 
meaning, l believe it poses a significant threat to free speech and intellectual freedom. 
As stated in this proposed bill, if a matter is declared obscene in a legal proceeding and the 
Attorney General or District Attorney finds that any public school is disseminating that material, 
they will be ordered to cease and desist. Many public schools already have policies in place to 
guide students in selecting material that is relevant to them based on age and/or lived 
experience. These policies, which are already in place, and implemented by highly trained 
professionals (that's credentialed and certified school librarians) are specifically designed to 
balance the need to protect children from harmful content while still allowing for freedom of 
inquiry and expression. 
Additionally, the definition of "obscene" can be subjective and varies from person to person. 
This can lead to censorship of material that may be valuable for educational or artistic purposes 
but simply deemed offensive by certain individuals. 
Furthermore, this bill will unduly burden the Attorney General and district attorneys and bog 
down and already overburdened court system. How will our DAs and AG find the time to do 
their due diligence to consider the matter as a whole to determine "literary, artistic, political or 
scientific value?" 
Lastly, this bill fails to consider the importance of academic freedom and the ability of 
educators to provide students with a well-rounded education. For instance, a work of literature 
that contains scenes or themes deemed obscene by some may hold significant literary, cultural, 
or historical value, and banning it would be a disservice to students ‘ education. One individual's 
perspective cannot be allowed to supersede all others. 
ln conclusion, _l believe that LD123 goes too far, will further and needlessly burden an already 
overwhelmed system, and threatens free speech, intellectual freedom, and academic inquiry. 
Therefore, I urge you to vote against this bill. Thank you. 
Abigail Thompson 
School Librarian 
RSU 78, Rangeley Lakes Regional School 
Rangeley, Maine
