While on the surface this bill looks sensible, the difficulty falls under who gets to decide what is 
considered obscene, as the national embarrassment involving Renaissance art in Florida so 
clearly demonstrates. A law like this would put humanities teachers at risk for having a class 
read Odysseus, studying Renaissance art with them, or reading The Great Gatsby. It would 
prevent science teachers from teaching about such essential and longstanding topics as the 
digestive system.  
 The fact that this law is likely intended to restrict GLBTQ inclusion in the classroom is 
downright dangerous. Whether one likes it or not, GLBTQ people do exist, and the choices of 
how to work with that boils down to harming young people or supporting them – both those 
who are GLBTQ, and those who are not. Study after study shows that students who feel safe, 
seen, and reflected by their school content thrive, and those who do not feel safe suffer, often 
to the point of suicide or, in the case of extreme bullying, violence at the hands of peers. Non-
GLBTQ students are similarly affected by the fallout from this, and by the risk that they, too, will 
be thought to be GLBTQ, whether or not they are. 
 Books and stories – from picture books in kindergarten that reflect children’s reality by 
showing all kinds of families to Hector ad Patroclus in the Iliad – help a great deal with this. 
There is a very big difference between my GLBTQ students who come to class every day talking 
about Minecraft and dinosaurs, and the terrified kids I grew up with who were frightened for 
their lives and unable to focus on learning, growing, or anything else because of it.  
 A law like this would similarly restrict health education, and this, too, is very dangerous, 
both because of the risks posed by voluntary sexual encounters, and those posed by sexual 
assault. I taught for several years in a school for students with high degrees of trauma, and one 
constant factor in those who had been assaulted or exploited was their lack of information 
about physiology, sexuality, assault, and STIs. It made them far easier targets, and also made 
recovery from their experiences far more difficult for them.  
 There are other ways to protect young people that do not strip them of the right to an 
artistic or health education and do not enable those who wish harm to 20% of the population 
to enact it. We do not need this law.   
Anna  Logowitz
Sedgwick
LD 123
While on the surface this bill looks sensible, the difficulty falls under who gets to 
decide what is considered obscene, as the national embarrassment involving 
Renaissance art in Florida so clearly demonstrates. A law like this would put 
humanities teachers at risk for having a class read Odysseus, studying Renaissance art
with them, or reading The Great Gatsby. It would prevent science teachers from 
teaching about such essential and longstanding topics as the digestive system. 
The fact that this law is likely intended to restrict GLBTQ inclusion in the 
classroom is downright dangerous. Whether one likes it or not, GLBTQ people do 
exist, and the choices of how to work with that boils down to harming young people 
or supporting them – both those who are GLBTQ, and those who are not. Study after 
study shows that students who feel safe, seen, and reflected by their school content 
thrive, and those who do not feel safe suffer, often to the point of suicide or, in the 
case of extreme bullying, violence at the hands of peers. Non-GLBTQ students are 
similarly affected by the fallout from this, and by the risk that they, too, will be 
thought to be GLBTQ, whether or not they are.
Books and stories – from picture books in kindergarten that reflect children’s reality
by showing all kinds of families to Hector ad Patroclus in the Iliad – help a great deal 
with this. There is a very big difference between my GLBTQ students who come to 
class every day talking about Minecraft and dinosaurs, and the terrified kids I grew up
with who were frightened for their lives and unable to focus on learning, growing, or 
anything else because of it. 
A law like this would similarly restrict health education, and this, too, is very 
dangerous, both because of the risks posed by voluntary sexual encounters, and those 
posed by sexual assault. I taught for several years in a school for students with high 
degrees of trauma, and one constant factor in those who had been assaulted or 
exploited was their lack of information about physiology, sexuality, assault, and STIs.
It made them far easier targets, and also made recovery from their experiences far 
more difficult for them. 
There are other ways to protect young people that do not strip them of the right to 
an artistic or health education and do not enable those who wish harm to 20% of the 
population to enact it. We do not need this law.  

