Anthony Shostak
Greene
LD 123
I am writing in support of LD 123 - An Act to Eliminate the Educational Purposes 
Exception to the Prohibition on the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors.
I am a parent of two teens. My career for these past thirty-plus years has been in 
education, and I sit on the board of directors of my local school district. Please note 
that my opinions expressed in this letter, though informed partly by my experience as 
a school director, should in no way should be construed as representing the board as a 
whole.
Why there is obviously obscene matter in school libraries beggars comprehension. 
Anyone who supported the law to allow the exemption this bill would remove should 
understand how their good intentions have been perverted. I had to review a book 
challenged in our district. This book contains the sexually explicit image of one 
person’s phallus firmly planted in someone else’s mouth. That sentence bears 
repeating: It is as graphic and explicit as the hardest of hardcore pornography.   
Allowing school librarians to place this in the hands of children is an egregious lapse 
of judgement. 
That lapse of judgement has knock-on effects; for one, it makes the job of a school 
director incredibly difficult. When righteously indignant parents challenge these 
obscene materials, the district’s lawyers caution that removing the book opens the 
school to First Amendment lawsuits. Do we remove the book for the good of the 
children in our district, or do we protect the district from litigation? So, you see, you 
legislators have created a problem. Obviating the situation by preventing these books’
presence in school libraries is the obvious solution. Eliminating the Educational 
Purposes Exception to the Prohibition on the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to 
Minors will do just that.
In addition to allowing school directors to concentrate their attentions on policies and 
fiscal matters instead of wading through community-dividing obscenity challenges, 
eliminating the exemption will help school librarians more wisely invest tax dollars in
materials more germane to the subjects taught in public schools and more suitable for 
the immature minds of the students. There are ample examples of books and movies 
that present the same subjects as those in the obscene ones, but without the obscenity, 
without the graphic explicitness of the particulars of someone’s ejaculation, the ease 
with which someone’s several fingers slipped into someone else’s (choose an orifice),
or the sensations of rhythmic penetration. One does not have to resort to obscenity to 
portray the diversity of human experience. 
If the aforementioned book with the fellatio image were a movie, it would have been 
rated NC17. No adult, not even a school librarian, would be allowed to bring a minor 
into a theater to watch it. No exceptions. Why then, do we allow this awful 
stuff—things that once seen cannot be unseen—into a school library? I’ll tell you 
why: because Maine’s legislature thought it would be a great idea. That was a horrible
decision. 
Now is your chance to undo that mistake, to right a wrong, for the good of our 
children and the future of Maine and our nation.
Please give your vote in support of LD 123 - An Act to Eliminate the Educational 
Purposes Exception to the Prohibition on the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to 
Minors.

