beth carlson
Kennebunk, Maine
LD 123
May 4, 2023
“Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Beth Carlson and
I am an English teacher at RSU21 and a member of the Maine Council for English 
Language Arts. I am writing because I oppose LD 123.
 
Here in Maine we pride ourselves on local control.  We also have traditionally had a 
culture that valued a live and let live sentiment.  This law goes against both of these 
values.  My three towns’ values are different, I’m sure than Houlton’s or Rangely’s.  
Each town should be free to fill their school and classroom libraries with books that 
reflect their values.  In addition, most if not all schools have opt out policies that 
parents can exercise.  I teach students who come in with different backgrounds, 
experiences, identities, and interests.  What one parent deems obscene is not offensive
to others.
In addition, we do not need another bill to do police obscenities because we have 
existing laws that work in our state. Librarians and teachers do not promote, possess, 
or distribute obscene materials as defined in Maine Code and decades of US Supreme 
Court case law, nor do we promote, possess, or distribute pornography to children. 
Distributing obscene materials and/or pornography to minors is illegal under current 
laws.  This bill would add to an already backed-up court system, wasting taxpayer 
money and resources.
Finally, books are tools for understanding complex issues. Limiting young people's 
access to books does not protect them from life's complex and challenging issues; in 
fact, books help them navigate the complexities they will face.  
I’d like to reiterate that local control based on a community’s values and even more 
local control by letting parents’ who have concerns about a book opt their child out is 
what already happens.  This bill will only clog the courts with complaints from 
activists trying to impose their will on a community.  Please unanimously vote not to 
pass LD123.
Sincerely, 
Beth Carlson
bcarlson@rsu21.net

