Brandie Burrows
Yarmouth
LD 123
I am speaking today as a teacher librarian from Yarmouth. I am very concerned about 
this proposed legislation and the impact it would have on my profession and, more 
importantly, on my students.
A comprehensive, legal definition of obscenity has not been established. According to
the Oxford dictionary, the definition of obscene is “offensive to moral principles.” I 
am an expert in my field but would not presume to be able to determine the moral 
principles of every child and every family in the state of Maine. The definition of 
obscene is subjective and should be left to the discretion of the schools the individual 
families. This bill supports the creation of a state wide morality police which would 
severely impact education in Maine. 
What is obscene to me will look different to what is obscene to my neighbor. I 
support the parent/family's right to discuss and decide what is appropriate for their 
family. As a parent, I know what is best for my child. I know their interests and 
maturity level and I also trust the educators we have hired to build a library collection 
that will not only meet my child’s needs, but the needs of all children in the school. I 
do not presume to know what is best for every child, nor should anyone else. There is 
a real push to discredit trust in our public schools and I believe this is a dangerous 
path to take and that our students will suffer for it. 
As public schools we serve the needs of the people in our communities. Each school 
district is different and therefore each school has different needs. This bill is seeking 
to remove an exemption that empowers educators to make professional judgments in 
their communities. We, educators and librarians, are the professionals in our field. 
This bill is seeking to minimize our area of expertise. As a librarian I was required to 
get a masters degree. School districts hire librarians to navigate the hundreds of books
published for young people each year. We do this by reading professional reviews, by
knowing our school’s curriculum and finding materials to support it, and by listening 
to our students’ interests. In short, we develop collections that match the needs and 
interests of the unique communities we serve. Librarians labor over book selection, 
with limited budgets I might add, and we care deeply about the students in our 
building. The accusation that I would harm a student with the books in my library  is 
insulting. 
There is a difference between evidence and anecdotal feelings. Proponents of this bill 
suggest that students should be protected from or are being harmed by obscene 
materials in school libraries. To my knowledge, there are no scientific studies or data 
that shows that a person has been harmed because of a book. The proponents of this 
bill are relying on feelings and anecdotes not facts. 
LD123 is overly broad, intrusive, and restrictive in its efforts to protect children from 
“obscene” materials in books. Please deny passage of LD123. Public schools need 
this exemption in order to teach skills and support curriculum, such as high school 
anatomy textbooks or materials for a middle school health class, but also to support 
the inquiry and curiosity of every student.
