 
 
May 3, 2023  
 
Testimony re: LD 123 : “An Act to Prohi bit the Dissemination  of Obs cene Matter  to Minors  in Public Schools ” and LD 
1008: “An Act to Establish a Rating System for Books in S chool Libraries ” – OUGHT NOT TO PASS  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs : 
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment in opposition to  LD 123 and LD 1008. My name is Chris McLaughlin, 
and I am a licensed clinical social worker with over 22 years of experience providing behavioral health services to children 
and families across a variety of treatment settings here in Maine . I am also humb led to be  the Executive Director of the 
Maine Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers (NASW- ME). A large part of my job at NASW -ME is to 
represent the interests of Maine’s social workers as they endeavor to meet the behavioral health needs of Maine people across all settings and ages from Fort Kent to York and all places in between . On behalf of our over 1000 members here in 
Maine, including many school social workers, I’m honored to share thoughts on this important proposed legislation.   
 
The title s of these  proposed  bills are misleading. What on the surface appea rs to be efforts to simp ly protect children are in 
fact designed to, among other thi ngs, disrupt  local control , minimi ze the training and expertise of  educators and be havior al 
health providers, and further marginalize youth from historically underrepresented and oppres sed communitie s. These bills 
represent v ersions of many “culture war ” bills flooding state legislatures all across the gover nment. Bills such as LD 12 3 
and LD 1008 have no place in our great state . 
 
LD 12 3 is an affront to the well-established concepts of access to educational materials, freedom o f expression, 
encouragement of  critical thinking, and supporting student intellect ual freedom  and first amendment rights. This bill fails 
to acknowledge the training and expertise of scho ol librari ans who already thoroughly r eview library  materials for the ir 
total educational value and of teachers who are highly skilled in identif ying what materials best align with the concepts 
they are looking to teach to their students. NASW -ME is particularly concerned for school social workers and school 
counselors who must be trusted to identify what resources their students need to assist them with whatever behavioral 
health crisis is happening for that student in that mo ment. Finally, we are c oncerned with  the impact that LD 123 would 
have on Maine ’s already understaffed and backed -up court system. This bill has the p otential to further distract cour ts away 
from more pressing needs and is a waste of taxp ayer funds. LD 12 3, unfortunately,  provides more questions tha n answers  
such as:  
 
How many books, pictures, photos, artwork, and videos would be submitted at the state level?  
  
How wi ll this effort burden our Distr ict Attorneys and Attorney General  as citizens subm it “matter ” that they find 
objectionable ?  
  
How much time this will take up in the already busy court system?  
  
How much this will cost the state with trials to determine if the books challenged are obscene?  
  
How will our  Distr ict Attorneys and Attorney General  find the time to do their due diligence to consider the matter as a 
whole to determine "literary, artistic, political or scientific value."  
 
Similarly, LD 1008 would propose  an unnecessary legislative mandate on Maine schools who are already struggling with 
administrative burdens , staffing vacancies, federal and stat e assessment requirements, and managi ng an ever growing youth 
behavioral health crisis, not to mention the epide mics of teacher b urnout and  low staff moral e. This bill would expose 
Maine schools to any number of  outside  special inter est groups looking to turn profi t or push their harmful  agenda s onto 
the students of Maine. Many state and professional organizations believe that blanket and one -sided rating syste ms for 
books would violate s tudent and parent freedoms and would f urther harm students who identify w ith historically 
marginalized and underrepresented groups such as students of color  and from indigenous  comm unities, LGBTQ + students, 
and students from minor ity religions and ethnicitie s. LD 1008 is a bla tant form of cens orship. NASW -ME is a strong 
proponent of parents having the  right to set expe ctations for their own children. However, we oppose  the notion that one 
individual or small group of individuals should have the power to limit access for all the youth of that school.  By requiring 
publishers to adhere to a standard set for just one state, th e passage of LD 1008 will likely result in a reduction in the 
number of vendors doing business in Maine and therefore, would give only cert ain vendors who prom ote a c ertain set of 
values t he ability to make a profit on Maine sc hools  as the y advance their  capitalistic  ideology. ALL st udents need to feel 
seen and valued in schools. O ne wa y this happens in through representation s of diversity  in books found on library shel ves 
and in classrooms. Unfort unately, the individuals  who back eff orts such as LD 100 8 seem overly focused on rating just 
those books that have characters who are LGBTQ + or who are from BIPOC communi ties. 41% of the books banned across 
U.S. classroo ms and librar ies duri ng the 2021- 2022 school year contained LGBTQ + themes whi le another 40% involved 
major characters of color (1). LD 1008 is just another effort  to eradicate t he exist ence of such communities and further 
perpetuate the harm being done to these youth. Allowing one person’s or group ’s per spective to dictate  what is 
“appropriate ” or “ mature ” content just exacer bates the harmful , yet very pr evalent, practic es of o ppression, discrimination, 
and sham e.  
 
Simply put, the  most successful and  effective way to protect ALL students is to trust school li brari ans, t eachers,  and school 
social workers and cou nselors to decide what  is most appropriate for students who can then work collaboratively with 
parents and families to ma ximize their choice for their children. I urg e this committee  to allow these individ uals to do their 
jobs without obstruction or overreaching laws standing in their wa y by re jecting both LD 123 and LD 1008.  
 I want to  thank you all for your work on this issue.  Please do not hesitate to reach out to NASW -ME for any support we 
can offer , including any social work  representation and participation in any future w ork s essions , should it be necessary, 
for LD 123  and LD 1008.  
 
Thank you again,  
 
 
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW 
Executive Director  
Maine Chapter – NASW  
 
Citations:  
(1) https://www.newsweek.com/among- banned- books -us-schools -41-percent -have-lgbtq- themes -report -1745557  

