David Arthur Kendall of Hancock, ME     05/04/2023  
www.ibelongAmen.com        LD123  
Committee: Education & Cultural Affa irs 
 
Senator Rafferty, Mr . Brennan & Committee Members; I stand before 
you a gay man that spent 30+ years in the lgbTQia TransQueer Gender 
Rainbow Cult and 20+ years as a transgender “woman”. I also stand 
before you a registered sex offender.  
I was shown explicit materials & pornography as a child. I was targeted 
& desensitized  with the very materials this Bill has been cre ated to 
eliminate . Presenting children with sexual materials will create 
sexualized children! Take it from me, please. I know  all about being 
groomed, victimized, sex -trafficked & criminalized by the adults in my 
life that I was supposed to be able to trust & confide in.  
I also know all about grooming and victimizing the  weak and the 
vulnerab le! I was a victim that victimized! I spent many years as a victim 
of sex-trafficking, being conditioned to become an agent for the very ones 
that used, abused and trafficked me.  
Children are being targeted ! Can you all hear me? Children are being 
targeted! Does anyone care? Can we not see the dangers of allowing 
explicit materials in classrooms or libraries? I was the child turned on by 
sexually explicit materials . I was the child that allowed adults to 
condition me! I was the victim that is sitting in the cl assroom  this 
morning waiting for you all to make the right decision!  
These materials CREATE sex offenders! These materials FEED the lusts 
and desires of sexually deviant men and women! How many educators in 
Maine have been charged with sex crimes against a child?!!? One is too 
many! But there have been several over the years .  
I don’t care what you stand for ! I don’t care what you think about me or 
how you feel about my choice of words. I care that we stop this assault 
on children ! I care that we do not allow one more child to become a 
victim because of access to explicit materials in the classroom or school 
libraries!  I care that you all have some type of dignity & integrity  when it 
comes to making the correct and moral decision here. Please PASS LD123  
Are there any questions?  
 
