Deanna Contrino
Saco
LD 123
Dear Committee Members:
LD 123 harms Maine school children by arbitrarily limiting their access to materials 
based upon the whims of individuals. If you have read Where the Wild Things Are 
(Sendak), The Lorax (Seuss), Charlotte’s Web (White) or any of the Harry Potter 
(Rowling) series, you have read a banned book. Chances are, these books were 
available at your school library. Please consider the following:
If you don't like a book at a library, don't check it out. Attempts to change state 
obscenity laws would make everyone a criminal.
Changing state obscenity laws to prosecute librarians is a back-handed attack on our 
First Amendment rights. There are already good policies in libraries that protect and 
preserve access to books and reading. This law would make it a crime for them to 
lend you a book someone else doesn’t like.
A book about sex may make someone uncomfortable. It’s a complex and very 
personal topic. But categorically describing all books about sex as obscene or 
pornographic is someone else imposing their personal morality on everyone. That 
isn’t how our society should work.
Proposed changes to state obscenity laws won’t protect children from images on the 
internet or their phones. Targeting public libraries and schools over books is 
misguided and doesn’t address the real issues.
State obscenity laws rely on a long-standing Supreme Court decision called the Miller
Test to determine if a book or movie is actually obscene or just makes some people 
uncomfortable. The Miller Test has been used successfully since the Regan years to 
make 
Department of Education 2020 Reading Standards 
https://www.maine.gov/doe/learning/content/ela/standards/reading).
This legislation also raises many practical questions:
Will this override all local control decisions about matter such as books, pictures, 
videos, art, etc...used in public schools? 
How many books, pictures, photos, artwork, and videos would be submitted at the 
state level?
How this will burden our District Attorneys and Attorney General?
How much time this will take up in the already busy court system?
How much this will cost the state with trials to determine if books challenged are 
obscene?
How will our DAs and AG will find the time to do their due diligence to consider the 
matter as a whole to determine "literary, artistic, political or scientific value." One of 
the three criteria to determine obscenity in section 1.D.3?
Please show respect for the experience and knowledge of the professionals hired to 
educate our students, and do not pass LD 123. Thank you.
Deanna Contrino, Saco ME

