Elizabeth  Andersen
Maine Association of School Libraries
LD 123
My name is Elizabeth Andersen. I have been an educator for close to 30 years. I have 
taught at all three levels: elementary, middle, and high school, both as a classroom 
teacher and a school librarian. I write to you today as an educator, a parent of a child 
from a marginalized group, and the President-Elect of the Maine Association of 
School Libraries. 
I urge you to vote against LD 123, which proposes to override local decisions about 
all materials used in our schools. The key question is: who gets to decide what is 
obscene? The United States Supreme Court in 1973 outlined the requirements for 
obscenity in Miller v California; this sets the precedent that obscenity is defined by:
(1) whether the average person applying contemporary community standards would 
find the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest;
(2) whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct
specifically defined by the applicable state law; and
(3) whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or 
scientific value
This is commonly known as the “Miller Test.” As stated above, the Miller Test states 
that obscenity can be defined by the average person applying “contemporary 
community standards.” School districts already have policies in place that allow 
communities to apply their own contemporary standards and decide on the 
appropriateness of school materials. Within IJJ (Instructional and Library-Media 
Materials Selection) policies, there is a subsection to address challenged materials. 
The last step of this formal challenge process in an IJJ policy requires the 
superintendent to form a committee of community members to provide an objective 
evaluation of the material that was challenged. This local control allows each 
community to make their own decisions.  
Maine schools already have systems in place to address concerns about materials. LD 
123 usurps local control and opens the door for groups who claim to be “moral 
gatekeepers” to restrict what information can be accessed by all Maine students. I 
urge you to vote against LD 123. 

