Elizabeth Kelly
Dixfield
LD 123
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the education and cultural 
affairs committee.
My name is Elizabeth Kelly and I'm a resident of 8 Meadow Brook Terrace,  Dixfield.
I want to testify in favor of LD123 along with a comment concerning LD1008, of 
which I am also in favor of.
Obscenity law in Maine states... "obscene if depicts sexual acts, excretion or images 
of genitals in a manner clearly offensive to the average person and lacks any literary, 
artistic, political or scientific value."  However, Maine existing obscenity law 
"exempts libraries, art galleries, museums and schools from being charged for 
providing obscene material allowing them to share provocative or controversial 
content for educational purposes without legal backlash."
As a retired 20 year veteran in public school education I am appalled with this law as 
it stands. We have seen over the years circumstances of abuse within our public 
schools. Although not the norm, it has, and does happen. 
We are now experiencing situations at a number of school districts in Maine where 
parents and community members are speaking out against this type of material and it's
availability in school libraries as it has an adverse effect on the relationships between 
parent and child. 
These personal issues are best left to the discretion of a parent concerning what their 
children are allowed to  
read, or be exposed to in public schools, and at what point is it age appropriate.  
Schools need to ere on the side of caution! There's no benefit to having this type of 
"literature " in our schools. This flies in the face of parental rights to decide when, at 
what age, and under what circumstances their child is ready for such material. 
This situation is not going away as public education is over stepping the boundaries of
parental involvement. 
We are now experiencing an increase in home schooling, and Co ops due to the fact 
there is a large population that see this as inappropriate and feel they have no recourse
but to pull their children out of public schools. As a taxpayer their voices need to be 
heard and validated. Their concerns are sincere. They pay for their children's 
education. 
As many of us are aware, and are now watching, what has transpired at school board 
meetings around this state,  it's time to make a correction in a different direction. One 
that we all can live with. 
Please do what's morally correct, with some common sense, and remove the 
educational purpose exception  on obscene and questionable material that minors in 
public funded schools are subject to. I support LD123.
I DO believe that there should be a rating system on school library materials, and that 
parents should receive notification when their child selects subjects that are of 
questionable nature. Such as rape, incest, and abusive relations as these are triggers 
for many minors who have suffered trauma.  I support LD1008.
Thank you.
Blessings
