Emily Connelly
Portland
LD 123
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, I am a parent with two young
children in public schools in Portland, and I work in the public library. I am writing 
today against LD 123, An Act to Prohibit the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to 
Minors in Public Schools.” I have submitted testimony about the earlier version of 
this bill, and am following up to address the revision. This measure is not written to 
help or protect our students, but is written to target teachers and public schools for 
trying to do their job — educate our students. This bill would be a waste of time and 
resources, and would keep our educators from being able to do their jobs. 
As a parent, I want my kids to have access to books about a whole range of subjects, 
and I trust our teachers and librarians to select great age appropriate learning 
materials. Bills like LD 123 are written to target books on LGBTQ+ people in 
particular. What kind of message is sent to those students who are themselves trans or
queer, hearing that books acknowledging their very existence are “obscene?” I can tell
you that books addressing gender and sexuality have helped my children find the right
words to describe themselves to us, and that is a beautiful thing! I volunteer in the 
school library and have seen the excellent collection they have there, and am so glad 
the students are free to borrow materials of their choosing, without worrying that they 
will get in trouble. 
LD 123 is written to take away local control over the curriculum, and the materials 
used in schools — books, videos, pictures, art — would then be submitted to the 
District Attorney’s and Attorney General for review. Are they prepared and properly 
to take on the burden of trying to determine whether “And Tango Makes Three” is 
obscene because it acknowledges two male penguins raised a chick together? Would 
it just take one parent's disapproval to remove a book from a school — or district? Or 
the state? Is this fair to the other children? How much time would this take for our 
already overburdened legal system? What will it cost to assess these materials? What 
happens to the materials while they are under “review” — are they taken away from 
teachers and classrooms? How much time would it take them to review? It is clear 
this bill is a hasty measure designed just to be disruptive, and isn’t written with our 
kids best interests in mind. 
I am against LD 123. Thank you for the chance to share my opinion today. 
