Emma Watson
Cumberland ME
LD 123
I am writing to submit testimony against the proposed bill LD 123. As both a parent 
and an educator in Maine, this bill offends and disturbs me. As a parent, the idea that 
my ability to choose what is and is not appropriate for my children to read, which 
would be taken away should this bill pass, is upsetting. As an educator, the idea that 
my knowledge, training, and experience is deemed unworthy, or that I have ulterior, 
malicious motives against my students is insulting.
The banning of books from schools and school libraries is in actuality a restriction of 
parents’ rights and freedoms. As a parent, it should be up to me to decide what is and 
is not appropriate for my children to read. By restricting and banning books, that 
decision is stripped from me and instead someone else’s ideas of morality and 
appropriateness would be forced upon myself and my children, ideas that may not 
coincide with my own beliefs. I want my children to be open-minded, empathetic, and
accepting people, and one of the best ways to ensure this is to allow them access to a 
wide variety of books that can introduce them to different perspectives, different 
people, different ideas, experiences, and viewpoints. Books allow children to learn 
about themselves but also about others. Books can be both a mirror and a window, 
and all children, regardless of their identities or backgrounds, should be able to both 
see themselves and those who are different in the books they read. Should there be a 
book that I deem inappropriate for my children to read, it should be my responsibility 
to do so. Removing books from schools and libraries based on someone else’ arbitrary
moral judgment call about what is or is not “obscene” denies all parents the right to 
choose. 
The most frequently challenged or banned books seem to be those written by or about 
people of color, members of the LGBTQIA+ community, and other marginalized or 
often underrepresented groups. As a public educator, it is my responsibility to teach 
all children, no matter their identity, background, race, or religion equally. It is my 
privilege to encourage growth, creativity, independent thought, and understanding of 
the world around them. It is my hope to make school a safe and welcoming place for 
all students. By banning books by or with characters who are represented by such 
protected identities, any child who identifies as a member of one of those groups 
could be caused great harm. What lesson does it tell children if a book about a 
character with whom they identify is deemed obscene or immoral because of that 
character? Teachers and librarians have extensive training and education regarding 
book selection, student wellbeing, and understanding what is age appropriate subject 
matter. Available books need to cover a wide range of age groups, abilities, and 
interests, and the teachers and librarians within the schools are the best ones to 
determine what should be within their classrooms and library collections. Parents are 
well within their rights to decide their child should not read a certain book, but they 
should not be allowed to stop another child from reading that book, as well, by having
it completely removed from the school.
For these reasons and so many more, I urge the legislature to vote against this bill to 
ensure no parent is stripped of their right to decide what is best for their own children.
I urge the legislature to vote against this bill to restore trust in educators and librarians
as those who are committed to ensuring all children are safe, understood, and 
respected. Thank you.

