TESTIMONY - 
May 04, 2023 
Good afternoon members of the Maine legislature, my fellow librarians, parents, and members of our 
state community,' 
_' 
Thank you for this opportunity to speak. My name is Heather Martin. _l am avcertified elementary school 
Librarian within the state of Maine, and I am here to speak in firm opposition to LD 123. 
Today, l feel really confident that you will be hearing from many of my fellow Librarians about great works 
of children's literature. Judy Blume (currently having a major moment in the national conversation), 
Madeline L'Engle or the late, great Maurice Sendack are just three of the shockingly large ensemble of 
authors whose books have given young readers a sense of belonging and self worth while also 
consistently making the most challenged lists. l am certain there will be meaningful testimony on behalf 
of all of these, and I thank them for speaking on behalf of great books.V 
l am here to ‘talk about the “low brow” books. 
l have a special spot in my heart for books like this. In fact, l think my career as an educator can probably 
trace back to one memorable parent.- teacher conference when l was in the 4th grade. My parents were 
book lovers. Serious book lovers. They loved Shakespeare, and PG Wodehouse, Peter DeVries and Kurt 
Vonnegut and I? Well, l was worrying them. . 
As they told my teacher, l was reading an endless stream of "junk." In particular, “The Black Stallion ” 
series, by Walter Farley. They could not get me to put those cheap paperbacks down and pick up a “real 
book." l’ll confess, rereading them as an adult, my parents had a point. They are not going to win any 
awards, especially by the time you get to Island StaIIion's Fury, book 7 in the series. Nevertheless, my 
teacher replied “But she’s reading. If she loves the books, and she's reading them... let her read.” And so 
they did. I think that maybe having ‘permission ’ from an educator took some of their burden away, but 
whatever the reason, I got to keep my books and the validation of my choice from my teacher meant the 
worldto me.._
TESTIMONY 
Reading remained a pleasure, a comfort and in time l came to love Shakespeare and Vonnegut and 
Wodehouse too (DeVries still eludes me) _ - and l went on to read plenty more besides. l went to college, 
got my Master's... but if those early books had been taken from me, l’m not sure that would be the case. 
l see the same thing in the young scholars who come into mylibrary. 
Naturally, l am moved by the profound, teary eyed moments when a student meets a leadcharacter who 
reminds them of themselves and they feel seen and celebrated; and l feel honored when a student tells 
me, with hand to throat, how deeply they felt about a book that shook their world... but l feel equally 
thrilled when l see a student bent over their open copy of Captain Underpants, shaking with laughter as 
they wipe happy tears from their eyes, or when I hear one student hand off a book to another saying 
"seriously, you have GOT to" read this, Big Nate is hysterical!," or hear the giggles as the pages turn ina 
"Calvin and Hobbes" collection. I totally get why that one assistant principal in Mississippi chose to readI 
Broke My Butt. It is a crowd pleaser. And don’t even get "me started on graphic novels - the “gateway 
books” to strong, dynamic readers!t 
Ironically, these books ljust mentioned, the ones that bring so much joy and enthusiasm to emerging' 
readers, are the same books l often hear mentioned when folks start talking about book-bans and censor 
lists. 
Sometimes grownups find them offensive. 
The thing that is truly offensive, however, is not a book but the idea that one group of people - no matter 
how well intentioned - gets to decide what everyone else‘ 
gets to read. 
To establish government censorship and control over what we read and our access to information is the 
antithesis of what we, as a nation and a state say we stand for, not to mention the plotline for an entire 
genre of post apocalyptic books. Most of which have also been challenged. it is fundamentallyl 
undemocratic, and history will bear this out again, as it has before.
TESTIMONY 
That is not to say there aren't guidelines and guardrails. Just as 3rd grade teachers are not attempting to 
teach advanced trigonometiy (baby genius stuff aside) because it is developmentally inappropriate for the 
student body being served, Librarians tailor the collection of the library to the student population as well. 
Librarians are not merely kind souls who love books. Though l like to think we are that as well. We are 
professionals with advanced degrees in collections development and information science as well as years 
of experience in the field. We are educators, professionally credentialed and certified. 
Fundamentally, our schools should be empowering our students and supporting them as they develop 
their own critical thinking skills while learning to evaluate information - not censoring their book choice. 
After all, you would be so bored if you only got to read what l thought was great. l can't imagine a quicker 
way to squelch an emerging reader's interest. And, really, the fact that in this day and age, kids are 
stepping away from their screens at all - and in favor of a book no less - well. Let the silly stuff fly l say. 
I urge you to vote NO on LD123. Thank you.
