Iris Eichenlaub
Hope
LD 123
To the Respected Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee:
I am submitting testimony to oppose LD 123 (revised) before you. I have numerous 
concerns as a parent, educator, and citizen.
As a parent, the right to determine what my child may access in the form of media 
and print and electronic materials is mine alone. I strongly oppose the idea that my 
freedom to make that determination for my child could be abridged and impeded if 
LD 123 is passed. This is a parental rights issue.
As an educator and school librarian, I have concerns that the books and materials 
being targeted as "obscene" represent a direct attack on the LGBTQ+ community 
which includes Maine children, families, and taxpayers. The outside groups pushing 
legislation like LD 123 bring a discriminatory agenda that does not belong in our 
state. 
As you are no doubt aware,  LGBTQ+ youth experience higher rates of bullying, 
abuse, homelessness, and die by suicide to name a few of the risk factors they face. 
As a high school librarian, my job was to welcome all students, to treat them with 
respect, and to offer these young minds a collection where they could both explore the
ideas of the world as well as see themselves within the pages of a book. 
Upon returning "Gender Queer" by Maia Kobabe, one student apologized for it being 
late. That student qualified their remark by adding, with a huge smile — "It's just I 
had to read this book twice! I couldn't believe that so much of my own experience 
was right here. And I had to make my dad and sister read it too." Was this book a 
lifesaver for this student? Hard to know. Did the student feel seen? Validated? 
Affirmed? Absolutely. 
Finally, as a citizen, I am appalled that a Maine legislator could stand behind this bill. 
What kind of funding will be required to support the district attorneys and attorney 
general if they are given the outrageous task to determine what qualifies as obscene? 
Our court systems are busy enough — how would this additional responsibility 
impact our public safety? 
Maine is a state that prides itself on local control. LD 123 would take control of 
educational priorities from the hands of the professionals who have been hired as 
educators and administrators in Maine public schools.
Thank you for considering my testimony.
Sincerely,
Iris Eichenlaub
