Testimony in Support of LD 123 (SP 62) 
"An Act to; Elimignate the Educational Purposes Exception to the 
Prohibition on the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors" 
Senator Rafferty, Re' pre'senta't'ive Brennan, and Members ofthe Educational and 
Cultural Affair Committee,' 
I am Jennifer White of Gray and l amtestifying in support of LD 123. For the past 
24 years, I have been the Co-Directorand Owner of a -state licensed childcare 
facility in_Windham. We are licensed for 100 children from the age of birth 
through age 12. In our state licensing rules it strictly prohibits exposing a child to 
profane language, depictions of violence, use of illicit drugs or sexual content. We 
have a huge issue across our state right now with public schools carrying library 
books, including personal collections in classrooms, that are inappropriate. lfl 
carried some of these books in my library at the center for 11— and 12-year-olds to 
read, l would be breaking the lavv, would lose my license, and could be prosecuted 
for sharing pornography with a minor. Many of these books do have pornographic 
content including language and images. The topics in these books are 
inappropriate and can be triggering for students who have been molested or 
sexually abused. l have worked with quite a few foster children over the years. 
Some have been through the trauma of sexual abuse and sharing a book with 
graphic details that depicts rape and incest would cause them even more harm. 
This is not helping our kids. 
Even the Center for Disease Control (CDC) has written materials on sexual abuse 
and outlines that showing pornographic images to individuals under the age of 18 
falls into child sexual abuse. Why would our public schools carry these in our 
libraries for recommended reading? 
l have heard many say that parents can opt their kids out so that they won't have 
access to these books in the library. That is simply not true. I know from 
experience. In most schools, there is no fail safe to ensure that doesn't happen. 
When our daughter was in middle school at RSU 14, she was in a gifted talented 
program. Her reading level was way above her age level. Her middle school 
started in grade 5. She was bored so they had her meet with the school librarian 
who had a recommended book list so she could do some extra reading. One
book, called The Hate You Give, given to her by the school librarian had over 500 
swear words in it. l\/lost of them were the F-word! She was ll or 12 years old at 
the time; Fortunately, my husband was able to read thro’ ug' 
h,this book before my 
daughter didand he promptly returned it to the librarian. Another book given to 
her as recommendedreading was about a student having an affair with the 
teacher. My husband read through to the third chapter and had read enough. He 
brought it back to the librarian. The excuses we received were, "I'm sorry,I 
thought that was a different book..." and "Sorry aboutthat, this book is supposed 
to be in the high school, not here at the middle school..." These books were hand 
picked by the librarians and given out as recommended reading. Our daughter did 
not search for these inappropriate books.‘ 
A child cannot unsee images they have seen. They cannotunread something 
graphic and inappropriate. These books do not belong in our school libraries. 
They are harmful and inappropriate for our students. if parents feel it is 
appropriate for their child to read, they can ﬁnd these books at the public library 
or online. They should not be in our schools. 
School Boards across the state have been approached by parents wanting these 
books removed and many are bogged down using an inefficient IJJ policy review 
process that takes 4-5 months at a time per book to review. School boards are 
divided onwhether they believe these books are pornographic or inappropriate. 
They will admit that their policies need revisions. We have been told more than 
once by school board members that the best thing we can do right now is come to 
Augusta and testify before our elected legislators on this matter so that the state 
can make the changes needed to help rectify this serious issue. We are here 
today asking you, as legislators, to remove the educational purposes exception 
that allows these kinds of materials in our public schools. 
Thank you, 
Jennifer White 
Gray,ME
