 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
May 4, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs , my name is Joe Anderson.  I am a 
resident of Portland, a hospital -based pediatrician, and I s erve  on the board of the 
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  I am  writing today to 
express our opposition  two pieces of legislation that, while seemingly innocuous, 
would support a culture of intolerance in our schools:  
• LD 123, An Act to Eliminate the Educational Purposes Exception to the 
Prohibition on the Disseminati on of Obscene Matter to Minors  
• LD 1008, An Act to Establish a Rating System for Books in School Libraries  
We ask that you vote Ought  Not to Pass on th ese two bills . 
 
These two bills suggest  that a problem exists where teachers and librarians are 
providing obscene materials, or at the very least, age -inappropriate materials, to 
students.  In our experience, this is not the case, as local school systems have 
extensive vetting and approval processes before books come  onto their shelves .  
In the rare cases where a parent wishes to challenge the age -appropriateness of 
certain educational materials, schools have processes in place to review the 
materials and correct course  if necessary.   
 
Most r ecently, efforts to ban educational materials or label  books  as obscene  have 
focused on a few specific areas.  These challenges have occurred across the 
country, as well as at home here in Maine, and often surround specific themes.  
Books featuring LGBTQ+ characters or themes are frequently targeted for 
censorship, and cherry -picked passages containing sexual themes or depictions of 
sexual activity are often targeted for censorship.  Literature  that express es 
political or religious views that are controvers ial or unpopular with some groups 
are often targeted, particularly if they are deemed to be promoting an ideology 
that is considered objectionable.  Finally, books that deal with issues of race or 
culture, particularly those that challenge dominant narrati ves or stereotypes, are 
contested.   These attempts to ban books or declare them obscene are often 
motivated by subjective opinions and personal biases, rather than legitimate 
concerns about the content of the books themselves.  
 
It is essential that childre n have access to a wide range of literature that reflects 
diverse perspectives and experiences.  Literature can be a powerful tool for 
promoting empathy, critical thinking, and cultural understanding.  LD 123 as 
amended invites politically motivated indivi duals to pursue obscenity 
investigations based on personal objections to material, when there is already a 
system in place within every local school system in the state to deal with such 
materials.  It suggests that government and law enforcement should be come the 
arbiter of which books should be made available in our school libraries, rather 
than those  decision s being made by educators, librarians, school boards, and 
parents.  
 
 
LD 1008 seeks to establish a rating system for books in school libraries, akin t o 
what we see on TV and in movies.  Not only does this undermine the 
professionalism of school librarians and educators, but it would be a significant 
burden on our school libraries .  It would  also limit the books available to young 
people , as it relies on  publishers to adopt its rating scheme .  Rating systems that 
currently exist are arbitrary and subjective  – we’ve all had the experience of 
disagreeing with the rating of a  movie or TV show.  Recent examples have  shown 
that LGBTQ themes or characters in bo oks are often placed in the bucket of 
“sexual themes” despite the actual content being completely unrelated to sexual 
activity.  Would a book be banned from elementary school libraries simply due to 
the presence of a gay main  character?  That question rema ins to be answered.   
 
Educators across our great state already have a monumental task at hand in 
ensuring our children have the skills and knowledge necessary to thrive in a 
constantly changing and diverse world.  Please don’t stifle their efforts, and  allow 
them to use their training and expertise to teach and guide our youth to become 
smart, talented, compassionate, and well -adjusted adults .   
Please vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 123 and 1008 . 
 
Respectfully,  
 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Co-Chair, Advocacy Committee  
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics  
 
 
 
  

