P.O. Box 486
Dover-Foxcroft, ME 04426
joseph.hennessey@colorado.edu
May 3rd, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:
Please let the text below serve as my written testimony in opposition to LD 123, “ An Act to Eliminate the Educational 
Purposes Exception to the Prohibition on the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors in Public Schools,” scheduled for 
public hearing on May 4th, 2023. The opinion below is my own and does not represent that of any other organization:
The exemption elimination that the bill proposes, even with its revised language in the proposed amendment, is both 
unnecessary and potentially damaging to academic discourse in public schools. Below are several, representative reasons.
First, the declaration of “obscenity” is subjective, difficult to litigate consistently, and relative to the person or entity which 
is making the declaration. And, as we know, public school curricula are approved at the local level, on the basis of the local 
control provision. Curricula are routinely vetted by school boards (at minimum every five years), open to public inspection 
and public comment, and subject to change at the pleasure of the board per MRSA 20-A §1001, 4705, and 6902. If a given 
school board wishes to discontinue the teaching of a certain book or censor an image or artifact, they are within the scope of
their powers to do so.    
Second, removing a reasonable protection from educators who work in good faith every day to promote critical thinking and
agency in their classes in response to the interests of any one group, liberal or conservative, is misguided and antithetical to 
the purpose of modern education. Schools are tasked with helping students to cultivate intellect, to develop the skills to 
grapple with complex questions, and to engage in discourse with both complementary and opposing points-of-view. Schools
are not tasked with acting as echo chambers, further siloizing students, or crystallizing preconceived notions. 
Third, the best practice and, in fact, policy-level expectation for the teaching of controversial issues is to place the topic or 
artifact in “critical context,” meaning inside of a variety of contrasting viewpoints so that a student may respond as 
he/she/they see fit and learn to think for him/her/themselves in a supportive environment. To wit, the NEPN/National 
School Boards Association/Maine School Management Assoication template policy, IMB, is part of the mandated policies at
the local level. Policy IMB stipulates that controversial topics and/or issues be considered in, among other ways, to be a) 
Developmentally-appropriate to the student, b) Presented in an objective and scholarly manner, and c) Deemed immediately
relevant to the district-approved curriculum. These three criteria, in conjunction with other discretionary provisions made at 
the SAU level, provide valuable and sufficient mechanisms for the school, district, and school board to respond to student, 
parent, and community concerns.
Fourth, if a parent or student objects to any material to be presented in the classroom as listed in the curriculum or on the 
course syllabus, all professional educators provide a comparable, educationally relevant, related activity. While many 
educators retain personal and academic freedom per their collective bargaining agreements, this does not supercede the 
desire of any concerned family member who wishes to modify his/her/their student’s educational program. 
In effect, the appropriate structures for student and family voice and choice are already in place. LD 123 unnecessarily 
complicates the relationship between individual families and local school administrative units. It is my hope that the 
Committee rejects this bill in its amended form and rather promotes Maine’s longstanding principles of educational 
autonomy and community-responsiveness.
Joseph Hennessey, MSEd
2018 Piscataquis County Teacher of the Year
2019 Maine Teacher of the Year
2020 National University Awardee for Maine
