Testimony Against The Passage of LD 123 
 
Libraries are places of exquisite exploration. In what other place in the world can 
you travel subjects, places, and time all at once without leaving the room? It’s 
pure magic.  It is true that not every book is right for every child and we, the 
librarians, are here to help students find just the right read for them as an 
individual. 
 
When we limit their selection of books a child’s world becomes limited. Choice is 
taken from them. We are telling them that their thoughts and interests are not 
valued. We are telling them they are not valued. We need to trust our children to 
read what they need to read. Reading differing opinions helps create a 
questioning attitude which in turn creates critical thinkers. Students can decide 
that the book is not right for them at any point and find another one. Self-
selection of materials by children is crucial to creating critical thinkers, for 
personal and academic growth, and for a child’s self esteem and mental 
stimulation (curiosity). 
 
If we tie teachers' and librarians’ hands, people who are using years of 
specialized education* and experience to choose books for kids, we are making 
the world smaller, and I believe, more scary for children. Children can explore the 
world from a place of safety through books. If we take that away they will lack 
these experiences and a stepping off place to talk about these situations with 
their families, their peers, and their teachers. We will be limiting their curiosity 
and their joy. We will be devaluing their personal experiences. We cannot allow 
the viewpoints of a few to limit the access of all which is what this legislative 
document would do. I hear time and again in these discussions how an adult 
does not find a book appropriate for their child. We purchase books and curate 
collections for all children. The conversation on what is appropriate for their child 
happens at home.Did I want to have a discussion about drugs with my 8 year old 
son? No, but I needed to because people had been finding needles on the road 
he rode his bike down. At 9 I needed to talk to him about porn when he 
inadvertently accessed some via a YouTube link that I found while looking at his 
history that evening. This was no one else’s responsibility other than my own. 
Life is out there. We need to talk to our kids and even more importantly, be ready 
to listen. 
 
Yes there are books with challenging topics in school libraries. They need to be 
in school libraries. We cannot simply send children to the public library. Many 
have no way to get to the public library and may have limited internet access or 
access to a device at home that allows them to access a public library's content 
from home. This would be so limiting for so many kids.There is no equity in that 
proposed solution. 
 
I appreciate the professionalism and respectful nature of yesterday’s testimony 
hearing. I am sorry I needed to leave before I could provide this in person but I 
understand and appreciate the reasons why the hearing started late.  
 
*Certificate 071: Library Media Specialist 
A.  Function: This certificate allows the holder to serve as a library media specialist pre-kindergarten 
through grade 12. 
B.  Eligibility: Applicants shall meet eligibility requirements specified in Part I. In addition, applicants 
shall meet eligibility requirements specified below. Individuals who are not eligible through any of these 
pathways may be eligible for a conditional certificate, in accordance with Section 1.11.B., below, and Part I 
Section 6.6 of this rule. 
1.   Requirements for either Eligibility Pathway 
(a) Earned at least a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university, in 
accordance with Part I Section 6.1 of this rule; 
(b)   Demonstrated competency in all of the School Librarian Preparation Standards  
(ALA/AASL/CAEP School Librarian Preparation Standards): 
 
http://www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aasleducation/ALA_AASL_CAEP_Schoo
l_Librarian_Preparation_Standards_2019_Final.pdf ); 
(c)    Completed a minimum of three semester hours in diversity-centered content related to 
today’s classroom (e.g., culturally responsive teaching, multicultural education, intercultural 
education, second language acquisition or world language teaching methods); and 
(d)   Completed an approved course for teaching students with exceptionalities in the regular 
classroom. 
2.   Certificate Eligibility Pathway 1 
(a)    Completed 36 graduate semester hours aligned with ALA/AASL/CAEP School Librarian 
Preparation Standards. 
3.   Certificate Eligibility Pathway 2 
(a) Holds a valid Maine professional teaching certificate; and 
(b)   Completed 24 graduate semester hours aligned with ALA/AASL/CAEP School Librarian 
Preparation Standards. 
4.   Conditional Certificate 
(a) Conditional Certificate Pathway 1 
i.    Earned at least a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university, in accordance with Part I 
Section 6.1 of this rule; and 
ii.   Completed a minimum of 24 graduate semester hours which align with the ALA/AASL/CAEP School 
Librarian Preparation Standards. 
(b)   Conditional Certificate Pathway 2 
i.    Earned at least a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university, in accordance with Part I 
Section 6.1 of this rule; 
ii.   Holds a valid Maine professional teaching certificate; and 
iii. Completed a minimum of six graduate semester hours which align with the ALA/AASL/CAEP School 
Librarian Preparation Standards. 
 
