CONCERNS REGARDING LD. 123 
An Act to Eliminate the Educational Purposes Exception to the Prohibition on the 
Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors 
INTRODUCTION 
Good afternoon Senator Libby, Representative Pomerleau, and Committee. My name is Missy 
Hall. l live in Waldoboro, and I am a retired ESE teacher (Special Education). l am opposed to /T 
LD 123, and I will speak as a professional as well as the mother of three now grown kids. 
CONCERN 1 
This bill will harm children. That may sound dramatic and hyperbolic, but it is the truth. l have 
taught many vulnerable students; students who have been hungry, abused, neglected,l 
unhoused, even a student who habitually out herself to relieve her pain. l could go on. 
For many students, school is their safe place; the place where they might have an adult whom 
they trust, and the place where many resources are available to help them learn about and 
better understand themselves and their world, through exposure to different ideas, different 
cultures, and different ways of doing things. Library books are an important part of that. if you 
take away books that are resources that may reflect how a marginalized or bullied student, ora 
student conflicted by their sexual identity feels, you take away opportunities for that student to 
realize they are not weird, or that they’re not the only ones with those thoughts, feelings, or 
experiences. You may be taking away a lifeline. 
Librarians, or Media Specialists, are well educated professionals whose book decisions are not 
made lightly. They are well versed in appropriate grade level topics and appropriate reading 
levels, and they spend hours pouring 
through books to ensure that the library will contain a variety of books on a variety of topics 
and ideas that will appeal to a diverse school population. L.D. 123 dismisses the expertise and 
professionalism of the people who choose to bring the world to children and youth in the form 
of books. 
CONCERN 2 
This bill is ambiguous. Just who will determine exactly what “obscene” is? Not school 
librarians, because LD 123 dismisses their expertise in doing so. Will it be a group of people 
whose intention is to carefully and thoughtfully evaluate a book’s merit, or will it, instead, bea 
group who from the outset has a particular outcome in mind? 
CONCERN 3 
Should it pass, this bill will only be implemented in public schools. That begs the question, 
shouldn’t private school kids be protected from “obscene” material too? 
Many Maine private and charter schools receive public funding, so they should have to adhere 
to the rules that govern the public schools too. l’m not advocating implementing this bill in both 
Maine public and private schools. Quite the contrary; I don’t think L.D. 123 should be passed 
or implemented at all. l’m simply suggesting that if protecting children were truly this bill’s 
intent, you would want it in all schools that receive public funding.
‘l
CONCERNS REGARDING LD. 123 
An Act to Eliminate the Educational Purposes Exception to the Prohibition on the 
Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors 
CLOSING 
Finally, and most importantly, l’|l end with how l began: kids. We must do what is right for 
kids. Let me be direct: the book most often challenged in Maine schools is the memoir Gender 
Queer. l suspect that this is the book that is being used as a tool to advance a political agenda. 
LGBTQ youth are at risk in this country. Research shows that 45%, ALMOST HALF, of LGBTQ 
youth seriously considered attempting suicide in the past year. 
L.D. 123 will do irreparable harm by prohibiting access to resources that vulnerable students 
need. 
Given all that I've said, Legislators, I implore you to do what is right for kids: vote NO on this 
bill.
2
