Respected members of the Legislature:
What do you see when you look at me?
Our cultural norms and prejudices aﬀect what you see and how you see me.  Thus I know that you see an older white lady who is dressed neatly and who appears solidly middle class. 
What you do not know about me is this: I am kind, I am empathetic, I am your neighbor, and so much more. I am the product of schooling that taught me to think, to act responsibly, and to question the motives of those who would seek to limit the ﬂowering of children who would also like to be kind, be empathetic, be your neighbor, act responsibly, and think for themselves. 
I urge you to act, not according to a script foisted upon our State of Maine by outside agendas; bills that propose elimination of human rights, but rather think for yourselves, recognize that there are issues beyond the harmful and negative ones being proposed here with the well-meaning LD 123, LD 1008, and the ill-designed and poorly written and presented LD 618. If you follow politics, you will discover that similar bills are on the agendas of state legislatures across the country. Why? Think about it. 
Many others have addressed those issues eloquently and with sincere passion. Some in favor giving heartfelt testimony based in personal experiences that are poignant. Let me add to the experiences: when she was six years old, my daughter came home from school with the book, In The Night Kitchen, by Maurice Sendak. We had read it before, but this was a book she chose herself at her school library. I was surprised when she ran to me saying, “somebody drew in the book.”  When we looked at it together, I was appalled to discover that someone had drawn, very carefully, in Sharpie marker, underpants on the little boy Mickey. If you are not familiar with the book, it is a Caldecott Award Winner in which the boy, Mickey, appears naked on one page. It’s not a very accurate rendering of a naked child. When I spoke to the library Ed Tech, she was not concerned in the least - most likely because she had done the artwork. That is redacting a book. That is not acceptable. When redacting a book is spoken about, this is what is meant. Frankly, it’s disgusting. 
The question was raised regarding the education of school librarians: we have, if we have an 070 certiﬁcation, earned a Masters Degree, usually in librarianship. I have an MLIS, Masters of Library and Information Science from Clarion University, Clarion, PA, and was the ﬁrst school librarian in the state to achieve National Board Certiﬁcation in 2002.
Another question was raised: who chooses books. Books are chosen on the basis of book reviews from professional resources such as School Library Journal, VOYA (Voice of Youth Advocates), Booklist, HornBook, and book reviews by peer librarians. The certiﬁed school librarian is the one who does the ordering and makes the choices based on the patrons in the school and according to a book selection policy that is in eﬀect in all school libraries. 
Pandora’s box has already been opened; you cannot put  reality back into it by passing legislation that seeks to eliminate what you don’t like by banning it. Censoring a book only makes it more desirable, children in my experience will ﬁnd work-arounds to read a book that has been banned or redacted. 
As far as banning the teaching of racial politics, or banning the practice of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion, prejudice is an ugly thing. Ignoring it is an ugly thing. Trying to impose thinking upon others is an ugly thing. Calling out my friends who are librarians and teachers for “dissemination of pornography” is an ugly thing. 

Don’t succumb to this outside agenda; realize that we must raise children to be thoughtful adults; vote NO on LD 123, LD1008, and LD 618.
Thank you for listening and reading,
Peg Becksvoort, 
Retired Librarian, NBCT 2002-2022
New Gloucester, Maine 04260
