 
 Good afternoon , Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee. My name is Samaa Abdurraqib, and I’m the Executive Director of the Maine Humanities 
Council. On behalf of my organization, I would like to encourage mem bers of this committee to vote “ought 
not to pass” on LD 123 and LD 1008.  
 
The Maine Humanities Council is an independent statewide nonprofit that supports life -long learning and 
civic engagement. We are the State of Maine affiliate of the National Endowm ent for the Humanities and 
the Library of Congress Center for the Book. We provide educational programs throughout the state 
addressing a range of needs, including literacy, promotion of reading, teacher enrichment, community 
history, increased civic engag ement, and cultural tourism. Our constituents include low -literacy adults, 
public school teachers, Veterans, domestic violence agencies, Department of Corrections facilities, health 
care workers, library patrons, and all Mainers from all walks of life. Mai ne Humanities provided both direct 
programs and grant funding for community cultural activities. We work closely with libraries and educators 
to create and deliver our programming.  
 
LD 123 is an unnecessary bill that will create burdens on for our Attorney  General, our district attorneys, 
and our court officials. We already have existing laws covering the dissemination of obscene materials to 
minors and those laws have been working well. It is already illegal to distribute  obscene  materials and/or 
pornograp hy to minors. Librarians and school educators do not promote, possess, or distribute obs cene 
materials as defined in Maine Code and US Supreme Court case law. This legislation would create 
burdensome processes for our elected officials and our court offici als. Our court system is already 
overloaded – this bill would waste taxpayer money and resources.  
 
Local school librarians have the training and the credentials to select appropriate materials for the 
populations that they serve. We need to trust their ex pertise and their understandings of their 
communities needs. This is particularly important in a large state like Maine, where our communities 
vary widely. Decisions about what should and shouldn’t be included in a book or literature collection 
needs to be  determined at the local level, alongside credentialed librarians and school staff.  
 
At Maine Humanities, we believe in the power of books. We know that books are tools that help all of us 
understand complex issues. We know that books can support all of u s as we navigate life’s challenging 
issues. And we know that books only mirror and reflect the issues that we all are already encountering 
the world outside of the texts. Restricting young people’s access to books will not ultimately protect 
them from comp lex and challenging issues. We  recognize that not all topics may be appropriate for all 
readers, but we believe that individual parents should be empowered to make those decisions with and 
for their specific children.  
 
I also encourage members of the committee to vote “ought not to pass” on LD 1008. This bill pushes us 
into the territory of censorship . Letter ratings, content warnings, and other types of red -flagging reduces 
a complex book or narrative to a few isolated features and seeks to limit people’s access to all that is 
presented in the text based on those isolated features. Subjecting books to this kind of labeling 
undermines the already comprehensive and detailed processes of book selection based on educational 
criteria, reading level, and age -relevance. Labeling books in this way  both narrows students’ ability to 
 
 choose books that align with their interests, and, because book labels would be visible, it also imposes 
on students’ privacy.  
 
Red flagging books in this way specifically causes harm to young people who identify as members of 
historically and currently marginalized or underrepresented groups. Maine schools and libraries have a 
duty to serve all students, regardless of race, ethnicity, abilities, religi on, gender identity and expression, 
and sexual orientation  (to list some of Maine’s protected identity categories). Labeling books that 
contain content specific to particular marginalized identity groups as “controversial” or “inappropriate” 
sends harmful,  value -laden messages to young people who may identify with the content discussed in 
the books.  
 
Committee members, I want to encourage you to trust school librarians and education professionals who 
are trained and licensed to connect students with materi als based on their interests, their reading level, 
and the age -appropriateness of the material. Please vote “ought not to pass” on LD 1088.  
 
Thank you for your time and attention,  
 
Samaa Abdurraqib, PhD  
 
 
Executive Director  
Maine Humanities Council  

