Savannah Sessions
Lovell
LD 123
As a librarian and an advocate for the freedom to read, I am writing to express my 
strong opposition to LD 123 and LD 1008. 
Maine already has existing laws that define and prohibit the promotion, possession, or
distribution of obscene materials to minors. In addition, school librarians and other 
public school employees do not promote, possess, or distribute materials that are 
illegal under current laws. LD 123, if passed, would remove local control from school
districts and school boards. Maine is a vast state with unique communities in every 
corner, and decisions about what materials are appropriate for any given school 
should be made by the members of the community, not by the Attorney General, the 
judiciary, or other outside entities. 
Moreover, school librarians, teachers, and other public school employees are 
professionally trained and credentialed to select materials that are both engaging and 
appropriate for the populations we serve. LD 1008 proposes a labeling system which 
is a form of censorship that throttles intellectual freedom. Whether these labels are 
intended to indicate reading level or “problematic” content, the end result is the same:
they limit students' ability to freely choose books and they infringe on students' 
privacy by making their reading preferences or needs visible to others. It is also 
unrealistic to expect publishers to provide these types of ratings based on local 
standards.
Books (and other materials provided by schools) are tools for understanding complex 
issues. Limiting young people's access to books does not protect them from life's 
complex and challenging issues. In fact, throttling intellectual freedom can hinder 
their ability to develop critical thinking skills and engage with diverse perspectives - 
skills that are paramount in today’s dynamic world.
I strongly believe that students and their parents/guardians should have the freedom to
make decisions about what they read and believe - but what not any other child or 
family reads and believes.
We must trust our professional educators and librarians to continue to connect 
students with materials that are both engaging and appropriate. I urge you to vote 
OUGHT NOT TO PASS on both LD 123 and LD 1008.
Sincerely,
Savannah Sessions

