Shawn McBreairty
Maine Source Of Truth 
LD 123
The 2022 Maine “teacher” of the year, as selected by the MDOE was Kelsey 
Stoyanova from Reeds Brook Middle School, in RSU22, Hampden, ME.
Stoyanova, along with Principal Susan Thibedeau, pushed kiddie porn on minor 
students, 9, 10 and 11 years old.  This is a disgusting and mentally unstable process to
hyper-sexualize kids.  
I’d dare anyone on the committee to read this passage out loud from a book on 
Stoyanova’s list and that was displayed in the classroom.  
All Boys Aren’t Blue:
Described in promotional literature as “a primer for teens eager to be allies as well as 
a reassuring testimony for young queer men of color” (emphasis added) includes 
content like this: Page 201: “You were fully erect at this point. You can’t tell anyone, 
ok? I promised. You grabbed my hand and made me touch it”. Page 202: “By now we
were both touching each other. Tried my best not to enjoy it because you were my 
cousin. We were crossing a line that family shouldn’t’ cross”. Page 204: “You told 
me to take off my pajama pants, which I did. You then took off your shorts followed 
by your boxers. Then you stood in front of me fully erect and said, Taste it. At first, I 
laughed and refused. But then you said, come on Matt, taste it. This is what boys like 
us do when we like each other. I finally listened to you. Then you got down on your 
knees and told me to close my eyes. That’s when you began oral sex on me as well”. 
Pages 204-205: “You then laid me on the ground and got on top of me. You began 
humping me back and forth. You got up off me and told me to come to the bathroom. 
You began stroking yourself in front of me. Then you began to moan slightly. You 
ejaculated into the toilet”. o Pages 267-268: “I got behind him. For the first few 
minutes, we dry humped and grinded. I was behind him, with my stomach on his back
as we kissed. After a few minutes, he got up and went to this nightstand, where he 
pulled out a condom and some lube. He then lay down on his stomach. I knew what I 
had to do even if I had never done it before. I had one point of reference though, and 
that was the 7+ years of watching porn. I remember the condom was blue and 
flavored like cotton candy. I put on some lube and got him up on his knees and I 
began to slide into him from behind. I eased in slowly until I heard him moan. I 
finally came and let out a loud moan to the point where he asked me to quiet down for
the neighbors”. Pages 270-271: “We took each other’s clothes off, fast but deliberate. 
After he told me to lie down on the bed. He asked me to turn over while he slipped a 
condom on himself. There is a fear as with most things you are doing for the first 
time. But this was my ass and I was struggling to imagine someone inside of me, and 
he was big.”
Stoyanova and Thibedeau are groomers.  They are criminals and there needs to be 
protection for minor students and parents.  Librarians and teachers should not be 
exempt from being held accountable for their criminal actions.  
People like Stoyanova have flooded our public schools, not with books that are 
helping kids, but with books that steals the innocence away from children. 
This bill should pass this committee and anyone voting against it, will appear happy 
to push porn on minor children.  
