%4<»5 
e_;@ 
Timothy Nangle THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 26 l3 lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Timothy Nangle in opposition to 
LD 123, "An Act to Eliminate the Educational Purposes Exception to the 
Prohibition on the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
May 4, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs, I am Senator Tim Nangle. I represent Senate District 26, which 
includes the communities of Casco, Frye Island, Raymond, Windham, and part of Westbrook. Today,I 
offer this testimony in opposition to LD 123 as believe it is vital to maintain local control and allow 
communities to decide for themselves what is and isn't appropriate for their students. 
LD 123 poses a threat to local control by taking the power of vetting educational materials away from 
local school boards. In my district, book challenges at RSU 14 have sparked contentious debates and led 
to a sharp increase in LGBTQ+ students being bullied and blatantly called slurs by their peers. 
By eliminating the educational purposes exception, this bill would amplify these challenges and make it 
more difficult for these students, who already face a higher rate of bullying and suicide, to access 
resources that support their identities and promote understanding among their peers. The emotional toll 
this takes on young people should not be underestimated. 
Additionally, I would like to emphasize the importance of representation in educational materials. Books 
such as "Gender Queer" and "Nick and Charlie" have been instrumental in helping students right in my 
district understand and accept their identities. Removing these resources could further isolate students 
who are already marginalized, leading to increased bullying, mental health issues, and feelings of 
exclusion. 
Furthermore, LD 123 may have a signiﬁcant impact on sex education in our public schools. By removing 
the exception for educational purposes, it is possible that essential and age-appropriate materials could 
be deemed "obscene" and subsequently banned, leaving students without the necessary information to 
make informed decisions about their health and relationships. 
While I acknowledge that some materials may not be suitable for all students, it is crucial to allow 
communities to make these decisions on a case-by-case basis. Elected members of local school boards 
can take into account the unique needs and values of their communities while ensuring that educational 
materials meet rigorous standards and provide accurate and inclusive information. 
Chair, State and Local Gavcmzmzni C0mr:~21'f{ee * Transporlalion Committee 
State House: (207) 287-1.515 * Fax: (207) 287~1’585 * T01’1Frec: 1-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711’ 
Timothy, Z\’a11gle@/egz' x:’atz11'e, n1c!i:?e.gov * !eg:'s/(mare.mai;1e.gm>/senate
—— 
a"1~%?:;rri@ ‘? 
Timothy Nangle THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 26 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
When a minority of state legislators attempt to impose their personal beliefs on the entire school system, 
they not only undermine the authority of elected local school boards but also risk causing long-lasting 
damage to the well-being and education of our young people. 
We must recognize that no single group of parents or individuals can claim to know what is best for 
every child or community. This bill, if passed, would use state power to impose a one-size- ﬁts-all 
approach to educational materials, disregarding the diverse needs and values of our students, their 
families and communities. 
We must stand ﬁrm against this overreach and instead focus on empowering elected local school boards 
to make informed decisions that prioritize the well-being, growth, and success of all students. 
In conclusion, I respectfully urge this Committee to oppose LD 123 and instead focus on fostering local 
control and allowing communities to make decisions that best serve the needs of their students. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions. 
Sincerely, 
vii i» Umgk 
Tim Nangle 
State Senator, Senate District 26 
Casco, Frye Island, Raymond, Windham, and part of Westbrook 
Chair, Staie and Local Govervmzent Comniiffee * T1'a1zs'porta?i011 Commilfee 
State House: (207) 287-1515 * Fax: (207) 287~]585 * To!ZF:'ee: 1-800-423-6900 * T2")? 7]] 
Tinzofliy.1\/(mg/e@legisicz{m'e. mains. gov * iegisiafeire. maine. gov/senaie
