 
Heather Manchester, MSAD 17, President 
Niki Chan, RSU 24, President Elect 
Deb Taylor, RSU 12, Treasurer 
Joanne Dowd, RSU 23, Secretary  
Debra McIntyre, Executive Director 
 
      
Testimony of Debra McIntyre, Executive Director, on behalf of the members of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association, testifying in opposition to LD 1284 An Act to Require 
Personal Finance to be Taught as a Separate Course to Obtain a High School Diploma. 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, my name is Debra McIntyre, and I am the Executive Director of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association. On behalf of the members of MCLA, I offer testimony in 
opposition to LD 1284 An Act to Require Personal Finance to be Taught as a Separate Course 
to Obtain a High School Diploma. 
 
As I have stated before, the Maine Learning Results standards provide a set of clear expectations 
as to what students should know, understand and be able to explain as they progress through each 
K-12 grade level. The social studies standards, which were recently revised in 2019, include 
personal finance and economics as one of the four content areas within social studies.  This 
strand exists throughout K-12 and breaks down the personal finance skills all students should 
know and be able to do.  While we may not fully agree that the concepts of personal finance 
belong in the social studies standards, we do not believe that state statute should dictate that a 
school must offer a stand-alone course.  Nor do we believe that state statute should dictate that 
if a school is unable to offer this as a stand-alone course, a student cannot earn a diploma.  In 
addition, we are concerned that this proposal will increase the need for certified social studies 
teachers and that with our current staffing challenges, this will be one more hurdle to overcome. 
 
Therefore, we believe that the instruction in personal finance already is required as stated in the 
Maine Learning Results.  How schools best meet the needs of their students, regarding course 
offerings and scheduling, needs to be left in the hands of school administration, not state 
statute.  
 
For these reasons, MCLA is opposed to LD 1284.  
Thank you for your time.  
