 
 
  
TO:  The Honorable Joseph Rafferty 
  The Honorable Michael Brennan, Co-Chairs 
  Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
DATE:  May 10, 2023 
RE: LD 1284: An Act to Require Personal Finance to be Taught as a Separate Course 
to Obtain a High School Diploma 
  
 
Honorable Chairs and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
I am opposed to -LD 1284 as it is currently written. 
 
As a life-long Maine educator whose work has primarily been with students who have not thrived in 
conventional education, I know how important teaching students the practical skills involved in personal 
finance is. I am in favor of teaching and requiring Personal Finance in high school, but this bill places the 
course in the Social Studies Department where it doesn’t belong and where we can’t afford to have it. 
 
Social Studies and Civics in particular are under resourced areas of our curriculum.  According to 
Waterville Social Studies Teacher Jessica Graham, putting another requirement into Social Studies 
without increasing the staffing in each high school to teach the subject would mean less civics, less 
history, less geography throughout Maine. 
 
Here is what Ms. Graham says in her testimony to your committee for the May 10th hearing: 
 
"The bill proposes to require that every high school offer a personal finance course as a social 
studies graduation requirement. It does not increase the state minimum of two years of social studies 
instruction. Districts will be faced with two choices: increase their district requirements for social studies 
and hire additional staff, or further limit the already scant time devoted to history, civics, and geography 
in most Maine high schools. “ 
 
I think logically, this course belongs in the Math Department as a requirement. Let’s not short change 
Social Studies, which after all embodies the primary reason we have public schools in the first place - to 
educate students to become active and engaged citizens! 
 
As an educator who has been concerned about the under-resourced nature of our social studies 
departments, compared to say STEM subjects, and the limited time students k-12 are exposed to civics 
and community engagement, I am opposed to adding more tangential requirements to teaching social 
studies in Maine schools. Please consider amending this well-intentioned bill to include the requirement 
in the Math department. 
 
Many thanks, 
Emanuel Pariser, Phd 
Waterville, Maine 04901 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
