Written Testimony by Susan Lamoreau  
Academy of Business  
Sanford Regional Technical Center  
 
In Support of L.D. 1284  
An Act to Require Personal Finance to be Taught as a Separate Course  
to Obtain a High School Diploma  
May 10, 2023  
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:  
 
My background is as a business education teacher for 36 years for the Sanford School 
Department.  Twenty eight years of those years were in the high school and the past 
eight years have been in the technical center where I reach students from eight partner 
schools from the southern part of Maine.  
With my experience, I strongly believe that students need exposure to financial literacy 
early in life.  Then as they progress to their junior and senior year where they can 
actually see  and relate to  its im pact, this  is wh ere it needs to be taught to ALL . 
Budgeting isn’t only about finance, it teaches self -discipline, how to save money, and 
how to take control of spending . Planting this seed by showing them how to budget is 
important in helping them make edu cated financial decisions that will benefit both their 
short -term as well as their long -term goals.  
Some students go on to college, some take off for the military while others enter the 
workforce immediately out of school. No matter what path they take, having these skills 
in their back pockets can save them from making financial missteps that can impact 
their future.  
Being a business major, I had the full gamut of business cour ses to prepare me for 
teaching. The  one course I did not have was personal financial literacy. Yes, I could 
balance my checkbook, put money in a savings account and know the importance  of 
paying my bills on time, but I was never taught the impact of credit .  
It was at a time when credit cards were given to college students without a second 
thought. I was one of those students who took advantage of getting that first credit card. 
Being a responsible person, I immediately gave it to my mother and said do not let me 
have access to this until the second semester of my senior year in col lege.  And t hat’s 
exactly how it played out . 
Second semester of my senior year arrived and it was time for “Spring Break .” I asked  
my mom  for my credit card knowing full well that I would  soon  be a “rich” teacher 
making tons of money in just a couple of mo nths.  Off I went on vacation  with a group of 
my college friends to Florida  with credit card in hand.  What a great time I had sparing 
no expense knowing I would soon be making those payments  after attaining that first 
teaching job.  
To me, I was what I tho ught was a responsible credit card holder.  I was getting my bill 
and making my minimum payment  on time .  I was finding new needs that I did not have 
immediate cash for, such as getting a new wardrobe for teaching and equipping a new 
apartment.  The more I used my credit card and raised that balance, the credit card 
company would send me a congratulatory le tter upping my credit limit. Still being the 
responsible person I was, I continued to make those minimum payments even though 
they were getting a little higher as my balance was increasing.  
It wasn’t until I was over $10,000 in debt (with a first -time annual salary of $15,600) that 
I realized, I was not paying down my debt .  I simply did not do the math to see what my 
true cost of credit was at that time.  I don’t even remember what the interest rate was 
because at the time, I didn’t see what the impact wo uld be. I was just paying more and 
more and getting further and further behind. It seems so simple, but it is a trap that so 
many fall into in life because they are not educated on the importance of using credit 
wisely and the cost of credit overall. It wa s probably my toughest lesson in life and one 
that I bring back to the classroom each and every year.  
Throughout my years of teaching, many students have returned advising me that they 
learned more in my personal finance class than they did later on in co llege and how it 
has helped them to stop and make sound financial decisions  and has impacted their 
lives.  
More than anything, finances impact everyone. Financial literacy is empowering for our 
youth and is an important building block for their future succ ess. Maine has the 
opportunity to invest in their children’s future by supporting LD1284 , An Act to Require 
Personal Finance to be taught  as a Separate  Course to Obtain a High School Diplom a. I 
ask that you support this bill to be enacted so the students o f Maine can leave high 
school better equipped to make sound financial decisions about their future.  
