 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry  
 
neither for nor against  
 
LD 1881, An Act Regarding Compensation Fees and Related Conservatio n Efforts to Protect Soils an d 
Wildlife and Fisheries Habitat from  Solar and Wind Energy Development and High -impact Electric  
Transmission Lines Under the Site Location of Development Laws  
 
Amy Wi nston, Senior Policy Director  
May 10, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Distinguished Members of the Committee:  
 
My name is Amy Winston, and  I live in Edgecomb. I am writing  this testimony  neither for nor against LD 
1881 on behalf of Coastal Enterprises, Inc. ( CEI). CEI is a private, non -profit Community Development 
Corporation (CDC) and Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick. CEI was founded in 1977 to develop job -creating n atural- resource -based business ventures in Maine’s rural and 
coastal regions. W e continue to work to build a just, vibrant, and climate resilient future for people in 
communities in Maine and other rural regions. We do this by integrating finance, business  expertise and 
policy solutions in ways that make the economy more equitable.   CEI has a 46 -year history of investment in Maine agriculture. We provide business services including free 
sector -specific business advising and technical assistance, and by mak ing loans and investments in new 
and existing farm and food -related businesses. Our focus on and commitment to Maine’s agricultural 
and natural resource industries has only grown  since our inception. Si nce 2018, CEI has provided $17.5 
million in financing to food and agriculture related enterprises, helping them to create or maintain 1,986 
local food economy jobs, and providing technical assistance to 412 farmers and food entrepreneurs.  
 
CEI is also invest ing in the transition to clean energy. CEI’s low-cost solar financing  has helped over 40 
businesses go green with $ 25 million in loans leveraging $45 million in investments across Maine and 
New England to install solar arrays . Our portfolio  generat es enough energy to power 3,500 homes  
annually . These loans prioritize low -income entrepreneurs and business owners from populations that 
have historically lacked access to credit and capital. In 2018, CEI established a subsidiary, Bright 
Community Capital, to increase access to solar energy and specifically to bring cost -effective solar power 
to low -income communities and neighborhoods. For its part, Bright Community Capital has provided 
$2.3 million in financing to developers  for solar projects and owns 1.6 MWs in projects bringing 
affordable solar power to non -profits, municipalities,  and affordable housing.  
 
Our missioned approach to photovoltaics understands that without access to credit and capital, low -
income consumers are unable to qualify for a loan or federal tax incentives. Credit risk (real or 
perceived), smalle r project sizes, developer balance sheet capacity, and technical assistance needs are 
 
additional hurdles1. For this reason, CEI was named to the Distributed Generation Stakeholder Group 
convened by the Governor’s Energy Office pursuant to LD 936 (P.L. 202 1, Ch. 390) to assist with 
recommendations for a cost -effective successor program for an equitable and appropriate  (from a land -
use perspective) , cost-effective distributed renewable energy program that is compatible with 
agricultural land use.  
 
CEI supports the  intent of this bill to  balance the state’s interest in keeping agricultural land available for 
food production  with its interest in transitioning  to renewable energy. By requiring solar developers to 
pay a compensatory  fee, fund conservation  efforts or ensure that a comparable amount  and quality  of 
land remains available through an easement or off -site preservation  option, this bill provides  a unique 
protection to safeguard im portan t agricultu ral soils  and soils of statewide importance . Requiring a 
mitigation  fee for development that o ccurs on prime agricultural soils and isn ’t dual use places value on  
the practice of  food  production that is so critical to the state ’s health, economy,  and culture .  
 We appreciate that the Department s of Agriculture, C onservation and Forestry and E nvironmental 
Protection  would collaborate – in consultation  with the Governor ’s Energy office  and the Department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  – to define “prime  agricultural soils ”, “soils of statewide importan ce”, 
“wildlife and fisheries habitats ”, and establish the  compensation fee program , fund(s) and fund(s) 
management structure through r ulemaking . While this adds another layer of permitting for solar 
developers , we feel that having establ ished rules  will help make costs predictable and  the price for 
protecting valuable farmland will be wort h the  added effort . We support the fl exible way in which the 
funds may be managed through  public -private partnership  and partnership with towns and local 
organizations .  
 
As drafted, the bill does not re ference any intent to apply to developments of a particular size or scale . 
We respectfully s uggest that this proposal would be more effective if it is restricted /applied to larger . i.e.,  
utilit y-scale , projects . This would preserve farmers ’ autonomy and flexibility to use their property  to 
develop modest installations t o provide the energy needed to run their businesses while ensuring that 
large tracts of productive farmland are not affected  without offsetting the  adverse  impact s of energy 
development on food production .  
 
We hope that you will discuss amending the bill to include a comparable  suggestion to clarify  that this 
law would  appl y specifically to large scale energy operations to conserve farmers along wi th farmland . 
Thank you for considering our testimony  on LD 1881.  
 
 
  
 
1 See Carsey Institute of Public Policy White Paper on Scaling Solar Equitably 2021  
