 
One Short Street · Suite 2 · Northampton, MA 01060  
Phone: (413) 586 -9330 · Fax: (413) 586 -9332  
www.farmland.org   
 
 
Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
By Chelsea Gazillo , American Farmland Trust, New England Policy Manager  
 
May 10 , 2023  
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry:  
I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of  LD 1881 – An Act Regarding Compensation 
Fees and Related Conser vation Efforts to Protect Soils and Wildlife Fisheries Habitat from Solar and 
Wind Energy Development and High -impact Electric Transmission Lines under the Site Location of 
Development Laws  
My name is Chelsea Gazillo, and I am American Farmland Trust's New England Policy 
Manager. American Farmland Trust (AFT) is the only national conservation organization dedicated to 
protecting farmland, promoting sound farming practices, and keeping farmers  on the land. AFT is a 
national leader in promoting Smart Solar Siting on farmland to support clean energy capacity while 
protecting our most viable agricultural lands from development pressures. AFT has a long history of 
working in Maine, stemming back to  our role in supporting the first farmland protection projects 
undertaken through the Land for Maine's Future program. Building off our New England Smart Solar 
initiative, AFT participated in the Agricultural Solar Stakeholder Group convened in 2021 by the  
Governor's Energy Office (GEO) and the Department of Agricultural, Conservation, and Forestry 
(DACF).1 
AFT supports LD 1881 as it will ensure more balanced and transparent solar energy AND create 
more funding to protect the state’s remaining farmland. In addition, this bill aligns with AFT’s Smart 
Solar Siting principles. Our first principle is to prioritiz e solar siting on buildings and land unsuitable for 
farming. You can find a list of AFT’s Smart Solar Siting Principle s here.  
When farmland is lost to any development, the food production, economic activity, and 
ecosystem services those farms provide are also lost. Losing our most productive farmland can also push 
farming activities to marginal land, which ma y require more significant inputs, resulting in higher 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to achieve comparable production. As Maine moves to capture the 
environmental, economic, and energy benefits of clean and renewable energy, the state must also 
minimize s olar development's impacts on farmland conversion. A critical step in accomplishing this goal 
is ensuring that Maine's Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry (DACF) has adequate 
resources to protect the state's most productive, versatile, an d resilient agricultural lands.  
In the summer of 2022, AFT released "Farms Under Threat 2040," wh ich estimates that between 
2016 -2040, 6.2 million acres (about the area of Massachusetts)  in the US will be converted to urban and 
highly developed land uses such as commercial buildings, industrial sites, and moderate -to-high-density 
 
1 https://farmland.org/project/smart -solar -for-new-england/  

 
One Short Street · Suite 2 · Northampton, MA 01060  
Phone: (413) 586 -9330 · Fax: (413) 586 -9332  
www.farmland.org  residential developme nt. The remainder, 12.2 million acres, will be converted to low -density residential 
areas, which range from large -lot subdivisions to rural areas with a proliferation of scattered houses. 
Furthermore, according to AFT's "Farms Under Threat 2020" report, it  is estimated that from 2001 -
2016, Maine lost roughly 17,700 acres2. According to "AFT's Farms Under Threat 2040" report, if 
recent trends continue, 53,4000 acres of Maine's farmland will be paved over, fragmented, or converted 
to uses that jeopardize ag riculture.  This is equivalent to 5% of the state's farmland, which is enough to 
generate $32 million in annual revenue."3 In short, Maine cannot afford to lose any  more farmland to 
development.   
AFT recognizes that deploying solar energy is essential to meeting Maine's renewable energy 
requirements (100% renewable energy grid by 2050) and to  national and global goals for mitigating 
climate change. Therefore, a rapid expansion of solar in all its forms and scales is needed – solar 
installed for on -farm energy, on most residential and commercial rooftops, parking lot canopies, and on 
landfills,  brownfields, and highway corridors. In addition, a substantial area of land will still be needed 
for utility -scale solar and community solar in Maine. Solar development in Maine is accelerating, and 
the Solar Energy Industries Association projects that Ma ine will double its installed solar capacity 
(1,196 MW)4 over the next five years. However, this rapid expansion cannot come at the cost of local 
agriculture and food production. Mitigation policies offer communiti es one means of ensuring farmland 
remains available, and farm businesses remain viable as the energy transition occurs. AFT has been 
actively involved in developing a similar provision in New York that also aims to collect a mitigation 
fee for solar projec ts sited on prime farmland.   
New York  offers an interesting case study for solar mitigation fees. As part of NYSERDA’s 
large scale solar solicitation, projects on actively farmed land greater than 30 acres in size are assessed a 
fee per acre of prime soils converted . Solar developers can reduce or sidestep this  fee (with approval 
from the New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets) if they redesign projects to avoid 
installing on  prime farmland or if projects  incorporate agrivoltaics —a type of dual use that pa irs 
agricultural production with solar energy generation in an integrated way on the same piece of land 
throughout the full life of the project.  AFT  directly  informed the development of these policies, but still 
recommends increasing the current fees and i ncorporating more incentives for farm viability and 
agrivoltaics  in a 2022 report . Additionally, AFT suggested the state consider no discounts on mitigation 
fees are made available for projects that displace farmer -renters. In 2022, New York  passed a law to 
assign all mitigation fees collected towards the state’s farmland protec tion program.    
 
Since 2013 farmers  have been facing nearly a 50% drop in net farm income and continue to  
struggle to  meet increases in farm production exp enses. This economic crisis has seriously impacted 
farm viability and farmers’  well-being, thus threatening farmland security. As climate impacts ravage 
growing seasons, and with the recent devastating discovery of PFAS contaminating our regions' soils, 
the livelihood of Maine's farmers has never been at greater risk.  Offering farmers  the option to explore 
solar installations  and sim ultaneously continuing t o protect  the state’s  most valuable farmland f rom 
development is a win for the state’s  local food system and continued efforts to fight clima te change . This 
critical  legislation i s a step in the right direction to do just that, protecting  the state’s  most productive 
farmland, a finite resource , from future development pressures  and promoting a clean energy futur e for 
Maine re sidents.  
 
2 https://storage.googleapis.com/csp -fut.appspot.com/reports/spatial/Maine_spatial.pdf  
3 https://farmlandinfo.org/publications/farms -under -threat -2040/  
4 https://www.seia.org/  
 
One Short Street · Suite 2 · Northampton, MA 01060  
Phone: (413) 586 -9330 · Fax: (413) 586 -9332  
www.farmland.org  AFT is confident that this piece of legislation will provide mechanisms that support the State of 
Maine's renewable energy goals  while aiding in the state ’s efforts to prote ct farmland and prom ote a 
resilient food system for consumers across Maine.   
Thank you for  the opportunity to submit testimony. Please feel free to contact me at 
cgazillo@farmland.org  or my colleagues at American Farmland Trust if you have any questions about 
this testimony on LD 1 884.   
 
With s incer ity,  
 
Chelsea Gazillo  
New England Policy Manager  
American Farmland Trust  
 
American Farmland Trust is an agricultural non -profit organization with a mission to save the land that 
sustains us by protecting farmland, promoting sound farming practices, and keeping farmers on the land. 
AFT is the only national agricultural organization that approaches  its work in this comprehensive, holistic 
manner. We recognize the connection between the land, forward -looking farming practices, and the 
farmers who do the work.  

