Jeffery Chick
Steuben
LD 1881
Hi, my name is Jeffery Chick from Harrington Elementary School in Harrington, 
Maine, where I am a science and social teacher for grades 4 through 6.
I am writing to testify in opposition to LD 1817 An Act to Support Outdoor Education
by Establishing the Outdoor School for All Maine Students Program.
The exclusive focus on overnight experiences in this bill is of concern for 2 reasons: 
1) These overnight experiences, while important, especially from a social-emotional 
development perspective, must be complemented with regular outdoor learning 
experiences close to home–like the ones my organization engages in as part of a 
collaboration with other non-profit, governmental, and for-profit organizations in our 
area. Failure to engage children regularly outdoors in their home communities has 
actually been shown to negatively impact students' sense of the environmental and 
cultural significance of their own home area, potentially leading to kids growing up 
and leaving the area, and making them think of outdoor experiences as isolated 
adventures, not a part of everyday life.
2) Overnight opportunities disproportionately benefit the more populated, affluent 
communities in southern Maine and the coast, where most of these facilities exist. If 
you work with children under the age of 4th grade, this bill also would not support 
their outdoor learning so that may be something to add too.
Also, I have had outdoor organizations come to our school to assist in teaching 
valuable lessons in ecology.  To think that the bill would limit funding to only those 
who participate in overnight activities would take away many opportunities for other 
children.  We have had many great lessons and outdoor opportunities for all grades at 
our school and for other children in our district.  
If this bill were amended to more broadly encompass the breadth of outdoor and 
environmental education opportunities and providers our students have access to 
across the state, I would gladly consider supporting it.
Thank you,
Jeffery H. Chick 
