 
  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1881,  
An Act Regarding Compensation Fees and Related Conservation Efforts to Protect Soils and 
Wildlife and Fisheries Habitat from Solar and Wind Energy Development and High -impact 
Electric Transmission Lines Under the Site Location of Development Laws  
 
May 10, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and  members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, I am Melanie Sturm, the Forests and Wildlife Director at the 
Natural Resour ces Council of Maine (NRCM). I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in 
support of LD 1881.  
 
NRCM works across a broad range of issues , including reduc ing the risks of climate change and 
conserving Maine lands and wildlife habitat , especially in the North Woods . Although climate action and 
land conservation can sometimes be in conflict, LD 1881 provides a framework for progress toward 
both.   
 
While clean energy development is  necessary and important  for Ma ine, we recognize  that all 
development has some degree of environmental impact  because the infrastructure directly or indirectly 
impacts wildlife  and may cut across  large,  undeveloped lands  or waterways . LD 1881 would help address 
this dilemma  by creating  a compensation program for unavoidable  impacts of solar energy  
development , wind energy  development,  and high -impact electric transmission lines . The bill would 
require  developers  to pay a mitigation fee if development occur s on prime agricultural soils or soils of 
statewide imp ortance. The bill would also require developers to pay a compensation fee to fund off -site 
habitat improvement or conservation  projects to mitigate  the adverse effects of a development on 
wildlife and fisheries habitat s.  
 
Compensating for habitat impacts is critical for the sustainability of fish and wildlife populations 
throughout Maine. Habitat loss and degradation are the leading causes of species declines and are 
compounded by other stressors, such as climate change, invasive species, and disease . As real estate 
pressure s continue and as more clean energy projects are built to meet the State’s greenhouse gas 
emission reduction goals , this bill provides a sensible strategy that should simplify the process for 
mitigating project impacts on flora and fauna .  
 
The program proposed in LD 1881  would provide more predictability for developers  because currently 
compensation requirements under Site Law are not applied consistently.  Much like the successful Maine 
Natural Resource Conservation Program , a program of the Maine Department of Environmental 
Protection and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers  that primarily deals with wetlands,  resources of the same 
or similar type would be protected elsewhere . By mitigating  such  impacts , we can protect resources  
valued by Maine people and businesses  while  continuing to make gains in decarboniz ing the electrical 
grid.  
 
I respectfully urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1881. Thank you for your time and 
consideration of this issue, and I would be glad to answer any questions you may have.  
