Testimony of Charles Katz-Leavy, Esq. 
Maine Judiciary Committee Public Hearing 
LD 657 Bill "An Act To Amend the Percentage Of Votes Needed For An Amendment 
Of A Declaration In The Maine Condominium Act" 
May 8, 2023 
Good Morning members of the Judiciary Committee. My name is Charles Katz-Leavy. I am an 
attorney with Jensen Baird in Portland, and reside in Falmouth. My legal practice includes a 
specialty in community association law, which involves representation of homeowner 
associations, developers, and individual homeowners.  
I'm here as a volunteer for the Community Association Institute (CAI), a national nonprofit 
organization that serves the interests of condominium associations and condominium owners 
with about 43,000 members. I am the Chair of the Maine Legislative Action Committee of CAI. 
Under present law, 33 MRSA § 1602-117, sub-§(d), most condominium declaration 
amendments must be approved by 67% of unit owners; however, some changes require 100% 
approval.  A 100% vote is now required to create or increase special declarant rights, increase the 
total number of units, change the boundaries of any unit, change the allocated interests of a unit, 
or change the uses to which any unit is restricted. The relevant language reads as follows: 
 
“(d) Except to the extent expressly permitted or required by other provisions of this Act, 
no amendment may create or increase special declarant rights, increase the number of units, 
change the boundaries of any unit, the allocated interests of a unit, or the uses to which any 
unit is restricted, in the absence of unanimous consent of the unit owners.” 
 
Unit owners and condominium associations frequently run across situations such as the minor 
extension of a deck, expansion of a unit, or intrusion of air conditioning equipment into common 
area, about which there is no serious controversy, but which cannot be changed because of the 
unanimous consent requirement. Another common example is correcting allocated interests that 
are based on errant calculations of square footage. There are instances when an association 
wishes to pass an amendment to address such a situation, but one or two disgruntled unit owners 
are able to block the will of a significant majority of owners.  Additionally, “Unanimous consent 
of the unit owners” does not mean unanimous consent only of those who show up and vote; it 
means consent from everyone.  Obtaining unanimous consent about anything is nearly 
impossible when the numbers exceed 15 or more people.  If just one person does not vote, there 
is no unanimous consent. This can leave Associations with governing documents that do not 
reflect the will of 90% or more of the members.  
 
In addition, the existing law contains ambiguous language “the uses to which any unit is 
restricted.”  Many amendments to a condominium declaration in some way affect how an owner 
can make use of the unit.  Condominium associations across the State of Maine have recorded 
hundreds of Declaration Amendments that regulate smoking, keeping pets, short-term rentals, 
loud noise, and other activities in the unit. These amendments are usually passed by a super-
majority of owners (at least 67%) who feel strongly about quality of life issues like short-term 
rentals on Air BNB, loud music late at night, or the keeping of an unlimited number of animals.  
Most attorneys who practice in the condominium area have taken the position that the 
Legislature intended for the term “use” as used in the current statute to mean land use 
classifications, i.e., amendments that would change the nature of the use of a unit from 
residential, commercial, industrial, single-family, or multi-family.  However, the current 
language in the statute is not clear. 
 
The proposed amendment changes the threshold for such actions from unanimous (100%) 
consent to 90% and clarifies the meaning of the term “use” in Section 1602-117 (d) of the Maine 
Condominium Act.  As previously stated, the LAC is supportive of the proposed changes to the 
statutory language.  A substantially similar bill was passed by the Legislature a few years ago, 
but for unknown reasons was vetoed by then-Governor Paul LePage. 
I would be happy to answer questions and expect to be available by Zoom. 
 
Charles Katz-Leavy
Falmouth, Maine (CAI)
LD 657
See attached
