Donna Dodge
Denmark
LD 1365
Dear Chairman Hickman and members of the Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs,
I am in support of LD 1365, An Act to Require Photograph Identification for Voting.
Requiring identification at the polling place is a reasonable request to ensure the 
accuracy and integrity of our elections.  Voter ID can prevent impersonation fraud, 
voting under fictitious registrations, double-voting by people registered in more than 
one state and voting by undocumented immigrants. 
Voter-ID laws also maintain confidence in the integrity of elections. Polling shows 
that a substantial majority of Americans support voter ID at the polls. 
Opponents claim that there is no voter fraud, or at least not enough to be concerned 
about. But history reveals many instances of voter fraud on a scale sufficient to 
determine election outcomes especially when close:  A 2010 election in Missouri that 
ended in a one-vote margin of victory included 50 votes cast illegally by citizens of 
Somalia. In Californial, a 1996 congressional race was almost overturned by hundreds
of votes illegally cast by noncitizens. A 1984 grand jury in Brooklyn revealed a 
widespread, 14-year conspiracy that resulted in thousands of fraudulent votes in state 
and federal elections.
The bottom line: Voter fraud has been and continues to be a serious problem. The 
U.S. Supreme Court recognized this fact in its 2008 ruling that upheld Indiana's 
voter-ID law.
It just makes sense that voting be at least as secure as other situations such as renting 
a car, getting on a plane, getting a library card, cashing a check at the bank all 
activities that routinely require ID.
The claim that voter ID suppresses the turnout of minority voters were proven false 
by studies and election results in Georgia and Indiana in 2008 and 2010.
Voter-ID laws also maintain confidence in the integrity of elections and a majority of 
people are in favor of voter ID at the polls. 
Please support LD 1365
Sincerely,
Donna Dodge
Denmark, ME
