 
 
   
 
LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.  
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333  
(207) 621-0087   Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)  
www.mainelse.org   
May 12, 2023 
Testimony of John Brautigam, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in opposition to 
L.D. 1365. 
Senator Hickman,  Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs: 
Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonprofit legal services organization with the mission 
of providing free legal assistance to Maine’s older adults when their basic human needs are 
threatened. Next year LSE will mark 50 years of service to older Mainers. 
Consent of the governed is the key to our system of democracy and that is why our right to vote 
is considered a fundamental right under both the U.S and Maine Constitution. Courts have made 
it clear that legislation affecting a fundamental right should be passed only on rare occasions and 
always as a last resort solution for a major problem. We oppose this bill because we believe that 
this proposed legislation will reduce access to voting without sufficient justification.1 
Accordingly, it will violate the Constitutional rights of all voters including those who are older 
adults.   
When a court considers cases involving a fundamental right it applies a test called “strict 
scrutiny” to the facts to determine whether the right has been impermissibly restricted.  This is a 
very high evidentiary threshold and requires proof that the action that is affecting a particular 
class of people serves a “compelling state interest” and that treating them in this way is 
“necessary” to serve that interest. In this case, the class is those individuals who have registered 
to vote and are enrolled voters. But it also would apply to those who wish to register to vote.  
Article Two of the Maine Constitution sets forth three basic requirements for becoming a voter. 
An individual must be a citizen, must be 18 years old, and must be a Maine resident. Our 
existing statutes provide a process for determining whether an individual meets those 
requirements and qualifies as an enrolled voter. The individual must appear before the municipal 
registrar of voters and produce documentary evidence demonstrating their eligibility.  
Some of the documents that the prospective voter may offer will contain a photo of the 
individual and some will not. Statutory provisions currently set forth acceptable documents for 
 
1 We also testified against LD 34. Our testimony included the text of the current law. 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=10010361 
May 12, 2023  page 2 
LD 1365 
 
 both identity and residence – Title 21-A §112-A “Proof of identity for voting purposes” and Title 
21-A§112 “Residence for voting purposes”. Both sections make clear that the Register has the 
discretion to consider what is offered and determine eligibility accordingly. The following 
language with either the word “identity” or “residence” as appropriate appears in each section.   
“Any of the following forms of documentation may be offered by an applicant and considered 
by a registrar in verifying the (identity/residence) of an applicant who is registering to vote under 
this chapter and whose name does not already appear in the central voter registration system as a 
registered voter.  The registrar need not request or consider all of these forms of documentation 
in order to verify an applicant's identity.” 
[Title 21-A §112-A  first paragraph, Title 21-A§112 (1)(A)]            
Especially appreciated by many older adults is the option to produce documents without a photo 
that may be considered and may be accepted by the Registrar as sufficient to prove their identity 
and residence. As the years pass, official documents with photos become invalid and the cost or 
ability to qualify for them becomes more problematic. Other adults may not have ever had those 
documents and will be disproportionately affected if the opportunity to prove identity and 
residence by alternative means is removed.        
The proposed legislation requires an individual who is already an enrolled voter to produce a 
specific type of photo identification before they may cast their vote. These include a current and 
valid driver's license, a Maine nondriver identification card, a United States passport, military 
ID, and a permit to carry a concealed handgun with a photograph. But specifically, not a Maine 
college or university ID. This list is significantly more restrictive than current law and doubtless 
removes discretion from the registrar.   
Many older adult who have been voters for many years will not have current driver licenses or 
any of the other documents and will be challenged to apply for a nondriver ID. The time and 
travel expense to obtain this document will be a significant barrier. Not to mention the indignity 
they will likely feel. Imagine an older adult, perhaps a war veteran, who has been a voter for 
years now required to prove once again who they are and where they live before they can vote.  
It would be difficult to find a clearer example of legislation infringing on an eligible voter’s right 
to vote. In fact, “infringing” might be an inadequate description because it would effectively 
disenfranchise anyone who did not have and did not use those specific documents to become a 
registered voter.  
This bill would exclude student IDs entirely and thus disenfranchise students who currently 
qualify using those documents. We remind the Committee that not some students are older adults 
within the age group served by Legal Services for the Elderly. 
We fail to see a compelling reason for altering the voting process in such an extreme fashion. 
There is no significant evidence of voting by unqualified persons or of voter impersonation. We 
have confidence in the judgment of our municipal registrars and do not believe that any changes 
are necessary to ensure the integrity of elections.  We hope that you will agree and vote “ought 
not to pass.” Thank you.
 
