kathryn kellison
Windsor
LD 1365
Senator Hickman, Representative Supina and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, thank you for this opportunity to 
speak to you.  I am a resident of Windsor and am speaking on behalf of the Maine 
Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network.  We are a collaboration of Unitarian 
Universalist churches from across the state which advocates for our values in the 
legislature.
I am here to testify in opposition to LD1365, An Act to Require Photographic 
Identification for Voting.
I have served as a sworn election clerk in Windsor for every municipal and state 
election since 2016.  My role has been to request the name of address of potential 
voters, locate their name in the official voter list for Windsor and check the box 
indicating that they have signed in to vote.  If the address is not consistent with the 
name, the voter works with the election clerk to fill out a change of address form 
which is noted in the list.  If they are new to Windsor, they fill out a voter registration 
card.
This is a system that has worked well for many years and shows no sign of failing.  
The risk of people voting using a false name and address is tiny.  At the same time, in 
our country, voting is right, not a privilege
Unitarian Universalists affirm and promote the use of the democratic process in all 
our affairs as a principle of our faith. Each of our congregations is governed like a 
town meeting.  Each member has a vote in every meeting, with the Clerk checking 
people in to be sure they are members.  We recognize the power of the vote and the 
necessity of making voting widely available to ensure a thriving democracy.
We believe that each person should have an equal opportunity to vote and will always
oppose any attempt to put restrictions or limits on access to the ballot box.  Any 
barrier to any person being able to cast their ballot goes against the idea of freedom 
on which this country was founded.
I urge you to join me in supporting democracy.  Please vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS 
on LD 1365.
Kathryn Kellison
Kell6787@gmail.com
207 445-4415 
80 Taylor Rd. (PO Box 49)
Windsor, Me 04363

