Linda Reardon
Orrington 
LD 1365
Augusta needs to realize the extent of voter fraud in Maine. It needs to be addressed 
ASAP. 
1. Voter ID should be mandatory. We have to show ID everywhere else for 
everything else. Even to buy a cell phone. Why is it not required for the most 
important event in our lives. WHO and what you vote for has a huge impact on your 
life. You want clean fair elections no fraud and voting rights are not politically altered
or manipulated by either party. It is the most important piece of our Constitution the 
right to choice. Representative Faulkingham has a very clear and fair petition for 
voter ID that has been signed by thousands of legal Maine voters. My husband and I 
got 1300 signatures on voting day by people who had just voted and were on their 
way out. The petition was then taken to the town clerks for verification of signatures. 
So the signatures could not be denied as legal. The people just voted. This petition is a
great start to securing honest elections. Some of the areas of problems are as follow. 
This data was obtained after careful research by several experts. 
1. People living in small townships have the choice of voting in several towns. 
Because of the voter rolls not being updated and no checks and balances people 
voting in 2-3 towns in the same elections 
2. Voter rolls in ALL towns and cities need to be updated. In our town we have a 
town clerk who has other duties but on her down time goes over the voter rolls and 
updates. By doing this on a regular basis it’s always updated. If towns have not kept 
up it will be a process to start but if kept up then it will always be updated and honest.
A sexton in a small town was concerned with the number of people voting. She 
checked her records to find almost 200 dead people voted. If voter rolls were updated 
this would help fix this issue 
. College students voting at school and in their home towns. College students who 
want to vote should only be allowed absentee ballots from their home towns and not 
allowed to vote in two states or twice in Maine. No one should be gathering ballots at 
colleges. If they are sincere about elections then they can get ballots from their own 
hometowns. Much fraud with college students 
4. People living in two states and not for the 6 month requirement should have to 
show ID and not allowed to vote in two states 
5. No one should be allowed to go into group homes or nursing homes and get 
signatures from unconscious people or people incapacitated. This too is a HUGE 
problem in Maine. 
6. Out of state money should not be allowed for the purpose of voting machines that 
can be rigged. We need paper back up in every town and city. 
7. Absentee Ballots for only military personnel and disabled persons who can not get 
to the polls. My own son is wheelchair bound and has never missed an in person vote 
since he was 18 he’s now 49. Transportation is available. Military ballots should be 
sent out in time to be counted on Election Day and NOT after. 
8. Same day in person voting should be mandatory. Also every town should have poll 
watcher from both parties for extra insurance of honest elections. We do it every year.
And it can be done in shifts. Many retired people would love to do this task
9. Lastly Rank Choice Voting is not Constitution and has been proven by experts on a
national level. This should be on the ballots and explained so people can understand it
and voted on again by the people not politicians who benefit from this. This only 
scratches the surface but it’s a start
