Mitch Degere
Durham
LD 1365
The saddest thing about voter I.D. is the compromising on this issue from the 
democratic side of the aisle. Republicans and conservatives across this country have 
taken power over that last twenty years via; voter suppression, unconstitutional 
gerrymandering, making the poor and marginalized parts of our society wait 10 to 12 
hours in line to vote. 
According to the Brennan Center for Justice in "The Truth about voter fraud", found 
that most reported incidents of voter fraud are actually traceable to other sources, such
as clerical errors or bad data matching practices. It is more likely that and an 
American will be struck by lightening, voter I.D. will prevent hundreds of thousands 
of votes not being tabulated and that will have an effect on who gets into office. 
This is why in America, which is a progressive country; The will and the majority of 
the people want assault rifles banned, want federal background checks, a waiting 
period, mandatory licensing, we want abortion to be safe and legal, believe health 
care is a right, believe climate change is real, want to reduce our addiction to oil, we 
don't want drug users to be in prison, we want better mental health care etc. 
This is again, the conservative right abusing power while sacrificing the country's 
democratic values, unable to distance themselves from Trump. Progressives have won
the arguments but democrats compromising on voting laws across this nation gave us 
the most oppressive president in our nations history. 
A comprehensive 2014 study published in the Washington Post found 31 credible 
instances of impersonation fraud from 2000 to 2014, out of 1 billion votes cast. Even 
this tiny number is inflated, as the study's author counted not just prosecutions or 
convictions, but any or all credible claims. In the last 40 years no voter fraud or 
totality of errors have ever determined the outcome of an election. The state of Texas 
has the strictest voter I.D. laws in the country, they did so knowing the fact that only 2
convictions out of 20 million votes over a decade occurred. Who does that?
People, across this great land of ours we're spending over $500 million a year on voter
I.D. and that figure is conservative. It's like spending $500 million dollars on a Dam 
to stop a bucket of water, and that's not hyperbole. I oppose LD 1365 on the basis that
it is undemocratic and I don't appreciate being treated like a toilet.
