Maine Town & City Clerks’ 
Association
Local Government Center  60 Community Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486
1-800-452-8786 (In Maine)  207-623-8428
Fax 207-626-5947
Representing Over 400 
Municipalities 
  
Date: April 7, 2023 
 
To: Senator Craig Hickman, Senate Chair 
Representative Laura Supica, House Chair 
And members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
 
From: Patti Dubois, Chairperson, Legislative Policy Committee  
Maine Town and City Clerks’ Association 
 
Re: LD 1365– An Act to Require  Photograph  Identification  for Voting  
 
Position: Neither For Nor Against 
 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association is neither for nor against LD 1365 and we thank 
you for the opportunity to outline our points for your committee.  In fact, surveys of 
municipal clerks on similar bills resulted in more than half of respondents being in support 
of this concept, and an equal percentage being either opposed or neither for nor against. 
 
Those in support of requiring ID to vote sited: 
• Increased voter confidence 
• Decrease in errors when checking voters off the voter list 
• Decrease in potential for voter fraud 
• Not a major hardship since most already have an ID 
• Strengthens the voting process and the accountability of elections 
 
Those in opposition of requiring ID to vote sited: 
• Could create confusion among voters, create long lines at polls while workers review 
various forms of ID, which may require additional staffing at the polls 
• Costs and accessibility to obtain special voter photograph identification cards 
• Voters have already demonstrated their identity when they registered to vote 
 
Although members appreciated that language has been added to standardize that absentee 
voters would also be required to provide photographic identification, clerks expressed the 
following concerns: 
• IDs are required upon return of the absentee ballot, but not at the issuance of the 
absentee ballot.  This requirement would mean that voters who are voting by 
absentee ballot would need to return a photocopy of their identification separate 
from their ballot, so that clerks can accept the absentee ballot in CVR before 
processing.  Requiring the identification document at issuance would be preferred. 
  
Maine Town & City Clerks’ 
Association
Local Government Center  60 Community Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486
1-800-452-8786 (In Maine)  207-623-8428
Fax 207-626-5947
Representing Over 400 
Municipalities 
  
 
• Once photocopies of identification documents are provided and attached to the 
absentee return materials, clerks expressed concern over the confidentiality of these 
documents, since absentee envelopes and applications are public and can be viewed 
during an inspection of these documents.   
• Since most voting of nursing home residents is done by absentee ballot, many of those 
residents no longer have a photo ID and would have difficulty obtaining any credentials 
from the Secretary of State if they have to visit a site in person. 
 
 
Since this bill doesn’t identify a process for voters who wish to vote but do not show photo 
identification, it is assumed that these voters will be turned away to come back with proper 
ID and may result in disenfranchising a percentage of voters.  Voters who are turned away 
will likely be frustrated or angry and will take that out on election clerks. 
 
Smaller municipalities noted that there is no allowance for the election clerk’s personal 
knowledge of the individual as allowable proof of identity.  In addition, the bill prohibits the 
use of in-state college IDs but is silent on other picture IDs such as those used for 
employment. 
 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association appreciates the opportunity to share its  
testimony with the Committee. Should any questions arise, please feel free to contact  me at 
207)680-4210 or by email: pdubois@waterville-me.gov  . 
