 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
Neither For Nor Against  
 
LD 1365, An Act to Require Photograph Identification for Voting  
 
May 12, 2023 
 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica  and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Lambert,  and I am providing testimony neither for nor against to LD 34 
on behalf of M aine M unicipal A ssociation ’s (MMA) elected 70- member Legislative Policy Committee  
(LPC).   
Like LD 34 also presented this session, the bill before you today would require all voters to 
present proof of their identity in the form of a photographic identification for their vote to be counted. 
While the LPC appreciates that the state will be requir ed to furnish a special voter identification card, the 
access challenges for obtaining valid identification still exist for some Mainers. From the municipal 
perspective, additional administrative tasks, and costs at the local level associated with verifyin g the 
provided identification is both valid and acceptable, as well as the additional steps the voters will have to 
take in order to get to the ballot box, are not justified given the absence of voter fraud in Maine.  
 
In that same vein, most residents of voting age currently possess a form of identification and this 
bill would not present a hardship for the majority. Furthermore, it could be argued that requiring photographic identification is becoming ubiquitous in today’s society and that this legislation should be 
enacted just to assuage the perception of any possible fraudulent voting. Though municipalities support 
working to combat voter fraud, there is still the possibility this bill could very well lead to eligible voters 
being excluded.  
 
As election clerks will be required to verify the validity of the identification presented to receive a 
ballot, it will also be necessary for election clerks to receive adequate training to make that evaluation and 
a clear process for appeals of those de cisions. If enacted, this bill will require a mandate preamble as it 
expands the duties of a local unit of government.  
 
Thank you for your time and considering the municipal perspective on this issue. 
 
 
