101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -0101  
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec ; tel. 207 -624-7736 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS  
 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows , Secretary of State  
Department of the Secretary of State  
 
May 12 , 2023  
 
Testifying In Opposition to 
  
L.D. 1365 “An Act to Require Photograph Identification for Voting " 
 
Senator Hickman , Representative Supica  and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
officer.  I am speaking today in opposition to L.D . 1365 .   
 
We can all agree the constitutional r ight to vote, guaranteed to all Maine citizens, is fundamental to our 
democracy. All voters should have the freedom to vote equally, and any bill that infringes on that 
freedom should be viewed with the strictest scrutiny with regards to the need and the p ublic interest.  
 
This is a bill that has already been heard once in this committee. As we stated then and state again 
today, this bill  would increase costs, complications and consequences to our elections and turn eligible 
voters away.    
 
In 2011, Secretar y of State Charles Summers formed an Elections Commission to study “voter 
participation, the current system for registering voters and the conduct of elections in the State.” 
(Resolves 2011, c.133.) The Commission held a series of meetings across the state  in 2012 and 
conducted extensive research including on the issue of voter ID and concluded in its report attached to 
this testimony:  
 
“The Commission, by a 4 to 1 vote, finds that the negative aspects of a Voter ID law outweigh its 
potential benefits and recommends that a Voter ID system not be pursued in Maine.”  
 
Photographic identification would exacerbate logistical challenges  
 
The logistics of such a practice would cause undue hardship at all levels of election administration but 
especially for the approximately 500 municipalities that will be on the front  lines of implementation.  
The time for each voter to check in at the Incomi ng Voter List (IVL) and obtain a ballot would 
increase by the amount of time it would take for the voter to present the ID and the election official to 
look at it and confirm the voter’s identity and address against the information on the voter list. 
Curre ntly, without the requirement of a photo ID, the current process on average should only take 
 
 
Shenna Bellows  
Secretary of State  Department of the Secretary of State  
 
Bureau of Corporations, Elections and Commissions  
 
 
 
Julie L. Flynn  
Deputy Secretary of State  
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -0101  
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec ; tel. 207 -624-7736 
 about 1 -2 minutes.  Even a one -minute increase, multiplied by the number of voters in any given 
municipality, could result  in extended  wait times  for voters , evidenced  in the long lines that we see at 
polling  locations  all across  America  in states  that have  voter  ID requirements . Longer wait times at the 
airport or at a liquor store because of a need to check ID may be an annoyance, but they do not infringe 
on anyone’s fundamental civil rights as a requirement for a specific ID at the polls would.  
 
Additionally, this new bill would likely cause municipalities to incur financial expenses. Although this 
bill does not  have language to explicitly allow a voter wit hout a photo ID to vote a provisional (i.e., 
challenged) ballot, the federal Help America Vote Act of 2002 (HAVA) requires that if an eligible 
voter is being denied the right to vote, they must be offered an opportunity to vote a challenged ballot 
rather t han being turned away . The process for administering the challenged or provisional ballot 
would likely take several minutes, and towns would have to hire extra election officials to handle that 
process efficiently . 
 
Moreover , implementing a voter ID requir ement would create significant administrative tasks and 
costs for both the Elections Division and the Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV) - both within my 
department . The BMV would incur the cost of materials for producing the free Maine non -driver 
identification card for any registered voter or prospective registrant who does not have a photo ID.  
Currently, there are 934,036  registered voters in active status.  Of t hose, there are 103,048  individuals 
who could not be matched with a Maine driver license or state ID credential, and thus would require 
some other form of photographic identification if they wished to vote at the polls. While some of these 
voters may have a passport or federal photo ID, there is no way to know how many of these voters do 
not have a photo ID and would need to obtain the free photo identification document described in  this 
bill.  
 
The cost to the BMV to produce a credential for eligible perso ns who do not have another form of 
acceptable photographic identification to verify identity for the purpose of voting is $ 2.00, not 
including postage costs .  Thus, it would cost approximately $ 206,096  to provide these cards to 103,048  
potential voters. These costs are only to cover the materials, and do not take into account the increased 
workload on the BMV main and branch offices to administer the application process and produce the 
non-driver ID cards for up to 103,048  individuals. Last year, our branches saw a 22% increase in the 
number of Mainers seeking services and with staffing shortages , due to the ongoing pandemic and 
other factors, meeting this increased need was challenging. There certainly could be a large number of 
voters trying to obtain the specific type of ID card  required under this bill  in the days or weeks prior to 
an election , which could overwhelm our front line motor vehicles staff . Therefore, we would need 
additional head count to our branches  in order to meet the  need , which would cost about $111,242.   
 
This bill seeks to solve a problem that does not exist  
 
This bill would neither increase election security nor increase faith in our elections. Indeed, the bill 
could reduce faith in our elections by making participation for certain types of voters – black, 
indigenous, people of color, people living  in poverty, seniors or people living in rural areas – more 
complicated and burdensome.  Such a bill could also undermine faith in elections by increasing lines at  
the polls and headaches for voters.   
 
In the 2 8 years as Deputy Secretary Julie Flynn has overseen the Elections Division, there has not been 
any evidence presented to the State of voter impersonation at the polls in order to influence the 
outcome of an election.1 When constituents raise questions about the integrity of our elections, we 
 
1 In the 2020 election, there was a situation of a college student voting using her roommate’s absentee ballot. However, 
the Attorney General stated there was no indication the student intended to do so in order to influence the outcome of 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -0101  
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec ; tel. 207 -624-7736 
 should respond with truth – that our elections are free, fair and secure – rather than validating those 
unfounded fears with bills like this one.  
 
In January of 2012, Deputy Secretary Julie Flynn prepared a report to the Secretary of State on our 
efforts to investigate suspected dual voting during the 2008 and 2009 elections; the report was shared 
with this Committee in 2012.  Of the initial 240 pair s/groups of suspected dual voting, 229 of them 
were determined through administrative review to reflect only apparent (not actual) dual voting as the 
result of human error by election officials.  Of the remaining 11 cases referred to the Attorney General 
for investigation, only 2 resulted in prosecution after further investigation; while the other 9 cases 
reflected apparent (not actual) dual voting as the result of human error. Experience has shown that 
where there has been a suspected case of fraud, there have been safeguards in place from the municipal 
level going to the Attorney General’s office so that these incidents would be identified and investigated 
promptly. Thus, we believe this bill present s a solution for which there is no documented problem.  
 
The financial impact of a photo  ID program would be severe  
 
Based on the experience of other states that have implemented a voter ID requirement, Maine would 
also incur the costs of designing and implementing a voter education and outreach program to inform 
voters of the new law as well as how to obtain the free vot er ID card if needed. The cost of 
promotional material , television and radio advertisements to ensure the public was made aware of this 
new requirement would cost about $600,000.  In total, the cost to implement this bill would be over 
$1.1 million . This number includes personal services, needs for a public awareness campaign , postage, 
technology updates, and equipment needed for staff , The total expense would result in a potential net 
loss o f $515,240 to the Highway Fund for every ID card provided for free  where there is normally a 
cost of $5 .  
 
States also have spent millions of dollars on litigation costs as voter ID laws have been challenged in 
the courts. In 2021, a federal court held the State of Texas responsible for $6.8 million in legal fees and 
costs owed to a group of plaintiffs  who sued over the  state’s  2011 voter ID law.  Since court decisions 
have been based on the specific requirements in each state’s laws and specific facts about their impact, 
it is hard to predict how this particular bill would fare if it were challenged. However, gi ven that , per 
statute,  our department is on the hook for legal costs and fees when faced with constitutional 
challenges, any judgment made against us would be  financially detrimental.  
 
Moreover , the provision for free IDs does not  insulate th is bill from legal challenges.   Texas, North 
Carolina, and Wisconsin all provided for free IDs in their voter ID laws, and all three laws wound up 
being enjoined by lower courts, although in each case, those injunctions were ultimately dissolved by 
appellate  courts.   It would be a mistake to assume that because those states ultimately prevailed, Maine 
would as well.   The fact that injunctions initially issued in all three cases shows that these are close 
legal questions that will turn  at least in part in the evidence that plaintiffs can muster of a substantial 
burden on voting.  
 
Voter restrictions will disproportionately disenfranchise Mainers  
 
Finally, we should be proud of the work we have done in Maine to move us forward toward greater 
participation, consis tently ranking in the top three  nationally for voter turnout.  Unfortunately, this bill 
proposes to restrict the types of ID to be used for purposes of voter registration and voting. Two years 
ago, Maine expanded the types of documentation used for proof of  identity to register to vote to 
 
the election but rather she did it because of a “personal dispute.” University of Maine Student Accused of Voting as 
Roommate , Associated Press, Oct. 20, 2020, https://apnews.com/article/elections -crime -maine -voting -2020 -voting -
1e466c446d2258bf0a02900b2ea52071 .  
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -0101  
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec ; tel. 207 -624-7736 
 include student IDs issued by Maine schools  and tribal IDs. T he bill before you today does  not include  
these types of IDs for purposes of voting  and indeed explicitly excludes student IDs , which at best 
could be very confusing for voters and election administrators, and at worst could be discriminatory 
against these voters.  
 
We know from experience in other states that requiring voters to show a p articular type of ID at the 
polls when voting has a disproportionate impact on traditionally marginalized communities. Time and 
time again, the evidence shows that black, indigenous and people of color as well as seniors were 
turned away unnecessarily when  they went to vote.2  We are concerned that this bill would have a 
discriminatory impact on people of color in our communities, seniors , those who are transient, our 
community members who are unhoused, people with disabilities, students, and poor people . Indeed the 
2012 Elections Commission convened by Secretary Charles Summers made the same point in its 
report:  
 
“Studies have shown that the requirement of a voter ID may deter 10 to 11% of eligible voters 
from voting. Because Maine has a disproportionate n umber of citizens who are elderly, poor 
and/or living in rural areas, the percentage of voters who would be discouraged from voting 
may be higher.”  
 
To ensure our  democracy is as representative as possible, we cannot  enact practices that would shut out 
certain members of society.  We should avoid any changes that make it harder to vote or that would 
move us backward. Implementing this bill would undermine the good, bipartisan work we have always 
done to protect Mainers’ voting rights.   
 
For the above reasons, we oppose L.D. 1365 . The right to vote should not come with barriers.  I thank 
you and would be happy to answer any questions that the committee may have.  
 
2 The New Voter Suppression | Brennan Center for Justice  
