 
May 09, 2023 
Testimony in support of LD 1365, “An Act to Require Photograph Identification for Voting” 
 
 
Good morning, Senator Craig Hickman, Representative Laura Supica, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Star Pelsue and I am a resident of Portland, 
Maine. I would like to take this opportunity to express my concerns about a voter ID requirement. 
 
  I believe that creating such a requirement has created barriers to participation in our democratic right 
to vote! I was one of those citizens that didn’t have a driver’s license until I was an adult. I didn’t have 
that desire that most teens had to get their license. I was fortunate that there wasn’t a voter ID 
requirement when I became eligible to vote. One of my proudest moments was the first time I was able 
to vote at the age of 18. I worked after school, so I didn’t have the time to go get a license or other form 
of ID. Then as an adult in my 20s, I worked two full-time jobs, once again leaving me with no time to go 
get an ID. One job was specifically to pay off my student loans so the thought of taking time off or a bus 
across town to get a special ID was not a priority at that juncture in my life. My mother also didn’t get 
her driver’s license until she was older and a mother of 3 with the 4th on the way. She didn’t vote when I 
was a young child because of so many barriers and one of those was she didn’t drive. I guess we should 
be thankful that when she was able to find someone who could drive her with all her children in tow 
there wasn’t a voter ID requirement.  
I find it mind-boggling that we are making it harder for some to vote. Yes, this law states that the ID 
needs to be provided at no cost but that is only one of the issues with procuring an ID. What if you need 
a document that you no longer possess? Location of Driver’s license bureaus? Childcare? And these are 
only a few issues that one might encounter in the quest for a voter ID card. 
As a taxpayer, I do think about the cost to our state by providing voter ID’s. I do not know what this will 
cost the state but as a voting taxpayer, I would prefer that the funds go towards education, eldercare, 
broadband, or food insecurity issues just to name a few. It seems to me that we are trying to fix a non-
issue. I do believe that the cries of voter fraud have been disproven. Out of over a billion votes cast, 
those tasked with identifying those fraudulent ballots found only 30 or so that were considered 
fraudulent. We should be looking at ways to make our voting more secure, but I am not convinced that a 
voter ID is the way to go at this point. I am asking that you not support this bill in hopes we can make 
sure we have a more secure and equitable method other than a voter ID. 
 
Sincerely, 
Star Pelsue 
Portland, Maine 
