  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso , on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
Neither For Nor Against LD 747: “An Act to Require the Probate Court to Rep ort Name 
Changes to the S tate Bureau of Identification ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
Wednesday , March 8, 2023  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary , I am writing o n beha lf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)1 neither for nor against  LD 747, “An Act to Require the Probate Court to 
Report Name Changes to the State Bureau of I denti fication” to raise i ssues f or your 
consideration .   
 
Criminal records can be an impo rtant component of community accountability and 
public safety . Certainly, the probate courts should have the benefit of reviewing a  person’s 
criminal record and the ability to consider a  criminal record in determining whether  to grant 
a petition to change a name . We note that the  current sta tute  allows  for both , but it does 
not require eit her.2 Employers and licensing authorities have valid interest s in understanding 
if those who may later be seeking a position of trust within the community have a prior 
criminal history indicat ing the person is  inappropriate for such a role or poses a heightened 
risk to vulnerable community members.  To that end, MCEDV sup ports the policy goal of 
increas ing appropriate information sharing between  Maine’s pro bate courts and the State 
Bureau of Identification.  
 
However,  name  change s have been , and continue to be , a tool that survivors of 
domestic abuse and violence (and other crime victims ) utilize for themselves and their 
children to support their safety in some of the most extreme cases of abuse or th ose cases 
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than  12,000 victims of domestic 
violence and their children in Maine last year , including court advocacy services in the civil and criminal courts 
to more than 5,000.  
2 Maine’s probate courts have stat utory authority to  require a person seeking a name change to undergo  one 
or more of the following background  checks: a criminal h istory record check; a motor vehicle record check; or a 
credit check  at the  applicant ’s cost ( Title 18 -C, section 1 -701, subsection 5). The probate courts  are also 
statutorily directe d to not change the name of an ap plicant if the court has any reason  to believe the person is 
seeking a nam e change for the purpose of committ ing fraud or for any other purpose contrary to the public 
interest  (Title 18 -C, section  1-701, subsection 6) , but are give n no guidance for how prior criminal history should 
impact that determination .  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 3 
with a certain level of notoriety . For an albeit  small number  of crime victims , nam e changes 
are a critically important part of their path to healing and long -term wellbeing. Policy makers 
should take great care  not to evis cerate this as a practical tool in response to a very real 
need identified for our systems to better guard against misuse  of process.  
 
Without appropriate  guardrails in place,  those who are inten t on tracking down their 
victim would only need to use a records request to the State Bureau of Identification to do 
so. For example, Jan Doe has determined that relocation is necessary to their  safety as a 
result of a pattern of domestic abuse and vi olenc e from their  ex-spouse, Pat. Jan  
successfully petitions the probate court to change their  name to Sam  Smith. Pat, hoping  to 
find identity and location information for Jan , sends a criminal records request to the SBI , 
asking for information for  Jan Doe . Pat then obtains a report  on Jan Doe where “Sam  Smith” 
is now listed as an alias as a result of the probate court having sent the name change order 
to the SBI under this new mandate.  
 
MCEDV  suggest s that the mo st approp riate way to accomplish transparency around 
whether a name change is likely to impact public s afety  is to require the probate court to 
review the known criminal history of the applicant  as part of the nam e change p rocess . 
Then,  where the probate court is in the best position to evaluate known facts  and/or seek 
additional information , the probate court should determine what level of information 
sharing  with the SBI, if any,  is needed to best atte nd to any future public sa fety concerns .  
 
If the committee  determine s some level of information sharing by the probate court 
back to the SBI should be mandated , we ask the Committee to consider a process where by:  
 
• anyone seeking a name chan ge must  be provided  with  accurate and transparent 
information concerning what communication the probate court and the State 
Bureau of Information will have in response to  both their petition and any 
resulting name change order ;  
• there should be a limit on who has access to th e name c hange information when 
a criminal history record report from the State Bureau of Identification  is sought , 
which sho uld not include making that information open to the general public ; 
• name change orders for petition ers with out any prior criminal record should not 
be required to be reported to the State Bureau of Identificatio n; and  
• if the probate court has determined that there is good cause for the  probat e 
records around the name change to be sealed , the probate  judge has some level 
of discretion  to determine if  a balancing of the i nterests and potential  harms 
indicates the name change  order should not be shared with state agencies  absent 
further court order.  
 
We appreciate that the State Bureau of Identification and the Department  of Public 
Safety are willing to continue to discuss the information sharing need s they have identified 
and to work together with interested parties to  bring forward a modifi ed proposal for your 
  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
consideration . We look forward to working with them on these issues. As always, thank you 
for the opportunity to share our perspective.   
 
 
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Public Policy Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 650-4356 , Email:  andrea@mcedv.org    
