LEGAL ADVOCATES 
, 
M . aoarsnnsns l 
. A 
: K’ 
%ETrans.Net . 
EQUAL|TYMA|NE redeﬁning “mm GLBTQ MGM .w‘it){.'liZS L cum t‘ 
Joint Standing ,Committee on Judiciary' 
.- 
Testimony of--Maine Transgender Network, EqualityMaine, and GLBTQ Legal 
. ‘A 
_ Advocates and Defenders.‘ 
. 
LD 747: An Act to Require the Probate Court to Report Name 
Changes to the State Bureau of Identification -
i 
March 8, 2023. 
Senator~Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Judiciary 
Committee: my name -is Gia Drew, I am the Executive Director of EqualityMaine, 
and I am testifying today on behalf of MaineTransNet, EqualityMaine, and GLBTQ 
Legal Advocates and Defenders, neither for nor against LD 47,4: An Act to Require 
the Probate Court to Report Name Changes to the State Bureau of Identification. 
This bill raises important issues regarding the efﬁcacy of our state background 
check system to support public safety. The state has a legitimate interest in 
ensuring that the name change process is not used toevade reporting obligations, 
violate the law, or to commit fraud. Bills concerning name-changes in recent. 
sessions have grappled with this issue. Although most probate‘ 
courts have adopted 
additional fraud protection mechanisms since the removal of the public notice 
requirement, LD 747 addresses one technical issue, communication with the State 
Bureau of Identiﬁcation, which is not addressed by these protections. 
That said, a core concern of recent changes to Maine's name change statutes was 
to better ensure the privacy, safety, and protection of all individuals seeking name 
changes, and especially those with reasonable fear for their safety related to being 
outed, or escaping abuse. We feel that LD 747 as currently drafted ‘does not 
sufﬁciently address these concerns and we urge the committee to amend it. 
We are aware of potential ﬁxes that would address these concerns if included. For 
example, Probate courts could be required to run a criminal history check in 
advance of granting a name change and to consider the results of that check when
granting a name change. lf. the judge orders the name change, this information 
could be submitted to SBI and a linked record containing both, names could be 
created. There may be other ways.of meeting both legitimate public safety and 
fraud concerns while also respecting privacy. l- 
We support the underlying objective of the bill and are eager to work with the 
committee and the sponsor to -draft an amendment that safeguards the public while 
protecting individual privacy.' 
Gia Drew (she/her) 
On behalf of: 
MaineTransNet-"
- 
EqualityMaine‘ 
, 'l 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders
