-3,».
“I 
. 1”’A . .~ 
Na, ,,» 
/E12. ,7 »:.. - 
. \,A£-' ..-i§”=*X, *§:El 
A ’i;’ " 
.1. #.],»;,=1 ’¢=' .5,¢;:i'.i1_» ‘,._ 
.~ . 
A Y; 
Q . .
“ . ‘ ‘\’A&§"l'§’-\"i 
I 
STATE or MAINE 
DEPARTMENT , or PUBLIC SAFETY 
Colonel William Ross LTC Brian Scott 
CHIEF DEPUTY CHIEF 
TESTIMONY or MATTHEW RUEL' 
DIRECTOR, STATE BUREAU or IDENTIFICATION 
In Support of LD 747 
An Act to Require the Probate Court to Report Name Changes to the 
State Bureau of Identification -' 
Members of the Committee: . 
My name is Matthew Ruel, and I am the Director of the State Bureau of 
Identification within the Department of Public Safety. I provide this testimony on behalf 
of the Administration in support of LD 747. 
SBI serves as the repository of all criminal history information in the state, and 
currently provides criminal history for law enforcement and public purposes. We are 
responsible for providing this information to law enforcement across the country, from the 
ofﬁcer roadside all the way through the criminal justice process up to judges making 
sentencing decisions. This information is also used as part of hiring, certification, and 
licensing requirements on a state and national level. Having an accurate, complete, timely 
criminal history is our mission and a key component in public safety. 
-: 
This LD is simply an effort to get all name change information so that we can 
properly link records together and close a gap that could allow people to no longer be 
linked to their criminal history. Just ‘since 2021 we are aware of 153 name changes where 
the original name had criminal history. When reviewing those records, we know they 
contained felony crimes, sex offenses, DV, and violating protection from abuse orders. We 
are also aware of at least one case where a person applied to work with special needs clients 
under the new name. As we continue to explore the scope of this work, I believe we may 
need to expand the language proposed to include notification from all agencies facilitating 
the name change process (i.e., Probate, the Administrative office of the Courts, and BMV). 
45 COMMERCE DRIVE, Sum: 1, 41 STATE HOUSE STATION, AUGUSTA, ME 043;;-0042 _ 
TEL: (207) 624-7200 I TTY: (888) $24-7900 I FAX: (207) 287-3042
If required for certain name changes there are already laws and procedures in place around 
sealing a record from public view and making it “conﬁdential” , meaning it would only be 
visible to law enforcement and a select number of 1icensing/ certiﬁcation requests that are 
tied to positions of trust in the community (DOE, Adoption, Foster Care, other state, and 
federally approved reasons). If the committee believes “sealing” from public view is 
important for some name changes the court order could identify the need to make the 
record conﬁdential and we could apply those changes to our dissemination procedures. 
For these reasons and many others, the Administration is in support of this LD.I 
apologize for not being there in person but had a prior commitment at a national meeting. 
I would be happy to pull together some of the major stakeholders and workshop this LD to 
make sure we address concerns. I will also try to attend work sessions and work with the 
committee as needed to answer any further questions. 
45 COMMERCE DRIVE, Sum: 1, 4: STATE HOUSE STATION, Aucusm, ME 04333-0041 
TEL: (207) 6:4.-7200 I TTY: (888)514-7900 I FAX: (207)287-3041
