J * Department of the Secretary of State 
\Q?g.':&"F'b" ‘; l l V
‘ 
I s----5" lb; 
Shenna Bellows _V 
Secretary of State' 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY' 
L.D. 747, “An Act to Require the Probate Court to Report Name Changes to the State Bureau of ' 
Identification ” 
l 
Testimony Provided by Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
March 08, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, I 
am Secretary of State Shenna Bellows. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today 
neither for nor against of L.D. 747, “An Act to Require the Probate Court to Report Name Changes to 
the State Bureau of Identiﬁcation.” 
The Address Conﬁdentiality Program (ACP), administered by the Secretary of State, provides an 
important service to residents of the State of Maine who are survivors of domestic violence, sexual 
assault or stalking. The program has two basic parts. First, the ACP provides a designated address to 
victims who have moved to a new location unknown to their abuser. Secondly, the program provides 
participants with a free ﬁrst-class conﬁdential mail forwarding service.' 
ACP allows both state and local agencies to contribute to the safety of domestic violence, sexual 
assault, stalking survivors by denying abusers the opportunity to use public records to violate the rights 
of others. 
We have concerns with the current language of the bill but have expressed these concerns to the bill 
sponsor and with the Director of Public Safety for the Maine State Bureau of Identiﬁcation (SBI). It is 
our understanding a working group of stakeholders will be convened in order to secure the safety of 
individuals like ACP participants and others." 
I am proud of the work my ofﬁce does to provide peace of mind to individuals who have survived 
traumatic situations and I look forward to the working group so these survivors may be able to 
maintain their peace of mind. _. 
This concludes my testimony. I am happy to answer any questions or get additional information to the 
Committee ahead of the work session. Thank you for your time. V‘ 
I 01 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.g0v/sos/cec' tel. 207-624-7736
