 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 747, An Act to Require the Probate Court to Report Name Changes to the State Bureau of 
Identification 
 
May 31, 2023 
 
Chair Carney, Chair Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Stephen 
Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, I am 
writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County Commissioners 
Association. In particular, we understand that this bill was heard originally in March, and has been worked by 
the Committee on two occasions in the intervening months. We write at this time to express our belated support 
for this bill and urge the Committee to pass the bill. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  LD 747 requires county probate courts to report by electronic means all name changes to the 
Bureau of Identification within the Department of Public Safety. Reporting such name changes would not be a 
burdensome requirement on county probate courts, and some courts already do so. Additionally, requiring such 
reporting would strengthen public safety by increasing the likelihood that law enforcement has information 
about individuals required to report, such as individuals on the sex offender registry whose names have been 
subsequently changed by the probate courts. For these reasons, we write in support of LD 747. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
