AMY B. ARATA ,ee,; _ STATE OF MAINE HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE 
"'1' AUGUSTA. MAn\IE 04333-0002 
Office: (I07) 387-I-I-IU 
Cell‘ ‘(I7I???-IQI7 . 1- . . . L 
\\\IST \I\ITHOL?SE REPUBLlC.L\?\ ‘ LEADER Fax: (Z071 287- I -I-I‘) 
E ~ I\'l n i I 1 Am) ..-\ra1a-:2] le< __'i.<I£m1rc.nidiIie ¢:0\ 
February 7, 2023 
» 
Testimony in Support of LD 101 
An Act to Return to the Former Owner Any Excess Funds Remaining After the Sale of 
Foreclosed Property 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation: 
My name is Amy Arata and I represent House District 104. I am also a licensed Realtor and 
before you today in favor of LD 101, ”An Act to Return to the Former Owner Any Excess Funds 
Remaining After the Sale of Foreclosed Property. ” 
The fact that Maine municipalities are able to take home equity away from taxpayers is 
outrageous! In a foreclosure of any other type of lien, the funds remaining after all liens, 
penalties, and fees are paid off goes to the former owner. There's no reason why a property 
tax lien should be any different. Although an owner who has equity would typically sell the 
property before a foreclosure sale, there can be extenuating circumstances, such as 
incarceration, incapacity, or death. Imagine working hard your whole life to pay off a home, 
intending for it to go to your children, and then leaving them nothing because of a few 
thousand dollars in property taxes are owed. This almost happened in my town, when at the 
last minute an heir showed up at the town meeting to beg for an extension, havingjust been 
made aware of the potential tax sale of their family property. I stood up at that meeting on 
their behalf, and I'm standing up here again today to protest this unfair practice that needs to 
be changed in Maine statute. 
As you review LD 101, this is an opportunity to fix the tax lien foreclosure statutes so that when 
there is a sale, a clean title remains. I've been told by a title attorney not to purchase property 
that had a tax lien foreclosure. If people can't purchase these properties with a clear title, 
there's a disincentive to improve them and make them available for people to live in, and we 
certainly need more homes. I suggest that you consult a title attorney for the work session so 
that you can address anything in the foreclosure process that may cloud a title. 
You may want to make changes to LD 101 to streamline the process. I recommend requiring an 
advertised, open auction rather than an appraisal. LD 101 addresses a somewhat
complex issue and could be an excellent opportunity to help get people get their hard-earned 
equity back for themselves or their family after a tax foreclosure sale. We all want Maine to be 
a state that treats people fairly. Thank you for your time and consideration, I would be happy 
to answer any question you may have.
