Ladies a nd Gentlemen of  the Commit tee on Ta xation:
My name is Da vid Manter, I  live in Fay ette, and I  am writing  to ask y ou to vote in favor
of L.D. 101.  One of  the founding  principles of our  country  is the rig ht of its citiz ens to own
proper ty, free from fea r that the g overnme nt will seiz e it.
The Constituti on of the United States, Ame ndment 5, say s, 
“No pe rson shall ... be de prived of life , liberty , or prope rty, without due proce ss of law; nor sha ll
private pr operty  be take n for public use , without just  compensa tion.”
In other wor ds, if a per son’s private pr operty  is taken for  public use, (i.e. to pa y off the de bt that
he owe s to the public,) that per son must rece ive just compensation, that is, the value of  the
proper ty taken less wha t is owed. 
The 14  Amendment say s, th
“No State sha ll make or e nforc e any  law which sha ll abridg e the pr ivilege s or immuniti es of
citizens of the United States; nor shall any  State deprive  any person of  life, liberty , or prope rty,
without due proce ss of law; nor de ny to any  person within its jurisdiction t he equa l protection of
the laws.”
Does a  proce eding  to forec lose on a prope rty to pay  a small debt fulfill due proc ess for
taking  the entire  value of  the prope rty?  Does the pe rson who ca nnot affor d to pay  a small debt
get the same  (equa l) protec tion of the laws for  the re maining va lue of his prope rty as a pe rson
who ca n afford to pay ?
The Maine  Constit ution, Article 1 sec tion 21, say s,
“Section 21.  Private pr operty , when to be ta ken.  Private pr operty  shall not be taken f or public
uses without just compensation; nor unless the public exigenc ies requir e it.”
What is t he public exige ncy (nee d) for  taking  all of a pe rson’s prope rty to pay  off a  debt
equivalent to only  a fraction of the  value of  that proper ty?  And wher e is the just compensation
for taking  more va lue than wha t is owed?
If a town c an sell a pe rson’s prope rty for a  fraction of the va lue for w hich they  were
taxing it, then they  are saying tha t’s all the prope rty is worth.  I f that’s the c ase, the n they  were
over- charging the  person f or taxes.  I f they  retroa ctively  dropped the  proper ty value to wha t they
are now say ing it’s wor th, he would proba bly be ahe ad on his tax pay ment.
I have pe rsonal experienc e with an unjust fore closure.  A  neig hbor of mine wa s going
throug h a toug h time and g ot behind on his tax es.  The a mount owed was r elatively  small,
$1,200, but had bee n outstanding long  enoug h for the T own to start fore closure pr oceedings. 
Rather than se e my  neig hbor put out of his home, at the time I  was a ble to come up with the
funds to pay  off the ove rdue por tion of his debt.  Even thoug h the new ta x bill arrived
immediately  afterwards, pay ing of f the oldest par t of the bill bought him enoug h time that he was
able to sell his home, pay  off his debt in full, and f ind a place  wher e he c ould affor d to live.
If the Town ha d proce eded w ith the forec losure, they  would have ta ken his home and sold
it for a bit more tha n enoug h to pay  his debt.  The Town w ould have made  a small profit on the
deal, the pur chase r would have  made a  bigg er profit on it, and my  neig hbor would have  been out
on the stree t with no funds with which to obtain lodging .  Is that any  way  to treat our c itizens?
Finall y, I do h ave one re quested am endm ent.  In para graph 3, if the  former  owner  fails
to appea r before the  deadline, instea d of allowing  the town to reta in the excess funds, I  would
urge that any excess fun ds be turned over  to the State  as Unclaim ed Propert y.  Why  should
the town be a llowed to proce ed with theft of the  value that wa s not rightf ully theirs, just beca use
the forme r landowne r was unable, for  whateve r reason, to appe ar in pe rson within 90 day s? 
Those who a re subjec t to a fore closure ma y be elde rly, have dif ficulty  trave ling, or  may  even be
in a nursing  home and pe rhaps not eve n cog nizant of what is going  on.  I s that any  excuse for the
town, which did not own the prope rty in the first place , to take the va lue of the pr operty  that
should be passed to their he irs afte r pay ing of f any  other outstanding  debts?
Please pa ss L.D. 101, or, a t the very  least, cha nge the wor d “may ” in the first sente nce of
Title 36 Section 949 to “must.” 
