1 
  
Testimony of Jonathan Selkowitz , Esq.  
Pine Tree Legal Assistance, Inc.  
Speaking in Support of LD 101 “An Act To Return to the Former Owner Any Excess Funds 
Remaining After the Sale of Foreclo sed Property ” 
Before the Committee on Taxation . 
Date of Public Hearing:  February 7, 2 023 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and members of the  Joint Standing  Committee on 
Taxation : 
My name is Jonathan Selkowitz.  I am the Managing  Attorney for  Pine Tree Legal Assistance ’s 
(Pine Tree) Consumer  and Foreclosure Prevention  Unit .  I am grateful for the opportunity to offer 
testimony  regarding  LD 101, and I apologize that a court -conflict prevents me from testifying in 
person today.  
I have been asked  by Representative Perkins  to share Pine Tree’s  perspective on this bill  and I am 
speaking today on  behalf of Pine Tree.  
Pine Tree is a statewide nonprofit organization that provides free legal services to low -income 
people throughout Maine . Representing homeowners to avoid losing their homes to municipal 
tax foreclosures has long  been a n area of focus for Pine Tree.  Pine Tree handles approximately 
50 cases per year involving municipal tax de linquency and foreclosure , including  representing 
homeowners in abatement applications , challenging the validity  of tax foreclosures , and 
counseling clients.  Based on this deep and broad experience, Pine Tree view s Maine ’s current 
municipal  tax enforcement regime as overly harsh, particularly to elderly and poor residents , and 
likely in violation of the Maine and United States Constitution.  
THE CURRENT PROPE RTY TAX FORECLOSURE LAWS ARE UNNECESSARILY SEVERE , STRIP POOR 
HOMEOWNERS OF THEIR MOST VALUABLE ASSET, AND LACK EFFECTIVE SAFETY VALVES . 
Under Maine ’s current property tax foreclosure process, a municipality automatically becomes 
the owner of the property when an unpaid tax bill is not paid in full within 18 months after the 
bill has been  turned into a lien; the process takes about 24 -30 months from the bill being issued 
to the town automatically foreclosing the lien.   Once the mu nicipality automatically forecloses, it 
owns the property  outright and can do with it as it pleases.  T here ’s no o bligation under state law 
to sell the property , there ’s no process by which a sale must be conducted, and there ’s no 

2 
 requirement to compensate the homeowner for  the amount of equity they have built up in their 
home above what is owed for taxes and foreclosure costs.  
This stripping of equity can be a draconian penalty for a modest debt.  This past fall, two P ine 
Tree clients from rural Hancock County  who are disabled and cared for their elderly parent  were 
subject to a  property tax lien foreclosure  that had a  lien balance of around $4 30.  The total tax 
debt at the time was around $2,6 30.  The town valued the property  at $41,100 but sold it at a 
poorly publicized auction  for $5,860— only $718 over the mi nimum bid amount. The clients were  
then summarily evicted by the purchaser.   
Not all tax lien foreclosures end this way. Many towns will allow homeowners to re deem the 
property post- foreclosure , although there is no right to such redemption. Some homeowne rs are 
granted poverty abatements . However , towns possess nearly absolute discretion whether to 
grant or deny a poverty abatement.  Pine T ree has been advise  by a few towns that they “never 
grant abatements. ”  
Though there have been recent interventions to avoid a home owner ’s dramatic loss of their 
equity through this process, particularly for elderly homeowners, those interventions do not go 
far enough. The 2017 amendments to the tax foreclosure process created  an option to sell elderly 
Mainer ’s foreclosed homes through a broker  with surplus funds going to the former owners.  But 
this process requires opt -in by the elderly own ers, who frequently struggle to satisfy technical 
legal processes like this.  A town  may  also revert back to the traditional  process if they cannot 
quickly find a broker or sell the property.  The recently implemented  State Property T ax Deferral 
Program provide s some relief,  but does not help the most vulnerable homeowners because that 
program  require s that the taxes are current.  Most Maine homeowners with property ta x liens 
are in a perpetual cycle of tax delinquency , and therefore will never qualify for th ose programs.  
Finally,  actual tax foreclosures in Maine almost always impact low in come ho meowners who are 
either elderly and/or disabled  and who own their homes unencumbered by other large liens.  If 
a homeowner has a mortgage, the mortgage company often escrows the tax payments and advances those pa yments if a homeowner falls behind on their mortgage.  In P ine Tree ’s 
experience, clients seeking assistance with property tax lie ns almost always own their homes 
outright  and are on  low,  fixed income s due to re tirement or disability .  This reality means that if 
a homeowner loses their home  due to tax foreclosure, the ir alt ernative is to find rental housing 
that is subsidized by taxpayers.  Not only does this process result in a long -term financial burden 
on tax payers, it adds unnecessary pressure on the ongoing housing crisis in Maine.  It makes far 
more sense to keep these people in their homes  paying what they can afford for p roperty taxes 
than to expend taxpayer  resources to find alternative rental housing for the in definite future.  
MAINE ’S TAX FORECLOSURE PROCESS MAY BE UNCONSTITUTIONAL  
Though many states have similar tax foreclosure proces ses, the United States Supreme Court is 
currently considering  whether such a process is an unconstitutional  taking without just 
compensation under the 5
th Amendment and an excessive  fine un der 8th Amendment.  See Tyler 
3 
 v. Hennepin County , No. 22 -166 (U.S. S.Ct.) , Certiorari G ranted.   The Maine Constitution has 
comparable provisions .  
The theory is straight forward:  if a town take s a $ 50,000 or $100,000 property to repay itself a 
$2,000 tax debt, it has taken the  person ’s home equity without anything close to fair 
compensation.  T he Town has also levied an excessive fine that is  not reasonably related to the 
town ’s actual costs or reasonably p roportional to the legal deviation by the homeowner.   
This committee may want t o tailor any legislative amendments to Maine ’s tax foreclosure 
process to the ultimate decision in Tyler v. Hennepin County . 
LD 101 IS A NECESSARY STARTING POINT IN REFORMING THE TAX FORECLOSURE PROCESS  
Pine  Tree sup ports L D 101 ’s premise of promoting fair compensation for the often- substantial 
equity a homeowner loses in a tax foreclosure.  But the reforms need to go further.   
First, instead of surplus sale  funds being given to the former ho meowner, towns should 
compensate the former owner for the difference between the fair market value of the property 
and the taxes owed plus  costs .  Without such a protection, municipalities will continue to sell 
foreclosed properties for the amount of the ta xes owed .  One way to achieve this would be to 
expand and improve the process available to senior citizens under 36 M.R.S. § 943 -C.  Another 
way would be to make a presumption that the most recent tax assessed value is the fair market 
value.  
Second, municipalities should retain the flexibility they have now to work out various kinds of 
arrang ements with delinquent taxpayers.  The provision in LD 101 requiring compensation to 
home owners  at 180 days after the tax foreclosure may di since ntivize towns from allowing 
homeowners to red eem post -foreclosure through payment plans.  One easy  way to avoid such 
a disincentive would  be to have the compensation obligation only be triggered when a 
municipality opts to sell a foreclosed property or seek s to evict or eject the homeowner -
occupant.  
Thank you for your consideration, and please let me know if I may provide any additional 
information that would assist the Committee.  
 
 
Jonathan Selkowitz,  
Pine Tree Legal Assistance  
 

Jonathan  Selkowitz
Pine Tree Legal Assistance, Inc.
LD 101
I unfortunately have a court-conflict and cannot appear in-person to provide my 
testimony.  I submit written testimony in lieu of in-person testimony.  Thank you.
