Good afternoon, My name is Lliam Perkins, I am licensed as an Associate Broker of 
Real Estate in the State of Maine, a resident of District 31, and as matter of full 
disclosure, the son of District 31 Representative Chad Perkins. 
I have come before the Committee today to speak in support of LD101. Currently, in our 
state, if your creditor forecloses on your home there is a statute that prescribes what is to 
be done with any funds secured in excess of what is owed to the creditor. 
The state and municipalities are not bound by the same statutes as mortgage holders 
when foreclosing on a property secured by a municipal lien, however they are bound by 
the 5”‘ Amendment to the constitution of the United States. I trust you are all familiar 
with our constitution, but will read a line that I believe holds much weight in this 
discussion~(and I quote) “Nor shall private property be taken for public use, without 
just compensation. ” 
As the law currently reads if you owe a small amount in taxes, despite owning your 
home outright, the state or your town could take tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars 
in equity with no recourse. This is theft, and it is wrong. 
Maine Revised Statutes, Title 14, Section 6324 states that in the case of a private 
foreclosure, carried out in proceedings described in Maine law, any surplus shall be 
returned to the mortgagor; the homeowner. 
To most people their home is their largest asset; and at a time when it is being proposed 
that the social security age be further increased to 70, the home in many cases isa 
persons largest resource and security, it is often the basis for many people’s retirements. 
Stripping Mainers of what they have earned and labored for, often for decades is wrong 
and unethical. 
This issue disproportionately impacts older Mainers, those on fixed incomes, those who 
due to medical issues are no longer able to earn an income, people who may be forced to 
make the unthinkable decision between their taxes, their heat, or medicine and food. The 
state and municipalities have no right to monies in excess of what is owed to them.I 
believe LD 101 is what is best for Maine, or more importantly, what is best for Mainers. 
Members of the committee, I hope that you, as representatives of the people of Maine, 
would agree.
