1TESTIMONY OF
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
Hearing Date: 2/7/23
LD 101 - An Act to Return to the Former Owner Any Excess Funds Remaining 
After the Sale of Foreclosed Property
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 101 - 
An Act to Return to the Former Owner Any Excess Funds Remaining After the Sale 
of Foreclosed Property.
Under current law, if a municipality, or the State Tax Assessor for property located 
in the unorganized territory, forecloses on property for failure to pay taxes owed on 
that property, the municipality is generally under no obligation to return any funds 
that exceed the amount owed in taxes after the sale of the property.  This bill would 
require the return of those excess funds subject to the process laid out in the bill.
For background, legislation in 2015 created the option for municipalities to return 
excess funds from sale of properties to previous owners, but only if the property 
was a homestead, and only if the former owner met certain age and income 
limitations.  The bill as drafted applies to all taxpayers and all types of property, 
including vacation homes, undeveloped land, and commercial property.  
While the Administration is not opposed to the general purpose of the bill, the 
Administration has significant concerns with the specifics of the bill.
2The bill’s requirement that the State or municipality pay the taxpayer “excess 
funds” based on an appraisal prior to actual sale of the property if the property is 
not sold within 180 days of foreclosure creates significant issues for both 
municipalities and for the State. 
Due to the statutory foreclosure sale process, sales of foreclosed property in the 
unorganized territory will always take longer than 180 days.  Because the State 
will not be posting or selling the property until at least a year following the 
foreclosure, there is the potential to be a significant difference between what the 
State pays out and what it recoups at auction.  
For municipalities, having to pay the excess funds prior to sale may create a 
significant burden on some municipal budgets, especially if that amount is not 
recovered at auction.  These concerns are particularly significant in the context of 
unique, expensive, or hard-to-sell properties.
The scope and purpose of the statutorily required negotiations is unclear; and the 
allocation of the costs of arbitration between the municipality (who can’t deduct 
those costs from the amount due the former owner), and the former owner (who is 
already delinquent and likely can’t afford to pay their taxes) may create additional 
issues. Alternatively, consideration should be given to using the standard property 
tax appeal processes to resolve disagreements between the taxpayer and the 
municipality.
Turning to a more technical concern with the bill, the application of the bill to 
properties with multiple owners should be clarified.
Finally, making this process mandatory for all municipalities will likely trigger the 
90% reimbursement mandate under the Maine Constitution, article IX, section 21 
3for costs to the municipality to administer the process to the extent costs are not 
recovered from sale proceeds.
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.  I would be happy 
to respond to any questions you may have now.
