To the member s of the Committ ee on T axation: 
This is to follow up on the testim ony I submitt ed online in support of L D 101.
I see tha t according  to the leg islative website, L D 101, An Ac t to Return to the Forme r Owne r
Any Excess F unds Remaining A fter the  Sale of F oreclosed Property , has bee n tabled.  I  thought
you might be inter ested in the May  25, 2023 decision of the U .S. Supreme Court in TYL ER v.
HENNEPI N COUNTY, MI NNESOTA, ET A L.  Her e is a link to the dec ision: 
https:/ /www.supre mecour t.gov/opinions/22pdf/22-166_8n59.pdf     
The c ase involved a  woman whose  proper ty was take n on a tax lien, the property  was sold for
more than w hat was ow ed, and the  County  kept the excess value .  This is precisely  the sort of
circumstance L D 101 see ks to address.  The  decision of the U .S. Supreme Court conclude s with
the following :
“The  Taking s Clause ‘wa s desig ned to bar  Gover nment from for cing some people
alone to bea r public burde ns which, in all fair ness and justice, should be bor ne by
the public as a  whole.’ A rmstrong , 364 U. S., at 49. A taxpay er who loses her
$40,000 house to the State to fulfill a $15,000 tax debt has made a  far greater
contribution to the public fisc than she ow ed. The  taxpay er must re nder unto
Caesar  what is Caesa r’s, but no more.
“Because we  find that Ty ler ha s plausibly  alleg ed a ta king unde r the F ifth
Amendment, and she  agrees that relief  under ‘ the Taking s Clause would fully
reme dy [her] harm,’ we ne ed not dec ide whethe r she ha s also alleg ed an e xcessive
fine unde r the Eig hth Amendment. Tr. of  Oral Arg . 27.  The judg ment of the
Court of Appea ls for the Eig hth Circuit is reverse d.” 
In light of the  decision of the U .S. Supreme Court, it would appear  that Maine ha s little choice
but to clarify  Maine law  to prohibit towns and counties from ke eping  “Excess Funds Rema ining
After  the Sale of F oreclosed Property .”
Thank y ou for y our consider ation.
Roberta Ma nter, F ayette
