 
 
Written Testimony from the Maine Credit Union League  
In Support of LD  101, An Act to Return to the Former Owner any Excess Funds Remaining After 
the Sale of Foreclosed Property  
February 7, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Committee on 
Taxation,  
My name is Robert Caverly and I serve as the Vice President of Advocacy & Outreach at the 
Maine Credit Union League . The League proudly  represen ts Maine’s 50 cred it unions and more 
than 720,000 members  statewide. Please accept our testimony in support of LD 101;  An Act to 
Return to the Former Owner any Excess Funds Remaining After the Sale of Foreclosed Property.  
As member -owned cooperative financial institutions, credit unions in the State of Maine have a 
vested interest in ensuring that individuals who undergo  municipal foreclosure have excess 
funds returned to them following the repayment of owed property taxes. Maine is currently 
one of only 12 states that do not currently require  this, and current  practice can financially 
harm the most vulnerable in our popu lation. The Supreme Court has recently granted a writ of 
certiorari  to hear  Tyler v. Hennepin County, Minnesota . The appellant asserts that the law in 
Minnesota , like current Maine law,  where a municipality takes and sells a debt and then 
reserves the surp lus is an impermissible violation of the Fifth Amendment’s takings clause.1 The 
case also considers whether the windfall is a violation of the Eighth Amendment for excessive 
fines. While the Supreme Court will not hear the case until April and a decision is unlikely to be 
rendered before June, enacting this bill would help the state avoid similar challenges .  
Additionally, we would support an amendment to distribute excess funds from municipally 
foreclosed property to subsequent lienholders, where any  exist. In the current system , credit 
unions and other mortgage holders will usually pay off the municipal tax lien and then 
commence foreclosure proceedings against the homeowner given the breach of their mortgage 
agreement . We believe that returning proc eeds from municipal foreclosure is an equitable 
practice  and would ask that in addition, this bill be amended  so that  additional liens on the 
property be included in the disbursement of funds  to offset  the loss of the property for credit 
unions . This would avoid the need for further court proceedings after the pro perty has been 
sold to seek the funds associated with the subsequent lien.  
 
1 “94-year -old grandmother fights home equity theft in Minnesota ” 
https://pacificlegal.org/case/mn_home_equity_theft/  
 
cc: Clerk Benjamin Berry, State House Room 127  It is important to remember that because of the cooperative structure of credit unions, any 
financial loss incurred by the credit union impacts all its members , not just the bottom line of a 
select few shareholders.  
It is never easy to have your home seized due to uncollected taxes. However, in those situations 
LD 101 could mitigate the damage to families and communiti es. We urge this committee to  
amend and  pass LD  101.  
Thank you for your consideration.  
