THO1\1AS A. COX 
Attorney at Law 
P.O. Box 1083 
Yarmouth, Maine 04096 
‘ ' 
February 7, 2023 
Senator Nicole_Grohoski, Committee Chair 
Representative Joe Perry, Committee Chair 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Re: LD 101--An Act to Return to the Former Owner any Excess Funds Remaining 
After the Sale of Foreclosed Property 
Dear Committee Chairs and Committee Members: 
I offer this testimony in support or LD I01. 
I am qualiﬁed to offer this testimony because I have devoted the last 15 years of 
my legal work to full-time pro bono representation of low-income Maine homeowners 
facing foreclosures. During what would have been retirement years for many lawyers, I 
have donated over $1 million of free legal work to protecting these vuhierable Maine 
homeowners against the abuses of the mortgage servicing industry. I have worked as the 
Volunteer Program Coordinator for the Maine Attorneys Savings Home Project. I am 
Of-Counsel to the National Consumer Law Center. And I am the proud winner of 
numerous awards for my work in representing low-income homeowners including the 
$ 100,000 Purpose Prize. 
By deﬁnition, any homeowner (and his or her family) is in dire economic straights 
if the homeowner is facing a foreclosure of his or her home--whether for a bank mortgage 
or for real estate taxes owed. A family’s loss of its home to foreclosure is devastating. 
The tolerance in Maine law for foreclosing municipalities to keep more of that Maine 
family’s money than is owed for taxes, after the homeowner has already suffered the loss 
of his or her home, is deeply disturbing. Any surplus remaining after a real estate tax lien 
foreclosure sale could well be critical money for the displace family trying to ﬁnd no 
rental housing or for meeting other urgent family health needs 
It would be a violation of Maine law for any bank to fail to turn over toa 
homeowner surplus sale proceeds resulting from the foreclosure sale of that homeowner ’s 
property. There is no good reason why municipalities conducting tax foreclosures should 
be treated differently by being allowed to keep surplus proceeds. Often the causes of such 
foreclosures are physical or mental health issues. To deprive these unfortunate former 
homeowners of their fair share of the value of their property after the municipalities ’ 
taxes and costs have been paid in full is unconscionable. 
Telephone: (207)749-6671 
Fax: (207) s47-4024 
Email: tac@gwi.net
In April of this year the United States Supreme Court will hear arguments on the 
question of whether a municipality ’s taking and selling of a home and retention of the 
surplus above taxes owed violates the 5*‘ Amendment to the United States Constitution, 
which prohibits the taking of private property for public use without just compensation. I 
predict that the Supreme Court will declare this practice to be Unconstitutional. I also 
suggest to you that the current law allowing municipalities to retain these surplus funds 
violates Article 1, Section 21 of the Maine Constitution which provides that “Private 
property shall not be taken for public use without just compensation; nor unless the 
public exigencies require it.” LD 101 presents the Legislature with an opportunity to now 
bring the Maine real estate tax law into compliance with the Maine and federal 
Constitutions and to treat Maine homeowners fairly when they find themselves in such 
unfortunate circumstances that they can no longer afford to pay the taxes on their homes. 
The Maine Legislature dealt with this issue in 2017, and the result was the 
enactment of 36 M.R.S. § 943 -C which provides protection only for low-income Maine 
homeowners over the age of 65. I respectfully suggest that the better way to deal with 
the issue presented by LD 101 may be to amend so that it will amend 36 M.R.S. § 943-C 
by removing that stat11te ’s limits on application and by making it applicable to all Maine 
homeowners. 
Thank you for your consideration of this important bill 
Very truly yours, 
*"/Jim (2/57¢ 
Thomas A. Cox
2
