Arleigh Kraus
Warren
LD 1585
April 19, 2023
Arleigh Kraus
Warren
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Arleigh Kraus.  I am 
a registered cannabis caregiver with a B.S. in biochemistry, an organic farmer, and 
business owner in Warren.  I am a founding member of the Maine Craft Cannabis 
Association, a member of Seed2Health Learning Health Alliance, a board member of 
Medical Marijuana Caregivers of Maine, the Chair of the Adult and Medical Cannabis
Committee for the Town of Warren, and I am a founding member of the Cannabis 
Council of Maine.  I have been a caregiver in Maine for over 10 years.
My testimony is in support of LD1585 An Act to Amend Maine’s Cannabis Laws to 
Protect Small and Medium-sized Cultivators.
It is clear that something must be done to aid and support the cannabis market in 
Maine which is facing an abundance of problems ranging from over regulation to over
supply.  Limiting cannabis licenses is not the solution.  If the true intent of updating 
regulations to assist and keep the local cannabis market from devastation then other 
considerations to keep small cannabis cultivators thriving should be considered.  
The way to protect small and medium cannabis businesses from the oversaturation of 
product from large scale cultivation operations is not by the limitation and capping of 
licenses.  Capping licenses will have the effect of driving competition for all future 
available licenses to a frenzy of corruption.  
Instead of increasing hurdles and roadblocks for small cannabis business owners by 
limiting licensing, an alternative which will strengthen the local economy is to place a
limit on cultivation size in both medical and recreational cannabis cultivation.  
Reducing cultivation sizes to a reasonable footprint for statewide farming instead of 
handing out massively scaled mega grow licenses is a responsible policy decision 
which should be considered.  
There are many factors which support this rationale.  Firstly, cannabis is not an export
commodity and there is a limit to consumption by the native population and influx of 
tourists. Our resident population is approximately 1,355,924.  Of this number 
approximately 7.75% have medical cannabis cards.  According to data from the office
of cannabis policy sales of recreational cannabis from 2022 was 158,886,554.  
A recent article from the San Francisco Gate states,  “Overproduction has dropped the
wholesale price of cannabis in California by as much as 95%. That’s made pot 
cheaper for consumers, but it’s also made it impossible for many farms to stay alive.” 
I have cited several references which I hope will be used as not only a reference but as
a warning as to what is to come in Maine if something drastic is not done.
We the people who have built the cannabis market in Maine are here to tell you that 
without a significant change to limit licensing large cultivation facilities our fate is the
same as what California and so many other states face. 
Even more unfortunate, the demise of local cannabis producers is not an isolated 
problem for the cultivators to face alone.  The services we use and pay for will be 
obsolete and not supported by our industry.  From the local grocery stores to the 
electricians and people hired to work as employees no one is immune, they too will be
economically hit by the demise of the small cannabis producers.  
Many program participants including the Cannabis Council which I am a member of 
have discussed what the upper limit of the cultivation square footage should be.  We 
landed on 7,000 as a reasonable compromise.  Immediately limiting the cultivation 
square footage for all new medical and adult use cultivation to a maximum of 7,000 
square feet for indoor cultivation is a start that makes sense for the sustainability of 
this program.  There are many opinions on how to best cope with the existing large 
tier 3 and 4 license holders as well as unlimited dispensary grows.  The most popular 
view is to add a grandfather provision which is terminated upon the transfer or sale of 
the license.   
The cannabis industry is failing for a multitude of reasons.  Over production which is 
causing oversaturation of cannabis into the legal market, this is causing prices of 
wholesale cannabis flower to fall to a place where cultivating is not sustainable.  
Considering our energy costs (electricity, propane) have increased by approximately 
78 percent, fertilizer and soil costs have increased by 40-50 percent, packaging costs 
are up by almost 90 percent, plus we still have repairs to do, servicing of equipment, 
everything costs more.  We are making barely enough to keep the lights on.  
We must take this seriously, the poor policy of unchecked licensing is a cancer to this 
program.  Before too long we will have no small and medium cultivators left in 
Maine.
Please vote ought to pass LD 1585
Respectfully,  
Arleigh Kraus
Works Cited
Wills, Julia, and Alexander Kummerow. “Maine Medical Marijuana | Laws and 
Regulations | Updates.” Americans for Safe Access, 
https://www.safeaccessnow.org/maine. Accessed 11 April 2023. 
https://www.sfgate.com/cannabis/article/failing-cannabis-farms-affecting-economy-1
7715193.php
https://calmatters.org/politics/2023/02/emerald-triangle-cannabis-communities/

