STATE or MAINE 
3 A HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ' 
SPEAKER'S OFFICE 
, 3' AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1315 
William D. Pluecker 
State Representative 
1133 Finntown Road 
Warren, ME 04864 
(207) 273-3044 
Bill.Pluecker@legislature.maine. gov 
Thank you Sen. Hickman and Rep. Supica, and the entire Veteran’s and Legal 
Affairs Committee for the chance to present to you LD 1585, “An Act to Amend Maine's 
Cannabis Laws to Protect Small and Medium-sized Cultivators. ” My name is Bill 
Pluecker. I represent House District 44, which is comprised by the towns Warren, Union, 
and Hope. 
The primary function of this bill is to eliminate or shrink some of the largest tier 
licenses in Maine for growing recreational cannabis and to put an upper limit on the 
square footage that can be grown on a dispensary license. We are all aware of the current 
glut of cannabis on the market, which is driving the price down. This over-production of 
product and resulting reduction in price presents a burden which is falling hardest on our 
small, local growers. They are the ones without the capital resources backstopping their 
businesses to Weather the market storm. In contrast, the low prices beneﬁt the larger 
corporations coming in from out of state, as they can sell at a loss for a period of time 
while the smaller, local competition goes out of business. The largest tiers of production 
allow these corporations to overproduce product, forcing the price even lower, and 
increasing the pressure on our local owners and growers. 
In my communities, we have not seen the multiplication of retail locations that 
more urban areas have seen for cannabis sales, but we have seen an increase in the 
number of growers as we have the land base to support them. It is these smaller, local, 
growers that are feeling the pinch from the rock bottom prices that do not cover the costs 
of production, especially in light of steadily increasing energy costs. 
You can see the details of how this bill addresses the issue in its summary, but it 
eliminates the Tier 4 license for growing recreational cannabis. It also shrinks the Tier3 
District 44: Hope, Union, & Warren
canopy area to 7,000 sq ft indoors, and 21,000 sq ft outdoors. It also puts an upper level 
limit on dispensary growers that equal the new Tier 3 grower limits. 
We have all discussed the looming bursting of a bubble within the cannabis 
industry, and exactly how the market will support the exponential growth within the 
industry. As a state, we do not want to see a situation where the only businesses that 
survive the aftermath of the sudden growth and contraction within the industry to be the 
largest out of state corporations. For many of us, a major reason why we were supporting 
the creation of theindustry was because we wanted to create an opportunity for small 
scale growers and retailers that were based in the state of Maine. It would be a shame if 
we accidentally created a space that came to be dominated by corporations from away.I 
ask that you support this bill as an opportunity to support our smaller growers through 
these trying times, temper the dropping prices, and grow a healthy and sustainable Maine 
Cannabis Industry for the future.
