jamie duncan
Greenville
LD 1585
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
I don’t see how any of this protects a small or medium business. 7000 square feet 
indoor and 20,000 outdoor is neither small or medium. There’s nothing small about 
multiple cultivation license holders with 28,000 square feet, either. 
I do think it’s a good idea to eliminate tier 4 20,000 sq ft is absolutely absurd and why
would they need to tag on an additional 7000?
Tier 3 is equally disturbing with 7000 sq feet indoor and 21,000 outdoor. It’s just a 
disgusting amount of growing space. Do the math and figure out how much product 
they’d be producing with that amount of space every 9 weeks or so. All the metrc 
tracking in the world will not stop that amount of product from heading out the back 
door untaxed and untested. 
My space is 250 square feet and it is enough to make an honest living. Read that 
again, please. 
Over 800 small caregivers like me went out of business last year and massive grows 
are partly why. I don’t see what the big difference is decreasing multiple cultivation 
license holders from 30,000 to 28,000 either way it’s a disgusting greedy amount of 
growing space. 
If you are going to allow these massive grows I wish you would at least impose a tax 
on those greedy businesses to compensate the rest of us for the massive energy they 
consume and the negative impacts their operations are having on the environment. 
I also don’t see why the big delay. Give those greedy people one more year to exploit 
a plant and a new industry? Why?
It’s in the best interest of our state to cultivate and support more small businesses 
rather than favor a few massive businesses. We contribute more to our communities, 
hire more local services, and the quality of our products are unmatched because we 
are so small and can give each plant much more attention. Our quality of life is better 
because we are our own bosses. Maine enjoys a reputation of the best craft cannabis 
in the east and it’s because of small craft cultivators not tier 3 growers or even tier 2 
growers. 
I don’t think anyone should be growing 7000 square feet indoor or 21,000 outdoor 
and I don’t see what parking has to do with it. Consider what happened to our food 
supply. We used to have many many small farmers that provided quality nourishing 
food locally. We had better communities then and were healthier. Now most of our 
food is controlled by a few massive companies and the nutritional value has decreased
significantly and our communities are for the worse for not having small farms. The 
same thing is happening to cannabis. This bill does nothing to protect small or 
medium-sized cultivators. Thanks for taking the time to read my testimony. 
