-ta
% __ ﬁg, ADMINISTRATlVE&FINANCIAL SERVICES 
:,,w'__w.,-;;.._ _ _ STATE OF MAINE 
OFFICE OF CANNABIS POLICY KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
162 STATE HOUSE STATION °°~*~“SSI°NER 
19 UNION STREET \I 
OFFICE OF CANNABIS POLICY 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0162 
JANET T. MILLS JOHN I-IUDAK 
GOVERNOR DIRECTOR 
April l9, 2023 
Re: LD 15 85 — An Act to Amend Maine's Cannabis Laws to Protect Small and Medium-sized 
Cultivators 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs: 
I am John Hudak, Director of the Ofﬁce of Camiabis Policy (OCP) and I am before you today to 
provide testimony on behalf of our ofﬁce neither for nor against LD 1585. While we are 
supportive of some of the provisions included in this bill, we do have concerns that 
implementation of this bill will require signiﬁcant disruption to businesses without providing the 
department adequate guidance on how to proceed. 
First, we are happy to see the introduction of deﬁnitions of “indoor” and “outdoor” cultivation to 
the program statutes; participants in both the medical and adult use programs frequently have 
questions regarding how these terms are deﬁned. OCP has even struggled to understand fully the 
legislative treatment of these terms. We would recommend amending the deﬁnition of 
“cultivated outdoors ” to remove from the deﬁnition the language around cannabis plants being 
planted in the ground. Many of Maine’s outdoor cultivation locations use raised beds or pots 
placed on the ground outside to retain better control over the composition of soil. 
Next, while we are supportive of placing limits on the maximum cultivation area that can be 
maintained by a registered dispensary, we are wary of setting limits that do not account for 
existing cultivation operations maintained by current registered dispensaries. It is important to 
remember that some dispensaries operating in Maine have been cultivating cannabis for overa 
decade, and even recent dispensaries have established their businesses under existing statutory 
requirements. To date 3 dispensaries have reported that they are maintaining indoor cultivation 
areas in excess of the 7,000 square feet this bill would pennit. At present, no dispensaries are 
engaged in outdoor cultivation. Among all 56 dispensaries currently in operation, cultivating 
dispensaries are growing anywhere between 1,500 and 30,000 square feet of mature plant 
canopy. However, as We’ve shared in previous testimony, we know there is a substantial 
oversupply of cannabis in the medical marketl that has contributed in part to the exodus of 
‘“ ...the medical cannabis market in Maine has been active for over ten years, making the 6:1 ratio an anomaly to 
trends observed in other states. Typically, as states progress in their tirneline post market legalization for medical or 
adult-use, the demand-to-supply ratio decreases as efficiencies are met.” Maine Ofﬁce of Cannabis Policy Cannabis 
Markets & Associated Outcomes - Survey Findings and Implications, Medical Supply Estimates, pp. 22- 28, 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
www.maine.gov/dafs/ocp/
caregivers from the medical market over the past year and a half. Additionally, there have been 
substantial changes to the medical cannabis program over the past decade. These changes include 
lifting patient designation requirements and eliminating the limit on the number of dispensary 
registration certiﬁcates that can be issued by the department. Implementing some limit on the 
number of cannabis plants a dispensary can cultivate is a commonsense change our office 
supports. 
Finally, we do have concerns regarding the elimination of the Tier 4 adult use cannabis 
cultivation facility license Without a plan to address existing Tier 4 cultivation facility licensees. 
Of the 89 adult use cultivation facility licensees, ll of those licensees hold Tier 4 licenses. Of 
those Tier 4 licensees, 5 cultivate some or all their cannabis indoors. Among all adult use 
cultivation facility licensees, 80 are licensed for indoor cultivation, and 9 are licensed for outdoor 
cultivation. Any changes to the existing license types should come with speciﬁc statutory 
language that addressed the process by which these licensees should be transitioned to a different 
license type and facility size. 
As always, we thank you for your time and We’ll do our best to answer any questions you may 
have. 
available at: https:i!www.maine.gov: ’dafsi0cp!sitesfmaine.gov.dafs.0cp/ ﬁles/inline- 
frlesiMaine%20OCP%20AHP%20Report%20t)6-22pdf, published Spring 2022. 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
www.maine.gov/dafs/ocp/
