€RAF“'l' CANNABES _ A Ii 5 ( ) ( . l A l l ON
F 
To The Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
April 19th, 2023 
Mark Barnett 
125 Granite St 
Auburn, ME 04210 
LD 1585 OUGHT TO PASS 
My name is Mark Barnett. l'm a resident of Auburn, owner of a medical caregiver retail shop in 
Portland called Higher Grounds of Maine, and the Policy Director for the Maine Craft Cannabis 
Association. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this important bill. The Maine Craft 
Cannabis Association recommends that the Veterans and Legal Affairs committee move LD 
1585, ‘An Act to Amend Maine's Cannabis Laws to Protect Small and Medium-sized Cultivators ’ 
as Ought to Pass. This legislation would improve Maine's medical cannabis program by: limiting 
the overall size of canopy that a licensee or registrant may cultivate which is currently 
completely unlimited; removing the arbitrary requirement in medical cannabis rules for on-site 
parking in order to receive a dispensary license; and providing definitions of outdoor and indoor 
cultivation in both programs to level the playing field for outdoor cultivators who face greater 
challenges in bringing crops to market. 
This legislation would also level the competitive playing field in the Adult Use program by 
removing the tier 4 license which currently allows for up to 34,000 square feet (assuming two 
7,000 square foot increases in renewal from 20,000) of canopy to be controlled by one license, 
concentrating market power in the hands of a few licensees who can afford to scale up industrial 
production and maintain losses dumping product at the expense of smaller, craft production that 
does not enjoy easy access to capital. For reference, medical caregivers, who represent the 
vast majority of small cannabis businesses in Maine, are only permitted 500 square feet of 
cultivation area, and are often unable to move their businesses into the Dispensary program or, 
if they so desire, into Adult Use, due to high capital costs but also local restrictions on the 
number of such businesses allowed. That caregivers can operate 500 square feet but 
dispensary registrants can grow unlimited quantities is an injustice. 
LD1585 DOESN'T BLOCK NEW LICENSES 
importantly, this legislation would Qt stop the issuance of new cultivation licenses in either 
program to ensure small Maine businesses can still enter either of these markets at any time or 
scale up from smaller operations. Stopping the issuance of licenses blocks small business 
formation. Our goal is to promote and sustain small business formation, as that ultimately leads 
to more of the benefit from these industries remaining here in this state. In a perfect world, no 
regulation of the production of cannabis should be the goal, as cannabis is a safe and natural 
source of relief, creativity, and joy, and has enormous therapeutic potential for a wide range of 
human ailments. lt is a plant, not a dangerous weapon, and one of the most powerful allies we 
have in nature. However, that ideal world is far off, and there are massive bottlenecks and 
restrictions and inefficiencies that exist in the cannabis markets as they are currently regulated. 
There is no ‘free market‘ for cannabis.
mart cmswasis /\ » o1 . 1 A I i <1> N 
LD 1585 CREATES A MORE EQUAL PLAYING FIELD 
If we want to help the greatest amount of our people realize the greatest benefit until that day, 
let’ admit that such a highly regulated market provides a huge advantage to large, well- 
capitalized players and weighs heavily on the ability of the average farmer to compete. We need 
only look at what corporate agriculture and more recently corporate cannabis has achieved in 
nearly every other state in the US—near total capture of the market due to advantages in raising 
capital and the ability to manipulate prices through control of both production and distribution. 
How can we support our smaller businesses against this advantage ’? By ensuring no player has 
the built-in ability to achieve that control, especially when access to the customer is so limited. 
Both the adult use market and the medical market in Maine, while composed of very different 
types of businesses, face heavy hurdles to find real estate, access banking services, obtain 
insurance, and a host of other problems most industries don't have to contend with. These costs 
eat into small entrepreneurs ’ limited resources. 
INDOOR VERSUS OUTDOOR CULTIVATION TYPES 
A glaring issue with our current systems of regulation is holding indoor and outdoor canopy as 
equivalent when it comes to allowed square footage. It is important that our system of regulation 
recognizes the different challenges and economics that each type faces. Outdoor cultivation, 
particularly in the state of Maine, has a far more limited period during which to grow and will at 
best produce a couple of harvests whereas an indoor operation could average 5 turns per year 
or above han/esting continuously. This is true even of ‘greenhouse ’ facilities that have evolved 
into multimillion-dollar buildings with fully artificial ecosystems that, like indoor, can much more 
easily be industrially scaled for those with the capital to do so. While no deﬁnition will capture 
the nuances of specific projects —for example a partially-fixed greenhouse structure with artificial 
lighting to supplement the sun is neither fully ‘indoor’ nor fully outdoor-the economics of how 
they can produce using electricity are much more similar to indoor than to true sun-grown 
cannabis that uses no electric lighting to grow flowers. We think the use of electricity to grow 
flowers and the creation of a largely-artificial ecosystem are the most important elements to 
differentiate from purely sungrown cannabis. LD 1585 would allow for ‘outdoor’ operations to 
use some small lighting to keep plants in vegetative state for operational purposes, and we 
recommend a friendly amendment to the bill to allow for powering fans for air circulation which 
are typically necessary even for fully sung rown cannabis under any type of structure. 
CHALLENGES TO IMPLEMENTATION SURMOUNTABLE 
There are bound to be some challenges with re-aligning these canopy sizes, as those laws were 
made in very different market contexts and have been on the books now for multiple years, with 
12 tier 4 licenses active and 9 in some conditional status, and nearly 50 dispensary licenses 
issued. While we emphatically believe action is needed, we also don’t want to damage legally 
operating businesses that built their business plans around the framework the state provided at 
the time. Ethically, we know the committee will have to consider these licensees ‘ vested rights 
and seek to avoid those damages and related job losses and possible legal action while 
exploring how to keep a lid on the production that could be pumped out of these licenses which, 
at 20,000 square feet-plus in Adult Use and unlimited in Medical, could easily destroy these 
markets. 
lf these licensees ’ are exempted in any way, however, we feel there must be mitigation so that 
their value in the market does not increase due to the change in canopy sizes. We recommend
M A l NE 
€RAFT €ANNABlS Ai5%f7(',l.-\ll() N 
a restriction on ownership transfer or sale requiring compliance with the new canopy sizes 
should the Legislature change them. lt would also be important to ensure that the tier 4 Adult 
Use licenses —which currently can apply to grow by 7,000 square feet every two years—do not 
retain that option unless the licensee already has a renewal in motion and approved. There's an 
automatic review included in the bill at year-end 2025, well before we expect any federal 
movement on legalization, but the committee could also consider adding a trigger clause to 
remove restrictions on canopy sizes as soon as interstate commerce exporting out of Maine is 
possible. 
We hope this can at the very least be the starting point for a conversation away from limiting 
who can participate, which seems to be the regulatory tendency. Maine truly has a special 
character and historical context that has created an incredible small craft ecosystem in our 
medical cannabis program. That unique economic model can be a shining example to the rest 
of the world, or it can be demolished by factory farms. We should defend and protect that 
ecosystem and, rather than push towards the more industrial regulation currently governing the 
Adult Use program, strive to build the Adult Use program back towards our small craft roots. We 
feel it's necessary if we are to avoid the train wrecks that other states’ legal markets have 
become due to massive oversupply from giant corporate grows that have essentially killed off all 
of the small businesses formerly operating in those states or sent them to the informal market. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. 
Sincerely, 
Mark Barnett 
