Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:
My name is Argy Nestor, I am a resident of Union and am the 1995 Maine Teacher of the Year. 
Thank you for the opportunity to communicate with you about my support of LD#1018. 
Creating space on the state board of education for a teacher would be a gift to the Maine 
education system. The teacher voice in this arena would add value and the benefits certainly 
outweigh any cautions. In fact, the state of Maine’s education system often boasts about doing 
what is exemplary for students. This bill provides an opportunity to do what is in the best interest 
of Maine’s learners, PK-higher education. Who knows learners better than teachers? Maine’s 
teacher leaders are champions at articulating a clear perspective of the day-to- day aspects of 
children and learning. Teacher membership on the state board of education is long overdue.  
For these reasons I strongly urge the committee to vote in favor of LD#1018.
Thank you for the important role you play in education in Maine. 
Argy Nestor
Union
LD 1018
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:
My name is Argy Nestor, I am a resident of Union and am the 1995 Maine Teacher of
the Year. Thank you for the opportunity to communicate with you about my support 
of LD#1018. 
Creating space on the state board of education for a teacher would be a gift to the 
Maine education system. The teacher voice in this arena would add value and the 
benefits certainly outweigh any cautions. In fact, the state of Maine’s education 
system often boasts about doing what is exemplary for students. This bill provides an 
opportunity to do what is in the best interest of Maine’s learners, PK-higher 
education. Who knows learners better than teachers? Maine’s teacher leaders are 
champions at articulating a clear perspective of the day-to- day aspects of children 
and learning. Teacher membership on the state board of education is long overdue.  
For these reasons I strongly urge the committee to vote in favor of LD#1018.
Thank you for the important role you play in education in Maine. 
