EDUCATE MAINE 
ooee The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from Dolly Sullivan, Program Director, Educate Maine 
In Support of 
L.D. 1018 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Dolly Sullivan, I am a Program Director at Educate 
Maine, a business-led education advocacy organization. Thank you for the opportunity to 
testify in support of LD #1018 An Act To Increase the Membership of the State Board of 
Education and Review the Board's Responsibilities, Functions and Staffing 
Educate Maine's mission is to ensure that all Maine people reach their highest educational 
potential. We administer the Maine Teacher of the Year program in partnership with the 
Maine Department of Education and the State Board of Education. Our work focuses on 
elevating the ”voice of teachers for the benefit of the profession" (Quaglia and Lande, 2015) 
and showcasing the profession as one that people want to pursue. 
For several yea rs, we have been advocating for a teacher to serve on the Maine State Board of 
Education. We believe this is an important way to acknowledge the expertise of teachers when 
deciding and implementing education policy. 
As the State Coordinator for the Teacher of the Year program, l'm privileged to work with some 
of Maine's most remarkable teachers. The County and State Teachers of the Year engage ina 
rigorous selection process that is designed as a professional leadership experience. It is 
important to note, that when we name the Teachers of the Year, county and state, we do not 
presume that they are the ‘best teacher in Maine" . We know that would be impossible. 
Rather, they are passionate teachers who take on added roles and responsibilities necessary to 
be ambassadors for their students and profession, engaging with business, education and 
policy leaders, and working with practicing and pre-service teachers. We believe their Teacher 
of the Year experience, coupled with their lived classroom experience, would be a tremendous 
resource to the State Board. 
43;? Ctaztgriesa i $:,z.i’i;e 3&3 § Piitartizzmcl. iliiﬁl M453? E 2€i?~i3¢1'?~i'££$3B
There is research that highlights the importance of having teachers at the table when 
discussing and deciding education policy that will be referenced in other testimony. There isa 
book called ”Teachers at the Table: Voice Agency and Advocacy in Education Policy Making" by 
Annalee Goode that is based on the simple premise that policy matters in education and 
teachers matter to policy. Moreover, the goal of having teachers as policy leaders leads to 
producing better educational policy that is more relevant and responsive to the youth, 
educators, families, and communities it serves. 
While Educate Maine supports this bill, we also support expanding the field to include County 
Teachers of the Year who are practicing teachers in addition to State Teachers of the Year. We 
will announce the 10th cohort of County TOYs in May - providing access to nearly 160 teachers 
from across the state who are leaders in the profession and continue to do amazing things for 
students. Additionally, going back to the 1990's, twenty of the State Teachers of the Year are 
still practicing educators. 
We urge you to vote yes on LD 1018 and consider the options available to ensure thata 
practicing teacher serves on the State Board. Included in the written testimony is a chart that 
shows other state policies for teacher appointment and terms on their state boards of 
education. We are available to provide information as needed. 
Thank you for your time. 
Dolly Sullivan 
Educate Maine 
dolly_@educatemaine.org
EDUCATE MAINE 
eoee State Notes Anecdotal 
Delaware Former TOY (must be an active teacher) is 
member nominated by the governor and is a- Nevada 
voting member. There is a web form forp 
the applications Teacher is appointed by the governor and ISa 
e ople to 
apply for board seats and governor selects from 
Georgia 
Education Governor announced that he wants a current TOY 
to serve an — role on the State Board of 
Wyoming In Wyoming, there must be a teacher 
represented and they are a full voting m ember. 
They serve 6-year terms. Our 2017 WTOY just 
came off the board after serving as chair. 
Arkansas 
year of service (July 1-June 30). TOY serves as a — member during their From a TOY- "it was an AMAZING experience. 
One of my favorite parts of being a TOY. We 
also attended all state board trainings or 
work sessions where they learned about 
upcoming policy. We served on a state board 
committee too. l was on the family 
engagement committee and the school 
improvement committee." 
North Carolina 
2 years. They — but can participat 
otherwise Current and previous year TOY serve as advisors 
for the State Board of Education. Each TOY serves
E 
482 Congress St. 2 Suite 363 2 Portiarztvi, ME 94401 5 2{3?~34'? ’ -~»i3€38
