Dorothy Maxwell
Legacy Maine Teacher of the Year/Cornish, ME-Residence
LD 1018
Dorothy A. Maxwell
P.O. Box 646
Cornish, ME 04020
207-787-1478
maxwelldorothy673@gmail.com
The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Testimony from Dorothy A. Maxwell, Legacy Maine Teacher of the Year,
Milken Family Foundation National Educator 
In Support Of
L.D.#1018:  “An Act o Increase the Membership of the State Board of Education and
Review the Board’s Responsibilities, Functions, and Staffing
Senator Pierce, Representative Brennan, and other distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Dorothy A. Maxwell.  I am a 
resident of the Town of Cornish and a retired business teacher from Maine SAD #55 
(Baldwin, Cornish, Hiram, Parsonsfield, and Porter).  I also teach business courses 
and graduate level courses to potential online educators through a virtual high school 
(www.vhslearning.org).  Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in favor 
of L.D. #1018.
My personal connection to this bill is based on my many years of teaching experience 
and the opportunity it affords to connect and collaborate with educators across Maine 
and the global community.  As a legacy Maine Teacher of the Year (1994), I 
experienced a life-changing event that truly continues today.  I traveled many miles 
both in Maine and beyond listening to teachers and students while hearing their many 
personal stories. Beyond my year of service, I was honored with a Milken Family 
Foundation National Educator Award.  I had the pleasure of attending several State 
Board of Education sessions where I was both a listener and participant.
This bill would provide a voice for teachers on the State Board of Education and add 
value to the important work of the State Board of Education. With increased teacher 
shortage both in recruitment and retention, there has never been a need for greater 
teacher voice than now. While I served my year as Maine Teacher of the Year, I was 
able to organize the Maine State Teacher of the Year Association to work 
collaboratively with the Department of Education and Cultural Affairs in promoting 
greater teacher recognition.  Creating a position on the State Board of Education 
would be yet another coordinating connection to the teaching profession.  
For these major reasons, I strongly urge the Committee to vote unanimously and pass 
L.D.#1018.  Thank you for the opportunity to testify and for your consideration of this 
important issue for the future of Maine.  I will gladly answer any questions.

