The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from Kaitlin Young, 2018 Maine Teacher of the Year 
In Support of 
L.D. 1018 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Kaitlin Young, I am a resident 
of Stetson, and the 2017 Piscataquis County Teacher of the Year and the 2018 Maine 
Teacher of the Year. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD #1018 An Act To Increase the 
Membership of the State Board of Education and Review the Board's Responsibilities, 
E . 
ls if 
During my tenure as Maine Teacher of the Year, l had the privilege of interacting with 
policymakers who expressed a sincere appreciation for teacher input and expertise. 
Unfortunately, many of our teachers who diligently serve in our schools do not share the 
same experience and often feel that their professional insight is undervalued. According 
to the Center for Education Policy's Listen to Us: Teacher Views and Voices, 94% of 
teachers believe that their opinions are not considered in state educational 
policymaking, and nearly half of the teachers say that state or district policies often 
create obstacles in their work. We must incorporate teacher voice at all levels of 
educational policymaking in order to ensure that future policies are creating 
opportunities and pathways instead of obstacles for teachers and students. 
The Maine Teacher and County Teacher of the Year program is an option for ﬁnding 
teachers to serve on the State Board. These educators are desirable for such a role 
because they participate in a rigorous and reﬂective selection process that includes the 
perspectives of business leaders, community members, administrators, and fellow 
teachers. These teachers receive professional learning experiences that develop their 
leadership, advocacy, and policy skills, preparing them to offer valuable perspectives and 
contributions to the State Board. As ambassadors for their schools, counties, and the 
teaching profession, they are connected to a growing network of teacher leaders
through the Maine County and State Teachers of the Year Association and can draw 
upon their collective expertise to inform their work, beneﬁtting Maine's policymakers. 
In 2007, the State Board of Education added two student representatives, which 
provided critical insights into the needs and wants of Maine learners and future leaders. 
Having recently attended several State Board meetings in support of fellow County and 
State Teachers of the Year, I can attest to the incredible insight and perspective that 
Joshua T. Lewinand and Ryan Hafener bring to these conversations. 
Teachers possess invaluable knowledge of our students, teaching best practices, and 
collaboration and advocacy skills that are crucial in designing, deciding, and 
implementing effective educational policies that align with their intended outcomes. 
As Maine continues to address the educator workforce shortage, appointing a dedicated 
teacher representative to the State Board of Education presents an excellent opportunity 
to demonstrate to teachers that their experience and expertise are not merely 
considered in state policy decisions, but are genuinely valued and viewed as an essential 
component of ongoing efforts to elevate teacher voice and promote policies and 
practices that lead to positive outcomes for teachers and Maine learners. 
In conclusion, I respectfully urge you to vote in favor of LD 1018 and consider the various 
options available to ensure that a practicing teacher serves on the State Board. I am 
available to provide any additional information as needed. 
Thank you for your time, for the opportunity to testify, and for considering this in your 
deliberations. 
Kaitlin Young 
2017 Piscataquis County Teacher of the Year 
2018 Maine Teacher of the Year 
kaitlinyoung461@gmail.com
