Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth Fr ench Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
Neither for Nor Against  
LD 1018: An Act to Increase the Membership of the State Board of Education and Review the 
Board’s Responsibilities, Functions, and Sta ffing 
Mallory Cook , Director of Training and Early Educator Engagement ,  
Maine Education Association  
Before the Committee  on Education and Cultural Affairs  
March  9, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs,     
  
My name is Mallory Cook (pronouns she/her/hers), and I am the Director of Training and Early 
Educator Engagement at the Maine Education Association . I am a certified English teacher and Building 
Administrator. I am writing to provide testimony on behalf of th e MEA neither for nor against LD 1018: 
An Act to Increase the Membership of the State Board of Education and Review the Board’s 
Responsibilities, Functions, and Staffing.   
  
Since taking on this role in September, I have attended hundreds of meetings focus ed on the crisis in 
front of us – the educator shortage. While all stakeholder groups work to include both qualitative and 
quantitative data in these discussions, it is incredibly frustrating when these conversations happen in the 
absence of educators. Thi s is especially true when it comes to Maine’s State Board of Education and 
committees. MEA supports the addition of a seat on the State Board, but we also think it is essential that 
this seat, and others, be held by practicing educators, a practice already  happening in at least 14 other 
states. It is certainly important that we have the wisdom of former educators on the board, but they are 
unable to give first -hand accounts of the issues in our schools today.    
  
Section 3 of the legislation before you call s for a Working Group to review the responsibilities, 
functions, and staffing of the State Board of Education.   We would hope the Working Group could 
include a discussion about the timing of their meetings to maximize participation from educators and the 
public and to allow working educators to serve on the State Board of Education without needing to miss 
classroom time.   At present, meetings begin at 9 and go well into the afternoon hours. Committee 
meetings also take place mid -morning. Such timing, while convenient for those working outside of 
education, is an incredible barrier and injustice to the people whom this board seeks to serve.    
  
Should the Committee choose to move forward with this bill, we believe voice should be given to those 
who do not alr eady have the audience nor the platform the Teacher of the Year has embedded in their  
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth Fr ench Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
role. Assigning this seat to Teacher of the Year also leaves out the potential for the important voices of 
our Education Support Professionals, who experience unique chal lenges within schools.    
  
Thank you for your time and consideration, and I welcome you to reach out with any questions.  
