 
   
 
 
 
 
Janet T. Mills  
                Governor  STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL  
AND FINANCIAL REGULATION  
35 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  
04333- 0035 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anne L. Head  
Commissioner  
March  21, 2023 
 
Senator  Nangle, Chair  
Representative Stover , Chair  
Committee on State and Local Government  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
Dear Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and Members of the State and Local Committee:  
On behalf of the  Department of Professional and Financial Regulation,  I am  writing this letter in 
opposition to LD 850, An Act to Re quire State Agencies to Complete the Rulemaking  Process 
within One Year of a Legislative Directive to Complete Rules .   
 
DPFR is a regulatory department consisting of 5 agencies and 6 affiliated boards.  We regulate insurance, financial institutions, securities, consumer credit, and a range of professions and occupations. Our statutory responsibility and mission is to protec t the citizens of Maine public 
through our regulatory functions.  Our regulatory authority is set forth by statute and our 
agencies and boards undertake rulemaking throughout the year in order to implement legislative intent and to perform our statutory du ty to protect the public.  To provide context  about  the 
enormity of our rulemaking responsibilities, just one of our agencies, the Office of Professional and Occupational Regulation (OPOR), is comprised of 37 licensing entities.    The APA rulemaking proce ss is a lengthy process which i ncludes notice to the public, the 
opportunity for public input, the requirement that the board formally respond to each public 
comment, two levels of review by the Office of Attorney  General , and votes to formally adopt a 
rule.  Much of the timing of this process is  not within  the agency’s control .  The agency has no 
control over the time it takes the OAG to complete their pre  legal review (OAG ) which in some 
instances has taken several months .  It is important to note that public comment may prompt 
substantive changes to a proposed  rule which then necessitates additional public noti ce and 
comment periods.   
 
Furthermore, t here is substantial pre -work that must be done before a rulemaking initiative  is 
even  started.  This prework includes extensive research and can also include coordination with 
stakeholders.  To do the “pre -APA” rulemaking tasks in a more condensed timeframe would 
require dedicated rulemaking staff  assigned solely to rulemaking, including additional attorneys.  
 
Agency staff who work licensing board rulemaking have a range of additional responsibilities .  
For an example, OPOR board managers are responsible for managing between 5 -9 licensing 
programs.  These managers are not only responsible for all rulemaking for their programs , they  
are also responsible for license application review and issuance of licenses, board management, 

 
 legislation,  and for ongoing administration of the complaint resolution process.  Without  
additional dedicated rulemaking staff, OPOR board managers would be required to temporarily 
cease or reduce all other aspects of their responsibilities, thus reducing the number of 
professional and occupational license s because of delayed application review and  slowing the 
resolution of consumer complaints.  In addition, OPOR only has  one attorney to assist board 
managers in their rulemaking for each of the 37 licensing programs.  Since OPOR licensing programs are supported entirely by licensing fees, the costs of additional rulemaking staff and attorneys would need to be reflected in increased licensing fees.  
 We urge you to vote ONTP.  Thank you for your time and I  would be happy to answer any 
questions at the work session.  
 
Sincerely,  
Joan  
Joan Cohen 
Deputy, Department of Professional and Financial Regulation  
 
 
