AMANDA E. BEAL 
COMMISSIONER  JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
    STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE , CONSERVATION & FORESTRY  
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER  
22 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE 04333  
HARLOW BUILDING  
18 ELKINS LANE 
AUGUSTA , MAINE  PHONE : (207) 287‐3200 
FAX:  (207) 287‐2400 TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STA NDING COMMITTEE ON STATE AND 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 850 
An Act to Require State Agencies to Complete the Rulemaking Process Within One Year of a 
Legislative Directive to Adopt Rules 
March 21, 2023 
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State 
and Local Government, my name is Judy East, and I am the Director of the Bureau of Resource 
Information and Land Use Planning in the Departme nt of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
(DACF). I am testifying on behalf of DACF in opposition to LD 850, An Act to Require State 
Agencies to Complete the Rulemaking Process W ithin One Year of a Legislative Directive to 
Adopt Rules .   
This bill states that when an agency is directed by law to adopt rules, the agency, 
unless otherwise required or directed by law, mu st adopt, or in the cas e of major substantive 
rules adopted under subchapter 2-A, must prov isionally adopt all of those rules within 12 
months of the effectiv e date of the law.  
 The goal among agency staff is to ensure that rules are administra tively clear to the regulated 
community and those who implement them. For ma jor substantive rules, this can take time. 
While agencies are likely to meet the requirement  in this bill, some circumstances may delay the
 
adoption of a rule beyond the agency's control. Fo r instance, if rulemaking is to be spearheaded 
by existing staff, they will need to balance that ac tivity with other existing responsibilities. Or, if 
to be overseen by a newly created position, the description of that  position must fi rst be vetted 
and approved by the Bureau of Human Resources, r ecruited, and then filled before the work can 
begin. Additionally, in complex and extensive rulemaking processes – of ten major substantive – 
rules are first developed by agency staff. This necessitates interactions among senior staff and 
the Attorney General's Office and can take severa l months. In addition, it is advantageous and 
legitimate to hold outreach meeti ngs among interested parties to develop and refine the rules. 
The input from such outreach is incorporated into the draft rules and then can be the subject of 
additional outreach meetings to ensure that te chnical and public objectives are realized. After 
that, final rules are drafted, and then the Administrative Procedures Act's public notice and hearing requirements can add anothe r few months to the process. We  have also seen recent laws 
challenged in court, and if the rulemaking process were part of the law, it would make the most 
sense to wait until the provision is adjudicated. 
 
 
If staff turnover occurs in an agency and/or the AG's office, rule development can be delayed 
significantly. Likewise, weather ev ents can delay outreach meeti ngs among interested parties, 
adding time to the process. The bill does not in dicate the repercussions if the deadline is not 
realized. Would the process star t over, some interim rule be imposed, or some method for 
granting an extension need to be developed? Woul d such an extension come from the legislature, 
the Secretary of State, or another executive branch member?  For these reasons, we recommend th at LD 850 ought not to pass.  
 Thank you for your time. I would happily answ er any questions at the work session. 
 
