Good afternoon. Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and 
honorable members of the Committee On State and Local 
Government, I am Patrick Corey and l live in Windham. I'd like to 
thank Representative Carlow for sponsoring LD 850, An Act to 
Require State Agencies to Complete the Rulemaking Process 
Within One Year of a Legislative Directive to Adopt Rules and 
wish to speak in SUPPORT. 
The United Nations Human Rights Council identifies five “key 
attributes of good governance. ” These include: transparency, 
responsibility, accountability, participation, and responsiveness. 
While LD 850 embraces and helps make possible each of these 
important qualities, the last, “responsiveness ” truly reflects the 
work of Maine's Legislature.‘ 
After the word “responsiveness ” and 
in parentheses the HRC adds “to the needs of the people.” As 
Maine's representatives, you are closest to its people and with 
that it's incumbent on you to make sure laws made by this body 
for the people are available to improve their circumstance. 
When making laws, it often makes sense to relegate rule making 
authority to Maine’s government agencies for implementation or 
because rules are needed. Unless a rule is major substantive, 
meaning that it comes back to the Legislature for review and
approval, it's often forgotten about by this body, taking for granted 
that its directives will be followed. 
Even the appearance that an agency is slow-walking or not 
implementing a law passed for Maine’s people using their 
entrusted rule making authority is terrible. The bill before this 
committee is intended to help you carry out your good and lawful 
work on behalf of Maine’s people. It provides the flexibility both 
the Legislature and State agencies need to partner together in 
implementing laws. Most of all, LD 850 provides a timeline for rule 
adoption if a different, negotiated and agreed upon timeline is not 
provided. 
I want to make a special note that the effective date makes this 
bill prospective, applying only to future laws._ 
How often is this Legislature presented with the opportunity to 
enact a law that both promotes its rightful authority while ensuring 
that the will of the people it represents does not go unserved? l’d 
like to thank the committee for your time and consideration.i
