Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
State of Maine 
(207) 287- 3531   
  Douglas A. Farnham  
Major  General  
Commissioner  
(207) 430- 6000  
 
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management  
33 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333- 0033 
 
 
 
 
LD 850 “An Act to Require State Agencies to Complete the Rulemaking Process Within 
One Year of a Legislative Directive to Adopt Rules ” 
 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
 
March 21 , 2023  
 
Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and honorable members of the State and Local 
Government Committee , I am  Scott Young, D eputy Commissioner, Department of Defense, 
Veterans and Emergency Management  (DVEM) . I am writing to address our concern for LD 
850, An Act to Require State Agencies to Complete the Rulemaking Process Within One Year of 
a Legislative Directive to Adopt Rules . 
 Our department only has one major substantive rule with an additional eight routine technical rules. Consequently, we do not have staff de dicated to rulemaking. Requiring all department 
rules to complete the rulemaking process within one year of a legislative directive could create 
an undue burden on our program managers who are already at capacity managing the military, veteran, and emergen cy management operations within the State. 
 Additionally, we have been faced with situations where additional information, legislation or funding was required to fully inform our rulemaking thus preventing us from completing this process within a year of a  directive. For example, in April 2022 Public Law 2021 Chapter 593 
established a requirement for our department to adopt rules to implement a new program to bury members of the Maine National Guard , who would not otherwise qualify, in the Maine Veterans 
Memorial Cemeteries. At the time the law was passed we thought the US Department of 
Veterans Affairs would fund the burials. Soon after the law was passed, they determined they would not. This left our department with a requirement to promulgate rules but wi th no funding 
to implement the program. We finally received funding in the FY 23 Supplemental Budget bill passed February 21, 2023. Given a situation like this you can see how by no fault of our own we would be in violation of the law if this bill is passe d.  
 Thank you for your consideration. If our department can be of further assistance, please reach 
out to me at Scott.a.young@maine.gov. 
 
Scott Young
Department of Defense, Veterans, and Emergency Management
LD 850
Attached is a letter for the committee concerning LD 850.
