 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.or g 
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary  
LD 1613, An Act to Prohibit Profiling and to Strengthen Civil Rights in Maine - Support  
Testimony by Mary L. Bonauto, GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders  
 April 26, 2023  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Committee on the 
Judiciary:  
  
I am Mary Bonauto, an attorney with GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders, and am testifying 
in support of LD 1613, An Act to Prohibit Profiling and to Strengthen Civil Righ ts in Maine. GLAD 
works in Maine, New England and nationally to support equal justice under law for LGBTQ people. 
We thank Speaker Talbot Ross for bringing forward this important bill.   
 
Under our State and federal constitutions, each of us is assured that  we come before our 
government as equals, including in our interactions with law enforcement officers.  No wants to or 
deserves to be identified  for law enforcement activity because of who they are, their race or color, who 
they associate with, signals of their faith or for other defin ing personal characteristics.   
 
In the same vein, the “Maine Civil Rights Act ,” Title 5 MRS chapter 337 -B – assures us that 
we can “engage in lawful activities” – including rights secured under the US Constitution and US laws 
as well as by the Maine Constitution and laws  - without interference of those rights by either 
governmental or private actors.   More specifically, we can live our lives without intentional or 
attempted  interference in the form of threats or actual or attemp ted “ physical force or violence against 
a person, damage or destruction  of property, or trespass on property .”   5 MRS §4681 (authorizing 
legal actions by the Attorney General for injunctive or other equitable relief to protect the exercise and 
enjoyment o f rights); id. at §4682 (1 -A) (same guarantee and authorizing a private right of action for 
legal or equitable relief).  
 
Even this cursory legal framework demonstrates th at LD 1613 is the right bill at the right time 
with respect to each of its parts:  the appointment of “civil rights officers” within law enforcement 
agencies (Part A) ; defining and prohibiting profiling by law enforcement (Part B) : and providing an 
extended deadline for the Attorney General’s Office to develop rules  for law enfor cement officers 
collecting demographic data during traffic stops (Part C).  
 
Part A of the bill rightly assumes that law enforcement can assist both law enforcement 
personnel and the public in “identifying and investigating civil rights violations.”  The mor e law 
enforcement knows about the law, the more they will understand their obligations and the limits of 
their authority. In addition, such officers would bring expertise to public encounters and questions 
about civil rights, and by identifying and investi gating civil rights issues, they would be a positive force 
in building bridges and trust with communities. Trust keeps everyone safer .     
 
Whether considering statutes, constitutional provisions,  or a dizzying array of case law,  it is 
fair to say that in -house expertise on civil rights is long overdue.  A llegations of civil rights violations 
can arise from community members ’ interactions – as with threats of harm and violence directed at 
1 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.or g people because of who they are .  Civil rights violations could arise f rom government actors  beyond the 
Maine Civil Rights Act, cited above, including  for discrimination , violations of equality, life and 
liberty, and from a government actor’s theft, false arrest, sexual misconduct , or deliberate indifference 
to serious harm t o a person in custody or to serious medical needs .  
 
Part B  of this bill prohibits law enforcement “profiling”  and contains an exception for credible 
information about a characteristic to be used when that characteristic is relevant to a location, time and 
criminal episode.  “ Profiling ” is defined as : 
• “relying, to any degree ” 
• “on actual or perceived race, gender, ethnicity, religion, socioeconomic status, ancestry, 
sexual orientation, gender identity, color, physical or mental disability or national or igin”.   
this bill rightly forecloses intentional actions by law enforcement based on “actual or 
perceived race, gender, ethnicity, religion, socioeconomic status, ancestry or national origin,”  
• in “targeting an individual for routine or investigatory acti vities, or in deciding on the scope 
and substance of law enforcement activity,  
• EXCEPT where there is “trustworthy information,” relevant to the “locality and time frame” 
and that  links a person with a particular characteristic (set forth above) to a specif ic criminal 
incident or scheme.       
 
We exp ect law enforcement to agree  with th e fundamental point  of Part B . Relying on 
demographic fac tors rather than other legi timate law enforcement factors is a strong indic ator of 
discrimination. For police to a pproach people simply because of their deep,  personal characteristics 
(e.g. race, sex, LGBTQ status)  hollows out the credibility of law enforcement and undermines public 
safety. This bill is a tool that will help law enforcement to step back and assess what factors are the 
most relevant to stops, investigations, seizures without using demographic factors as a shortcut.  Doing 
so pro tects all of us.  
     
 In Part C, the bill extends the deadline for the Attorney General to issue guidelines for 
collecting , recording, and retaining  demographic data obtained  from officer perception during motor 
vehicle traffic stops , namely color, ethnicity, gender and age .  This bill follows on enactment of LD 
132, An Act To Implement the Attorney General's Recommendations on Data Collection in Order To 
Eliminate Profiling in Maine  (130th Legislature) .  Mainers hunger for real information and dat a in law 
enforcement and beyond.  The extension gives the Attorney General time to get this rig ht.   
 
Thank you for your consideration, and we hope that  you will vote ought to pass on  LD 1613 
and the critical reforms it makes.     
 
Attorney Mary L. Bonauto  
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders   
257 Deering Ave., Suite 203   
Portland, ME 04103  
 
 
 
