Maine Sheriffs ’ Association  
“One Team, One Mission”  
 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President  
 
Sheriff Scott Nichols , 1st Vice -President, Sheriff William King , 2nd Vice -President – Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary –  
Sheriff Todd Brackett , Treasurer – Sheriff  Troy Morton, Immediate Past President –  
Sheriff Joel Merry, Past President -at-Large - Mary -Anne LaMarre, Executive Director  
 
 
  
 
  
 
     
 
April 26, 2023  
L.D. 1613 –  An Act to Prohibit Profiling and to Strengthen Civil Rights in Maine   
 Senator Carney , Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary , my name is Dale Lancaster . I am the Somerset  County Sheriff and the 
President  of the Maine Sheriffs Association.  This testimony is on their behalf.   
 Maine Sheriffs reviewed L.D. 1613 –  An Act to Prohibit Profiling and to Strengthen Civil Rights 
in Maine, and an engaged and lengthy discussion ensued.  Mai ne sheriffs expressed qualified 
support for the concept of this bill yet there are some obstacles that we wish to express to members of this committee. As a result, our position is Neither For Nor Against  L.D. 1613. 
 Bias-based profiling is unacceptable.  We can and we must eliminate profiling in Maine in all 
facets of our state, especially law enforcement.  As leaders of county law enforcement, you have our commitment toward this end.  Our hesitation to fully embrace L.D. 1613 lies in the mechanics of its implementation , not in its goal of eliminating profiling.  
 Maine sheriffs’ concerns center around the subjective language currently in L.D. 1613.  The 
added requirements of ‘ ethnic and socioeconomic  status ’ must be  carefully  examined  and 
discussed .  We believe more d efinition  needs to be provided to best understand the expectations 
we’re making of law enforcement officers who ar e often assessing situations as vehicles pass by 
them during evening hours with very low visibility.    The follow -up concerns expressed  by sheriffs  involved collecting this data.  Several members of 
our legislative policy committee noted they don’t currently have the tools  to properly collect 
requested data .  Maine’s fifteen regional and county jails  utilize three different computer 
operating systems that do not communicate with each other, which prevent s us from providing 
electronic notifications to victims, a service every other state in the country provides at some level.  Another illustration of re strictions inadvertently placed on well -intentioned professionals.  
 We respect and value the vision behind this bill and strongly urge decision -makers to reach out 
to the Maine Sheriffs Association as needed.  We look forward to being a resource as this bil l 
moves through next steps.    Thank you for your consideration.  
 Sincerely,   
 Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster  
Maine Sheriffs Association  

