Luna/xoue 0F women VOTERS* 
I’ if 
TO: The Honorable Tim Nangle 
The Honorable Holly Stover, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
DATE: April 25"‘ , 2023 
RE: LD 1348, An Act to Modernize Executive Branch and Legislative Branch Compensation 
Good afternoon Senator Nangle and Representative Stover, 
|\/ly name is Lane Sturtevant. I'm a resident of Warren. l am here today representing the League of 
Women Voters of l\/laine. I am testifying neither for nor against LD 111%, 
Salaries l3Ll8 
The League of Women Voters of Maine is a nonpartisan political organization that has been working for 
over 100 years to encourage informed and active participation in government, to increase understanding 
of major public policy issues, and to influence public policy through education and advocacy. We never 
support or oppose any political party or candidate. 
Part of working to encourage active participation in government is working to ensure that there is equal 
access not only to the ballot box but also to elected ofﬁce. Anyone who is eligible to vote should be able 
to vote and anyone who is eligible to serve in public office should be able to run for ofﬁce and serve if 
elected. That is why we have supported policies, like the Clean Elections program, that reduce the 
ﬁnancial barrier to running for office. 
LD 1348 addresses the ﬁnancial barrier to serving in office that comes after someone is elected. As you 
very well know, serving in the State Legislature is an incredible commitment. The schedule ofthe 
legislative session and the time spent fulﬁlling the duties of the ofﬁce make it difﬁcult to maintain 
full—time employment unless a legislator has the privilege of being self-employed or of working an 
extremely ﬂexible career. For working Mainers, then, the decision to run for state legislature involves the 
calculus of whether they can afford to serve in ofﬁce. The current compensation for state legislators 
would not cover the cost of living expenses for most Mainers while the legislature was in sessionl , 
meaning that they would have to somehow make up those expenses in the remaining half of the year or 
rely on retirement funds, a partner's income, or family wealth. 
As a consequence of the inadequate compensation for state legislators, many Mainers are barred from 
pursuing this form of public service. Inequalities in wealth and income levels mean that poor and 
working class Mainers, younger Mainers, women, and Mainers of color are less likely to be able to afford 
1 
It is worth noting that even with lodging reimbursements to stay in Augusta — which have limitations anyway —a 
legislator would not be able to halt rent or mortgage payments without potentially losing their year-round housing. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@lwvme.org 207.622.0256 www.lwvrne.org
LWVME to VLA April 25, 2023 
LD 1348 
to serve than older white men. l can tell you that I, personally, would not be able to serve in the State 
Legislature due to this ﬁnancial barrier. 
The League of Women Voters of Maine is fully committed to diversity, equity, and inclusion in principle 
and in practice (Diversity, Equit\_¢ and Inclusion Policy). We are also committed to working for ”0pen, 
accountable, representative, and responsive government at every level" (LWV Impact on issues, page 
17). These positions lead us to support equitable compensation for those serving in the State Legislature. 
We support any progress that LD 1348 might make toward such equitable compensation. However, the 
League of Women Voters of l\/laine has not fully analyzed the cost of disruption to year-round 
employment or cost of living data in Maine in order to evaluate what speciﬁc compensation amount 
would do away with the ﬁnancial barrier to service. Additionally, based on preliminary attempts to 
average the salaries of state legislators (adjusted for an annual estimated salary), the League would not 
anticipate a signiﬁcant increase to the existing l\/laine state legislator compensation if this formula, with 
the prorating for months in session, were utilized. 
Further, we have some concerns about the usefulness of this approach to Maine state legislator 
compensation: First, a national average salary of all state legislators does not guarantee equitable 
compensation — indeed, there are currently eleven states that compensate their legislators less than 
Maine's already low rate, including New Hampshire, which pays its legislators $100 and New Mexico, 
which does not pay its legislators at all. Second, a national average salary of state legislators has no 
relationship whatsoever to the cost imposed by serving in the State Legislature in Maine; for example, 
the cost of living in Maine differs from other states even if their legislator salaries took their state's cost 
of living into consideration. Ultimately, using a national average salary formula seems like a completely 
arbitrary method for determining the compensation for state legislators in l\/laine. The League would 
suggest using Maine-speci ﬁc metrics to determine equitable compensation for state legislators, such as 
cost of living data in Maine or other metrics relevant to the cost imposed by serving in this ofﬁce. 
Despite these reservations, we do support increasing the compensation by any amount as a long 
overdue matter of moving toward equitable access to serving in the State Legislature. LD 1348 appears 
to have the potential to increase legislator compensation, though perhaps not by much. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@1wvme.org 207.622.0256 www.lwvme.0rg
