LD 34 (2023) Voter ID Bill Testimony 
Good morning, I am Alex AuCoin. I am speaking to you today regarding LD 
34, a bill to require voter identification. While I have many concerns about 
this bill and its potential impediment to voter access, I am speaking to you 
today specifically as an advocate for members of the LGBTQ community. I 
am the President of the Hallowell Pride Alliance, the past President of the 
Bridge Alliance in Bangor and a Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist 
working in Maine since 2003. Much of my professional career has been 
working with LGBTQ Individuals, couples and families, with a specialty in 
supporting Transgender and Gender non-conforming youth and adults. I 
am also a part of the LGBTQ Community. 
Many members of my community, myself included, have histories which 
include trauma, harassment and discrimination. For some of us, these 
histories are triggered by the need to show photo identification which may 
not align with our gender expression and presentation. This may occur 
while someone is in the process of gender transition or due to challenges 
with updating identification for a variety of reasons. Our Transgender 
citizens, in particular, have founded fear that outing themselves to their 
community may result in similar threats again. This reality was part of the 
impetus behind the passage of LD 1900 in 2022. This previous law 
removed the requirement of public notice of name changes. Requiring 
photo identification as a requirement to voting may cause similar threats to 
the safety, housing, and employment of Trangender Mainers by outing 
them to community members. 
Given the potential harm related to being outed in one’s community, the 
passage of this bill could discourage members of the Transgender and 
Non-Binary Community from engaging in the voting process. Throughout 
the past few years, we have seen an onslaught of bills aimed at attacking 
the rights and freedoms of transgender youth and adults. As these rights 
remain a central focus of legislators within our state and across our nation, 
it is critical that these individuals feel empowered to use their voices and 
their votes to advance their freedoms. As a community that has had to fight 
vigilantly for their rights, barriers to voting access is yet another way of 
limiting their freedoms. 
Please, reject this bill in order to maintain voter access for members of our 
Transgender community and all Mainers.
