W’ CENTER FOR SECURE 
I/mo MODERN ELECTlONS 
February 6, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Committee On Veterans and Legal Affairs: 
lam Alysia Melnick and I am here to represent the Center for Secure and Modern Elections in opposition 
to LD 34 An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of Voting. This 
bill seeks to address an issue that simply does not exist in Maine, and would instead create undue 
burdens on local elections officials, voters, and Maine taxpayers. 
Research has shown that there is no evidence to suggest widespread voter fraud corrupted the outcome 
of the 2020 or 2022 elections in Maine. There is simply no demonstrated need for a photo-ID 
requirement in Maine. Maine's elections are safe and secure, with a comprehensive voter registration 
process where people must first prove their identity, citizenship, and residency to register to vote. 
Furthermore, strict voter ID requirements previously enacted in states like Texas and lndiana have cost 
these states millions of dollars; $2 million in Texas and $10 miilion in lndiana. There is simply no need for 
Maine taxpayers to incur this financial burden for the sake of addressing a virtually non-existent 
problem. 
And, we cannot ignore that requiring voter ID would make it more difficult for eligible Mainers to vote, 
especially for our seniors who don't drive and may not have a driver's license, people in rural areas who 
have a harder time getting to the BMV, and Mainers with low-incomes. While this bill outlines providing 
free IDs through the Secretary of State's office, Mainers who must obtain new copies of their 
documentation to receive an lD, such as their birth certificate, may still face burdensome costs. 
Instead of creating more barriers making it harder for eligible voters to cast a ballot, we urge the 
legislature to continue to support election workers dedicated to keeping Maine's elections safe, secure, 
and accessible. Please vote no on LD 34, An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification 
for the Purpose of Voting.
