 
 
 
 53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202   |  Portland, ME 04101  
 Phone: 866 -554-5380  | Fax: 207-775-5727  | TTY: 877-434-7598  
 aarp.org/ me  |  me@aarp.org  |  twitter: @aarp maine  
 facebook.com/ aarpmaine  |  instagram.com/aarpme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 February 6, 2023  
 
Testimony Opposed to LD 34 An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic 
Identification for the Purpose of Voting  
 
Greetings Senator Hickman and Representative Supica and Honorable  members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Bridget Quinn, and I am an Associate 
State Director of Advocacy and Outreach for AARP Maine.  
 
AARP is the nation’s largest nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated to empowering 
Ameri cans 50 and older to choose how they live as they age. On behalf of our more than 200,000 
members statewide, thank you for the opportunity to share testimony.  Today I am here to testify in 
opposition of LD 34.  
 
AARP has been fighting to protect the rights of all Americans 50+ to vote freely, easily and safely for 
more than 35 years . We have a long history of non-partisan  voter education and engagement , in 
addition to  fair and straightforward election procedures that help increase the participation of  
voters aged 50 and older.   LD34 concerns us because  requiring photographic identification may 
inadvertently create barriers to  voting bycomplicating the voting process for voters who may no 
longer have a photo ID because they no longer have a license, or other identifying document , 
particularly older adults and individuals living in very remote parts of the state   
 
AARP opposes strict  photo identification requirements because these laws threaten to reduce 
legitimate citizen participation – particularly by older voters – in the electoral process , without 
increasing the security of elections . LD 34 ’s photo identification requirements also risk an adverse 
impact to voters living in nursing homes, assisted living facilities, or congregate settings. Many of 
these voters live with limited incomes and/or disabilities , and they may find it difficult to acquire 
the necessary identification to vote . Additionally, there are no prov isions in LD 34 to educate voters 
on these changes, which could catch many off -guard, leaving them unable to exercise their 
constitutional right.   
 
AARP supports your goals of secure elections, but changes  to the voting process should ensure 
increased acc ess, fairness, and simplicity; not add ed barriers and complexity.  
 
Thank you for your time, and we urge the members of this committee to oppose LD 34. If you have 
questions for me, I can be reached at bquinn@aarp.org  or at 207 -272 -8563.  
 
Thank you,  
 Bridget Quinn  
Associate State Director of Advocacy and Outreach  
