February 6, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 34: “An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic 
Identification for the Purpose of Voting.” 
Presented to Joint Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
David Andrews 
Faimouth, Maine 
dandrew1@me.com 
Good morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and honored members of the 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. Thank you for this opportunity to speak in favor of 
LD 34. My name is David Andrews. I am a private citizen, a retired physician, a 31 year military 
resen/e veteran, and, most recently, a poll worker for my home town of Falmouth. 
Nothing is more critical to our constitutional process than readily accessible voting for all 
citizens. However, the electoral process must also instill a full measure of voter conﬁdence. 
These two essential goals are not mutually exclusive, and to claim othen/vise is fallacious. 
As a poll worker for my community, I have witnessed elements of the election security process 
that our outstanding town clerk staff take so seriously. They include ballot access security, 
chains of custody, tabulation security, bipartisan citizen participation, and the use of voter rolls 
that are securely generated. However, any chain of security is no stronger than its weakest 
link. I argue strongly that Maine’s weak link is the lack of a valid photo ID, presented by every 
person to whom a ballot is issued. 
Maine is in the distinct minority of states. Thirty-six states now have voter ID requirements, 23 
of which mandate photo lD’s. In the past 3 years, 7 states have enacted laws to create or 
strengthen voter ID processesl . Many other democratic countries have voter ID laws. These 
include the United Kingdom, Canada, Mexico, Germany, Switzerland, Norway, and others. 
Maine is an outlier in this regard. 
As an oft~cited Monmouth University poll revealed in 2021, 80% of the 810 adults supported 
photo ID when casting ballots, while 71% supported easier in person early votingz , as we do 
here in Maine. 
A voter photo ID requirement is common sense. Such mandates are indeed part of our daily 
lives: airline travel, public interstate buses, financial transactions, hotel check-ins, access to 
government benefits, health care, car rental, and more. These are common sense security 
measures made necessary by the frailty of human nature. 
My most recent experience as a poll worker, has moved me to speak out. My task was issuing 
ballots after my colleague ’s check of the voter list. Multiple voters presented ID cards, either 
assuming it was expected, or to make a statement. I rebuffed them all, as required. During 
that morning, I became aware of two individuals voting who had not resided in Faimouth, for 
well over two years. Both issues were resolved for the future, and with no public challenge. In 
spite of this experience, I do not believe that voter malfeasance in Maine has altered any 
election results. However, as just one person at one table in one town, I witnessed fraud two 
similar incidents. Though somewhat minor, it has undermined my confidence in one element of 
our Maine electoral process. 
I sincerely hope that the Maine legislature will take action to discourage such activity. 
Thank-you all for your time and effort in leading our state, and for this opportunity to speak. 
1 https://www.ncsI.org/elections-and-campaigns/voter-id 
2 https://www.monmouth.edu/polling~institute/reports/monmouthpoll us 062121/)
