February 6, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and other members of the Joint Standing Committee
on Veterans and Legal Affairs: my name is Gia Drew , and I am providing this testimony as
Executive Director of EqualityMaine on behalf of ourselves and of GLBTQ Legal Advocates &
Defenders (GLAD).
EqualityMaine was founded in 1984 following the tragic murder of Charlie Howard, a young
man who was thrown of f a bridge in Bangor just because he was gay . We have been advocating
on behalf of Maine’ s LGBTQ+ community for 39 years, and we have more than 70,000 members
across the state of Maine. GLAD was founded in 1978 to promote equal justice under law
through litigation, policy and public education in New England and nationally and operates an
office in Portland.
EqualityMaine and GLAD oppose LD 34,
An Act to Require
a Person to Show Photographic
Identification for the Purpose of Voting
. This bill
is unnecessary for numerous reasons, including
that our State already uses other means to verify identity and address to great ef fect, but most
specifically because voter ID laws are a form of voter suppression. While voter ID laws
disproportionately impact many communities, we’d like to highlight two: transgender individuals
and older adults.
A transgender person is someone whose gender identity is dif ferent from the sex they were
assigned at birth.
Every day , transgender Mainers
face discrimination, harassment, and bias.
Transgender people are often seen with suspicion, questioned about their identity , and
misgendered too frequently . They’re ridiculed and made the subject of jokes, sometimes behind
their backs, but often to their faces.
Those who have
the means to transition and live as the
gender they’ve always known themselves to be do so, and all transgender people just want to
have healthy and happy lives and families and contribute to society like other Mainers do.
For transgender people, identity documents are often a source of dif ficulty . Presenting
identification that does not reflect one’ s gender identity is a common trigger of harassment of
transgender individuals.
1
In fact, LD 34 would require
the election clerk to announce a voter's
1
https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/lgbtq-rights/reports/2012/12/18/48367/id-accurately-reflecting-ones-gender-ident 
ity-is-a-human-right/
1

“name in a loud, clear voice,” but the name on their identification may not match with how
others know them, thereby potentially embarrassing and/or outing that person to their local
community . Members of the trans community experience this type of mismatch and
accompanying harassment all too regularly , as they are asked to present identification at
government of fices, to banks, bars and restaurants. Although EqualityMaine and others have
worked with the Legislature in recent years to simplify the process by which an individual may
change their name and gender marker in accordance with their gender identity , many in our
community still do not have documentation that reflects who they know themselves to be. About
one quarter of transgender Americans who have transitioned (i.e. they have taken steps such as
changing their appearance and name to better match their gender identity) lack any identification
that accurately reflects their gender .
2
Given the
negative experiences transgender people
experience while presenting an ID that does not reflect who they are, bills like LD 34, would
likely discourage them from voting even though they would have identification verifying that
they are who they say they are and that the live where they say they live.
Further , the process of changing one’ s documentation can be quite burdensome and costly .
Transgender individuals must navigate several state and federal agencies to update dif ferent
documents and they incur a cost at each step - $35.00 for a Maine driver ’s license, $1 10.00 for a
new passport, and so on. Given that transgender individuals are more likely to live in poverty
than the general population
3
, the costs associated
with obtaining new photo identification will
disproportionately burden their ability to exercise their right to vote. While LD 34 mentions that
the Secretary of State’ s office will be compelled to issue “free” voter ID cards, those procedures
and their financial impact has not been approved by that of fice, and again creates another
needless hurdle a person has to overcome to vote.
Indeed, scholars at the UCLA  Williams Institute have assessed the extent to which strict voter
identification laws harm transgender Americans, and noted that 878,00 transgender voters faced
barriers or even disenfranchisement in the 35 states with restrictive voter identification laws in
the November 2022 elections. In the eight states with “strict” photo identification laws, 59% of
the transgender voters in those states lacked
any
documentation that accurately reflected their
gender
4
, while 57% of the 173,400 voters in non-strict
photo identification states were also
without documentation accurately reflecting their name and gender .  The result in these cases is
disenfranchisement.
In addition to transgender adults generally , EqualityMaine also advocates on behalf of older
LGBTQ Mainers. Our “Network for Older Adults,” formerly SAGE Maine, became a program
4
K’O’Neill et al, The Potential Impact of Voter Identification Laws on Transgender Voters in the 2022 General Election, 
at:
https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Trans-Voter-ID-Sep-2022.pdf
(Sept. 2022) at pp. 5, 16 ;
s e e 
a l s o
https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Trans-Voter-ID-Feb-2020.pdf
(similar analysis for the 2020 
general election).
3
https://www.transequality.org/sites/default/files/docs/USTS-Full-Report-FINAL.PDF
2
https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/publications/voter-id-laws-costs-trans-voters/
2
of EqualityMaine at the end of 2019. This bill also has significant implications for the older
adults in our community .
While about one in ten Americans lack a valid, government-issued ID, this figure rises to one in
five adults over 65.
5
Voters born before recording births became common practice may lack a
birth certificate, the document commonly used to obtain a driver ’s license. And as some older
adults for go driving as they age, they may choose not to obtain a new ID. The cost of obtaining
new ID also presents a challenge for older adults; some have reported that when they’re on a
fixed income like Social Security , obtaining a new ID is secondary to more ur gent expenses like
rent, food and medication.
6
Older adults are more likely to face transportation barriers in voting because they are less likely
to drive, and those challenges multiply when polling places are consolidated, which can also
increase wait times.   Some older adults and others face challenges from a lack of accessible
polling locations or ballots
7
. We anticipate that
LD 34 would compound these factors and would
depress the voter turnout of the older LGBTQ adults on whose behalf EqualityMaine advocates.
LGBTQ people call Maine home for many reasons: some are born here, others are here because
of work or family ties, and with greater frequency , people move here for personal safety reasons.
Regardless, most look forward to being able to actively participate in our political process with
pride. On behalf of EqualityMaine and GLAD, and an aging LGBTQ Mainer myself, I ask this
committee to reject LD 34.
Thank you.
EqualityMaine
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders
By Gia Drew (she/her)
Executive Director
EqualityMaine
7
https://www.aging.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Executive%20Summary1.pdf
6
https://www.npr.org/2018/09/07/644648955/for-older-voters-getting-the-right-id-can-be-especially-tough
5
https://www.aarp.org/politics-society/government-elections/info-01-2012/voter-id-laws-impact-older-americans.html
3
