Veterans & Legal Affairs Committee 
February 6, 2023 
LD84: An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose 
of Voting 
Goodrnorning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and honorable members of 
this committee. l\/ly name is Holly Swartz, l am a resident of Union and here today to 
testify in favor of LD34. 
The foundation of our Democratic Republic rests upon the citizens of this country 
having a confidence in our election system. Since our inception, citizens have had 
complaints regarding voting rights, many many justifiable. Our system was improved 
over time and we are needing another adjustment. As life has become more 
complicated, including the use of Absentee Ballots, the extension of voting days, 
considerations of pandemic voting and the increase of a non~citizen population, we 
mustensure that each vote is legitimate. The confidence of our Democratic Republic, 
my confidence in voting, requires it. l\/lost of the people in my circle do not have any 
confidence in our election system. l majored in Political Science in college; l worked 
for USDA in college; I have been to many pro—choice protests in my day. l am very 
active and strongly believe in voting - and l have lost confidence in our system. 
Participation in our Republic is tantamount. l believe that voter fraud occurs ona 
regular basis from both sides of the isle. l do not care what party politic anyone is from 
in this matter. We require a photo id for much less important situations, like adopting a 
pet. We need a photo id in this country to do the following: buy alcohol, open a bank 
account, apply for Food Stamps and Welfare, apply for Medicaid and Social Security, 
rent or buy a house, flying on a plane, getting married, purchasing a gun, adopting a 
pet, renting a hotel room, buying a cell phone, picking up prescription medication, 
visiting a casino, holding a protest, donating blood, purchasing tobacco, applying for 
unemployment benefits. Most people find a way to get what they need in order to do 
what they want. 
Thirty-five states require or request some form of lD. l believe 11 states have what 
would be considered “strict” voter id laws. Maine is a leader in the country. Please 
allow us to lead by firming up our election system confidence and showing the rest of 
the nation that this is a logical, non-partisan component to voting.
