Written Testimony of Jess Maurer on Behalf of  
the Maine Council on Aging  
to the Joint Standing Committee on  
                         Veterans and Legal Affairs   
In Opposition to  LD 34 – An Act to An Act to Require a 
Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose 
of Voting   
Submitted via Testimony Portal on February 6 , 202 3 
 
 
Greetings Senator  Hickman & Representative Supica and members of the Joint 
Standing  Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs.  
My name is Jess Maurer and I’m the Executive Director of the Maine Council on Aging 
(MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged, and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testifying in opposition to LD 34, An Ac t to Re quire a Person to 
Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of Voting because we are concerned that 
this legislation will have the unintended consequence of disenfranchising tens of thousands 
of older Maine citizens who are already experienci ng challenges in exercising their 
constitutional right to vote.  
 
Consider these facts:  
 
 More than 193,000 people in Maine are age 70 or older; more than 66,000 of these people  
are over 80;  
 Although 93% of people in Maine age 65 and older have a driver’s license, that number 
drops t o only 72% for people over 80;  
 Nearly half of the older women over 80 live alone;  
 More than a quarter of people over 80 are entirely reliant on someone else for all  of their 
transportation needs; and  
 Women over 80 in particular will be challenged to secure transpo rtation for non -essential 
purposes.  
 
There can be no question that older people value their independence above all else. In most of  
Maine, the ability to drive is inexorably linked to one’s independence, so most people hold onto  
their driver’s licenses as long as possible. Still, thousands of older Mainers stop driving each  year 
due to age or illness, either voluntarily or otherwise. In 2019, the Insurance Institute for  Highway 
Safety estimated that about 17% of people 70 and older did not have a driver’s license.  
In Maine, this translates t o about 33,000 people age 70 and older who do not hold a current  
driver’s license. And this estimate was made before COVID!  
 
Even still, 33,000 is a big number -- those people who no longer hold a current driver’s license in  
Maine. How many of them have tak en the next step to have some other type of photographic  

identification once their license lapsed? Our Equity Manager has a mother who is 92 – she 
stopped driving since the pandemic but has not even considered getting a photo ID. Again, in  
ordinary times, some might still have a valid passport, but with travel still a high risk activity,  
some passports will expire and not be renewed.  
 
Older people who don’t drive or have access to public transportation have to rely on others to get  
to medica l appointments, church, the grocery store, the bank, and to the hairdresser. They also  
have to arrange a ride to the polls to vote. If they don’t live with a spouse or adult relative, they  
have to rely on family, friends, and neighbors to meet their basic transportation needs.  
 
Here’s the rub – none of us like to ask for help. We ask when we have to, but we only ask when 
we have no other options and we try hard not to burden others. Many of us independent Mainers  
would rather go without before putting someo ne else out. So, while many of us will be  
compelled to ask for rides to medical appointments and to get groceries when we can no longer  
drive, most of us won’t likely ask for rides that aren’t completely necessary.  
 
If a person no longer drives, securing a  new government -issued ID would be a significant  
hardship. This is normally an interaction that must be done in person, where the person seeking  
the ID must get a ride to a motor vehicle office, present various documents that prove residency  
and have a photo taken. For some, health issues prevent this kind of travel; others may still be  
reluctant to be in busy public places, others simply will not find someone willing to drive them  
for that purpose; and still others may not be able to reimburs e a driver for gas. Most simply  
won’t want to put someone else out the several hours this trip might take, just to gain access to  
an ID they otherwise do not need.  
 
If this law takes effect, we’re concerned that thousands of older adults will simply not go to the  
polls if they don’t have an ID or they won’t take the steps necessary to obtain a non -driver ID  
before voting. Many may not realize there is this new require ment until they try to cast their  
ballot and discover the need for documentation that they don’t have and have never needed  
before. If they go to the polls without an ID, it is unlikely they will be able to get an ID within 3  
days of casting a provisional ballot.  
 
There is no reason for an older Mainer to go through this process. If these bills are enacted, they  
will require thousands of older Mainers who do not currently hold valid government issued IDs  
to secure them if they want to exercise their constit utional right to vote. This creates an inequity  
for some portion of older Mainers who will simply be unable to clear these hurdles.  
 
Maine has one of the highest percentages of older voters in the country. We should be proud  
about this level of voter engag ement and should be doing everything possible to ensure that older  
Mainers continue to have access to this precious right even as their ability to get around declines.  
It makes no sense to enact a law that would significantly interfere with the ability of thousands of  
older voters to exercise this constitutional right. We urge you to vote in opposition to this bill.  
If these bills are intended to avoid voter fraud, we urge the Committee to find a more surgical  
way to address specific incidents of voter frau d than to impose a requirement that will impact a  
significant number of older people who have every right to cast their ballot.  
Thank you.  
Jessica Maurer    207 -592-9972  
