LD 34
Good Afternoon Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the
Veteran and Legal Affairs Committee,
My name is Jesse Hargrove. I live in Thorndike and teach Social Studies at
Hermon High School. I also serve on the RSU 3 School Board, and the
Thorndike Budget Committee. I submit testimony against
LD 34, An Act to
Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of
Voting
.
This bill is a solution in search of a problem, and frankly, I’m growing
increasingly impatient with efforts that lack evidentiary merit, thus contradicting
an educator’s pedagogical mission to foster critical thinking, analytical reasoning,
and civic mindedness. This bill is another example of efforts to sew unwarranted
distrust in our election systems, to minimize the voice of citizen voters, and
restrict access. In a land that preaches freedom and democracy, we ought to be
spending our time debating ways  to expand citizen engagement, increase voter
turnout, and encourage the next generation to be informed and involved. Instead,
this bill would place unneeded roadblocks in the pathway of democratic
participation.
Maine elections are fair, and free of fraud. The Heritage Foundation lists
Election Integrity as a top issue, and ranks Maine tied for 32nd in the nation.
However, a deeper dive into the organization’s Election Fraud Database, reveals
only two substantiated cases of Voter Fraud, both occurring in 2010…over 12
years ago.  According to the
Lincoln County News
the
situations were discovered
during a state-wide voting-fraud sweep. Then Assistant Attorney General Leanne
Robbin said about the two cases, “These aren’t people with an agenda…They’re
good-old-boys.” The two cases of duplicate voting occurred on accident and
misunderstanding of law when owned property crosses municipalities. In either
situation, a photo identification would have been unhelpful.
On the other hand Mississippi (ranked 22nd on the Heritage scorecard),
contains just over twice Maine’s population, has a strict photo identification
requirement. Heritage Foundation shows 21 confirmed situations of voter fraud in
the same time period dating back to 2010…over 10 times the number as Maine.
The types of fraud in these cases include buying votes, illegal assistance, and
voting out of district…cases that photo identification would not have prevented,
and infinitesimally small in comparison to the actual number of ballots cast over
the decade. New Hampshire, our New England neighbor with a similar
population, is ranked 20th on the scorecard, and imposes an “acceptable” ID
requirement. According to Heritage Foundation data, New Hampshire has
charged 19 individuals with election fraud, the majority of which were duplicate
voting charges, unimpeded by an identification requirement. Again, a miniscule
number of cases over several election cycles, with hundreds of thousands of
ballots. The data comes short of demonstrating the need, nor effectiveness of
such measures.
As a twenty year educator, I have worked with students to instill a sense of
civic mindedness, and to recognize the variety of ways, including voting, that
Americans can actively participate in our democracy. In addition, we develop
analytical skills and evidence based reasonings.
Findlaw
cites a 2012
American
National Elections Study
which demonstrates the most
impacted by photo
identification laws are young Americans (between 17 and 24 years), Black
Americans, Hispanic Americans, and low income Americans. My students don’t
need extra hurdles as they transition to adulthood. The data from the Heritage
Foundation demonstrates the integrity of Maine elections, as is, and the diligence
of measures already in place.
Respectfully Submitted,
Jesse Hargrove
Thorndike, ME
