Joseph Grant
Wiscasset
LD 34
I am writing in support of LD-34, An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic 
Identification for the Purpose of Voting.
Recent Rasmussen polls have shown that 83% of likely voters consider election integrity an 
important issue. Polling also indicates that 74% of likely voters support mandatory voter ID, 
and also showed 56% of respondents are convinced "it's likely that cheating affected the 
outcome of the 2020 presidential election," 
The 2005 Bipartisan Commission on Federal Election Reform, known informally as the 
Carter-Baker Commission made 87 recommendations. One recommendation was to call for 
voter ID standards nationwide and the use of the REAL ID card. Former President Carter, 
when speaking months after the release of the report, said other countries not known for 
being examples of democracy had fairer elections than the United States, and stressed the 
need for photo IDs.  Regarding U.S. election requirements Carter said, “It’s disgraceful and 
embarrassing.”. 
When considering rules for voting it is useful to see how we compare to the rest of the world. 
In the case of voter ID, 46 of the 47 European countries require a government issued photo 
ID to vote. The UK is implementing voter ID requirements in October of this year to make the 
count 47 of 47. To introduce the policy, they issued the following statements. In our current 
electoral system, there is inexcusable potential for someone to cast another’s vote at the 
polling station. All you need to do is say a name and address when you go to vote. Stealing 
someone’s vote is stealing their voice. Voter fraud is a crime that we cannot allow room for, 
so the government is stamping out any potential for it to take place in elections. Showing 
identification to prove who they are is something people of all walks of life already do every 
day. It is a reasonable and proportionate approach to extend this practice to voting and give 
the public confidence that their vote is theirs, and theirs alone. They also noted. It will bring 
the rest of the UK in line with Northern Ireland, where a form of voter identification has been 
in use since 1985, requiring photo identification since 2003, with no adverse effect on voter 
participation.
In conclusion, U.S. voters are concerned about voter fraud, want voter ID, the 2005 Bipartisan
Commission on Federal Election Reform recommended its use almost 20 years ago, and it is 
a requirement in almost every developed country in the world. The requirement of voter ID 
has not been shown to reduce voter participation. Not requiring the use of voter ID is to invite 
voter fraud. We need to strengthen election integrity.  
Joe Grant, Wiscasset

