HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
, 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
"=="' ~" 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
Joshua Morris l\/lAlNE RELAY 711 
P_O. Box I-16 
North Turner. ME ll-1166 
.|oshuz1.I\'lorri;\r[: leuislzitu| ‘e.m:1ine.go\ 
Residence: (Z07) 754-782*) 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, distinguished members of the committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am Representative Joshua Morris and I proudly represent the 
people of Leeds, Wayne, and my hometown of Turner. I am here today as a co-sponsor of LD 34, 
An Act to Require a'Pers0n T 0 Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of Voting. 
Showing photographic identiﬁcation is something that we as citizens do daily. One 
cannot open a bank account, buy a car, purchase, or rent a home without showing a driver’s 
license or some form of photo ID. When we travel, to board an airplane, rent a car, or stay ina 
hotel, you must show an ID to do all of these things. Furthermore, if you are going to a theme 
park like Disney World, in order to pick up park tickets, you must show a photo ID. 
Requiring a photo identiﬁcation in those cases does not present a burden on anyone. We 
understand that showing an ID adds a layer of security for us as individuals; it says that onlyI 
can get the service that I paid for. It also ensures for the company that only the individual they 
are contracted with will be the one that gets the house, car, airplane seat, or hotel room. 
What this bill proposes to do is common sense. It ensures that the person who is voting is 
who they say they are. By requiring an individual to show proof of photo ID before voting, we 
are ensuring that only that person can cast their vote. I am very conﬁdent that no one will walk 
into Turner on Election Day and claim to be Joshua Morris or Jeff Timberlake, the clerks know 
who we are. However, in a town of 6000 people, it would be impossible to know the name and 
face of every person who walks through the door wishing to vote. All we are asking is that when 
someone announces their name, they also show a photo ID that the election worker can verify 
before handing them a ballot. 
If someone does not have a driver’s license, this bill allows for them to get a photo ID 
free of charge from the Secretary of State for the purposes of voting. You may hear that this 
District 91 Leeds, Turner and Wayne 
Printed on iec\ cled papei
, HOUSE OE REPRESENTATIVES 
ifs" 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
<6’-s AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
~ E” (207) 287-1440 
Joshua Morris MAINE RELAY 711 
P.O. Box Z46 
North Turner. ME (H166 
.los11ua.!\'lo1 ‘z"isik:z legislature.maine.go\ 
Residence: (207) 75-l-7829 
creates a hardship for elderly people that no longer drive. Most people still have a bank account 
and as I have said, a photo ID is required when you go to the bank. Just last year, I helped my 
grandmother renew her photo ID; it was a very easy and straightforward process. 
When I am at the polls on Election Day, I have had many voters come up to me to ask 
Why we do not already require this as 35 other states already do. Some people approach the table 
to get their ballot with their ID already out ﬁguring it is already required.' 
It is time for Maine to enact a photo ID law. We are already used to showing photo ID on 
a daily basis. Requiring a photo ID at the polls is common sense, it does not create an undue 
burden on the citizens of this state. Thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have. 
District 91 Leeds, Turner and Wayne 
Primed on recycled papei
