Hon. MaryAnne Kinney 
40 Maple Ln 
Knox, l\/lE 04986 
Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 34 An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic 
Identification for the Purpose of Voting 
February 6, 2023 _ 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, I am l\/laryAnne Kinney of Knox, where cows still outnumber people-had to 
get that in there, old habits die hard- and l am here to testify in support of LD 34 An Act 
to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of Voting. 
According to NCSL (National Conference of State Legislatures) 37 states have voter ID 
laws, with the most recent changes being a November 2022 citizen referendum in 
Nebraska and Ohio passing HB 458 in January 2023. This leaves l\/laine in the minority of 
states requiring Voter ID at the polls. This is not a partisan issue as some may try to 
convince you to believe. The opposition will tell you this will disenfranchise the elderly, 
minorities, and the poor. There will be arguments that voter fraud is why we need this 
law. Both arguments are false in my opinion and l will explain my positions. For the first 
concern this bill allocates language for the issuance of a special voter photographic 
identification card at no charge to the voter. The number of people affected by this is 
extremely small. Most of the people who will be said to be “disenfranchised ” must have 
photo ID to receive the benefits of healthcare, EBT, and other federal and state welfare 
benefits. Some proponents will argue that voter fraud exists, l personally do not agree 
with this statement. Rather it is the perception that fraud exists and therefore many no 
longer vote as they are under the impression that fraud exists and their vote ”cloesn’t 
count" . l\/laine still has a decent voter turnout for elections but my experience asa 
candidate and representative who interacts with voters regularly is seeing a significant 
number of people who no longer vote due to concerns around this perception. The 
piece l try to relay about our secure elections is the fact that we still have paper ballots 
in l\/laine. Recent recounts prove that even the counting machines are properly counting 
our ballots. So I am confident for now that our elections are very secure. That has not 
allayed the concern to those who are convinced of fraud. Voter ID would be a simple 
step to show this state cares about every voter concern and wants full transparency in 
our elections.
According to a Gallup poll conducted in October 2022, 79% of those polled favor voter 
ID in order to vote at the polls. There is a partisan gap but the majority of those polled 
were in support of photo ID with 97% of republicans, 53% of democrats, and 84% of 
independents in favor of this type of legislation. ln 2016 the numbers were similar with 
80% in favor and the breakdown being closer among the two major parties (95% of 
republicans, 63% of democrats, and 83% of independents in favor). 
During testimony of voter ID and other election law bills in the 130"‘ legislature we 
heard repeatedly from municipal and town clerks who were overwhelmingly in favor of 
voter lD. As someone who has worked at the polls on election day in the past (when my 
name was not on the ballot) it was difficult to get friends and neighbors to follow the 
simple procedure of stating their name and address to pick up a ballot under Title 21-A 
IVIRSA §671 sub §1. Showing a photo ID with this information would reduce the failure 
to comply with this section and assist election clerks in making sure they are checking 
off the correct voter on the list. 
In the 130th legislature, LD 1126 regarding online voter registration was enacted with 
the argument of Maine being in the minority of states offering online registration similar 
to our minority status on this issue. The representative from Camden, Rep. Doudera 
stated that in 2010 only 6 states offered online registration but by 2021 (she thought 
38) states including Washington DC offered this service. I verified that currently 42 
states (now including l\/laine, although the rules have yet to be fully established) offer 
online voter registration. The kicker is that in order to register to vote there still needs 
to be a form of ID (most commonly a photo lD) to prove valid registration. 
l urge this committee to unanimously support an ought to pass motion for this bill. 
Thank you, 
Hon. i\/laryAnne Kinney
