LY 6/2416 ¢ Senator Matthew Pouliot 
' 3 State House Station 
,%;/gg Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
_ _ (207)287-1505 
Xe/zale Zmhwt /5 
TESTIMONY OF SENATOR MATTHEW POULIOT 
Sponsor of LD 34 
“An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of 
Voting” 
Public Hearing: February 6"‘ 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs. I am Senator Matt Pouliot and I represent Senate District 15, which 
includes the towns of Augusta, Belgrade, China, Mount Vernon, Sidney and Vassalboro. I am 
here to present my bill LD 34 “An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identiﬁcation 
for the Purpose of Voting.” 
I thought it would be poignant to open with a statement from Freedom House: 
“In a healthy democracy, all parties should compete to garner the broadest possible support from 
voters, and adhere to electoral rules that maximize both voter participation and administrative 
impartiality. We urge lawmakers across the country to reject any legislation that contradicts these 
principles. Civic activists and democracy movements around the world continue to look to the 
United States for inspiration and support, and it is essential that we set a positive example for 
those seeking to establish free and fair elections in their own countries. ” 
For those of you not familiar with Freedom House, they are a 501(c)3 organization focused on 
strengthening democracy around the world and I completely agree with their statement. 
Some will say that this bill is an attempt to cause voter suppression. I can understand that point 
of view. The question, though, is who is being suppressed? 
Many people when asked if there is fraud in Maine elections will say, “No”. 
To be honest, I believe we are doing all we can to ensure a free and fair election and I suppose I 
would like very much to count myself in the “No” crowd. However, there are also many among 
Fax: (207)287-1527 * TTY (207) 287-1583 * Message Service 1-800-423-6900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
us who do not believe that there isn’t any fraud. And whether we like it or not, perception is 
reality. 
For those who believe there is no problem with election integrity, I would argue there is not fully 
a Way for us to say all is being done to ensure there truly isn’t. 
Why you might ask? Well, in part, because we do not have a requirement for voter identiﬁcation 
to vote in Maine after initial registration. 
Public support for requiring identiﬁcation to vote is consistently over 70%, yet We don’t havea 
universal requirement on this mandate of a margin. 
Why is that? 
Well, frankly I think it has a lot to do with why we, collectively, think that voters are being 
suppressed. 
In November 1980, pollingl showed that the number of Americans who felt that the American 
system of voting is sound stood at a stellar 62%, with 6% of respondents saying it was sound 
with no changes and 56% saying sound with some improvements needed. Fast forward to 2022, 
and when asked, the responses showed an abysmal 36% overall conﬁdence in the system of 
voting, with the same 6% saying it is essentially perfect and the other 30% saying - “yeah it’s 
basically sound, but it could use some work” 
So if only 6% of people think there is nothing to see here when it comes to our system of voting, 
why are we not agreeing to a change? 
I think the answers vary - but largely have to do with who it is perceived would be losing the 
opportunity to vote. But when looking through that lens, We must also see those people who do 
not participate because they believe they have no agency, that their vote doesn't matter because 
they feel the system is rigged or stacked against their views. 
If only 36% of the electorate believes that the system is basically sound, and further only 6% 
who needn’t not be any changes, why Wouldn’t we take all measures to ensure integrity and 
restore faith in our system? Doing so would help increase the strength of democracy through 
more robust participation. 
But maybe some want those who do not believe in the system as it works now to not to vote after 
all. That’s a grimacing thought, but perhaps it should be considered that many voters do not feel 
their matters or that it will be lost and as such, they do not participate in the electoral process. 
I’d like to think that is not truly the case, yet in the face of such staggering drops in public 
conﬁdence, Why would we not take it upon ourselves to provide conﬁdence in the system? 
Whether some think that voter ID will move the needle or not, we also can not show that it will 
1 
https://WwW.monmouth.edu/polling-institute/reports/monmouthpoll_us_070'722/
not help. If we do not have data that shows requiring an ID to vote would actually disenfranchise 
voters, why then would we not use it to help restore conﬁdence in our system of democracy with 
more voters again? 
Perhaps we can glean information on why this is so vehemently opposed from the ACLU, as 
published in the “Oppose Voter ID Legislation ” section of their websitezz 
“Voter ID laws deprive many voters of their right to vote, reduce participation, and stand in 
direct opposition to our country’s trend of including more Americans in the democratic process. 
Many Americans do not have one of the forms of identiﬁcation states acceptable for voting. 
These voters are disproportionately low-income, racial and ethnic minorities, the elderly, and 
people with disabilities. Such voters more frequently have difficulty obtaining ID, because they 
cannot afford or cannot obtain the underlying documents that are a prerequisite to obtaining 
government-issued photo ID cards.” 
The absolute last thing I would want to do is deprive any legal voter from their right to vote. That 
is why I am proposing that Maine lead the way with issuing free ID cards to all Maine residents 
who need one. That would take away concerns that anyone who can not afford an ID or arrange 
for transportation or access to documents to would get one to make sure that the concern noted 
becomes a non—issue. 
I should note that as drafted, state university or community college identiﬁcation would not be 
accepted, however, I propose we amend the legislation to allow for those issued by the state of 
Maine university or community college system to be allowed, as long as the student is a Maine 
resident. 
I hope that this committee will see this bill for what it is, which is an effort to restore faith and 
conﬁdence in the system. Not all of you can be a part of the 6% who think the system is perfect 
the way it is, so if we can all agree improvements should be made, why not look at this asa 
sensible approach, supported by a broad array of the public, to improve the issue. 
We should take all measures to restore trust, which hopefully, will increase participation and 
enthusiasm among the electorate. Wliile we currently see high levels of voter participation in 
Maine, my concern is we will see a persistent erosion of this, following the trend of the lack of 
conﬁdence in the system of voting from the early ‘ 80’s to now. 
I will Wrap up with another great article3 shared from Freedom House in which the author Nicole 
Bibbins Sedaca calls out the new “them” in a World that is increasingly becoming “us vs. them”, 
“The new “them” must be those who seek to weaken democratic institutions, sow distrust in our 
society, and question democratic values. They include hate-mongers, purveyors of violence and 
intimidation, and self-serving fabulists who attack the legitimacy of free and fair elections. Some 
of them may claim to share our policy views or deepest beliefs, but they clearly do not share our 
dedication to upholding democracy. We must recognize that their destructive behavior will 
Zhttps://www.aclu.org/fact-sheet/opp0se-voter-id-legislation-fact-sheet 
3 https://freedomhouse.org/article/americans-must-unite-defend-our-democracy
eventually undermine the freedom of all Americans. They are the real threat to our nation and 
our future. 
So let us unite in vigorously opposing those who are willing to undermine our system for 
personal or partisan gain, and in Working to reverse the decline in our democracy. We must call 
on our newly elected leaders to govern in this spirit, and We must conduct ourselves accordingly 
as well.” 
Please join me in supporting this common sense measure to help restore trust in our democratic 
process. 
Thank you.
