 
 
 
 
1 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
Ought  Not To Pass  – LD 34 
 
An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic  
Identification for the Purpose of Voting  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
 
February 6 , 2023 
 
Senator Hickman , Representative Supica , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs , good morning . My name is Michael Kebede , and I am Policy 
Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions . On 
behalf of our members , I urge you to reject LD 34. 
 
If enacted, LD 34 would ban voting by registered voters who do not present photographic 
identification. This bill is not only a solution in search of a problem, but a problem in -and-of-
itself: it would  put serious obstacles in the way of people seeking to exercise a fundamental right.  
 
The right to vote is fundamental because it is protective of all other rights. The right to vote is 
protected by more constitutional amendments – the First, Fourteenth, Fifteenth, Nineteenth, 
Twenty -Fourth and Twenty -Sixth – than any other right we enjoy as Americans. That is because 
voting is the cornerstone of our democracy. The power of the vote by the people is our ultimate 
safeguard against corruption and abuse of power by the government.  We urge you in all of your 
deliberations to seek ways in which the right to vote can be expanded, to promote rather than 
restrict participation, and to ensure that the integrity of our elections is protected, so that the 
elections reflect the will of  the citizenry, rather than the power of a few.  
 
Despite  decades of success across the country expanding voting access and widening the 
democratic process to historically disenfranchised populations, attempts to roll  back that progress 
through voter ID and oth er laws have ramped up in recent years . Voter ID laws lea d to 
significant burdens for eligible voters trying to exercise their mo st fundamental constitutional 
right. States across the country have passed measures to make it harder for Americans – 
particularly Black people, the elderly, students, and people with disabilities – to exercise their 
fundamental right to cast a ballot.  
 
Take Wisconsin  as an example.  Multiple federal courts have ruled that parts of its strict photo 
voter ID law , among the most draconian in the country ,1 is either unconstitutional or requires 
 
1 Arkansas, Georgia, Indiana, Kansas, Mis sissippi, Misso uri, and Tennessee  also have strict photo voter 
ID laws .  
  
 
2 
 substantial modification s. In his  2016  ruling, US District C ourt Judge James Peterson wrote that 
Wisconsin ’s voter ID law is “a cure worse than the disease. ”2 He continued that “[t]he Wisconsin 
experience demonstrates that a preoccupation with mostly phantom election fraud leads to real 
incidents of disenfranchisement, which undermine rather than enhance confidence in elections, 
particularly in minority communities .”3 He added that “[t]he Legislature’s immediate goal was to 
achieve a partisan objective, but the means of achieving that objective was to suppress the 
reliably Democratic vote of Milwaukee’s African Americans. ”4  
The Maine legislature has repeatedly rejected efforts to restrict access to the ballot. Indeed, in  
2013, our state’s Elections C ommission  comprehe nsively investigated and rejected the concept 
of voter ID s. The then-Secretary of State Charles Summers formed the  taskforce pursuant to a 
2011 voter ID bill that was amended into a study. The Commission researched legal cases, 
considere d policy research, and held hearings across the state of Maine. Hundreds of Mainers 
offered testimony, both in person and in writing. In their final report, members of the 
Commission weighed the pros and cons of a voter ID law in Maine and recommended against 
establishing a voter ID  system , finding that “the negative aspects of a Voter ID law outweigh its 
potential benefits.”5 
 
We agree . Voter ID in Maine w ould create many problems – here are two: 
 
First , this bill would  prevent legal, registered voters from casting their votes.  In particular, 
elderly Mainers, who may have given up driving, and people living in poverty, who may not be 
able to afford a car, are less likely to have a driver’s license.   Mainers liv ing in rural areas will 
face challenges getting to a state office to obtain a photo ID , even if the ID  is given free of 
charge . Birth certificates, passports and other documents required to get a government -issued ID 
cost money and require resources that m any Mainers simply do not have.   
 
Second , this bill would  place a needless  burden on election workers  and the public purse . Clerks 
and wardens w ould have to be retrained on which photo IDs are acceptable , and enacting voter 
ID laws would  cost money that would be better spent elsewhere. R esources w ould be needed to 
train election workers. If the legislature fail ed to provide funding for such training, the bill would  
be an unfunded mandate. With the opioid  overdose  crisis  and economic chall enges  of climate 
change , among other pressing expenses , surely this money could be spent elsewhere in a way 
that would benefit Mainers.  
 
Maine has long been a national leader  in voting rights . We are only one of two states that allow 
incarcerated people to vote. We are among a minority of states with same -day voter -registration.  
This bill would take us backwards,  suppressing votes and diluting a fundamental right . We urge 
this committee to vote ought not to pass .  
 
2 One Wisconsin Inst., Inc. v. Thomsen , 198 F. Supp. 3d 896, 903 (W.D. Wis. 2016), order enforced, 351 
F. Supp. 3d 1160 (W.D. Wis. 2019), and aff'd in part, vacated in part, rev'd in part sub nom. Luft v. Evers, 
963 F.3d 665 (7th Cir. 2020), and aff'd in part,  vacated in part, rev'd in part sub nom. Luft v. Evers, 963 
F.3d 665 (7th Cir. 2020)  
3 Id. 
4 Id. at 904.  
5 Report of the 2012 Elections Commission  at 11,  January 28, 2013 , availa ble at  
https://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/elec/ElectionsCommissionReport.pdf .  
