PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.aclumaine.org 
AMERICAN GIVII. LIBERTIES lINl0N 
Maine 
TESTIMONY or MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought Not To' Pass - LD 34 C 
An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic 
Identiﬁcation for the Purpose of Voting 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
February 6, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning. My name is Michael Kebede, and I am Policy 
Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On 
behalf of our members, I urge you to reject LD 34. 
If enacted, —L—B—34 would ban voting byeregistered voters who do not present-photographic 
identiﬁcation. This bill is not only a solution in search of a problem, but a problem in-and-of- 
itself: it would put serious obstacles in the way of people seeking to exercise a fundamental right. 
The right to vote is fundamental because it is protective of all other rights. The right to vote is 
I 
protected byimorevconstitutional amendments - the First, Fourteenth, Fifteenth; ‘N‘ineteenth, t t ‘ 
Twenty~Fourth and Twenty~Sixth — than any other right we enjoy as Americans. That is because 
voting is the cornerstone of our democracy. The power of the vote by the people is our ultimate 
safeguard against corruption and abuse of power by the government. We urge you in all of your 
deliberations to seek ways in which the right to vote can be expanded, to promote rather than 
restrict participation, and to ensure that the integrity of our elections is protected, so that the 
_ .. 
.,.éi.é.&.iOnS réﬂgét thé €v._i116,f_t.Hé ciﬁzéﬁryg .fathéf_ ﬂ.1Hﬁ.tﬂééowéf. df é f6‘i__.,,,, . W-.. _ i 
Despite decades of success across the country expanding voting access and widening the 
democratic process to historically disenfranchised populations, attempts to roll back that progress 
through voter ID and other laws have rampedup in recent years. Voter ID , laws lead to 
signiﬁcant burdens for eligible voters trying to exercise their most fundamental constitutional 
right. States across the country have passed measures to make it harder for Americans — 
particularly Black people, the elderly, students, and people with disabilities — to exercise their 
fundamental right to cast a ballot. 
Take Wisconsin as an example. Multiple federal courts have ruled that parts of its strict photo 
voter ID law, among the most draconian in the country, ‘ is either unconstitutional or requires 
‘ Arkansas, Georgia, Indiana, Kansas, Mississippi, Missouri, and Tennessee also have strict photo voter 
ID laws.
1
substantial modiﬁcations. In his 2016 ruling, US District Court Judge James Peterson wrote that 
Wisconsin ’s voter ID law is “a cure worse than the disease. ”2 He continued that “[t]he Wisconsin 
experience demonstrates that a preoccupation with mostly phantom election fraud leads to real 
incidents of disenfranchisement, which undermine rather than enhance conﬁdence in elections, 
particularly in minority communities. ” He added that “[t]he Legislature ’s immediate goal was to 
achieve a partisan objective, but the means of achieving that objective was to suppress the 
reliably Democratic vote of Milwaukee ’s African Arneri' cans.?f-4i
. 
,_ ~- 
The Maine legislature has repeatedly rejected efforts to restrict access to the ballot. Indeed, in 
2013, our state’s Elections Commission comprehensively investigated and rejected the concept 
of voter IDs. The then-Secretary of State Charles Summers formed the taskforce pursuant toa 
2011 voter ID bill that was amended into a study. The Commission researched legal cases, 
considered policy research, and held hearings across the state of Maine. Hundreds of Mainers 
offered testimony, both in person and in writing. In their fmal report, members of the 
Commission weighed the pros and cons of a voter ID law in Maine and recommended against 
establishing a voter ID system, ﬁnding that “the negative aspects of a Voter ID law outweigh its 
potential beneﬁts.”5 
We agree. Voter ID in Maine would create many problems — here are two: 
First, this bill would prevent legal, registered voters from casting their votes. In particular, 
elderly Mainers, who may have given up driving, and people living in poverty, whomayenot be 
able to afford a car, are less likely to have a driver’s license. Mainers living in rural areas will 
face challenges getting to a state ofﬁce to obtain a photo ID, even if the ID is given free of 
charge. Birth certiﬁcates, passports and other documents required to get a government-issued ID 
cost money and require resources that many Mainers simply do not have. 
Second, this bill would place a needless burden on election workers and the public purse. Clerks 
and wardens would have to be retrained on which photo IDs are acceptable, and enacting voter 
ID laws would cost money that would be better spent elsewhere. Resources would be needed to 
train election workers. If the legislature failed to provide funding for such training, the bill would 
be an unfundedmandate. With the opioid overdose crisis and economic challenges of climate 
change, iarnongyotheripressingi expenses, surely this money mild be spent ¢1s¢w’h<-miiii '5 
way 
that would beneﬁt Mainers. 
Maine has long been a national leader in voting rights. We are only one of two states that allow 
incarcerated people to vote. We are among a minority of states with same-day voter-registration. 
This bill would take us backwards, suppressing votes and diluting a fundamental right. We urge 
this committee to vote ought not to pass. 
2 
One Wisconsin Inst., Inc. v. T homsen, 198 F. Supp. 3d 896, 903 (W.D. Wis. 2016), order enforced, 351 
F. Supp. 3d 1160 (W.D. Wis. 2019), and affd in part, vacated in part, rev'd in part sub nom. Luft v. Evers, 
963 F.3d 665 (7th Cir. 2020), and affd in part, vacated in part, rev'd in part sub nom. Luft v. Evers, 963 
F.3d 665 (7th Cir. 2020) 
3 
Id. 
4 Id. at 904. 
5 
Report of the 2012 Elections Commission at ll, January 28, 2013, available at 
https://Www.maine.gov/sosfcec/elec/ElectionsCommissionRepo1t.pdf.
2
