February 5, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 34:
An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification
for the Purpose of Voting
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs:
My name is Nathan Gould, and I am writing this testimony in support of to LD 34, "An 
Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of Voting." 
Growing up, the importance of voting and participating in our representative form of 
government has been instilled in me, and over the course of my adulthood I have seen the 
consequences of non-participation in the democratic process. There is, in my town, a historical 
example of a well-known building and beloved being torn down after few bothered to show up 
to a town meeting to say otherwise, to the townspeople’s later surprise.
I see, in my lifetime, a repetition of this. I have heard, regardless of the individual’s party
affiliation, a severe lack of trust in our elections. I would be surprised if you yourselves hadn’t 
heard at least one person scoff at the idea of voting, claiming “it’s all rigged!” It seems that just 
about every election of greater notability than dog-catcher becomes surrounded with 
contention, the results drawing the ire of one group or the other. An effective way to combat 
this lack of confidence is requiring photographic identification.
There are those who may take issue with Photo IDs being required to vote, concerned 
with the possibility that it may hinder those unable to get identification. While I would counter 
with the ease of getting a nondriver identification card, Section 2 of LD 34 handles it even better
with “special voter identification cards,” issued for free by the Secretary of State. This soundly 
ensures an individual’s suffrage is protected regardless of their socio-economic status.
I firmly believe that protecting this foundational function and critical component of our 
republic is in the best interest of all the electorate, regardless of lifestyle, ideology, where you 
got your news from this morning, or whether your lunch cost $10 or $50. All want their vote to 
count and matter, and it is clear to me that having a voter present their Photo ID when they 
arrive at the polls is a sturdy defense of our elections and a surefire way to restore a good 
amount of confidence in the system. I look forward to presenting my driver’s license when I go 
to vote in 2024, assured that my ballot is, without question, my ballot.
I ask and encourage the Committee to vote Ought to Pass. Thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
