MAll\lERSfc»r 
MODl?{Rl\l 
ELECHONS 
February 6, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, members of the Committee On Veterans and Legal Affairs: 
l'm here today to testify on behalf of Mainers for Modern Elections in opposition to LD 34. 
Mainers for Modern Elections is a coalition that is committed to ensuring that our right to vote safely 
transcends politics and partisanship. We advocate for safe, secure, modern elections. Our coalition is 
committed to securing equitable access to the ballot for every eligible Maine voter. 
Coalition members include the ACLU of Maine, AARP of Maine, the Center for Secure and Modern 
Elections, Common Cause, Defend Our Health, Gateway Community Services, the League of Women 
Voters of Maine, the Maine AFL-CIO, Maine Citizens for Clean Elections, Maine Conservation Voters, 
Maine Education Association, Maine Equal Justice, Maine Immigrant Rights Coalition, Maine People's 
Alliance, Maine Service Employees Association-SEIU Local 1989, Maine Women's Lobby, Maine Youth 
Power, Planned Parenthood of Northern New England, and Represent Us. 
The freedom to vote is a fundamental right in our democracy. It should not be more accessible for some 
Americans than others. 
Proponents of these measures have argued that photo lD is required to buy alcohol and board a plane 
so why not to vote? Flying to another city or purchasing alcohol are not fundamental civil rights. Voting 
is. Democracy isn't transactional, and polling places aren't retail stores. Their locations, processes, and 
costs are not supposed to be easily accessible for some but severely out of reach for others. 
Furthermore, Maine's elections are safe and secure and we already have a comprehensive voter 
registration process where people must first prove their identity, citizenship, and residency to register to 
vote. 
Voter lD measures do little to nothing in terms of election security — and they do very little for our faith 
in elections. Their main effect is to add more costs, complications, and consequences to our elections 
and to turn eligible voters away — voters like Maine seniors who don't drive and may not have a driver's 
license or people living in rural areas of our state who may have a harder time getting to the BMV. 
lnstead of creating more barriers making it harder for eligible voters to cast a ballot, we urge the 
legislature to protect our freedoms and continue to support election workers dedicated to keeping 
Maine's elections safe, secure, and accessible. 
Please vote ought not to pass on LD 34, An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification 
for the Purpose of Voting.
