Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
Testimony of Maine Transgender Network
LD 34: An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of
Voting
February 6, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Honorable Members of the Joint Committee on
Veterans and Legal Affairs: my name is Quinn Gormley, I am the Executive Director of the
Maine Transgender Network, and I am testifying today on behalf of MaineTransNet
in opposition
to LD 34, "An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of
Voting."
Similar to many other minoritized communities represented here today, the addition of voter ID
requirements would present disproportionate challenges to transgender Mainers attempting to
perform their civic responsibilities. According to data from the 2021 Maine Transgender
Community Survey, Only 25% of transgender Mainers have a State issued ID that matches their
gender identity. Only 22.7% have a State issued ID that lists their chosen name. Only 30% of
transgender Mainers have a government issued photo ID that correctly lists either their name or
gender marker.
Data collected by the Williams Institute documents a disproportionate level of denial of access
to voting experienced by transgender people with incongruent ID's in states with Voter ID
requirements. Transgender voters were more likely to be challenged on their identity than
cisgender voters when registering to vote or when seeking to vote. They also documented lower
rates of voting among eligible voters who are transgender in these states.
In all cases, these impacts were especially pronounced among transgender voters of color, with
disabilities, youth, and older adults.
The disproportionate impact of voter ID laws on minority populations are well documented and
well known to advocacy groups and legislators who routinely push similar legislation. They offer
no meaningful rebuttal to these concerns because these concerns are why they push these
policies in the first place. The voters who will be impacted by these bills, by and large, weren't
going to vote for the elected officials who support these bills. The disenfranchisement is the
point. This is an attempt to deny minority communities a voice in our democracy while
systematically empowering elected officials whose ideas do not produce majorities when our
democracy has full participation.

This bill is craven, harmful, and a bad choice for Maine. Which is why we have repeatedly
defeated similar legislation in recent years. I urge you to vote
ought not to pass
on this and all
similar legislation.
Thank You,
Quinn Gormley
she/her
Executive Director
Maine Transgender Network
quinn@mainetransnet.org
Sources:
Gormley, Q., Jones, O. G., & Williams, M. (2021). (rep.).
Maine Transgender Community Survey
Data Complete Report
. Maine Transgender Network INC.
Retrieved from
https://reporting.alchemer.com/r/701290_615f7ab920f285.88687302.
O'Kniell, K et.al. (2023, January 6).
The potential
impact of voter identification laws on
transgender voters in the 2022 general election
. Williams
Institute. Retrieved February 5, 2023,
from https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/publications/trans-voter-id-impact/
