122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Opposition to:  
LD 34: An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of Voting  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
State House, Room 437 Monday, February 6, 2023  Good morning, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and execut ive director of Maine Public Health Association. 
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is  to improve 
and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challe nges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously.  This bill aims  to change Maine voting law by requiring voters to provide photo identification . At MPHA, we 
support making voting accessible, secure, and equitable for all eligible vot ers in Maine. We believe ensuring 
that all eligible voters can cast their ballots fairly and equitably is a public health priority, given associations with health equity and health outcomes . We are concerned the provisions in this bill will contribute to voter 
suppression and will limit voting access for eligible voters in Maine. We also believe there is insufficient evidence to support the need for this provision or that requiring identification improves election security. On the contrary, a ccessible voting policies do support  election integrity . 
 In 1988, the Institute of Medicine published a landmark report , The Future of Public H ealth
, which 
acknowledges that voting is a public health issue because it helps shape “ the conditions in which people can be 
healthy.” The American Public Health Association  considers voting to be  a public health issue  because it 
impacts civic policies ranging from budgets to carrying firearms to insurance and LGBTQ rights. The Health 
and Democracy Index  analysis also demonstrates that “communities with high voter participation enjoy greater 
social cohesion and belonging and better health.”  
 According to Dr. Edward Ehlinger
, past -president of the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials 
(ASTHO), voting directly impacts health: “Research conducted in 44 countries showed that ci vic participation, 
specifically voter participation, wa s associated with better self -reported health —while another study showed 
that those who did not vote reported poorer health outcomes. Historically, we can see this trend play out via suffrage and voting rights. While other factors were of course at play, it was after women got the right to vote in 1920 that the maternal and infant mortality rates dropped dramatically. This can be attributed to the passage of the Sheppard Towner Act of 1921, which set up maternal and child health units in every state health 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  department, expanded collection of birth and death data, and began federal funding of state health programs. 
Similarly, when the Voting Rights Act of 1965 passed, infant mortality rates dropped and the Black/white dispar ity in those rates narrowed, again because of legislation that was passed in response to new voter 
enfranchisement.”  
 Specific to this bill, s ome individuals may experience barriers to having photo identification, including persons 
experiencing homelessness, people with low -income, older adults, persons with disabilities, people who oppose 
having their photo taken due to religious or cultural beliefs , and non- white populations .
1 Voter identification  
laws are indeed considered restrictive and exclusive in the Cost of Voting Index , which refers to the time and 
effort associated with casting a vote.  
 We respect wanting to ensure election security. However, we believe we can ensur e election security while also 
ensuring all  eligible Maine voters are able to cast their ballots  fairly and equitably. We believe accessible elections 
are essential to p rotecting and promoting public health. Currently, Maine is a national leader in voter accessibility. 
We are proud of that leadership. We respectfully request you vote LD 34 “ought not to pass.” Thank you for your 
consideration.  
 
 
1Government Accountability Office (GAO). Issues related to state voter identific ation laws. September 2014. GAO Report to 
Congressional Requesters. https://www.gao.gov/products/gao- 14-634. 
