 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
 
Neither For Nor Against  
 
LD 34, An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of 
Voting 
 
February 6, 2023  
 
 
Senator Hickman , Representative Supica  and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Lambert,  and I am providing testimony neither for nor against  
to LD 34 on behalf of M aine M unicipal A ssociation ’s (MMA)  70-member Legislative Policy 
Committee  (LPC).   
The bill before you today would require all voters to present proof of their identity in the 
form of a photographic identification for their vote to be counted. While the LPC appreciates  that 
the state will be required to furnish a special voter identification car d, the access challenges  for 
obtaining valid identification  still exist for some Mainers.  From the municipal perspective, 
additional administrative tasks, and costs at the local level associated with verifying the provided 
identification is both valid and acceptable, as well as the additional steps the voters will have to take in order to get to the ballot box, are not justified given the absence of voter fraud in Maine.  
 In that same vein, most residents of voting age currently possess a form of identifica tion 
and this bill would not present a hardship for the majority . Furthermore, i t could be argued that 
requiring photographic identification is becoming ubiquitous in today’s society and that this legislation should be enacted just to assuage the per ception of any possible fraudulent voting. 
Though municipalities support working to combat voter fraud, there is still the possibility this 
bill could  very well lead to eligible voters being excluded.  
 
As election clerks will be required to verify the vali dity of the identification presented to 
receive a ballot, it will also be necessary for election clerks to receive adequate training to make 
that evaluation and a clear process for appeals of those decisions. If enacted, this bill will require 
a mandate pr eamble as it expands the duties of a local unit of government.  
 
MMA’s LPC supports the Maine Town and City Clerks Association members and have 
taken a neither for nor against position on this bill.  
 
Thank you for your time and considering the municipal perspective on this issue..   

 
