Sarah Hewitt
Alfred
LD 34
Good morning, 
I am writing today to voice my concern with LD 34. As it's known, Maine has a predominantly 
elderly population. Many of our citizens rely on transportation from family, neighbors, or 
caregivers. Many don't hold, or have a need to hold a valid government issued ID. I am 
concerned for those that fall under this category, and it should be concerning that their rights 
could be altered. It's been seen time and time again where an individual will come into our 
office not bearing, and not owning, a required document of identification. This happens often 
with those trying to register to vote or obtain vital records among many other circumstances. 
Luckily there is procedure set in place that allows a resident to prove their residency and 
identity in other fashions such as an affidavit, or a social security number. This enactment 
would seem contradictory to those procedures. 
A number of times we, as clerks, have seen our residents get dropped off to conduct 
their business. What would happen if one of those voters forgot their ID and have 
now lost their chance to cast their ballot. How can we be certain their driver would 
agree to do another round trip. Wouldn't this alter their right to vote? This goes hand 
in hand with any situation. Families that could be on time crunches to get their ballot 
cast during lunch break, or before school drop off, working around the schedules of 
their families. It's a real situation that we, as humans, forget our proper identification 
from time to time. If they're on our Incoming Voter List why should they have to 
prove that all over again? 
Methods in place at the polls allow our elections to be conducted in an efficient 
manner. Stating your name and residence or updating stale information for example. 
How would this affect the method with absentee ballots? How do those requesting 
online prove who they are, or are they exempt? It's my duty to make sure all voters 
get treated equally. 
I fear for our ballot clerks. Would they now bear the excessive task of checking 
identification for valid dates as well as being efficient with their markings on the 
Incoming Voter List? Would we lose many of our workers with this extreme 
workload? Many ballot clerks are also retired, and elderly. They could see this as a 
time to give up their position after decades of being confident in their work. 
For these reasons, as well as a number of others, I urge you to think twice about what 
this action could create. We have done well over the years guiding the election 
process to success as we currently stand. 
Thank you for your time. 
