Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health
In Opposition of LD 34, “An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the 
Purpose of Voting”
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee
February 6, 2023
Greetings, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans and Legal 
Affairs Committee: My name is Sarah Woodbury. I am a native Mainer and the director of 
advocacy for Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health’s mission is to make sure that everyone 
has equal access to safe food and drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-
free and climate friendly.  Please accept this testimony in opposition of LD 34, “An Act to 
Require a Person to Show Photographic Identification for the Purpose of Voting”. 
The right to vote is one of our most fundamental rights as Americans. It may seem curious that 
an organization that works on environmental health issues would engage in issues around 
voting rights and access to the ballot. As we see it, a functioning democracy is necessary to 
protect the health and environment of its citizens. Voting is an integral part of that functioning 
democracy, and we should do everything we can to make sure that voting is easy and 
accessible for all citizens. 
Requiring that all citizens provide photo ID to vote creates a barrier to voting and does nothing 
to protect election security. Maine already has safe and secure policies in place that requires 
proof of residence and citizenship when registering to vote. It is not necessary to add another 
layer to this process that could impede access to the ballot. There are many eligible voters here 
in Maine that may not have the resources or ability to provide additional proof of eligibility. We 
have many older citizens that do not drive or live in rural communities where it is hard to get to 
the BMV to get the required ID. For some families, the added cost is simply not something they 
can afford.
There is no evidence that there is widespread voter fraud here in Maine that would require 
instituting additional voter ID policies. According to the Attorney General’s office, there were 
only two cases of voter fraud in the 2020 election in the entire state of Maine1. Neither of those 
cases impacted the outcome of the election. We need to be pushing back against election 
disinformation and the notion that there is widespread voter fraud and work to restore faith in 
1 Hogan, S. (2022, June 5). Elections officials fight misinformation about Maine's voting securityS. The Maine 
Monitor. Retrieved February 4, 2023, from https://www.themainemonitor.org/misinformation-seeks-to-cast-
doubts-on-security-of-maines-elections-in-2022/ 
our elections process instead of adding additional costs and complications to the process of 
voting for all eligible voters.
The legislature should do all it can to protect the fundamental right to vote for all citizens and 
make the process easier, not harder. Therefore, Defend Our Health urges the committee to 
unanimously vote “ought not to pass” on LD 34.
Thank you for your time.
