DISABILITY 
RIGHTS 
MAINEIJ February 6, 2023 
Senator Craig Hickman 
Representative Laura Supica 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
State House, Room 437 
Augusta, ME 04330 
Re: LD 34, An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic Identiﬁcation for the Purpose of 
Voting 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Honorable Members of the Committee; 
On behalf of Disability Rights Maine (DRM), thank you for providing me the opportunity to 
submit testimony regarding LD 34, An Act to Require a Person to Show Photographic 
ldentiﬁcationfor the Purpose of Voting. My name is Sara Squires and I am the Public Policy 
Director at Disability Rights Maine (DRM), the state's designated federal Protection and 
Advocacy agency for Mainers with Disabilities. One of DRM's programs is the Protection and 
Advocacy for Voting Access (PAVA), which works to ensure full participation in the electoral 
process for individuals with disabilities. This proposed legislation offers a remedy that is in 
search of a problem. Rather than address an actual, existing issue, LD 34 would only serve to 
exacerbate a well-documented failure of our electoral process: the disenfranchisement of 
voters with disabilities. 
This bill addresses the direct cost of obtaining a photographic identification, previously equated 
to a poll tax, by adding a fiscal note that transfers this cost to the State, thereby making ID 
cards "free" for voters. This is misleading. This fails to consider the indirect costs associated 
with acquiring a State ID or a proposed ”free" photographic Voter ID. Obtaining certified birth 
certificates, copies of court orders, medical records or any of the acceptable supporting 
documents can prove costly. Many individuals with disabilities are relegated to a life of 
poverty, relying on a fixed income that barely covers their basic living expenses, let alone the 
cost of obtaining documents required to obtain a photographic ID. This burden is magnified for 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330 
207.626.2774 - 1.800.452.1948 - Fax: 207.621.1419 - drme.org 
MAlNE'S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
2 
individuals residing reside in nursing homes, assisted living facilities or any number of care 
facilities and whose income is diverted to cover their cost of care. 
In Doe vs. Rowe, 156 F. Supp. 2d 35 (D. Me. 2001), the Maine Law Court ruled that even if an 
individual is under guardianship, they still retain their right to vote. Despite this ruling, 
Disability Rights Maine is concerned that guardians might nevertheless prevent their wards 
from obtaining state identification cards, thereby barring their access to the electoral process. 
Similarly, if an individual has a payee who manages their Social Security benefits, the payee has 
the ability to refuse authorization of funds necessary for obtaining supporting documents. 
These individuals, especially eligible voters with disabilities in Maine who are dependent on 
friends, family or paid support staff for transportation and/or financial and other decision- 
making, would be unable acquire an ID and therefore barred from participating in the voting 
process. 
Finally, thousands of Maine people with disabilities do not have their driver's license and, 
where the lack of a public transportation system is well acknowledged, physically accessing a 
Motor Vehicle Office will prove difficult. Currently, no permanent offices exist within five of 
Maine's sixteen counties (Franklin, Lincoln, Piscataquis, Somerset, and Waldo). While the 
Secretary of State's Office has established mobile locations that serve more remote areas of the 
state, none of these offices are presently open and accessible by the public. Further, obtaining 
a State ID is not a covered service under MaineCare's Non-Emergency Transportation Program, 
forcing individuals to rely on friends, family, or costly taxi services to transport them to a Motor 
Vehicle Office. For individuals who already lack reliable transportation, even accessing a 
Bureau of Motor Vehicle Office can pose logistical — and financial — challenges. 
It is for the foregoing reasons that Disability Rights Maine urges you to vote ought not to pass 
on legislation that will erect further barriers to voting by Maine individuals with disabilities. 
Sincerely, 
gﬁm/Bu %%""“5 
Sara Squires 
Public Policy Director 
_2_
