Personal Testimony February 6, 2023 LD 34 
Public Hearing of Veterans and Legal Affairs State House Rm 437 
Speaker: 
William C. Moody 74 Mayo Rd. Wa|doboro,Maine 04572 
Comments: 
The easiest way to undermine the effectiveness of a democratic society is to 
negate the rule of one person-one vote through voter fraud. There have been 
multiple example of this in the past, resulting in bogus election results. 
Throughout history, one can find examples of elections being thrown by extra 
votes cast by dead people. ln addition, others can easily vote using false identity 
without photographic proof of their true identity. Any honest person need only 
search a few examples of massive voter fraud cases in some of our states to 
see the results that are inconsistent with mathematical and statistical reality. 
This problem can be quickly solved by requiring voters to present photographic 
evidence of their living existence. As any responsible and thinking person should 
be able to recognize; dead people have a difficult time presenting photo lD., as 
well as others claiming to be someone they are not. 
Photo identification is required to receive dozens of services from government 
services and the private sector. 
This one step in our voting process would greatly eliminate massive voter fraud. 
Legislators who are in favor of this action, demonstrate their honest integrity, 
and help to restore voter confidence in government and their own personal 
character. Those opposed to this bill, undermine the public's confidence in 
government, which is in itself, a means to discourage the publics' active 
participation in the democratic process .... ..yet another tactic to influence election 
results. Without election integrity, we have no republic, only a corrupt rule by the 
criminal “majority ”; just like every other decadent communist government on the 
planet. 
LD 34 should be passed by everyone concerned about election integrity to 
guarantee honest results. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, and remember.... 
“Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it” Ps 127:1
