 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT   
 
TESTIMONY OF SHENNA BELLOWS, MAINE SECRETARY OF STATE  
and KATE MCBRIEN, MAINE STATE ARCHIVIST  
 
March 28 , 2023  
 
Neither For , Nor Against  
 
L.D. 1005 , Resolve, to Authorize Flying the Former Maine Flag  on Certain Occasions  
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State and Local Government;  we are Shenna Bellows, Maine’s Secretary of State, and Kate 
McBrien, Maine’s  State Archivist. Neither the Department of Secretary of State nor Maine State 
Archives, which falls under the Department’s jurisdiction, have  a formal position on L.D. 1005 . But 
we believe we have useful information that may assist the committee in its de liberations on this 
important legislation.  
 
While we understand the underlying goal of this bill, the Archives have already investigated many 
of the issues raised  and have shared the 1901 flag’s history in this committee before . We are 
including below aga in for reference.  Additionally, perhaps the Adjutant General is better suited to 
lead the working group as – under Title 1, section 206 – it is their role to be keeper of the official 
flag. 
 
Maine’s state flag has undergone changes over the 200 years of ou r statehood. Perhaps most 
interestingly, our state did not designate an official flag until 1901, which specified the flag design 
in question today. We had no official flag for our first almost 100 years of statehood. For an 
unknown reason, this first offi cial design only lasted 8 years, before legislation changed the flag to 
its current design in February of 1909. Unfortunately, any record of the debate around the change in 
flag design did not survive, so we cannot provide any reasoning behind it.  
 
Before  1901, Maine had flags, of course; but most were designed by state and local militias for their 
individual use. The Seal of the State of Maine, which now graces the blue shield of our current state 
flag, was designed by a joint legislative committee during  the beginning of our statehood. A copy of 
their report resides in the Maine State Archives, and while a record of their deliberations does not 
exist, we do have the product. The seal of the state originally was meant as the official mark, the 
“seal” to re present Maine on official documents. Often affixed to state records with wax, the state 
seal elevated a document and the action it represented with great solemnity. It appears to have been 
a common sentiment throughout New England to carry that official se al role onto the state flag. 
Several neighboring New England states adopted flags like our current one, using their own state 
seals around 1909 as well.  
 
The original, 1901 flag design is important as a commonly understood symbol of Maine and its 
connectio n to New England. The Pine Tree became an early symbol of New England, often viewed 
 
 Department of the Secretary of State  
 
Bureau of Corporations, Elections and Commissions  Shenna Bellows  
Secretary of State  
 
 
Kate McBrien  
Maine State Archivist  
 
 as referencing the Tree of Peace as well as New England’s , and certainly Maine’s,  strong timber 
economy. Colonists used the pine  tree symbol commonly on coins and flags thr oughout the 17th and 
18th centuries. Leading up to the Revolutionary War, the pine tree became a symbol of colonial 
unrest  and resistance . This common symbol is now  proposed as the new license plate design, tying 
it to the 1901 flag  and the symbols of our long and rich history and culture.  
 
Symbolically today, flags remind us of our unity as one people engaged in a common cause, and of 
surviving difficult struggles t ogether. The design of the flag is made meaningful by the people who 
embrace it. The lack of debate in the record means we do not know why the flag was changed in 
1909, which leaves us only to speculate. But it also frees us to make our own choice for what  would 
be the best and most appropriate flag for the state today. As you deliberate L.D. 1005 , we believe 
the history of the proposed and the current  flag design may prove useful to you.  
 
For the above reasons, we are neither for nor against. We are happy  to answer any questions you 
may have.  
 
