 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 508
H.P. 365 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2019
Resolve, To  Study the  Protection  of Youth and  Young Adults from 
Addiction and Premature Death by Restricting  Marketing of 
Tobacco Products
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GROHOSKI of Ellsworth.
Cosponsored by Senator MOORE  of Washington  and
Representative: McCREIGHT of Harpswell, Senator:  MILLETT  of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR1433(01)-11Sec. 1.  Office of Attorney General to research State's ability to restrict 
2marketing of tobacco products to youth and young adults.  Resolved:  That the 
3Office of the Attorney General shall research regulatory options for protecting youth and 
4young adults from the marketing of tobacco products, including electronic nicotine 
5delivery systems.  When appropriate, research under this section may be conducted in 
6conjunction with the Department of Health and Human Services, Maine Center for 
7Disease Control and Prevention, Tobacco Prevention and Control Program.  The research 
8must include at a minimum:
91.  Investigating where and how youth and young adults are being exposed to 
10industry marketing of all tobacco products and their delivery systems and the efficacy of 
11such marketing;
122.  Examining the legal options to limit youth and young adult exposure to industry 
13marketing;
143.  Examining the legal options to limit the number of and location of tobacco retailer 
15licenses, including limiting the total number of licenses issued, limiting the number of 
16licenses in an area based on population, restricting retail locations in relation to schools, 
17playgrounds and other areas where youth and young adults congregate, specifying an 
18allowable distance between tobacco retailers and specifying an allowable distance 
19between tobacco retailers and tobacco-free pharmacies;
204.  Designing a system to encourage members of the public to report to the federal 
21Food and Drug Administration any marketing of tobacco products that makes health or 
22therapeutic claims; and
235.  Examining any other legislative options available for restricting the marketing of 
24all tobacco products.
25Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than February 1, 2020, the Office of the 
26Attorney General shall submit a report with the results of the research under section 1 to 
27the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services.  The committee shall 
28submit a bill to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature related to the report.
29SUMMARY
30This resolve requires the Office of the Attorney General to research marketing 
31practices by the tobacco industry and regulatory options for the State to employ to curb 
32youth and young adult use of and addiction to tobacco products, including electronic 
33nicotine delivery systems.  The Office of the Attorney General is required to report its 
34findings to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services by February 1, 
352020, and the committee is required to submit a bill to the Second Regular Session of the 
36129th Legislature related to the report.
