 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 73
S.P. 26 In Senate,  January  15, 2019
An Act  To Provide  an Income Tax Credit for Certain Student  Loan 
Repayments
Reference to the Committee on Taxation  suggested and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator POULIOT of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative TIPPING of Orono and
Senators: CHIPMAN of Cumberland, HERBIG of Waldo, SANBORN, H.  of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR0581(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  36 MRSA ยง5217-E is enacted to read:
3ยง5217-E.  Credit for certain student loan repayments
41.  Credit allowed.  An individual who is required to include in federal adjusted 
5gross income all or a portion of the amount of student loan payments made directly to the 
6individual's student loan lender by the Finance Authority of Maine, or an entity managed 
7or administered by the Finance Authority of Maine, for residents of the State employed 
8by a business located in the State is allowed a refundable credit equal to the amount 
9required to be included in federal adjusted gross income multiplied by the individual's 
10highest federal marginal income tax rate under the Code, Section 1.
11SUMMARY
12This bill provides an income tax credit for certain student loan repayments made by 
13the Finance Authority of Maine or an entity managed or administered by the Finance 
14Authority of Maine.  The credit is equal to the amount an individual is required to include 
15in federal adjusted gross income as the result of student loan payments made directly to 
16the individual's student loan lender by the Finance Authority of Maine, or an entity 
17managed or administered by the Finance Authority of Maine, for residents of the State 
18employed by a business located in the State multiplied by the individual's highest federal 
19marginal income tax rate.
