 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1180
H.P. 854 House of  Representatives, March 12, 2019
Resolve, To  Establish the Task Force To Better Coordinate the 
Protection of Vulnerable Populations
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BERRY of Bowdoinham.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Representatives: BRENNAN  of Portland, CRAVEN of Lewiston, DENK of Kennebunk, 
MORALES of South  Portland, NEWELL  of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, WARREN of 
Hallowell, Senators:  CARPENTER of  Aroostook, MOORE of Washington.

Page 1 - 129LR0458(01)-11Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, many departments and agencies of government, including the Department 
4of Health and Human Services, the Office of the Attorney General, the Department of 
5Public Safety, occupational licensing boards and the district attorneys, share 
6responsibility for investigating allegations of abuse and neglect of vulnerable populations; 
7and
8Whereas, it is critical that the many governmental entities that are charged with this 
9duty work together when possible to share information and coordinate responsibilities; 
10and
11Whereas, this legislation creates the Task Force To Better Coordinate the Protection 
12of Vulnerable Populations, which is directed to identify areas of improvement in the 
13coordination of information and processes of the entities that investigate allegations of 
14abuse and neglect; and
15Whereas, the task force's study must be initiated before the 90-day period expires in 
16order that the study may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to 
17the next legislative session; and
18Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
19the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
20immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
21therefore, be it
22Sec. 1.  Task force established.  Resolved:  That the Task Force To Better 
23Coordinate the Protection of Vulnerable Populations, referred to in this resolve as "the 
24task force," is established to identify areas of improvement in the coordination of 
25information and processes of the entities that investigate allegations of abuse and neglect.
26Sec. 2.  Task force  membership.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 
27353, the task force consists of 15 members as follows:
281.  Four members appointed by the President of the Senate as follows:
29A.  One member of the Senate who serves on the Joint Standing Committee on 
30Health and Human Services;
31B.  One member of the Senate who serves on the Joint Standing Committee on 
32Criminal Justice and Public Safety;
33C.  One member who represents an advocacy organization for people with low 
34income in the State; and
35D.  One member who represents an advocacy organization for people with disabilities 
36in the State;
372.  Four members appointed by the Speaker of the House as follows:
Page 2 - 129LR0458(01)-11A.  One member of the House of Representatives who serves on the Joint Standing 
2Committee on Health and Human Services;
3B.  One member of the House of Representatives who serves on the Joint Standing 
4Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety;
5C.  One member who represents an advocacy organization for seniors; and
6D. One member who represents an advocacy organization for people with 
7developmental disabilities in the State;
83.  Four members appointed by the Governor as follows:
9A.  One member who represents an organization that provides training and support to 
10parents of children with disabilities or special health care needs and the professionals 
11who work with the families;
12B.  One member who represents an advocacy organization for people with 
13developmental disabilities;
14C.  One member representing the long-term care ombudsman program; and
15D.  One member representing the State Board of Nursing;
164.  The Commissioner of Health and Human Services or the commissioner's designee;
175.  The Commissioner of Public Safety or the commissioner's designee; and
186.  The Attorney General or the Attorney General's designee.
19Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the first-named Senate member is the Senate 
20chair and the first-named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the task 
21force.
22Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of task force.  Resolved:  That all 
23appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 
24resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 
25Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 
26the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the task force.  If 30 days or more 
27after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 
28made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 
29for the task force to meet and conduct its business.
30Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the task force shall identify areas of improvement 
31in the coordination of information and processes of the entities, including but not limited 
32to the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Public Safety, 
33occupational licensing boards, the Office of the Attorney General and the district 
34attorneys, that investigate allegations of abuse and neglect of vulnerable populations.  The 
35study conducted by the task force must include, but is not limited to:
361.  A review of the coordination and information sharing that exists between 
37governmental entities that are charged with the responsibility of receiving complaints of 
38abuse or neglect of vulnerable populations and investigating and acting on those 
Page 3 - 129LR0458(01)-11complaints and an analysis of the potential for greater coordination and sharing of data 
2and information;
32.  An examination of the many different gateways through which an allegation of 
4abuse or neglect may be filed and the absence of clear jurisdictional primacy over such 
5allegations and whether these issues have an impact on the ultimate resolution of such 
6allegations;
73.  An analysis of the definitional and language differences in statutes and rules 
8regarding abuse and neglect and the impact of such differences; and
94.  A review of any additional issues associated with training, staffing and funding 
10experienced by governmental entities charged with the responsibility of receiving 
11complaints of abuse or neglect of vulnerable populations.
12Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human 
13Services shall provide the task force with staff assistance and access to any 
14nonconfidential aggregate information necessary for the task force to carry out its duties.
15Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 4, 2019, the task force 
16shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 
17legislation, for presentation to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
18Services.
19The Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services may submit a bill 
20related to this report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
21Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
22legislation takes effect when approved.
23SUMMARY
24This resolve establishes the Task Force To Better Coordinate the Protection of 
25Vulnerable Populations to identify areas of improvement in the coordination of 
26information and processes of the entities that investigate allegations of abuse and neglect. 
27The task force must report its findings and recommendations, including suggested 
28legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services by December 
294, 2019. 
