 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 589
H.P. 433 House of  Representatives, February 5, 2019
Resolve, Directing the State Board of Education To Adopt Rules  
Prohibiting Teachers in  Public Schools from Engaging in Political, 
Ideological or  Religious Advocacy in the Classroom
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative LOCKMAN of Bradley.
Cosponsored by Senator GUERIN of Penobscot and
Representatives: ARATA of New Gloucester, BRADSTREET of Vassalboro, CAMPBELL of Orrington, O'CONNOR  of Berwick, PERKINS of Oakland.

Page 1 - 129LR1749(01)-11Preamble. Whereas, the purpose of public education in America is to produce 
2knowledgeable and competent adults able to participate as informed citizens in the 
3democratic process; and
4Whereas, education in a democracy is best served by teaching students how to 
5think, not telling them what to think; and
6Whereas, our country is divided over many issues affecting its citizens; and
7Whereas, it has been established through surveys that a majority of kindergarten to 
8grade 12 teachers discuss controversial issues in their classrooms; and
9Whereas, it has been established that some teacher training institutions, teacher 
10licensing agencies, state education departments and professional teacher organizations 
11have condoned and even encouraged this behavior under the guise of "teaching for social 
12justice" and other sectarian doctrines; and
13Whereas, time spent on political or ideological indoctrination takes time away from 
14instruction in the academic subjects taught by public educational institutions including 
15the foundational subjects of mathematics, science, English, history and civics and 
16prevents students from receiving the best possible public education as funded by the 
17taxpayers of the State; and
18Whereas, parents and taxpayers have a right to expect that taxpayer resources will 
19be spent on education, not political or ideological indoctrination; now, therefore, be it
20Sec. 1.  State Board of Education to adopt rules prohibiting teachers in 
21public schools from engaging in political, ideological or religious advocacy in 
22the classroom. Resolved:  That the State Board of Education shall adopt rules 
23prohibiting teachers in public schools from engaging in political, ideological or religious 
24advocacy in the classroom.  Rules adopted under this resolve must be clear and provide 
25enforcement mechanisms for appropriate and professional ethical behavior by teachers 
26licensed in the State in tax-supported schools to prohibit teachers using the classroom to 
27engage in political, ideological or religious advocacy.
28Sec. 2.  Rules criteria.  Resolved:  That the rules required by this resolve must 
29prohibit a teacher in a public school during class time or while otherwise operating within 
30the scope of employment as a teacher from doing the following:
311.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any candidate or nominee for public office or 
32any elected or appointed official regardless of whether the official is a member of the 
33local, state or federal government;
342.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any pending, proposed or enacted legislation or 
35regulation regardless of whether the legislation or regulation is pending or proposed or 
36has been enacted at the local, state or federal level;
Page 2 - 129LR1749(01)-113.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any pending, proposed or decided court case or 
2judicial action regardless of whether the court case or judicial action is at the local, state 
3or federal level;
44.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any pending, proposed or executed executive 
5action by an executive or executive branch agency at the local, state or federal level;
65.  Introducing any controversial subject matter that is not germane to the topic of the 
7course being taught;
86.  Endorsing, supporting or engaging in any activity that hampers or impedes the 
9lawful access of a military recruiter to the school campus;
107.  Endorsing, supporting or engaging in any activity that hampers or impedes the 
11actions of local, state or federal law enforcement;
128.  Advocating in a partisan manner for any side of a controversial issue; the rules 
13must require a teacher to provide students with materials supporting both sides of a 
14controversial issue being addressed and to present both sides in a fair-minded, 
15nonpartisan manner. For purposes of this paragraph, "controversial issue" means an issue 
16that is a point made in an electoral party platform at the local, state or federal level; or
179.  Segregating students according to race or singling out one racial group of students 
18as responsible for the suffering or inequities experienced by another racial group of 
19students.
20Sec. 3.  Violations; notice; training.  Resolved:  That rules adopted under this 
21resolve must contain clear guidelines for enforcement and provide penalties for violations 
22up to and including termination.  The State Board of Education shall provide written 
23notice to all affected teachers, parents and students of their respective rights and 
24responsibilities under the rules and shall provide at least 3 hours of annual continuing 
25teacher education to affected teachers to instruct the teachers in the teacher 
26responsibilities required by the rules.
27Sec. 4.  Voluntary adoption of educator's code of ethics.  Resolved:  That 
28all state professional teacher organizations and unions be requested to voluntarily adopt 
29an educator's code of ethics and professional responsibility that incorporates the rules 
30adopted pursuant to this resolve and that specifically prohibit teachers in kindergarten to 
31grade 12 instruction from using the classroom for political indoctrination.
32Sec. 5.  Major substantive rules. Resolved:  That rules adopted pursuant to this 
33resolve are major substantive rules as defined by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, 
34chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
35SUMMARY
36This resolve directs the State Board of Education to adopt major substantive rules 
37prohibiting teachers in public schools from engaging in political, religious or ideological 
38advocacy in the classroom or from introducing any controversial subject matter that is not 
Page 3 - 129LR1749(01)-11germane to the topic of the course being taught, with penalties for violations up to and 
2including termination of the teacher. This resolve requires the State Board of Education to 
3provide written notice of the rules to all affected teachers, parents and students and for 
4teachers to receive annually at least 3 hours of continuing teacher education to instruct the 
5teachers on the rules.  Finally, this resolve requests professional teacher organizations and 
6unions to voluntarily adopt an educator's code of ethics and professional responsibility 
7that incorporates the rules and that specifically prohibits teachers in kindergarten to grade 
812 instruction from using the classroom for political indoctrination.
