 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1136
H.P. 825 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2019
An Act  To Provide  Snow Sports Safety Information  to Consumers
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MASTRACCIO  of Sanford.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Representatives: COLLINGS of  Portland, HANINGTON of Lincoln, MARTIN of Greene, 
WARREN of Hallowell, Senators: POULIOT of Kennebec, WOODSOME of York.

Page 1 - 129LR1472(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง15217-A is enacted to read:
3ยง15217-A.  Ski area operator responsibilities
41.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
5following terms have the following meanings.
6A.  "Accident" means any incident resulting in one or more persons requiring direct 
7transport by an air ambulance, ground ambulance or other mode of transport from the 
8ski area to a medical facility.
9B.  "Anatomical locations of trauma" means the head, vertebrae, chest, abdomen, 
10upper extremities or lower extremities.
11C.  "Glasgow Coma Scale" means a scoring system used to describe the level of 
12consciousness of a person following a traumatic brain injury.
13D.  "Number of operational days" means the number of days a ski area is open for 
14skiing during a season or defined period.
15E.  "Number of skiing days" means an accounting of the number of times a person 
16purchases a tramway ticket or uses a season pass at a ski area over the course of a 
17season or a defined period.
18F.  "Safety plan" means a written document that details all the governance, 
19management and operational roles and responsibilities of a ski area, including 
20standard processes, policies, procedures, practices, methods and materials 
21consistently employed and subject to compliance monitoring by the ski area operator 
22to prevent accidents and reduce the severity of injuries.
23G.  "Skiing" has the same meaning as in section 15217, subsection 1, paragraph B.
24H.  "Terrain difficulty rating" means the designation, related symbols and criteria 
25used by a ski area to communicate the degree of difficulty of the terrain for skiing.
26I.  "Trauma score" means the trauma scoring system generally used by emergency 
27medical professionals prior to transport, including the Glasgow Coma Scale, blood 
28pressure, respiratory rate and evidence of external hemorrhage.
292.  Safety plan.  Beginning July 2020, and annually thereafter, a ski area operator 
30shall create and maintain a safety plan.  The safety plan must be accessible on the ski area 
31operator's publicly accessible website, if it has a publicly accessible website, and must be 
32available to a skier upon request.
333.  Accident reporting.  Beginning July 2020, and annually thereafter, a ski area 
34operator shall produce a report that includes the number of operational days and the 
35statistics on all skiing accidents from the previous year.  The report must be accessible on 
36the ski area operator's publicly accessible website, if it has a publicly accessible website, 
37and must be available to a skier upon request.  The report must include the following:
38A.  The number of accidents that occurred at the ski area to persons snowboarding;
Page 2 - 129LR1472(01)-11B.  The number of accidents that occurred at the ski area to persons on skis;
2C.  The specific cause of each accident at the ski area, including, but not limited to, a 
3fall while on skis or a snowboard, a fall from a tramway, a collision with another 
4person or a collision with a fixed object;
5D.  The anatomical locations of trauma from each accident occurring at the ski area;
6E.  Trauma scores as a result of each accident at the ski area;
7F.  The age of each person involved in each accident at the ski area;
8G.  The sex of each person involved in each accident at the ski area; 
9H.  The frequency and location of each accident at the ski area;
10I.  The number of skiing days of each person involved in each accident at the ski area 
11in the season in which the accident occurred; and
12J.  The varying terrain difficulty ratings.
13SUMMARY
14This bill requires a ski area operator to annually create a safety plan for the ski area 
15and make that plan accessible to the public.  It also requires ski area operators to report on 
16skiing accidents from the previous year and make those reports accessible to the public.
