 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 495
S.P. 160 In Senate,  January  31, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Commissioner  of Agriculture, Conservation  
and Forestry To  Conduct a Feasibility Study  on Locating a Grain 
Processing Facility in Aroostook County
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by President JACKSON of Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Representative HICKMAN of Winthrop and
Senators: BLACK of  Franklin,  CARPENTER  of Aroostook, DILL of Penobscot,  GUERIN  of 
Penobscot, Representatives: MARTIN of Eagle  Lake, MARTIN of Sinclair, McCREA of Fort 
Fairfield, STEWART  of Presque Isle.

Page 1 - 129LR1179(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, farmers in Aroostook County rotate their potato crops with grain crops in 
4sequential seasons in order to maintain a healthy balance of nutrients in the soil and 
5increase soil fertility and crop yield; and
6Whereas, due to the scarcity of grain processing facilities in the region, the grain 
7that is grown for the purposes of soil enrichment is wasted; and
8Whereas, the location of a grain processing facility in Aroostook County would 
9provide local dairy farmers with an economical, local supply of grain, and benefit the 
10grain farmers by providing a local market for the grain; and
11Whereas, the feasibility study required by this legislation must be initiated before 
12the 90-day period expires in order that the study may be completed and the report 
13submitted in time for submission to the next legislative session; and
14Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
15the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
16immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
17therefore, be it
18Sec. 1.  Feasibility study. Resolved:  That the Commissioner of Agriculture, 
19Conservation and Forestry shall conduct a study on the feasibility of locating a grain 
20processing facility in Aroostook County.
21Sec. 2.  Findings and recommendations. Resolved:  That the Commissioner of 
22Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry shall present the study findings and 
23recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and 
24Forestry no later than December 4, 2019. The joint standing committee may submit a bill 
25relating to the subject matter of the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th 
26Legislature.
27Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
28legislation takes effect when approved.
29SUMMARY
30This resolve directs the Commissioner of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to 
31conduct a study on the feasibility of locating a grain processing facility in Aroostook 
32County. The resolve directs the commissioner to present the study findings and 
33recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and 
34Forestry no later than December 4, 2019, and authorizes the joint standing committee to 
35submit a bill relating to the subject matter of the report to the Second Regular Session of 
36the 129th Legislature.
