 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 372
H.P. 281 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2019
An Act  To Increase the Safety of Municipal Residents by Allowing 
Municipalities To Address Downed  Wires  in Extended Power 
Outages
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative McCREIGHT  of Harpswell.
Cosponsored by Senator GUERIN of Penobscot and
Representatives: ACKLEY of Monmouth, BAILEY of Saco,  BERRY of Bowdoinham, 
DAUGHTRY of  Brunswick,  HANDY  of Lewiston, HEPLER of Woolwich, TEPLER of 
Topsham, Senator: CARSON of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR0078(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  30-A MRSA ยง3111 is enacted to read:
3ยง3111.  Extended power outages
4In the event of a power outage of 5 or more days, a municipality may hire 
5appropriately licensed professionals to address power, telephone and similar lines that 
6have been felled by weather events and that are preventing access to roadways within the 
7municipality.  A municipality's costs pursuant to this section must be paid by the 
8municipality, but the municipality may apply to receive compensation from the local 
9electric utility, the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management, Maine 
10Emergency Management Agency, the United States Department of Homeland Security, 
11Federal Emergency Management Agency or another funding source.
12SUMMARY
13This bill allows a municipality, in the event of a power outage of 5 or more days, to 
14hire appropriately licensed professionals to address power, telephone and similar lines 
15that have been felled by weather events and that are preventing access to roadways within 
16the municipality.  It allows a municipality to apply to receive compensation from the 
17local electric utility, the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management, 
18Maine Emergency Management Agency, the United States Department of Homeland 
19Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency or another funding source.
