 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 717
H.P. 522 House of  Representatives, February 11, 2019
An Act  To Provide  Comprehensive Mental Health Treatment 
Reform
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CRAVEN of Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  AUSTIN  of Skowhegan,  CLOUTIER of Lewiston, 
FARNSWORTH of  Portland, FAY of Raymond, MADIGAN of Waterville,  McCREA of Fort 
Fairfield, PERRY of Calais.

Page 1 - 129LR1391(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to create a seamless crisis services system that allows high-risk 
6patients timely access to inpatient care and to increase communication within the crisis 
7services system to better manage patients after discharge. The purpose of this bill is to 
8save lives and improve the overall quality and integrity of the crisis services system by:
91.  Creating a single point of entry for a high-risk patient by designating an 
10independent entity of a hospital to provide clinical assessment of the patient and 
11determine whether the patient meets inpatient criteria of care;
122.  Adopting universal criteria under which priority admission for a patient is based 
13on acuteness of crisis and length of stay in an emergency room;
143.  Requiring hospitals to communicate with and make referrals to community 
15providers for aftercare within 24 hours following discharge from the emergency room or 
16inpatient treatment when patients are most at risk of suicide; and
174.  Exploring further significant upgrades, access and training in developing 
18prevention and postintervention services with the goal of avoiding hospitalization of 
19patients with mental illness who are not in need of psychiatric hospitalization and can be 
20stabilized in the community.
