 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 485
S.P. 150 In Senate,  January  31, 2019
An Act  To Require  an Owner of a Dangerous Dog To Remain at the 
Scene of an Assault by  the Dog
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator POULIOT of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative HARNETT of Gardiner and
Senator: BELLOWS of Kennebec, Representatives:  DOORE  of Augusta,  FECTEAU of 
Augusta.

Page 1 - 129LR0179(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  7 MRSA ยง3955 is enacted to read:
3ยง3955.  Leaving the scene of a dangerous dog assault
4The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog that assaults a person and causes serious 
5bodily injury to that person may not leave the scene of the assault before giving that 
6owner's or keeper's name and current address to the injured person, a person acting for the 
7injured person or a law enforcement officer, except for the purpose of securing aid for the 
8injured person, in which case the owner or keeper leaving the scene of the assault shall 
9give that owner's or keeper's name and current address after securing such aid.
10A person who fails to comply with this section commits a Class C crime.
11SUMMARY
12This bill requires the owner or keeper of a dangerous dog that assaults a person and 
13causes serious bodily injury to remain at the scene of the assault until after providing the 
14owner's or keeper's name and current address to the injured person, a person acting for the 
15injured person or a law enforcement officer.  A person who fails to comply commits a 
16Class C crime.
