 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1722
S.P. 571 In Senate,  May 14, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Secretary of State To Develop a Plan  for 
Implementation of  Automatic Registration of Nonregistered Persons 
Qualified To Vote through  Records  of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
Submitted by the Secretary of State pursuant to Joint Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LUCHINI of Hancock.
Cosponsored by Representative:  SCHNECK  of Bangor.

Page 1 - 129LR2287(01)-11Sec. 1.  Secretary of State to plan for implementation of automatic voter 
2registration; report.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State shall study and develop a 
3plan for the implementation of automatic voter registration using records transmitted 
4through the Department of the Secretary of State, Bureau of Motor Vehicles of persons 
5who are qualified to vote but not registered.  The plan must include consideration of the 
6current compatibility of computer systems used by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and the 
7central voter registration system as defined in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 21-A, 
8section 1, subsection 6-A with regard to facilitating automatic voter registration and the 
9technical infrastructure improvements required to facilitate automatic voter registration, if 
10any.  The plan must address development of security measures to protect the data 
11transmitted for the purposes of voter registration; data uniformity standards in regard to 
12names and residence addresses contained in the 2 databases; and any other information 
13the Secretary of State determines to be important when considering implementing 
14automatic voter registration.  The Secretary of State shall submit a report of the findings 
15of the study, including the implementation plan and funding needs, to the Joint Standing 
16Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs no later than February 1, 2020.  The Joint 
17Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs is authorized to report out a bill to the 
18Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature based on the recommended plan.
19SUMMARY
20This resolve directs the Secretary of State to study the implementation of automatic 
21voter registration.  The Secretary of State is required to submit a report to the Joint 
22Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs by February 1, 2020.
