 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 Date: 5/1/19 L.D. 908 
(Filing No. H-SD.l) 
~~-/ !,.1, ' AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
129TH LEGISLATURE 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT .. ft, to H.P. 672, L.D. 908, Bill, "An Act To 
Require Schools To Submit Pest Management Activity Logs and Inspection Results to the 
Board of Pesticides Control for the Purpose of Providing Information to the Public" 
Amend the bill by incorporating the attached fiscal note. 
SUMMARY 
This amendment incorporates a fiscal note. 
The fiscal note on the amendment, which is a fiscal note only amendment, identifies 
certain requirements in the bill as a potential state mandate. In order to be a mandate 
pursuant to the Constitution of Maine, a provision must require a· local unit of 
government to expand or modify its activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures 
from local revenue. The committee finds the provisions identified as a potential mandate 
do not require a local unit of government to expand or modify its activities so as to 
necessitate additional expenditures from local revenue. 
The requirement in the bill that a local school administrative unit submit a pest 
management activity log to the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, 
Board of Pesticides Control by January 15th of each year for the previous calendar year 
does not require an expansion or modification of activities so as to necessitate additional 
expenditures from local revenue. Local school administrative units currently prepare pest 
management activity logs with the required data pursuant to rules established by the 
Board of Pesticides Control. The committee finds that the act of submitting a pest 
management activity log that is already required to be maintained does not necessitate 
additional expenditures from local revenue. 
Page 1 -129LR1854(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 05/02/19 fo?ac 
129th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD908 LR 1854(02) 
An Act To Require Schools To Submit Pest Management Activity Logs and Inspection Results to the 
Board of Pesticides Control for the Purpose of Providing Information to the Public 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment.;/,{ /I-Ju~) 
Committee: Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
State Mandates 
Required Activity Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Potential State Mandate - Unfunded 
Requires local school administrative units to submit a pest management activity log 
to the Board of Pesticide Control by January 15th of each year for the previous 
calendar year. Local school administrative units currently prepare a pest 
management activity log with the required data pursuant to rules established by the 
Board of Pesticide Control. Unit Affected 
School Local Cost 
Insignificant 
statewide 
The required local activities in this bill may represent a state mandate pursuant to the Constitution of Maine. If the 
bill does require a local unit of government to expand or modify its activities so as to necessitate additional 
expenditures from local revenue, the state mandate provisions of the Constitution of Maine require either: (1) 
General Fund appropriations be provided to fund at least 90% of any additional necessitated local costs of the 
mandate; or (2) a Mandate Preamble be added to the bill and two-thirds of the members of each House vote to 
exempt the mandate from the funding requirement. If the bill does represent a state mandate and neither one of these 
actions occurs, the local units of government will not be required to implement the mandated activities. 
Fiscal Detail and Notes 
Any additional cost the Depmiment of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Board of Pesticides Control as a 
result of changes to rules related to their record keeping of pest management activity on school properties are 
anticipated to be minor and can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. 
LRl 854(02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
