 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 640
S.P. 202 In Senate, February 7, 2019
Resolve, To  Require a Study of Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Reductions from  the Proposed  Central  Maine Power Company 
Transmission Corridor
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CARSON of  Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative RYKERSON  of Kittery and
Senators: BELLOWS of Kennebec, BLACK of Franklin, CLAXTON of Androscoggin, FARRIN of  Somerset, FOLEY of York, Representatives: DODGE of Belfast,  FAY  of 
Raymond, TUCKER of Brunswick.

Page 1 - 129LR2042(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, Central Maine Power Company has promoted its proposed western Maine 
4transmission corridor, the New England Clean Energy Connect project, or NECEC, as a 
5means of reducing greenhouse gas emissions but has not provided adequate evidence to 
6the public and decision makers; and
7Whereas, Department of Environmental Protection rule Chapter 375: No Adverse 
8Environmental Effect Standards of the Site Location of Development Act requires that 
9projects cause no unreasonable alteration of climate, but the department has not 
10performed an independent analysis of the greenhouse gas effects of the NECEC and has 
11no plans to do so; and
12Whereas, the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 35-A, section 3132 requires the Public 
13Utilities Commission to consider the environmental effects of proposed transmission line 
14projects, but the commission has not performed an independent analysis of greenhouse 
15gas effects of the NECEC and has no plans to do so; and
16Whereas, climate change poses a substantial threat to Maine's economy, natural 
17resources and public health, including from increased spread of insect-borne diseases, 
18more frequent damaging storms, elevated sea levels and warming oceans; and
19Whereas, 53 miles of new, 150-foot-wide transmission corridor through western 
20Maine would fragment the largest expanse of intact temperate hardwood and mixed forest 
21in the world; and
22Whereas, Maine's natural resources agencies have expressed serious concern about 
23the transmission corridor's harm to brook trout, deer and other species; and
24Whereas, the New Hampshire Site Evaluation Committee concluded that there 
25would be no reduction in greenhouse gases from Northern Pass, a similar project to the 
26NECEC, unless Hydro-Quebec builds new facilities to increase generating capacity to 
27supply electricity to Massachusetts; and
28Whereas, Hydro-Quebec's application to Massachusetts to supply energy via the 
29NECEC specifically states that the NECEC will not result in any new construction of 
30facilities to increase generating capacity; and
31Whereas, Maine people and decision makers need concrete, verifiable, publicly 
32available information about the greenhouse gas reductions or lack of reductions 
33associated with the NECEC in order to make an informed decision on whether to support 
34the project; and
35Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
36the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
37immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
38therefore, be it
Page 2 - 129LR2042(01)-11Sec. 1.  NECEC review.  Resolved:  That the Department of Environmental 
2Protection shall review all relevant, verifiable evidence and issue a report on the total net 
3effect on greenhouse gas emissions from the New England Clean Energy Connect project 
4as proposed by Central Maine Power Company.  The department shall submit the report 
5to the Legislature, make the report available to the public and provide a copy of the report 
6to the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities by June 1, 2019.  The department 
7shall consider all relevant, verifiable evidence from New England, the Province of 
8Quebec, Canada and any other area as needed to determine the total net effect of the 
9project on greenhouse gases. The department may conduct the analysis of greenhouse gas 
10effects itself within existing resources or hire an independent consultant to conduct it. The 
11department may not issue a permit for the project without taking into account the results 
12of the department's review.
13Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
14legislation takes effect when approved.
15SUMMARY
16This resolve requires the Department of Environmental Protection to review all 
17relevant, verifiable evidence on the total net effect on greenhouse gas emissions from 
18Central Maine Power Company's New England Clean Energy Connect project and submit 
19a report to the Legislature, make the report available to the public and provide a copy of 
20the report to the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities by June 1, 2019.  The 
21resolve prohibits the department from issuing a permit for the project without taking into 
22account the results of the department's review.
