 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 391
H.P. 300 House of  Representatives, January 29, 2019
Resolve, To  Establish the Study Committee To Develop a 
Disposition Plan for Future Surplus State  Property  in York County
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MASTRACCIO  of Sanford.
Cosponsored by Senator WOODSOME of York and
Representatives: FECTEAU of  Biddeford,  FOLEY of Biddeford, HARRINGTON of Sanford, 
HYMANSON of York, Senators: CHENETTE  of York, FOLEY  of York.

Page 1 - 129LR0711(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, the Study Committee To Develop a Disposition Plan for Future Surplus 
4State Property in York County must be established in order to study and plan the 
5disposition of the 3 district courthouses in York County to be vacated when the courts are 
6consolidated into one building and of associated surplus state property; and
7Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90-day period expires in order that 
8the study may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 
9legislative session; and
10Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
11the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
12immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
13therefore, be it
14Sec. 1.  Committee established.  Resolved:  That the Study Committee To 
15Develop a Disposition Plan for Future Surplus State Property in York County, referred to 
16in this resolve as "the committee," is established.
17Sec. 2.  Committee membership.  Resolved:  That the committee consists of 10 
18members appointed as follows:
191.  Three members of the Senate, who represent York, Springvale and Biddeford, 
20appointed by the President of the Senate;
212.  Three members of the House of Representatives, who represent York, Springvale 
22and Biddeford, appointed by the Speaker of the House;
233.  Three municipal officials, one each from York, Springvale and Biddeford, who are 
24involved in economic development, appointed by the President of the Senate; and
254.  A representative of the Southern Maine Planning and Development Commission 
26appointed by the Speaker of the House.
27Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the first-named Senate member is the Senate 
28chair and the first-named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the 
29committee.
30Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of committee.  Resolved:  That all 
31appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 
32resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 
33Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 
34the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the committee.  If 30 days or more 
35after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 
36made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 
37for the committee to meet and conduct its business.
Page 2 - 129LR0711(01)-11Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the committee shall study and plan the 
2disposition of the 3 district courthouses in York County to be vacated when the courts are 
3consolidated into one building and of associated surplus state property.
4Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Legislative Council shall provide 
5necessary staffing services to the committee, except that Legislative Council staff support 
6is not authorized when the Legislature is in regular or special session.
7Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 4, 2019, the committee 
8shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 
9legislation, for presentation to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
10Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
11legislation takes effect when approved.
12SUMMARY
13This resolve establishes the Study Committee To Develop a Disposition Plan for 
14Future Surplus State Property in York County to study and plan the disposition of the 3 
15district courthouses in York County to be vacated when the courts are consolidated into 
16one building and of associated surplus state property.
