 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 504
H.P. 361 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2019
An Act  To Enhance the  Development of Innovative  Career and 
Technical Education Programs
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HIGGINS of Dover-Foxcroft.
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS  of Piscataquis and
Representatives: HANDY of Lewiston, McCREA of Fort Fairfield, MILLETT  of Waterford,  
O'CONNOR of Berwick, SAMPSON of  Alfred, STEWART of Presque Isle, Senators: 
BELLOWS of Kennebec, WOODSOME of York.

Page 1 - 129LR0831(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง8403-A, sub-ยง2, as amended by PL 2017, c. 420, ยง2, is 
3further amended to read:
42.  Procedure for authorizing career and technical education satellite programs.  
5Any affiliated unit that wishes to operate a career and technical education satellite 
6program shall submit a written request to operate such a satellite program to the 
7governing body of the center or region with which the unit is affiliated commissioner.  
8The request must fully document the perceived need for the operation of a satellite 
9program.  The governing body of the center or region with which the unit is affiliated 
10shall consider the request and forward its recommendation to the commissioner 
11concerning whether that request should be approved.  The commissioner shall act on the 
12request pursuant to section 8306-B.
13SUMMARY
14This bill streamlines the procedure for authorizing career and technical education 
15satellite programs.  Current law requires any affiliated unit that wishes to operate a career 
16and technical education satellite program to submit a written request to operate a satellite 
17program to the governing body of the center or region with which the unit is affiliated.  
18The governing body of the center or region considers the request and then forwards its 
19recommendation to the Commissioner of Education.  Instead, the bill provides that the 
20written request be submitted directly to the Commissioner of Education for approval.
