 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 1915
S.P. 662 In Senate, December  24, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental Protection To Evaluate Emissions  from Heated Aboveground  Petroleum Storage 
Tanks
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on December 20, 2019.  Referred to  the Committee  
on Environment and  Natural Resources pursuant to Joint  Rule  308.2 and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative CARNEY of Cape Elizabeth and
Senators: CARSON of Cumberland, CHIPMAN of Cumberland, VITELLI of Sagadahoc, Representatives: KESSLER of South Portland, PEBWORTH of Blue Hill.

Page 1 - 129LR2700(01)-11Sec. 1.  Air emissions study.  Resolved:  That the Department of Environmental 
2Protection shall study methods to measure and estimate air emissions from fixed-roof, 
3heated aboveground petroleum storage tanks.  In conducting the study under this section, 
4the department shall include, but is not limited to, consideration of methods published by 
5the United States Environmental Protection Agency, ASTM International and the 
6National Institute of Standards and Technology, as well as methods used by other states 
7and jurisdictions.
8Sec. 2.  Odor and air emissions control study.  Resolved:  That the 
9Department of Environmental Protection shall study methods to control odor and other air 
10emissions from emission sources at oil terminal facilities, including emissions from 
11aboveground petroleum storage tanks, loading racks and vessel offloading.  In conducting 
12the study under this section, the department shall include consideration of best available 
13technologies for the control of odor and emissions being used by other states and 
14jurisdictions.
15Sec. 3.  Report.  Resolved:  That, by January 1, 2021, the Department of 
16Environmental Protection shall report its findings under sections 1 and 2 to the joint 
17standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over environment and natural 
18resources matters.  The report must include recommendations from the department for 
19methods to be applied for emissions measurement and estimates, as well as recommended 
20odor and emission control requirements, and must include identification of any 
21procedural steps necessary to implement those recommendations in the State under the 
22federal Clean Air Act.
23The joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over environment 
24and natural resources matters is authorized to submit legislation related to the report to 
25the First Regular Session of the 130th Legislature.
26SUMMARY
27This resolve directs the Department of Environmental Protection to study methods to 
28measure and estimate air emissions from fixed-roof, heated aboveground petroleum 
29storage tanks and methods to control odor and other air emissions from emission sources 
30at oil terminal facilities.  The department is required to submit a report by January 1, 2021 
31to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over environment 
32and natural resources matters, which may submit legislation to the First Regular Session 
33of the 130th Legislature.
