 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 724
H.P. 529 House of  Representatives, February 11, 2019
An Act  To Amend the Maine Background  Check Center Act To 
Provide Employers  Flexibility To  Use Approved  Alternate Vendors
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FAY of Raymond.
Cosponsored by Senator HERBIG of  Waldo and
Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, COREY of Windham, DENNO  of Cumberland,  
FARNSWORTH of  Portland, MASTRACCIO  of Sanford, MEYER of Eliot.

Page 1 - 129LR0782(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, this legislation must take effect within the 90-day period in order to help 
4ensure public safety; and
5Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
6the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
7immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
8therefore,
9Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
10Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง9054, sub-ยง2, as enacted by PL 2015, c. 299, ยง25, is amended 
11to read:
122.  Employer obligations.  An employer subject to this chapter shall use the 
13Background Check Center to conduct a comprehensive background check that includes a 
14criminal history records check for all direct access workers.  The employer shall comply 
15with the requirements of this chapter when making employment-related decisions for 
16direct access workers.  Notwithstanding any other law or rule to the contrary, an 
17employer at any time may apply for and obtain approval from the department to use an 
18approved alternate vendor instead of the Background Check Center as long as all other 
19laws and rules under this chapter pertaining to the use of alternate vendors are complied 
20with in order for the employer to obtain approval.
21Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
22legislation takes effect when approved.
23SUMMARY
24This bill allows an employer seeking to conduct a comprehensive background check 
25for a direct access worker under the Maine Background Check Center Act to apply for 
26and obtain at any time from the Department of Health and Human Services approval to 
27use an approved alternate vendor instead of the Background Check Center as long as all 
28other laws and rules pertaining to the use of alternate vendors are complied with in order 
29for the employer to obtain approval.
