 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 662
H.P. 483 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2019
An Act  To Count  Study Abroad toward Secondary School Credit
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FECTEAU of Augusta.
Cosponsored by Senator POULIOT of Kennebec and
Representatives: DODGE  of Belfast, DRINKWATER of Milford,  FECTEAU of Biddeford, 
INGWERSEN of Arundel, KORNFIELD of Bangor, MASON of Lisbon,  McCREA of Fort 
Fairfield, SAMPSON of  Alfred.

Page 1 - 129LR1657(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง4730 is enacted to read:
3ยง4730.  Study abroad
4A school administrative unit shall award course credits to a student who has studied 
5abroad and who seeks to be awarded course credits by the student's local school 
6administrative unit in accordance with one of the following standards.  The school 
7administrative unit may:
81.  Elective credit.  Award the student elective credits in the amount equal to 1/3 of 
9the direct instruction hours received abroad;
102.  Third-party certification.  Award the student course credits in the relevant 
11content area if the student attains certification in that content area by a 3rd party approved 
12by the school administrative unit.  The amount of course credits must be determined by 
13comparing the results of the certification and the requirements of an equivalent course 
14offered by the school administrative unit; or
153.  Summative assessment.  Award the student course credits in the relevant content 
16area if the student receives a passing grade on:
17A.  The summative assessment in an equivalent course offered by the school 
18administrative unit; or
19B.  The first summative assessment in a course that is one level higher than the 
20equivalent course offered by the school administrative unit.
21SUMMARY
22This bill requires school administrative units to award course credit to students who 
23have studied abroad by awarding the student elective credit based on hours of instruction 
24received abroad or by awarding credit hours in the relevant content area if the student 
25receives 3rd-party certification or if the student passes a summative assessment.
