 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 348
H.P. 274 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2019
An Act  To Prohibit the Providing of Misleading or Inaccurate  
Information via Caller Identification Services during Telemarketing  
Calls
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TIPPING of Orono.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: RILEY  of Jay, ROBERTS-LOVELL of South Berwick, RYKERSON of 
Kittery, Senator: MILLETT of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR0064(01)-11 Be it enacted  by the People of  the State of Maine as  follows:
2 Sec. 1.  10 MRSA ยง1499-A, as enacted by PL 2003, c. 70, ยง1 and affected by ยง2, 
3 is amended  to read:
4 ยง1499-A.  Telemarketing; prohibition on number blocking and misleading caller 
5 identification
6 1.  Definitions.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
7 following terms  have the following  meanings.
8 A.  "Caller identification service" means a service  that allows  a telephone subscriber 
9 to have the telephone number and, where available, name of the calling party 
10 transmitted contemporaneously with the telephone call and displayed on a device in 
11 or connected to the  subscriber's telephone.
12 B.  "Seller" means any person who, in connection with a telemarketing  transaction, 
13 provides, offers to provide or arranges for others to provide goods  or services to the 
14 customer in exchange for  consideration.
15 C.  "Telemarketer"  means any person who, in connection with telemarketing, initiates 
16 or receives telephone  calls  to or from a  customer or  donor.
17 D.  "Telemarketing"  means a plan, program or campaign  that is conducted by use of 
18 one or more telephones or other telecommunications services, including 
19 interconnected voice over Internet protocol, to induce the purchase of goods or 
20 services or a charitable contribution and that involves more than one intrastate 
21 telephone call.  "Telemarketing"  does not include the solicitation  of sales  through the 
22 mailing of a catalog that contains a written description or illustration  of the goods or 
23 services offered for sale, the business  address of the seller and multiple  pages of 
24 written material or illustrations, and that is issued not less frequently than once a 
25 year, if the person  making the solicitation does not solicit customers  by telephone but 
26 only receives calls initiated by customers in response to the catalog and during those  
27 calls takes orders without further solicitation.  For purposes of this paragraph, the 
28 term "further solicitation" does not include providing  the customer  with information 
29 about, or attempting to sell, any other  item included in the same  catalog that 
30 prompted the customer's call or in a substantially  similar catalog.
31 2.  Prohibition.  Except  as provided in subsection 3, it is an unfair trade  practice, as 
32 prohibited by Title 5, section 207, for a seller or telemarketer to fail to transmit or cause  
33 to be transmitted  the telephone number  and, when made available  by the telemarketer's 
34 carrier, the name of the telemarketer  to any caller identification service in use by a 
35 recipient of a telemarketing  call.
36 2-A.  Misleading or inaccurate caller  identification information prohibited; 
37 penalty.  A seller  or telemarketer  may not knowingly cause any caller identification 
38 service to transmit misleading or inaccurate caller identification  information with the 
39 intent to defraud  or cause harm  to another  person or to wrongfully  obtain anything of 
40 value.  In addition to any other penalty provided by this section, a person  found guilty of 
41 violating this subsection commits  a civil violation for which a fine of not less than $500 
Page 2 - 129LR0064(01)-11 for the first offense and not less than $1,000 for any subsequent offense must be adjudged  
2 and for which the seller or telemarketer must pay restitution of any financial benefit 
3 secured through conduct proscribed  by this  subsection.
4 3.  Exception.  It is not a violation of subsection 2 or 2-A for a seller or telemarketer 
5 to substitute for  the name and telephone number used in or billed for  making the call:
6 A.  The name of the seller or charitable organization on whose behalf  the 
7 telemarketing call is placed; and
8 B.  The seller's or charitable organization's customer  or donor service telephone 
9 number that is answered  during regular business hours.
10 SUMMARY
11 This bill makes it a civil violation for a seller or telemarketer engaging  in a 
12 telemarketing call to knowingly cause  any caller identification service  to transmit 
13 misleading or inaccurate  caller identification  with the intent  to defraud or cause harm to 
14 another person  or to wrongfully obtain anything  of value.  It establishes  a fine of not less 
15 than $500 for the first offense and of not less than $1,000  for any subsequent  offense to 
16 be imposed in addition to any other penalties imposed under  the law regarding 
17 telemarketing and  caller  identification and requires  restitution  to be paid.
