 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1299
H.P. 942 House of  Representatives, March 19, 2019
An Act  To Incentivize Municipalities,  State  Agencies, Colleges and 
Universities To  Use Electric Vehicles
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative INGWERSEN of  Arundel.
Cosponsored by Senator CHENETTE of York and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, DENK of  Kennebunk, DOUDERA of Camden, HEPLER 
of Woolwich, MAXMIN of Nobleboro, MEYER of Eliot, PLUECKER of Warren.

Page 1 - 129LR1380(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  35-A MRSA ยง10124 is enacted to read:
3ยง10124.  Electric vehicle incentive program
4The trust shall, in accordance with this section, develop a program to provide grants 
5to municipalities, state agencies, colleges and universities to support the purchase of 
6charging stations for electric vehicles and the purchase of electric vehicles.
71.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
8following terms have the following meanings.
9A.  "Electric vehicle" means a car or other motor vehicle that uses one or more 
10electric motors for propulsion.
11B.  "Eligible charging station" means a charging station for an electric vehicle that is 
12made available for public use other than a standard 120-volt electrical outlet and 
13includes but is not limited to a 240-volt charging station or a direct current charging 
14station.
15C.  "Eligible entity" means a state agency, a municipality or a college or university 
16located in this State.
17D.  "Fund" means the electric vehicle fund established in subsection 3.
18E.  "Program" means the electric vehicle incentive program established pursuant to 
19this section.
202.  Program design.  Under the program, the trust may provide grants to eligible 
21entities for the purchase and installation of one or more eligible charging stations or one 
22or more electric vehicles.  The trust shall establish procedures for eligible entities to apply 
23for grants under this section and for choosing grantees and determining grant amounts.  
24The program may provide grants for the full or partial cost of vehicles or charging 
25stations and grants for the purpose of providing matching funds for or otherwise 
26supplementing other state, federal or private funding.
273.  Fund established.  There is established the electric vehicle fund.  The fund is a 
28nonlapsing fund administered by the trust.  The trust may seek and accept funding for the 
29program from any source, public or private.  Any funds accepted for use in the program 
30must be deposited in the fund.  Funds not spent in any fiscal year remain in the fund to be 
31used for the purposes of this section.  Any interest earned on funds in the fund must be 
32credited to the fund.
33SUMMARY
34This bill requires the Efficiency Maine Trust to develop a program to provide grants 
35to municipalities, state agencies, colleges and universities to support the purchase of 
36charging stations for electric vehicles and the purchase of electric vehicles.
