 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 159
S.P. 46 In Senate,  January  17, 2019
An Act  To Require  Cameras in Ambulances  When a Patient Is 
Being Transported
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MIRAMANT of Knox.
Cosponsored by Representative BEEBE-CENTER  of Rockland  and
Senators: CHIPMAN of Cumberland, DILL of Penobscot, GRATWICK of Penobscot, Representatives: DOORE of Augusta, DOUDERA of Camden,  RYKERSON of Kittery.

Page 1 - 129LR0192(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง86, sub-ยง4 is enacted to read:
34.  Video recording required.  An ambulance that is or may be used to transport a 
4patient from the scene of an emergency or from a hospital or other health care facility to 
5another place must be equipped with video recording equipment capable of creating a 
6clear video record of the care provided to the patient during the transport.  Whenever an 
7ambulance transports a patient from the scene of an emergency or from a hospital or other 
8health care facility to another place, the video recording equipment required under this 
9subsection must be in operation for the duration of the transport and must be producing a 
10clear video record of the care provided to the patient.
11A.  A licensee that operates an ambulance service required under this subsection to be 
12equipped with video recording equipment shall maintain each video record required 
13to be produced under this subsection for 90 days from the date of the recording, after 
14which time the licensee shall ensure that the video record is destroyed.
15B.  In accordance with federal health information privacy laws and regulations and 
16Title 22, section 1711-C, a video record produced under this subsection must be 
17maintained as confidential.  A licensee shall provide a copy of a video record 
18produced under this subsection to the board or the department upon request, and the 
19board or the department shall maintain the confidentiality of the video record in 
20accordance with the requirements of section 91-B.
21SUMMARY
22This bill requires that, whenever an ambulance transports a patient from the scene of 
23an emergency or from a hospital or other health care facility to another place, the 
24ambulance must be equipped with video recording equipment that is in operation for the 
25duration of the transport and that is producing a clear video record of the care provided to 
26the patient.  In accordance with applicable federal and state law, the video records are to 
27be maintained as confidential by the ambulance service operator and, if applicable, by the 
28Emergency Medical Services' Board and the Department of Public Safety.
