 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 227
H.P. 190 House of  Representatives, January 22, 2019
An Act  To Strengthen Maine's Public Health Infrastructure
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PERRY of Calais.
Cosponsored by Senator CARSON of Cumberland and
Representatives: BRENNAN  of Portland, CRAVEN of Lewiston, GATTINE of Westbrook,  
HEPLER of Woolwich, MEYER  of Eliot, Senators: DAVIS of Piscataquis,  MOORE of 
Washington.

Page 1 - 129LR1626(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to enact measures designed to strengthen the State's public health 
6infrastructure by:
71.  Identifying community-level geographic regions where essential public health 
8services, including competent and qualified comprehensive community health coalitions, 
9can be funded equitably;
102.  Ensuring that basic and essential public health services be delivered in each public 
11health district and tribal health district;
123.  Identifying emerging nonclinical public health workers, including community 
13health workers, community paramedics, recovery coaches and resiliency coaches, who 
14can strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of public health service delivery;
154.  Facilitating, when possible, the integration and collaboration of public and private 
16public health professionals with public safety professionals and emergency preparedness 
17professionals; and
185.  Enabling the operation of public health professionals, public safety professionals 
19and emergency preparedness professionals as a cohesive and coordinated public health 
20team to improve the visibility and understanding of public health among Maine children 
21and adults.
