 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 735
H.P. 540 House of  Representatives, February 11, 2019
An Act  To Create a Permanent Wabanaki Law Enforcement Seat 
on the Board  of Trustees of the Maine  Criminal Justice Academy
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TALBOT ROSS  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Representative WARREN of Hallowell, Senator MOORE of Washington and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, CARDONE of Bangor, FECTEAU of Biddeford,  
HARNETT of Gardiner,  HICKMAN  of Winthrop, MOONEN of Portland, TUELL of East 
Machias, Senator: CARPENTER of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR1278(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  25 MRSA ยง2802, as amended by PL 2013, c. 147, ยง7, is further amended 
3to read:
4ยง2802.  Board of trustees
5There is created a board of trustees for the academy consisting of 17 18 members as 
6follows: the Commissioner of Public Safety, ex officio, the Attorney General, ex officio, 
7the Game Warden Colonel in the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, ex officio, 
8the Commissioner of Corrections, ex officio, and the Chief of the State Police, ex officio, 
9and a law enforcement official representing the Wabanaki tribal governments of the 
10Aroostook Band of Micmacs, the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, the Passamaquoddy 
11Tribe at Motahmikuk, the Passamaquoddy Tribe at Sipayik and the Penobscot Nation and 
12the following to be appointed by the Governor: a county sheriff, a chief of a municipal 
13police department, 2 officers of municipal police departments who are not police chiefs, 
14an educator who is not and has never been a sworn member of a law enforcement agency, 
15a criminal prosecutor from one of the offices of the District Attorney, a representative of 
16a federal law enforcement agency, 3 citizens each of whom is not and has never been a 
17sworn member of a law enforcement agency, a municipal official who is not and has 
18never been a sworn member of a law enforcement agency and one nonsupervisory 
19corrections officer representing a state or county correctional facility.  The law 
20enforcement official representing the 5 Wabanaki tribal governments must be appointed 
21by the tribal governments by a process determined by those governments that provides 
22for the board membership to rotate among the tribal governments.
23A designee of an ex officio member is a member of the board only during the term of 
24office of the ex officio member who designated the designee. All of the other members of 
25the board serve for a term of 3 years, except that the Wabanaki law enforcement member 
26serves for a term of 2 years.  A trustee holds office for the term for which the trustee is 
27appointed or until the trustee's successor had has been appointed and qualified.  Members 
28of the board are entitled to compensation in accordance with Title 5, chapter 379.  Any 
29vacancy on the board of trustees must be filled in the same manner as the original 
30appointment, but for the unexpired term.
31SUMMARY
32This bill provides a permanent seat on the Board of Trustees of the Maine Criminal 
33Justice Academy for a representative of the 5 Wabanaki tribal governments.  The tribal 
34representative must be a law enforcement official and must be chosen for a 2-year term 
35by a process determined by the tribal governments.  The process must require that the 
36position rotate among the 5 tribal governments.
