 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1159
H.P. 848 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2019
Resolve, To  End Hunger in  Maine  by 2030
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HICKMAN of Winthrop.
Cosponsored by President  JACKSON  of Aroostook and
Representatives: Speaker GIDEON of  Freeport,  KRYZAK of Acton, MAXMIN of Nobleboro, 
PLUECKER of Warren, ROBERTS-LOVELL  of South Berwick,  STROM  of Pittsfield, 
TALBOT ROSS of  Portland, Senator: MOORE of Washington.

Page 1 - 129LR2009(01)-11Preamble. Whereas, the Legislature finds that, for the economic and social well-
2being of the people of the State, all people must be free from hunger, food insecurity, 
3malnutrition, starvation or endangerment of life from scarcity of or lack of access to 
4nourishing and culturally appropriate food; and
5Whereas, the human, social and economic costs of hunger, food insecurity and 
6malnutrition to the State are enormous and far reaching, leading to lost productivity, 
7health-related problems, reduced well-being, decreased learning ability, reduced 
8fulfilment of human potential and social and political unrest that undermines 
9development efforts; and
10Whereas, one in 4 children in Maine goes to bed hungry every night, 37% of the 
11Maine people who face hunger, food insecurity or malnutrition do not qualify for any 
12public assistance and Maine ranks first in New England and 9th in the nation for food 
13insecurity; and
14Whereas, many emergency food relief sites in the State regularly lack fresh fruits 
15and vegetables and other nutrient-dense foods for residents struggling with hunger, food 
16insecurity or malnutrition; and
17Whereas, for the consumer, producer and the environment, the cost of food 
18produced by and for the global industrial food system has risen in the last decade; and
19Whereas, 90% of the food Maine people consume is imported from elsewhere; and
20Whereas, Maine has all the natural resources and hard-working, self-reliant people 
21to grow, catch, harvest and process enough food to reduce imports and provide the people 
22of the State with a diet based more on Maine-produced foods and yet state food policy to 
23date has not significantly reduced hunger, food insecurity or malnutrition for the people 
24of the State; now, therefore, be it
25Sec. 1.  Plan to eliminate hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition in the 
26State.  Resolved:  That the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, in 
27consultation and collaboration with interested parties and stakeholders, including, but not 
28limited to, statewide and community-based advocacy and emergency food relief 
29organizations and nonprofit organizations, financial institutions, private foundations, 
30interfaith religious councils, farmers, persons who fish commercially, food producers, 
31state and local granges, civic organizations, regional, local and community food policy 
32councils and people who struggle with hunger, food insecurity or malnutrition, shall 
33collaborate with the Department of Marine Resources, the Department of Inland Fisheries 
34and Wildlife, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Labor, 
35the Department of Economic and Community Development, the Department of 
36Education, the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management, Bureau of 
37Maine Veterans' Services and the University of Maine Cooperative Extension to develop 
38a comprehensive strategic plan to eliminate hunger in the State by 2030. The strategic 
39plan designed under this resolve must at least:
401.  Use existing programs, staff and resources to the extent possible;
Page 2 - 129LR2009(01)-112.  Define and articulate the scope of the food and nutrition situation in the State, 
2including accurate data and information related to the contribution of relevant sectors on 
3nutrition, food consumption and production, food distribution systems, household 
4incomes and other relevant demographic data, in order to address the multiple dimensions 
5of hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition;
63.  Include any recommendations of legislative commissions, task forces, working 
7groups or studies on ending hunger for any targeted population that will prove effective 
8for the general population;
94.  Determine any disproportionate impact of hunger, food insecurity or malnutrition 
10on people living in food deserts across the State and include proposals to close those gaps 
11more quickly as the State moves toward eradicating hunger;
125.  Determine the barriers to access to healthy and culturally appropriate food and 
13include proposals to eliminate those barriers for persons who struggle with 
14intergenerational hunger, food insecurity or malnutrition and for persons who struggle 
15with intermittent hunger, food insecurity or malnutrition;
166.  Balance supply-side policies and solutions such as increasing agricultural 
17productivity and accessing markets, investing in family farms, small-scale fisheries and 
18forestry and fostering governance of land tenure and natural resources with policies and 
19solutions that promote food self-sufficiency, including hunting, foraging and the policies 
20outlined in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 7, section 219;
217.  Establish benchmarks and measurable outcomes based on sound evidence and 
22analysis to monitor progress, assess impacts and interpret outcomes in order to ensure that 
23actions bring the State closer to eradicating hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition by 
242030; and
258.  Identify and propose adequate resource allocation in order to translate policies, 
26programs and legislation into concrete action.
27Sec. 2.  Initial design commencement.  Resolved:  That, no later than 30 days 
28after the effective date of this resolve, the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
29Forestry shall begin inviting interested parties, stakeholders and the departments outlined 
30under section 1 to convene the first planning session.
31Sec. 3.  Initial design report. Resolved:  That, by February 10, 2020, the 
32Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry shall submit a report to the Joint 
33Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry detailing the initial 
34design for the plan under section 1. The committee is authorized to submit legislation 
35based on the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
36SUMMARY
37This bill directs the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, in 
38consultation and collaboration with interested parties and stakeholders, to collaborate 
39with the Department of Marine Resources, the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Page 3 - 129LR2009(01)-11Wildlife, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Labor, the 
2Department of Economic and Community Development, the Department of Education, 
3the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management, Bureau of Maine 
4Veterans' Services and the University of Maine Cooperative Extension to develop a 
5comprehensive strategic plan to eliminate hunger in the State by 2030.  The Department 
6of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry is required to submit an initial design for the 
7plan by February 10, 2020 to the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation 
8and Forestry, which may submit legislation based on the report to the Second Regular 
9Session of the 129th Legislature.
