 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1375
H.P. 996 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2019
An Act  To Prevent  Law  Enforcement Officers from Using Their 
Authority To Extract  Sexual Favors
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative McCREA of Fort Fairfield.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox, Senator  MILLETT  of Cumberland and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, DODGE of  Belfast,  FECTEAU of  Augusta, MARTIN of 
Sinclair, O'NEIL of Saco,  Senator: CARPENTER of  Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR0020(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA §255-A, sub-§1, ¶¶W and X, as enacted by PL 2011, c. 
3423, §6, are amended to read:
4W.  The actor is employed to provide care to a dependent person, who is not the 
5actor's spouse or domestic partner and who is unable to perform self-care because of 
6advanced age or physical or mental disease, disorder or defect.  For the purposes of 
7this paragraph, "domestic partners" means 2 unmarried adults who are domiciled 
8together under a long-term arrangement that evidences a commitment to remain 
9responsible indefinitely for each other's welfare.  Violation of this paragraph is a 
10Class D crime; or
11X.  The actor is employed to provide care to a dependent person, who is not the 
12actor's spouse or domestic partner and who is unable to perform self-care because of 
13advanced age or physical or mental disease, disorder or defect and the sexual contact 
14includes penetration.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "domestic partners" means 
152 unmarried adults who are domiciled together under a long-term arrangement that 
16evidences a commitment to remain responsible indefinitely for each other's welfare.  
17Violation of this paragraph is a Class C crime.;
18Sec. 2.  17-A MRSA §255-A, sub-§1, ¶¶ Y and Z are enacted to read:
19Y.  The actor is a law enforcement officer and the other person, not the actor's spouse, 
20is under arrest, in custody, being interrogated or temporarily detained, including 
21during a traffic stop or questioning pursuant to an investigation of a crime, by the 
22actor.  Violation of this paragraph is a Class D crime; or
23Z.  The actor is a law enforcement officer and the other person, not the actor's spouse, 
24is under arrest, in custody, being interrogated or temporarily detained, including 
25during a traffic stop or questioning pursuant to an investigation of a crime, by the 
26actor and the sexual contact includes penetration.  Violation of this paragraph is a 
27Class C crime.
28SUMMARY
29This bill makes sexual contact between a law enforcement officer and a person who 
30is not the law enforcement officer's spouse while the person is under arrest, in custody, 
31being interrogated or temporarily detained, including during a traffic stop or questioning 
32pursuant to an investigation of a crime, by the law enforcement officer a Class D crime.  
33If the sexual contact involves penetration, the sexual contact is a Class C crime.
