 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 902
H.P. 666 House of  Representatives, February 19, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation To Conduct  a Sunrise  Review of  the Proposal To License 
Certain Mechanical Trades
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CUDDY of Winterport.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representative: SYLVESTER  of Portland, Senator: President JACKSON  of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR1056(01)-11Sec. 1.  Department of Professional and Financial Regulation to conduct a 
2sunrise review regarding the proposal to license certain mechanical trades.  
3Resolved:  That the Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation shall 
4conduct an independent assessment pursuant to the sunrise review requirements in the 
5Maine Revised Statutes, Title 32, chapter 1-A, subchapter 2 of the proposal to license 
6certain mechanical trades.
7Sec. 2.  Reporting date established.  Resolved:  That, no later than February 
818, 2020, the Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation shall submit a 
9report with any necessary legislation following the independent assessment under section 
101 to the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
11and Business.  That committee is authorized to submit legislation on the subject matter of 
12the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
13SUMMARY
14This resolve requires the Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation to 
15conduct an independent assessment pursuant to the sunrise review requirements in the 
16Maine Revised Statutes of the proposal to license certain mechanical trades and submit a 
17report to the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
18Advancement and Business.
