 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 1988
S.P. 690 In Senate,  January  8, 2020
An Act  To Prohibit the Distribution  of  Deceptive  Images or Audio 
or Video Recordings with the Intent To Influence the Outcome of  an 
Election
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative FECTEAU of Biddeford and
Senators: CARPENTER of Aroostook, DESCHAMBAULT of  York,  LIBBY of Androscoggin, 
LUCHINI of Hancock, Representatives: BERRY of Bowdoinham, HICKMAN of Winthrop,  
McCREIGHT of Harpswell, STOVER of Boothbay.

Page 1 - 129LR2747(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง34 is enacted to read:
3ยง34.  Materially deceptive audio or visual media
41.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
5following terms have the following meanings.
6A.  "Materially deceptive audio or visual media" means an image or an audio or video 
7recording of a candidate's appearance, speech or conduct that has been intentionally 
8manipulated in a manner that would cause a reasonable person:
9(1)  To mistakenly believe that the image or audio or video recording is authentic; 
10and
11(2)  To have a fundamentally different understanding or impression of the 
12expressive content of the image or audio or video recording than that person 
13would have if the person were hearing or seeing the unaltered, original version of 
14the image or audio or video recording.
15"Materially deceptive audio or visual media" does not include any image or audio or 
16video recording that constitutes satire or parody.
17B.  "Person" means an individual, committee, firm, partnership, corporation, 
18association or organization.
192.  Prohibition.  Except as provided in subsection 3 or 4, a person may not, with 
20actual malice and within 60 days of an election at which a candidate will appear on the 
21ballot, publish or distribute materially deceptive audio or visual media of the candidate 
22with the intent to injure the candidate's reputation or to deceive a voter into voting for or 
23against the candidate.
243.  Exception; disclosure.  Notwithstanding subsection 2, a person may, within 60 
25days of an election at which a candidate will appear on the ballot, publish or distribute an 
26image or an audio or video recording that would otherwise qualify as materially deceptive 
27audio or visual media of the candidate if the image or audio or video recording is 
28accompanied by a disclosure as described in this subsection.
29A.  If the material is an image, the following disclosure must be printed immediately 
30adjacent to the image in a font size that is easily readable by the average viewer and 
31that is no smaller than the largest font size of other text, if any, published or 
32distributed with the image: "This image has been manipulated."
33B.  If the material is a video recording, the following disclosure must appear for the 
34duration of the video recording in a font size that is easily readable by the average 
35viewer and that is no smaller than the largest font size of other text, if any, included 
36in the video recording: "This video has been manipulated."
37C.  If the material is an audio recording, the following disclosure must be read in a 
38clearly spoken manner and in a pitch that can be easily heard by the average listener, 
39at the beginning and end of the audio recording and, if the audio recording is greater 
Page 2 - 129LR2747(01)-11than 2 minutes in length, interspersed within the audio recording at intervals of no 
2greater than 2 minutes each: "This audio has been manipulated."
34.  Persons exempt.  Notwithstanding subsection 2, the following persons may 
4publish or distribute materially deceptive audio or visual media in the following 
5circumstances:
6A.  A radio or television broadcasting station, including a cable or satellite television 
7operator, programmer or producer, may broadcast materially deceptive audio or 
8visual media as part of a bona fide newscast, news interview or news documentary or 
9on-the-spot coverage of a bona fide news event if the broadcast includes in a clear 
10statement that can be easily heard or read by the average listener or viewer that there 
11are questions about the authenticity of the materially deceptive audio or visual media;
12B.  A radio or television broadcasting station, including a cable or satellite television 
13operator, programmer or producer, may broadcast materially deceptive audio or 
14visual media if it is paid to do so; and
15C.  The owner of a publicly accessible website or the publisher or printer of a 
16regularly published newspaper, magazine or other periodical of general circulation, 
17including an Internet or electronic publication, that routinely carries news and 
18commentary of general interest may publish materially deceptive audio or visual 
19media if the media is accompanied by a clear statement that the materially deceptive 
20audio or visual media does not accurately represent the speech or conduct of the 
21candidate whose appearance, speech or conduct is manipulated in the media.
225.  Injunctive relief.  A candidate whose voice or image appears in a materially 
23deceptive audio or visual media published or distributed in violation of this section may 
24seek a temporary restraining order and injunction prohibiting publication or distribution 
25of the materially deceptive audio or visual media.  The candidate bears the burden of 
26proving a violation of this section by clear and convincing evidence.
276.  Monetary damages.  A candidate whose voice or image appears in a materially 
28deceptive audio or visual media published or distributed in violation of this section may 
29bring a civil action against the person that published or distributed the materially 
30deceptive audio or visual media for the recovery of general or special damages as well as 
31reasonable attorney's fees and court costs.  The candidate bears the burden of proving a 
32violation of this section by clear and convincing evidence.  Nothing in this subsection 
33may be construed to preclude a candidate from seeking monetary or equitable relief 
34through other actions as permissible by law.
357.  Laws unaffected.  This section may not be construed to alter any rights, 
36obligations or immunities of an interactive computer service under 47 United States 
37Code, Section 230.
38SUMMARY
39This bill prohibits a person from publishing or distributing, with actual malice and 
40within 60 days of the date of an election, materially deceptive audio or visual media of a 
41candidate who will appear on the ballot with the intent to injure the candidate's reputation 
Page 3 - 129LR2747(01)-11or to deceive a voter into voting for or against the candidate.  The bill defines "materially 
2deceptive audio or visual media" as an image or an audio or video recording of a 
3candidate that has been intentionally manipulated in a way that would cause a reasonable 
4person to mistakenly believe that the image or recording is authentic and that would cause 
5the person to have a fundamentally different understanding or impression of the content 
6of the image or recording than the person would have if the image or recording was 
7unaltered.  An image or audio or video recording that constitutes satire or parody is not 
8considered materially deceptive audio or visual media.  The bill authorizes a candidate 
9whose voice or image appears in materially deceptive audio or visual media to bring a 
10civil action seeking injunctive relief or monetary damages.  In such an action, the 
11candidate bears the burden of proving the violation by clear and convincing evidence.
12The bill's prohibition against the distribution of materially deceptive audio or visual 
13media does not apply if the materially deceptive audio or visual media is accompanied by 
14a disclosure indicating that the image or audio or video recording has been manipulated; 
15distributed as part of a news broadcast that includes a clear statement that there are 
16questions about the authenticity of the image or audio or video recording; broadcast by a 
17radio or television broadcasting station that has been paid to broadcast the materially 
18deceptive audio or visual media; or published by an Internet website or regularly 
19published newspaper, magazine or other periodical, as long as the materially deceptive 
20audio or visual media is accompanied by a statement that it does not accurately represent 
21the speech or conduct of the candidate.
22This bill is based on a recently enacted California law.
