 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 648
H.P. 469 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2019
An Act  To Improve  Reporting  of Operating Under the Influence 
Offenses
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative COREY of Windham.
Cosponsored by Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland and
Representatives: COOPER of Yarmouth,  COSTAIN of Plymouth, NADEAU of Winslow, 
PERKINS of  Oakland, RECKITT of South  Portland,  WARREN of Hallowell, Senators: 
CARPENTER of  Aroostook, DESCHAMBAULT of York.

Page 1 - 129LR1975(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  25 MRSA §1544, last ¶, as amended by PL 2001, c. 399, §6, is further 
3amended to read:
4The bureau shall establish a category for abuse by adults of family or household 
5members, a category for cruelty to animals and a category for crimes that manifest 
6evidence of prejudice based on race, religion, disability, sexual orientation or ethnicity 
7that are supplementary to its other reported information.  The bureau shall establish 
8separate categories for offenses that involve operating under the influence of alcohol, 
9offenses that involve operating under the influence of intoxicating substances other than 
10alcohol and offenses that involve operating under a combination of alcohol and other 
11intoxicating substances.  The bureau shall prescribe the information to be submitted in the 
12same manner as for all other categories of the uniform crime reports.
13SUMMARY
14This bill requires the Department of Public Safety, Bureau of State Police, State 
15Bureau of Identification to maintain separate categories in its uniform crime reporting for 
16offenses that involve operating under the influence of alcohol, offenses that involve 
17operating under the influence of intoxicating substances other than alcohol and offenses 
18that involve operating under a combination of alcohol and other intoxicating substances.
