 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 997
S.P. 287 In Senate, February 26, 2019
An Act  To Promote Social and Emotional Learning and 
Development for Young Children
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BREEN of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative GATTINE of Westbrook and
Senators: GRATWICK  of Penobscot, MILLETT  of Cumberland, MOORE of Washington, 
Representatives: BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland, FARNSWORTH of  Portland, KORNFIELD  
of Bangor, MILLETT of Waterford, MORALES of South Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR0108(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง254, sub-ยง20 is enacted to read:
320.  Statewide voluntary early childhood consultation program.  Beginning 
4September 1, 2020, the commissioner shall implement a statewide voluntary early 
5childhood consultation program to provide support, guidance and training to improve the 
6abilities and skills of early care and education teachers and providers working in public 
7elementary schools, child care facilities as defined in Title 22, section 8301-A, subsection 
81-A, paragraph B, family child care settings and Head Start programs serving infants and 
9children who are 8 years of age or younger who are experiencing challenging behaviors 
10that put the infants or children at risk of learning difficulties and removal from early 
11learning and education settings, and to improve the abilities and skills of families and 
12foster parents with infants or children who are 8 years of age or younger in the home who 
13are experiencing challenging behaviors that put the infants or children at risk of learning 
14difficulties and removal from early learning and education settings.
15Sec. 2.  Early childhood consultation program.  By September 1, 2020, the 
16Department of Education shall develop, establish and implement an early childhood 
17consultation program under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20-A, section 254, 
18subsection 20, referred to in this section as "the program," to enable trained consultants 
19with expertise in the areas of early childhood development and mental health to work on-
20site with early care and education teachers and providers working with children to aid 
21them in the use of low-cost or no-cost evidence-based strategies that reduce challenging 
22behaviors in children and promote social-emotional growth; to provide guidance to 
23parents about effective ways to address their children's behavioral difficulties; and to 
24connect children and families to programs, resources and supports that will assist them in 
25their development and success, while addressing barriers to accessing these resources and 
26supports.  The department shall design the program in consultation with the national 
27Center of Excellence for Infant and Early Childhood Mental Health Consultation, a 
28project funded by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, 
29Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, and key stakeholders in the 
30State, including mental health professionals delivering mental health consultation within 
31the State.  In developing the program, the department shall:
321.  Develop standards and guidelines to ensure that the program is implemented with 
33primary consideration given to the core elements of evidence-based services as adapted 
34for the State's unique rural character.  The guidelines must include effective strengths-
35based strategies and plans that support children's success across learning environments. 
36The standards must include knowledge of research-informed infant and early childhood 
37mental health practices, family circumstances that affect children's behavior and mental 
38health, developmental science and milestones, mental health, trauma-informed 
39approaches, adverse childhood experiences, sensory processing issues, poverty, disability 
40and community supports, resources and services available to a child and the child's family 
41to alleviate family stress;
422.  Explore enhancing cross-sector professional development capacity in the State 
43through partnerships with entities such as the national Center of Excellence for Infant and 
Page 2 - 129LR0108(01)-11Early Childhood Mental Health Consultation and the Technical Assistance Center on 
2Social Emotional Intervention for Young Children, a project funded by the United States 
3Department of Education;
43. Develop a plan for consultants to establish connections for individualized on-site 
5coaching as requested by teachers, caregivers and families.  The plan may include 
6professional development in the form of group training and communities of practice that 
7include professionals, such as home visitors or child welfare staff, who work with young 
8children and families.  The plan must reinforce and extend the supports provided by early 
9childhood mental health consultants to people providing professional development in 
10early childhood and public school settings;
114.  Develop a system for collecting and analyzing implementation data and selected 
12outcomes to identify areas for improvement, promote accountability and provide 
13continuous quality improvement and service delivery to improve child outcomes by 
14providing feedback, including feedback from department staff and community 
15consultation staff; 
165.  Develop a plan for establishing, training and certifying a roster of community-
17based qualified mental health consultants with the specialized knowledge, skills and 
18experience to effectively coach families, teachers, providers and program directors to 
19promote a child's social and emotional health and reduce challenging behaviors.  The 
20training must include training related to the following: trauma; adverse childhood 
21experiences; resilience; trauma-informed practices; child development from birth to 8 
22years of age; effects of substance use; sensory processing issues; needs of children with 
23disabilities, including special education law; the State's child protection and foster care 
24system; other disciplines such as occupational therapy, speech therapy, physical therapy 
25and mental health therapy; and public and private supports and services, including the 
26Women, Infants and Children Special Supplemental Food Program of the federal Child 
27Nutrition Act of 1966; the Child Development Services System under the Maine Revised 
28Statutes, Title 20-A, section 7209; the division within the Department of Health and 
29Human Services concerned with children's behavioral health services; case management; 
30and entitlement programs.  Consultants must also receive training that is regionally 
31appropriate to understand the programs, resources and supports in their region or 
32community in order to link children, families and professionals to them. The training 
33must also include training in cultural competence to ensure consultants understand the 
34needs of the ethnically diverse communities they may be serving and the unique services 
35needed to support those populations;
366.  Develop a plan for supervision of early childhood consultation and outreach staff 
37that includes administrative, clinical and reflective supervision;
387.  Develop a plan in conjunction with staff from the Child Development Services 
39System under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20-A, section 7209 for how early 
40childhood consultants can support children, families and staff who intersect with the 
41Child Development Services System, particularly as the plan relates to children who are 
42referred for behavior issues; and
Page 3 - 129LR0108(01)-118.  Develop a memorandum of understanding with the Department of Health and 
2Human Services to determine how mental health consultants can support children and 
3families involved in the State's child protection and foster care system.
4Sec. 3.  Early implementation.  The Department of Education shall provide 
5support, guidance and training under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20-A, section 254, 
6subsection 20 in 5 locations prior to implementation of the statewide voluntary early 
7childhood consultation program in Title 20-A, section 254, subsection 20.
8Sec. 4.  Report.  The Department of Education shall submit a report by January 1, 
92021 to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over education 
10matters regarding the status of the statewide voluntary early childhood consultation 
11program in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20-A, section 254, subsection 20 and the 
12program's ability to provide support and guidance to families, early care and education 
13teachers and providers working with children.  The joint standing committee may submit 
14legislation related to the report to the First Regular Session of the 130th Legislature. 
15SUMMARY
16This bill requires the Commissioner of Education to implement, beginning September 
171, 2020, a statewide voluntary early childhood consultation program to provide support, 
18guidance and training to families, early care and education teachers and providers 
19working in public elementary schools, child care facilities, family child care settings and 
20Head Start programs serving infants and young children who are experiencing 
21challenging behaviors that put them at risk of learning difficulties and removal from early 
22learning settings.  The bill requires the Department of Education to design and implement 
23the program and to report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 
24jurisdiction over education matters on the implementation of the statewide voluntary 
25early childhood consultation program.
