 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1112
H.P. 816 House of  Representatives, March 5, 2019
An Act  To Provide  Employee Vaccination Compensation
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FECTEAU of Augusta.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  O'CONNOR of  Berwick, SAMPSON of Alfred, Senator:  
POULIOT of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 129LR1631(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  26 MRSA ยง592-A is enacted to read:
3ยง592-A.  Employee vaccinations
41.  Right of refusal.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an employee has 
5the right to refuse any or all vaccines or other immunizing agents required or 
6recommended by the employee's employer without coercion, consequence or retaliation 
7by the employer.
82.  Workplace; expense of employer.  An employee who elects to receive a vaccine 
9or other immunizing agent required or recommended by the employer has the right to 
10receive the vaccine or other immunizing agent at the employee's workplace and at the 
11expense of the employer.
123.  Documentation.  An employee who elects to receive a vaccine or other 
13immunizing agent pursuant to subsection 2 must be given documentation at the time of 
14immunization that describes the vaccine or other immunizing agent and includes 
15information about possible side effects.
164.  Injury or adverse medical reaction.  An employee must be compensated by the 
17employer for medical expenses for any injury or adverse medical reaction suffered by the 
18employee as a result of the vaccine or immunizing agent received under subsection 2 and 
19the employee must be provided paid time off for the employee's necessary absence from 
20work.  Paid time off provided pursuant to this subsection may not be counted against the 
21employee's sick time, vacation time or other benefits.  This subsection applies in addition 
22to any remedy available under Title 39-A.
235.  Notice.  An employer shall provide employees with written notice of the 
24employee's rights under this section on an annual basis.  The Department of Labor may 
25prescribe the form and format of this written notice.
26SUMMARY
27This bill establishes the right of an employee to refuse any vaccine required or 
28recommended by the employer without coercion, consequence or retaliation by the 
29employer and the employee's right to receive the vaccination at the employee's workplace 
30and at the expense of the employer.  It also requires the employer to compensate the 
31employee for any medical expenses incurred by the employee due to an injury or adverse 
32reaction to a vaccine and to provide any necessary paid time off to the employee, in 
33addition to any sick time, vacation time or other benefit offered by the employer.  
34Compensation for the employee's injury or adverse reaction to a vaccine is provided in 
35addition to any remedy available under the workers' compensation laws.
