 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1288
H.P. 930 House of  Representatives, March 14, 2019
An Act  To Establish a MaineCare Reimbursement Rate Review 
Process and the MaineCare Independent Rate Commission
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FARNSWORTH  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  CRAVEN of  Lewiston, HANDY  of Lewiston, HICKMAN  of 
Winthrop, HYMANSON of York, MADIGAN  of Waterville, McCREIGHT of Harpswell, 
RECKITT of South Portland, WARREN of Hallowell.

Page 1 - 129LR1288(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  5 MRSA §12004-J, sub-§18 is enacted to read:
318.  
4
5
6
7Sec. 2.  22 MRSA §19-A is enacted to read:
8§19-A.  Review of reimbursement rates for providers under MaineCare program
91.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
10following terms have the following meanings.
11A.  "Alternative health care practices" means health care practices not considered to 
12be part of conventional medicine, including alternative medical systems, mind-body 
13interventions, biologically based treatments, manipulative and body-based methods 
14and energy therapies.
15B.  "Commission" means the MaineCare Independent Rate Commission.
16C.  "Committee" means the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 
17jurisdiction over appropriations and financial affairs.
18D.  "Facility-based physician" means an anesthesiologist, emergency room physician, 
19neonatologist, pathologist or radiologist practicing medicine primarily in a health care 
20facility.
21E.  "Initial contact agency" means an agency or private organization that a recipient 
22or potential recipient contacts initially to determine MaineCare program eligibility or 
23for a referral for specific MaineCare program services.
24F.  "Provider" means a provider of MaineCare program services.
25G.  "Recipient" means a recipient of MaineCare program services.
262.  Schedule of review of reimbursement rates for providers under the 
27MaineCare program.  On or before September 1st of each calendar year, the department 
28shall establish a 5-year schedule for annual reviews of reimbursement rates under the 
29MaineCare program so that each provider rate is reviewed at least every 5 years and 
30provide the schedule to the committee.  If the department receives a petition or proposal 
31for a reimbursement rate to be reviewed or adjusted, the department shall provide a copy 
32of the petition or proposal to the commission.  The department may exclude a 
33reimbursement rate from the schedule under this subsection if that rate is adjusted on a 
34periodic basis as a result of state law or federal law or regulation.  The department shall 
35include the list of excluded rates with the schedule of reimbursement rates required by 
36this subsection.  By December 1st of the year prior to a scheduled year, the committee or 
37the commission may direct the department to review any reimbursement rate that is not 
38scheduled during or that is excluded from the scheduled year.  The department shall Health and 
Human ServicesMaineCare 
Independent Rate 
CommissionNot Authorized 22 MRSA §19-A
Page 2 - 129LR1288(01)-11review each reimbursement rate pursuant to subsection 3 scheduled for review and any 
2unscheduled or excluded reimbursement rate the commission or the committee directs the 
3department to review. 
43.  Review process.  The department shall review a reimbursement rate under 
5subsection 2 pursuant to this subsection.
6A.  The department shall conduct an analysis of the access, service, quality and use of 
7each service subject to reimbursement rate review.  The department shall compare the 
8rate reimbursed with available benchmarks, including Medicare rates and usual and 
9customary rates paid by private parties, and use qualitative tools to assess whether 
10reimbursements are sufficient to allow for provider retention and recipient access and 
11to support appropriate reimbursement of high-value services. On or before May 1st of 
12the scheduled review year the department shall provide a report on the analysis 
13required by this subsection to the committee, the commission and any stakeholder 
14and stakeholder group affected by the reimbursement rate review as identified by the 
15department.
16B.  Subsequent to the provision of a report under paragraph A, the department shall 
17work with the commission and any stakeholder and stakeholder group identified by 
18the department under paragraph A to review the report and develop strategies for 
19responding to the findings, including any nonfiscal approaches or rebalancing of 
20rates.
21C.  Subsequent to the review under paragraph B, the department shall work with the 
22Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of the Budget to 
23determine achievable goals and executive branch priorities within the state budget.
24D.  On or before November 1st of the scheduled rate year, the department shall 
25submit a written report to the committee and the commission containing the 
26department's recommendations on all of the reimbursement rates reviewed for that 
27year pursuant to this subsection and all of the data relied upon by the department in 
28making its recommendations. The committee shall consider the recommendations 
29submitted pursuant to this subsection in formulating the budget for the department.
304.  MaineCare Independent Rate Commission.  The MaineCare Independent Rate 
31Commission, established by Title 5, section 12004-J, subsection 18, is established as an 
32independent commission within the department that provides review and oversight over 
33the MaineCare program reimbursement rate process.
345.  Membership; meetings; bylaws; administrative support.  The commission 
35consists of 24 members, appointed as follows:
36A.  A recipient with a disability or a person who represents recipients with a 
37disability, appointed by the President of the Senate;
38B.  A representative of hospitals providing MaineCare program services 
39recommended by a statewide association of hospitals, appointed by the President of 
40the Senate;
41C.  A representative of providers of transportation to recipients, appointed by the 
42President of the Senate;
Page 3 - 129LR1288(01)-11D.  A representative of rural health care centers, appointed by the President of the 
2Senate;
3E.  A representative of home health care providers recommended by a statewide 
4organization of home health care providers, appointed by the President of the Senate;
5F.  A representative of providers of durable medical equipment recommended by a 
6statewide association of durable medical equipment providers, appointed by the 
7President of the Senate;
8G.  A representative of providers of behavioral health care services, appointed by the 
9President of the Senate;
10H.  A representative of primary care physicians who provide services to recipients 
11recommended by a statewide association of primary care physicians, appointed by the 
12President of the Senate;
13I.  A representative of dentists who provide services to recipients recommended by a 
14statewide association of dentists, appointed by the President of the Senate;
15J.  A representative of federally qualified health centers, appointed by the President of 
16the Senate;
17K.  A representative of private nonmedical institutions and community-based service 
18providers, appointed by the President of the Senate;
19L.  A representative of providers serving recipients with intellectual and 
20developmental disabilities, appointed by the President of the Senate;
21M.  A representative of child recipients with a disability, appointed by the Speaker of 
22the House of Representatives;
23N.  A representative of physicians who specialize in an area of health care and are not 
24employed by a hospital who see recipients, recommended by a statewide association 
25whose members include at least 1/3 of the doctors of medicine and osteopathy 
26licensed by the State, appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
27O.  A representative of providers of alternative health care practices recommended by 
28a statewide association of alternative health care practices, appointed by the Speaker 
29of the House of Representatives;
30P.  A representative of initial contact agencies, appointed by the Speaker of the House 
31of Representatives;
32Q.  A representative of ambulatory surgery centers, appointed by the Speaker of the 
33House of Representatives;
34R.  A representative of hospice providers recommended by a statewide association of 
35hospice and palliative care providers, appointed by the Speaker of the House of 
36Representatives;
37S.  A representative of substance use disorder treatment providers recommended by a 
38statewide association of substance use disorder treatment providers, appointed by the 
39Speaker of the House of Representatives;
Page 4 - 129LR1288(01)-11T.  A representative of facility-based physicians who see recipients, appointed by the 
2Speaker of the House of Representatives;
3U.  A representative of pharmacists providing services to recipients, appointed by the 
4Speaker of the House of Representatives;
5V.  A representative of managed care plans, appointed by the Speaker of the House of 
6Representatives;
7W.  A representative of advanced practice registered nurses recommended by a 
8statewide association of nurses, appointed by the Speaker of the House of 
9Representatives; and
10X.  A representative of physical therapists or occupational therapists recommended 
11by a statewide association of physical or occupational therapists, appointed by the 
12Speaker of the House of Representatives.
13A member serves a 4-year term and may be reappointed.  The appointing authorities shall 
14make a concerted effort to include members of diverse political, racial, cultural, income 
15and ability groups from urban and rural areas. Members shall elect a chair and a vice-
16chair from among the membership.  A member serves without compensation or 
17reimbursement for expenses.  The commission shall meet at least once every quarter, and 
18the chair may call additional meetings determined necessary for the commission to 
19complete its duties.  The commission shall enact bylaws and procedures to govern its 
20operations.  The department shall provide administrative support to the commission.
216.  Commission duties.  The commission shall:
22A.  Review the schedule of reimbursement rates under subsection 2 and recommend 
23any changes to the schedule;
24B.  Review a report prepared by the department under subsection 3, paragraph A and 
25provide to the department comments and feedback on the report;
26C.  With the department, conduct a public meeting to allow providers, recipients, 
27stakeholders, stakeholder groups and other interested parties an opportunity to 
28comment on a report prepared by the department under subsection 3, paragraph A;
29D.  Review a proposal or petition for a reimbursement rate to be reviewed or adjusted 
30that is received by the commission;
31E.  Determine whether a reimbursement rate not scheduled for or excluded from 
32review should be reviewed during that calendar year;
33F.  Recommend to the department and the committee any changes to the process of 
34reviewing reimbursement rates including measures to increase access to the process 
35such as providing for electronic comments by providers and the public; and
36G.  Provide other assistance to the department as requested by the department and the 
37committee.
Page 5 - 129LR1288(01)-11SUMMARY
2This bill establishes a process by which the Department of Health and Human 
3Services maintains a schedule of MaineCare program reimbursement rate reviews in 
4which each rate is reviewed at least every 5 years.  Under this process, the department 
5reviews a rate for access, service, quality and use of service and compares the rate 
6reimbursed with available benchmarks, including Medicare rates and usual and 
7customary rates paid by private parties, and uses qualitative tools to assess whether 
8reimbursements are sufficient to allow for provider retention and recipient access and to 
9support appropriate reimbursement of high-value services.  The department is required to 
10provide a report of its review to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 
11jurisdiction over appropriations and financial affairs, the MaineCare Independent Rate 
12Commission, a 24-member group of interested parties providing oversight of the rate 
13review process, and stakeholders.  After holding public meetings and consulting 
14stakeholders and stakeholder groups and consultation with the Department of 
15Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of the Budget, the department makes 
16recommendations on the MaineCare reimbursement rates to the joint standing committee 
17of the Legislature having jurisdiction over appropriations and financial affairs to assist in 
18developing the department's budget.
