 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1669
H.P. 1196 House of  Representatives, May 2, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Help Ensure That Direct Initiatives of Legislation Are Compatible with the Constitution of Maine and  Statutory Law
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative O'CONNOR of Berwick.
Cosponsored by Senator FOLEY of  York and
Representatives: BRADSTREET  of Vassalboro, DeVEAU of Caribou, HAGGAN of  
Hampden, JOHANSEN  of Monticello, SAMPSON of Alfred, STEWART of Presque Isle, 
Senators: DOW of Lincoln, TIMBERLAKE  of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 129LR0300(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง20 is amended to read:
5Section 20.  Meaning of words "electors," "people," "recess of 
6Legislature," "statewide election," "measure," "circulator," and "written 
7petition"; written petitions for people's veto; written petitions for direct 
8initiative.  As used in any of the 3 preceding sections or in this section the words 
9"electors" and "people" mean the electors of the State qualified to vote for Governor; 
10"recess of the Legislature" means the adjournment without day of a session of the 
11Legislature; "statewide election" means any election held throughout the State on a 
12particular day; "measure" means an Act, bill, resolve or resolution proposed by the 
13people, or 2 or more such, or part or parts of such, as the case may be; "circulator" means 
14a person who solicits signatures for written petitions, and who must be a resident of this 
15State and whose name must appear on the voting list of the city, town or plantation of the 
16circulator's residence as qualified to vote for Governor; "written petition" means one or 
17more petitions written or printed, or partly written and partly printed, with the original 
18signatures of the petitioners attached, verified as to the authenticity of the signatures by 
19the oath of the circulator that all of the signatures to the petition were made in the 
20presence of the circulator and that to the best of the circulator's knowledge and belief 
21each signature is the signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and 
22accompanied by the certificate of the official authorized by law to maintain the voting list 
23or to certify signatures on petitions for voters on the voting list of the city, town or 
24plantation in which the petitioners reside that their names appear on the voting list of the 
25city, town or plantation of the official as qualified to vote for Governor.  The oath of the 
26circulator must be sworn to in the presence of a person authorized by law to administer 
27oaths.  Written petitions for a people's veto pursuant to Article IV, Part Third, Section 17 
28must be submitted to the appropriate officials of cities, towns or plantations, or state 
29election officials as authorized by law, for determination of whether the petitioners are 
30qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the 5th day before the petition must be filed 
31in the office of the Secretary of State, or, if such 5th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a 
32legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal 
33holiday.  Written petitions for a direct initiative pursuant to Article IV, Part Third, 
34Section 18 must be submitted to the appropriate officials of cities, towns or plantations, or 
35state election officials as authorized by law, for determination of whether the petitioners 
36are qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the 10th day before the petition must be 
37filed in the office of the Secretary of State, or, if such 10th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or 
38a legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal 
39holiday.  Such officials must complete the certification of only those petitions submitted 
40by these deadlines and must return them to the circulators or their agents within 2 days 
41for a petition for a people's veto and within 5 days for a petition for a direct initiative, 
42Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, of the date on which such petitions were 
43submitted to them.  Signatures on petitions not submitted to the appropriate local or state 
44officials by these deadlines may not be certified.  The petition shall set forth the full text 
45of the measure requested or proposed.  Petition forms shall may be furnished or approved 
Page 2 - 129LR0300(01)-11by the Secretary of State upon written application signed and notarized and submitted to 
2the office of the Secretary of State, the office of the Governor, the office of the Attorney 
3General and the Legislature by a resident of this State whose name must appear on the 
4voting list of the city, town or plantation of that resident as qualified to vote for Governor.  
5The Secretary of State, the Governor, the Attorney General and the Legislature shall 
6review a measure requested or proposed and determine whether the measure is 
7compatible with the Constitution and statutory law.  If the Secretary of State, the 
8Governor, the Attorney General or the Legislature determines that the measure is not 
9compatible with the Constitution or statutory law, the Secretary of State may not furnish 
10or approve petition forms for the measure.  The full text of a measure submitted to a vote 
11of the people under the provisions of the Constitution need not be printed on the official 
12ballots, but, until otherwise provided by the Legislature, the Secretary of State shall 
13prepare the ballots in such form as to present the question or questions concisely and 
14intelligibly.
15Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
16Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
17respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
18holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
19following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
20proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
21"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to establish a process 
22to help ensure that direct initiatives of legislation are compatible with the 
23Constitution of Maine and statutory law?"
24The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
25and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
26square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
27declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
28State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
29review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
30amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
31becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
32Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
33shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
34of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
35SUMMARY
36This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require that a person 
37who requests a petition form for a direct initiative of legislation must submit a written 
38application for a petition form to the office of the Secretary of State, the office of the 
39Governor, the office of the Attorney General and the Legislature.  The Secretary of State, 
40the Governor, the Attorney General and the Legislature must review a direct initiative of 
41legislation and determine whether it is compatible with the Constitution of Maine and 
42statutory law.  If the Secretary of State, the Governor, the Attorney General or the 
Page 3 - 129LR0300(01)-11Legislature determines that the measure is not compatible with the Constitution of Maine 
2or statutory law, the Secretary of State may not furnish or approve petition forms for the 
3direct initiative of legislation.
