 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1759
S.P. 589 In Senate,  May 21, 2019
An Act  Regarding the  Electronic Data and  Court Records Filed in 
the Electronic Case Management  System of the Supreme Judicial 
Court
Submitted by the Judicial  Department pursuant to Joint Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CARPENTER  of Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Representative BAILEY of Saco and
Senator: KEIM of Oxford, Representatives: CARDONE of Bangor,  DeVEAU  of Caribou, 
HARNETT of Gardiner,  TALBOT ROSS of Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR2310(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  4 MRSA §7 is amended to read:
3§7.  General jurisdiction; control of records
4The Supreme Judicial Court may exercise its jurisdiction according to the common 
5law not inconsistent with the Constitution or any statute, and may punish contempts 
6against its authority by fine and imprisonment, or either, and administer oaths. It has 
7general superintendence of all inferior courts for the prevention and correction of errors 
8and abuses where the law does not expressly provide a remedy and has control of all 
9records and documents in the custody of its clerks whether physical or electronic, 
10including those stored in an electronic case management system. Whenever justice or the 
11public good requires, it may order the expunging from the records and papers on file in 
12any case which has gone to judgment of any name or other part thereof unnecessary to the 
13purpose and effect of said judgment. It may issue all writs and processes, not within the 
14exclusive jurisdiction of the Superior Court, necessary for the furtherance of justice or the 
15execution of the laws in the name of the State under the seal of said court, attested by any 
16justice not a party or interested in the suit and signed by the clerk. 
17Sec. 2.  4 MRSA §8-C, as enacted by PL 2015, c. 78, §1, is amended to read:
18§8-C.  Rules concerning electronic court records
191.  Rules and orders; processes and procedures.  Notwithstanding any other 
20provision of law, the Supreme Judicial Court may adopt rules and issue orders to permit 
21or require the use of electronic forms, filings, records, documents, e-mail and electronic 
22signatures whenever paper forms, filings, records, written notice, postal mail and written 
23signatures are required for judicial, legal or any other court-related process under the 
24Maine Revised Statutes.
25The Supreme Judicial Court, by rule, may determine any other processes or procedures 
26appropriate to ensure adequate preservation, disposition, integrity, security, appropriate 
27accessibility and confidentiality of the electronic court documents, data and court records 
28described in this section and section 8-D.
292.  Electronic signatures.  An electronic signature may be accepted as a substitute 
30for and, if accepted, has the same force and effect as the use of a manual signature.  The 
31Supreme Judicial Court shall determine the type of electronic signature required, the 
32manner and format in which the signature is affixed to the electronic record and the 
33criteria that must be met by a party, including attorneys, filing a document.
34Sec. 3.  4 MRSA §8-D is enacted to read:
35§8-D.  Rules concerning electronic case management system
361.  Rulemaking for electronic case management system.  The Supreme Judicial 
37Court shall develop and adopt rules addressing any systems or procedures appropriate to 
38ensure adequate preservation, disposition, integrity, security, accessibility and 
Page 2 - 129LR2310(01)-11confidentiality of electronic data and court records filed with or generated by the state 
2courts and stored in an electronic case management system.  In developing the rules, the 
3Supreme Judicial Court shall ensure that the tradition of open courts and public access to 
4court records is preserved by making available those court records that advance the 
5public's interest in the administration of justice while maintaining the protection of 
6private, personal or confidential information, data and documents.
72.  General policies regarding access to electronic court records.  The following 
8provisions apply regarding access to electronic court records.
9A.  Access to electronic court records by the public is the presumption.  Electronic 
10court records that are not designated confidential, private, closed, sealed or otherwise 
11not public records by state or federal statute or by court rule or order must be publicly 
12accessible except as otherwise provided in this subsection. The presumption that 
13electronic court records are public does not preclude the imposition of reasonable 
14fees for access to records.
15B.  All parties to a case, and the attorneys for those parties, must have access to the 
16electronic court records for that case, whether or not those records are publicly 
17accessible, unless otherwise specifically ordered.
18C.  When an entire case type is closed to the public by statute, the electronic court 
19records of a case of that case type are not publicly accessible.  For case types that are 
20generally open to the public, specific documents, data and information from those 
21case types may be closed to the public by state or federal statute or by court rule or 
22order.
23D.  Documents, data and information that are designated confidential, private, closed, 
24sealed or otherwise not public by state or federal statute or by court rule or order that 
25are contained in electronic court records are not publicly accessible.
26SUMMARY
27This bill requires the Supreme Judicial Court to develop and adopt rules regarding 
28court records and documents retained by the courts in an electronic case management 
29system. The rules must reflect the presumption that court records are open to the public 
30except in certain circumstances when necessary to protect private, personal or 
31confidential information, data and documents or when designated confidential by state or 
32federal statute or by court rule or order.  The presumption that court records are public 
33does not preclude the imposition of reasonable fees for access to those records.
