 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 578
H.P. 422 House of  Representatives, February 5, 2019
Resolve, To  Create  a Pilot Program To Assist the Transition to 
Recovery of  Persons Suffering from Opioid  Use Disorder
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HYMANSON of York.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: GATTINE of Westbrook, MADIGAN of Waterville, PERRY of Calais, STOVER of Boothbay.

Page 1 - 129LR0025(01)-11Sec. 1.  Pilot program to assist transition to recovery. Resolved:  That the 
2Commissioner of Health and Human Services shall develop a pilot program designed to 
3assist the transition to recovery of persons suffering from opioid use disorder.  The 
4commissioner shall establish the requirements and approval process of the program.
5Sec. 2.  Report; recommendations. Resolved:  That, by December 2, 2020, the 
6Commissioner of Health and Human Services shall submit a written report to the joint 
7standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services 
8matters that summarizes the results of the pilot program authorized pursuant to this 
9resolve, together with any recommendations for continuation of the program.  Following 
10receipt and review of the findings and recommendations, the joint standing committee 
11may submit a bill relating to the subject matter of the report to the First Regular Session 
12of the 130th Legislature.
13SUMMARY
14This resolve directs the Commissioner of Health and Human Services to develop a 
15pilot program designed to assist the transition to recovery of persons suffering from 
16opioid use disorder.  The resolve directs the commissioner, by December 2, 2020, to 
17submit a written report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 
18jurisdiction over health and human services matters summarizing the results of the pilot 
19program, together with any recommendations for continuation of the program, and 
20authorizes the joint standing committee to submit a bill relating to the subject matter of 
21the report to the First Regular Session of the 130th Legislature.
