 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 499
S.P. 164 In Senate,  January  31, 2019
An Act  To Prohibit Payment  per Signature on  Petitions for  Direct  
Initiatives and People's  Veto Referendums
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator GUERIN of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Representative SCHNECK  of Bangor and
Senators: CYRWAY  of Kennebec, LUCHINI of Hancock, Representatives:  ACKLEY  of 
Monmouth, COOPER  of Yarmouth, HANINGTON  of Lincoln, HUBBELL of Bar  Harbor, 
McCREIGHT of Harpswell, STROM of Pittsfield.

Page 1 - 129LR0615(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง904-C is enacted to read:
3ยง904-C.  Payment per signature; prohibition
41.  Findings.  The Legislature finds that the practice of paying persons who collect 
5signatures for initiative or referendum petitions based on the number of signatures the 
6persons collect has corrupted the signature collecting process and is eroding public 
7confidence in the petition process.  The Legislature finds that the large numbers of 
8invalidated signatures that have been collected during petition efforts by persons who 
9were paid for the number of signatures collected provides strong evidence that the 
10practice of paying for signatures collected has corrupted the signature gathering process.  
11The Legislature further finds that the State has a vital interest in ensuring that the 
12signature gathering process is not corrupted by practices that erode public confidence in 
13the petition process.
142.  Payment per signature.  A circulator of an initiative or referendum petition, a 
15direct initiative or people's veto organization registered in accordance with section 903-C 
16or a person who causes the circulation of an initiative or referendum petition may not 
17receive payment for the collection of signatures if that payment is based on the number of 
18signatures collected.  This section does not prohibit a circulator of an initiative or 
19referendum petition, a direct initiative or people's veto organization registered in 
20accordance with section 903-C or a person who causes the circulation of an initiative or 
21referendum petition from being paid a salary or fee that is not based on the number of 
22signatures collected.
23SUMMARY
24This bill prohibits the circulator or person who causes the circulation of an initiative 
25or referendum petition or a petition organization from receiving payment for the 
26collection of signatures based on the number of signatures collected.  The bill clarifies 
27that a salary or fee for the collection of signatures is not prohibited if it is not based on the 
28number of signatures collected.
