 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1635
S.P. 524 In Senate, April 25, 2019
Resolve, To  Improve Access to Early and Periodic  Screening, 
Diagnostic and Treatment Services  for Children from Birth  to 8 
Years of Age
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CARSON of  Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative FARNSWORTH  of Portland and
Senators: CLAXTON of Androscoggin, DAVIS of Piscataquis, GRATWICK of Penobscot,  
MOORE of Washington,  Representatives: MADIGAN of Waterville, MEYER of Eliot, 
PERRY of  Calais, REED of Carmel.

Page 1 - 129LR0451(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, research on early childhood emphasizes the importance of identifying 
4child development challenges as early as possible and addressing the needs of young 
5children from birth to 8 years of age to ensure their successful participation in early and 
6lifelong learning; and
7Whereas, data indicates that Maine ranks 50th in the nation for the rate of infants 
8provided with early intervention services for developmental delays; and
9Whereas, recent brain research has shown that it is essential to address child health 
10and well-being issues as early as possible and to provide children with services they need 
11to thrive in school; and
12Whereas, the MaineCare program is underused for early and periodic screening, 
13diagnostic and treatment services provided to eligible children; and
14Whereas, there is a lack of information about the capacity of state or federally 
15funded programs and services to serve the needs of Maine children from birth to 8 years 
16of age that needs to be remedied as soon as possible; and
17Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
18the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
19immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
20therefore, be it
21Sec. 1.  The Department of Health and Human Services to convene a 
22stakeholder group.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services, 
23in consultation with the Department of Education, shall convene the participants in the 
24federally funded Developmental Systems Integration initiative to determine the capacity 
25of the State to respond to its child find responsibilities as required under the federal 
26Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and to provide early and periodic screening, 
27diagnostic and treatment services, referred to in this resolve as "EPSDT services," to 
28children from birth to 8 years of age, the gaps in services and the costs of addressing 
29those gaps.  The Department of Health and Human Services shall submit a report with the 
30findings to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services.  The report 
31must include the following:
321.  Data on the number, ages and geographic locations of children from birth to 8 
33years of age receiving EPSDT services;
342.  The capacity of the State to ensure that all children from birth to 8 years of age 
35who require EPSDT services are located and identified by child find and receive services;
363.  Current levels of federal and state funding designated or available to support child 
37find and EPSDT services for children from birth to 8 years of age;
384.  Barriers that impede access to child find and EPSDT services;
Page 2 - 129LR0451(01)-115.  Shortages of providers of child find and EPSDT services including a breakdown 
2by county of those shortages and a breakdown by specific service;
36.  An assessment of the comprehensive developmental screening for children from 
4birth to 8 years of age in relation to the recommendations of the American Academy of 
5Pediatrics;
67.  An assessment of the deficits in comprehensive developmental screening; and
78.  An estimate of the costs to address the shortages in child find and EPSDT services 
8and any recommendations to ensure or expand services so that all children from birth to 8 
9years of age are adequately served regardless of health insurance status, age, geographic 
10location or type of developmental delay or disability identified.
11The department shall submit the report no later than December 30, 2019.  The Joint 
12Standing Committee on Health and Human Services may report out legislation relating to 
13the subject matter of the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
14Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
15legislation takes effect when approved.
16SUMMARY
17This emergency resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services, in 
18consultation with the Department of Education, to convene the participants of the 
19federally funded Developmental Systems Integration initiative to determine the capacity 
20of the State to provide child find and early and periodic screening, diagnostic and 
21treatment services to children from birth to 8 years of age, the gaps in services and the 
22costs of addressing those gaps.  The report must be submitted to the Joint Standing 
23Committee on Health and Human Services no later than December 30, 2019.
