 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 980
H.P. 735 House of  Representatives, February 26, 2019
An Act  To Amend Provisions of the Maine Energy Cost Reduction 
Act Regarding Assessments  on Ratepayers
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative RILEY of  Jay.
Cosponsored by Senator LAWRENCE of York and
Representatives: BERRY of Bowdoinham, CAIAZZO of Scarborough, DENK of Kennebunk, GRIGNON of  Athens,  HANLEY of Pittston,  KESSLER  of South  Portland,  WADSWORTH of 
Hiram.

Page 1 - 129LR1867(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  35-A MRSA ยง1905, sub-ยง1, as amended by PL 2015, c. 445, ยง6, is 
3further amended to read:
41.  Assessments on ratepayers.  The commission may direct one or more 
5transmission and distribution utilities, gas utilities or natural gas pipeline utilities to 
6collect an assessment from ratepayers for the following purposes:
7A.  To finance the participation of a transmission and distribution utility, a gas utility 
8or a natural gas pipeline utility in an energy cost reduction contract or a physical 
9energy storage contract; and
10B.  To pay the costs of energy cost reduction contract or physical energy storage 
11contract evaluation and administration under section 1906, subsection 2.
12All assessments must be just and reasonable as determined by the commission and must 
13be identified as an energy cost reduction contract charge or a physical energy storage 
14contract charge on a ratepayer's utility bill. When determining just and reasonable 
15assessments, the commission shall consider the anticipated reduction in the price of gas or 
16electricity, as applicable, accruing to different categories of ratepayers as a result of the 
17contract.
18In determining whether anticipated reductions in gas or electricity prices for electricity 
19ratepayers in the State from an energy cost reduction contract are adequate, the 
20commission may consider whether programs, contracts and other long-term enforceable 
21energy project commitments in other states will reduce market prices of electricity, 
22natural gas or both sufficient to make assessments of electricity ratepayers in the State for 
23the energy cost reduction contract just and reasonable.  Such commitments may include 
24programs for long-term contracts for wind energy, solar energy, hydroelectric energy and 
25energy storage projects and other enforceable obligations that reduce the market clearing 
26electricity price applicable to electricity ratepayers in the State.
27SUMMARY
28This bill amends the Maine Energy Cost Reduction Act to permit the Public Utilities 
29Commission to consider the effect on electricity market clearing prices in Maine of 
30programs, contracts and other enforceable obligations in other states in determining 
31whether assessments on Maine electricity ratepayers for natural gas pipelines and gas 
32storage are just and reasonable.
