 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
/uf:i 
2 Date: lt l lfL \ \ c\ L.D. 1661 
(Filing No. S-Jcf-)) 
3 HEAL TH COVERAGE, INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
4 Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Secretary of the Senate. 
5 STATE OF MAINE 
6 SENATE 
7 129TH LEGISLATURE 
8 FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
9 COMMITTEE AMENDMENT " (T " to S.P. 538, L.D. 1661, Bill, "An Act To 
1 O Create the Drug Donation and Redispensing Program" 
11 Amend the bill in section 2 in ยง2700-B by inserting after subsection 5 the following: 
12 '6. Immunity from liability. A person may not be subject to any civil or criminal 
13 liability, or to any discipline by a professional licensing board, for any action taken in 
14 good faith in accordance with this section.' 
15 Amend the bill by relettering or renumbering any nonconsecutive Part letter or 
16 section number to read consecutively. 
17 SUMMARY 
18 This amendment adds a provision to protect a person from civil or criminal liability 
19 and from professional discipline of a licensing board for actions taken by a person in 
20 good faith in accordance with the requirements of the drug donation and redispensing 
21 program established in the bill. 
22 FISCAL NOTE REQUIRED 
23 (See attached) 
Page 1 -129LR2470(02)-l 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Fiscal Detail and Notes Approved: 05/29/19 feac:.. 
129th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 1661 LR 2470(02) 
An Act To Create the Drug Donation and Redispensing Program 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment 'i\" I. (~, ,-.i,c1 \ 
Committee: Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Cun-ent biennium cost increase -General Fund 
This bill establishes the drug donation and redispensing program under the Department of Health and Human Services 
(DHHS). The program collects donations of unused prescription and legend drugs from health care providers, health 
care facilities and other sources, including at drop-off locations throughout the State, and redispenses the drugs 
through participating phmmacies to qualified low-income persons. The DHHS would need to create a number of new 
positions to run the program, identify spaces for designated donation sites, obtain a warehouse to store drugs or 
contract with a third-party wholesaler, create a system to transpoti the drugs from donation sites to a central 
warehouse and to pharmacies or secure disposal sites, create an outreach program to acquire participating pharmacies 
and to acquire or increase liability insurance to mitigate the risks associated with the potential adverse affects of a 
recipient acquiring and ingesting drugs not intended for his/her treatment. Additionally, the DHHS is concerned that 
pharmacies will be unable to determine if a person's family income is equal to or less than 350% of the federal poverty 
level for most residents. As there are no programs currently handled by the DHHS similar to this program, many of 
these costs are unknown. No estimate of the costs of the program can be determined at this time. 
LR2470(02) -Fiscal Note -Page I of I 
