 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1210
H.P. 874 House of  Representatives, March 12, 2019
Resolve, To  Direct the  Commissioner of Corrections To Study 
Changes in  Corrections Practices and Reinvestment in Corrections 
Resources To Reduce  Recidivism and Control  Correctional Facility 
Costs
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TALBOT ROSS  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator CARPENTER of Aroostook and
Representatives: BAILEY  of Saco, COOPER of Yarmouth, HICKMAN of Winthrop,  
MORALES of South  Portland, RECKITT of South Portland, WARREN of Hallowell, 
Senators: MOORE of  Washington, ROSEN  of Hancock.

Page 1 - 129LR0562(01)-11Sec. 1.  Commissioner of Corrections to establish working group to study 
2changes in corrections practices.  Resolved:  That the Commissioner of 
3Corrections, referred to in this resolve as "the commissioner," shall establish a working 
4group to study and report on changes in corrections practices and reinvestment of 
5corrections resources and develop recommendations to reduce recidivism and control 
6correctional facility costs.  The commissioner shall include in the working group 
7membership relevant personnel from the Department of Corrections and other members 
8who represent county corrections facilities, the court system, prosecutors, defense 
9attorneys and groups that advocate for prison reform and any other interested persons that 
10the commissioner determines appropriate.
11Sec. 2.  Working group responsibilities. Resolved: That, in furtherance of the 
12goals of the working group established in section 1, the working group shall consider 
13upstream interventions, diversion and alternative sentencing, prevention and harm 
14reduction and mental health and substance use disorder treatment, including:
151.  Corrections placements by type of offender, including the number of offenses 
16committed by the offender and the number of times the offender was incarcerated;
172.  The use of sentencing guidelines for certain low-level offenders;
183.  The use of community-level supervision instead of incarceration for certain low-
19level offenders;
204.  The efficacy of a graduated sanction and incentive program to ensure that 
21disciplinary responses are swift, certain and proportional while allowing offenders to earn 
22time off their sentences for engaging in behavior that reduces their risk of committing 
23another crime;
245.  The expansion statewide of mental health and substance use disorder treatment 
25services;
266.  The increased use of planning for the transition from incarceration to release from 
27custody; and
287.  The effectiveness of criminal justice decision makers trained in the use of 
29evidence-based practices and interpreting key performance measures.
30Sec. 3.  Report. Resolved:  That, by January 15, 2020, the commissioner shall 
31submit the report and recommendations of the working group established in section 1, 
32including any recommended legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
33Justice and Public Safety. The committee may report out legislation based upon the report 
34to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
35SUMMARY
36This resolve directs the Commissioner of Corrections to establish a working group to 
37study changes in corrections practices and reinvestment of corrections resources in 
Page 2 - 129LR0562(01)-11various ways to reduce recidivism and control correctional facility costs, including 
2upstream interventions, diversion and alternative sentencing, prevention and harm 
3reduction and mental health and substance use disorder treatment.
