 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 256
S.P. 68 In Senate,  January  22, 2019
An Act  To Ban the  Use of Leadership Political Action Committees 
for Personal  Profit
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CHENETTE of  York.
Cosponsored by Representative SCHNECK  of Bangor and
Senators: President JACKSON of Aroostook, LUCHINI of Hancock.

Page 1 - 129LR0521(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง1054-B, as enacted by PL 2017, c. 98, ยง1, is amended to 
3read:
4ยง1054-B.  Payments to Legislators by political action committees
5If a Legislator is a principal officer or treasurer of a political action committee or is 
6one of the individuals primarily responsible for raising contributions or making decisions 
7for the political action committee, the committee may not compensate the Legislator for 
8services provided to the committee. The committee may not make payments or distribute, 
9loan, advance, deposit or gift money or anything of value to or compensate a business 
10owned or operated by the Legislator.  The committee may reimburse the Legislator for 
11expenses incurred in the proper performance of the duties of the Legislator, for purchases 
12made on behalf of the committee and for travel expenses associated with volunteering for 
13the committee.  Allowable reimbursement for expenses does not include payments from 
14the committee that are determined by the commission to be for the purpose of personal 
15financial enrichment of the Legislator.  The funds of the committee may not be 
16commingled with the personal funds of the Legislator or the funds of a business owned or 
17operated by the Legislator.
18SUMMARY
19Current law prohibits a political action committee from compensating a Legislator or 
20a business owned or operated by the Legislator if the Legislator is a principal officer or 
21treasurer of the committee or one of the individuals primarily responsible for raising 
22contributions or making decisions for the committee.  This bill further prohibits such a 
23political action committee from making loans or gifts to a business owned or operated by 
24the Legislator and prohibits commingling the funds of such a political action committee 
25with the personal funds of the Legislator or the funds of a business owned or operated by 
26the Legislator.
