 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1332
H.P. 960 House of  Representatives, March 19, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Require  State  and Congressional Elections To Be  Decided 
by a Plurality of Votes  Cast
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative JOHANSEN of Monticello.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  COSTAIN of  Plymouth, DeVEAU of Caribou,  PICKETT of 
Dixfield, SKOLFIELD  of Weld, Senator: ROSEN of Hancock.

Page 1 - 129LR1525(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. First, ยง4-A is enacted to read:
5Section 4-A.  Primary election.  A primary election for Representative must be 
6decided by a plurality of votes cast.
7Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Second, ยง2-A is enacted to read:
8Section 2-A.  Primary election.  A primary election for Senator must be decided 
9by a plurality of votes cast.
10Constitution, Art. V, Pt. First, ยง2-A is enacted to read:
11Section 2-A.  Primary election.  A primary election for Governor must be 
12decided by a plurality of votes cast.
13Constitution, Art. IX, ยง26 is enacted to read:
14Section 26.  Congressional elections.  A primary, general or special election for 
15United States Representative or United States Senator must be decided by a plurality of 
16votes cast.
17Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
18Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
19respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
20holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
21following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
22proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
23"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require that a 
24primary election for State Representative, State Senator or Governor be 
25decided by a plurality of votes cast and that a primary, general or special 
26election for United States Representative or United States Senator be 
27decided by a plurality of votes cast?"
28The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
29and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
30square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
31declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
32State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
33review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
34amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
35becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
Page 2 - 129LR1525(01)-11Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
2shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
3of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
4SUMMARY
5This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to provide that a 
6primary election for State Representative, State Senator or Governor must be decided by 
7a plurality of votes cast.  It also provides that a primary, general or special election for 
8United States Representative or United States Senator must be decided by a plurality of 
9votes cast.
