 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 697
S.P. 210 In Senate, February 11, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services To Conduct a Review of Rules Governing In-home Personal  Care  
Assistance Services
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative PEOPLES of Westbrook and
Senators: CARPENTER of Aroostook, WOODSOME  of York,  Representatives: BAILEY  of 
Saco, DOORE  of Augusta, HICKMAN of Winthrop, MATLACK of St. George, RECKITT of 
South Portland, VEROW of Brewer.

Page 1 - 129LR1026(01)-11Sec. 1.  Review.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services 
2shall review its rules governing the provision of and reimbursement for in-home personal 
3care assistance services, including direct support provided in an individual's home by a 
4direct support professional; habilitative training; and assistance with self-care, personal 
5development and well-being.  In the course of its review, the department shall also 
6examine the manner in which entities providing personal care assistance services provide 
7to affected individuals information such as advance notice of staff absences, termination 
8of services and training requirements.  The department shall complete its review no later 
9than September 1, 2020, and shall update its rules to ensure the provision of high-quality 
10care and to provide protections to vulnerable people who receive personal care assistance 
11services.
12SUMMARY
13This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services to review and 
14update its rules governing the provision of and reimbursement for in-home personal care 
15assistance services to ensure the provision of high-quality care and to provide protections 
16to vulnerable people who receive personal care assistance services.
