 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 767
H.P. 572 House of  Representatives, February 12, 2019
An Act  To Ensure the Availability of In-person  Visitation in County 
Jails
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TALBOT ROSS  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: BAILEY  of Saco, BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland,  HEPLER of Woolwich, 
MARTIN of  Greene,  TEPLER  of Topsham, WARREN of Hallowell, Senators: CARPENTER 
of Aroostook, DESCHAMBAULT of York.

Page 1 - 129LR0324(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  30-A MRSA ยง1556-A is enacted to read:
3ยง1556-A.  Visitation
4Except as otherwise provided in this section, and subject to any conditions and 
5limitations required for the safety and security of a county jail as determined on a case-
6by-case basis by the sheriff of the county jail, the sheriff shall provide for in-person 
7visitation between a prisoner and a visitor of the prisoner.
81.  Video-only visitation.  Upon a determination by the sheriff of a county jail that 
9in-person visitation between a particular prisoner and a visitor of the prisoner may 
10jeopardize the safety and security of the jail, the sheriff may restrict that prisoner to 
11video-only visitation.  Upon a determination by the sheriff that the jail facility is unable to 
12provide a safe and secure location for any in-person visitation, the sheriff, on a short-term 
13basis only, may restrict all visitation at the jail to video-only visitation.
142.  Contact visitation.  Subject to any conditions and limitations required for the 
15safety and security of a county jail as determined on a case-by-case basis by the sheriff, 
16the sheriff shall provide opportunities for in-person visitation involving physical contact 
17between a prisoner and a visitor of the prisoner, unless the sheriff determines that the jail 
18facility is unable to provide a safe and secure location for any in-person visitation 
19involving physical contact.
20SUMMARY
21This bill requires the sheriff of a county jail to provide for in-person visitation 
22between a prisoner and a visitor of the prisoner, subject to any conditions and limitations 
23required for the safety and security of the jail as determined on a case-by-case basis by 
24the sheriff.  The bill authorizes a sheriff to restrict a particular prisoner to video-only 
25visitation upon a determination that allowing in-person visitation for that prisoner may 
26jeopardize the safety and security of the jail.  The bill also requires the sheriff to provide 
27opportunities for in-person visitation involving physical contact between a prisoner and a 
28visitor of the prisoner, subject to any conditions and limitations required for the safety 
29and security of the jail as determined on a case-by-case basis by the sheriff.
