 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 170
H.P. 133 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
An Act  To Prohibit Questions  Regarding Criminal  History on  
Certain State  Employment Applications
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SHEATS of Auburn.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: McCREIGHT of Harpswell, SYLVESTER of Portland, Senator: LIBBY of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 129LR0104(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง792 is enacted to read:
3ยง792.  Application forms for employment
4An application form for employment for a position in State Government may not 
5include any questions regarding an applicant's criminal history except when, due to the 
6nature and requirements of the position, a person who has a criminal history may be 
7disqualified from eligibility for the position.  For purposes of this section, "position in 
8State Government" means a position in the legislative, executive or judicial branch of 
9State Government or a position with a quasi-independent state entity or public 
10instrumentality of the State. "Position in State Government" does not include a position in 
11a school administrative unit, municipality, county or other political subdivision of the 
12State.
13SUMMARY
14This bill prohibits the State from including questions about criminal history on its 
15employment application forms.  The bill provides an exception to that prohibition when, 
16due to the nature and requirements of the position, a person who has a criminal history 
17may be disqualified from eligibility, such as for a law enforcement officer, corrections 
18officer, child protective or adult protective services caseworker or child development 
19services worker position.  The bill applies to state employment positions in the 
20legislative, executive or judicial branch of State Government and positions with quasi-
21independent state entities or public instrumentalities of the State; it does not apply to 
22positions in school administrative units, municipalities, counties or other political 
23subdivisions of the State.
