 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 520
H.P. 377 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2019
An Act  To Resolve Tie Votes by the Washington  County Budget 
Advisory Committee
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TUELL  of East Machias.  (BY  REQUEST)

Page 1 - 129LR0857(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, county budget advisory committees perform a valuable public service in 
4the development of the budgets of their respective counties; and
5Whereas, it serves the public interest for county budget advisory committees to 
6resolve disagreements and issues regarding deliberations concerning county budgets and 
7recommendations made by the committees; and
8Whereas, it is difficult, and sometimes impossible, for a budget advisory committee 
9to perform its duties and issue recommendations with an even number of members, as an 
10impasse can result; and
11Whereas, currently the Washington County Budget Advisory Committee has an 
12even number of members and, in order to properly perform its duties regarding the 2019 
13county budget, a mechanism to resolve tie votes needs to be in place prior to September 
14of this year; and
15Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
16the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
17immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
18therefore,
19Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
20Sec. 1.  30-A MRSA ยง900-B, sub-ยง4 is enacted to read:
214.  Tie votes.  In the event of a tie vote on an item, the budget advisory committee 
22shall present the item to the county commissioners, who shall decide the item by majority 
23vote.  The county commissioners may vote under this subsection only on an item that is 
24presented by the budget advisory committee.
25Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
26legislation takes effect when approved.
27SUMMARY
28This bill provides that in the event of a tie vote on a budget item by the Washington 
29County Budget Advisory Committee, the committee is required to present the item to the 
30Washington County commissioners to decide by majority vote.
