 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 935
H.P. 690 House of  Representatives, February 21, 2019
An Act  To Increase the Viability  of Assisted  Living  Facilities by 
Increasing the Rate of Reimbursement
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PERRY of Calais.
Cosponsored by Senator CLAXTON of Androscoggin and
Representatives: BRENNAN  of Portland, MADIGAN of Waterville.

Page 1 - 129LR0879(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  PL 2017, c. 460, Pt. B, ยง2, sub-ยง3 is amended to read:
33.  Rate study.  Cost-of-living increases as described in subsection 2 must continue 
4on an annual basis until the Department of Health and Human Services has completed a 
5rate study conducted by a 3rd party, including participation of providers, for adult family 
6care services, adult day services or homemaker services and the rates in the rate study 
7have been implemented.  The rates implemented pursuant to the rate study must be 
8increased by an inflation adjustment cost-of-living percentage change in reimbursement 
9in accordance with the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics 
10Consumer Price Index medical care index.
11SUMMARY
12Under current law, the MaineCare payment rates attributable to wages and salaries 
13for personal care and related services for adult family care services, adult day services 
14and homemaker services must be increased by a cost-of-living adjustment until the 
15Department of Health and Human Services has completed a rate study conducted by a 3rd 
16party, including participation of providers, for adult family care services, adult day 
17services or homemaker services and the rates in the rate study have been implemented.
18This bill requires that the rates determined by the department pursuant to the rate 
19study also must be increased by a cost-of-living adjustment.
