 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 890
S.P. 256 In Senate, February 19, 2019
An Act  To Expand Workforce Access  by Creating Apprenticeship  
Programs To Increase Access  to Licensure in Certain Occupations
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator KEIM of Oxford.
Cosponsored by Representative DAUGHTRY of Brunswick and
Senators: DESCHAMBAULT of York, FARRIN of Somerset, GUERIN of Penobscot, HERBIG of  Waldo.

Page 1 - 129LR1543(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to enact the Expanded Workforce Access Act of 2019, which will 
6authorize the use of apprenticeships as an alternative means of obtaining licenses to 
7perform certain occupations. Occupations included under this Act may include, but are 
8not limited to, barbering or limited barbering and nail technology.
9This bill will expand access to the workforce by allowing individuals to fulfill 
10licensing requirements through participation in apprenticeship programs, thus allowing 
11participants to earn a paycheck at the same time as they acquire hands-on training and 
12experience.  Under this bill:
131.  The licensing boards for the occupations that are included in this expanded 
14apprenticeship program will grant licenses to applicants who meet criteria established by 
15the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation;
162.  The criteria established may include, without limitation:
17A.  Successful completion of the 8th grade;
18B.  Completion of an apprenticeship that is approved by the Department of Labor or 
19the United States Department of Labor or in accordance with any applicable state or 
20federal law.  For purposes of this bill, "apprenticeship" is defined as a program that 
21meets the federal guidelines set out in 29 United States Code, Section 50 and 29 Code 
22of Federal Regulations, Part 29; and
23C.  Successful completion of any necessary examination, as determined by the 
24Department of Professional and Financial Regulation.  The passing score on an 
25examination for a participant in the expanded apprenticeship model may not exceed 
26the passing score that is otherwise required under the rules adopted by the applicable 
27licensing board.  If the rules adopted by the applicable licensing board do not 
28otherwise require successful completion of an examination, an examination may not 
29be required for participation in the expanded apprenticeship program.
303.  The Department of Professional and Financial Regulation will be required to 
31adopt rules necessary to implement the expanded apprenticeship program, including 
32limitations on the length of and the numbers of hours required by each authorized 
33apprenticeship.
