 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1607
S.P. 513 In Senate, April 23, 2019
An Act  To Create the Department of Early  Care and Learning
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative KORNFIELD of Bangor and
Senators: President JACKSON of Aroostook, LIBBY  of Androscoggin, MOORE of 
Washington, ROSEN of  Hancock, Representative: FARNSWORTH of Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR0215(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to create the Department of Early Care and Learning as a cabinet-
6level state agency within the executive branch of State Government. The department 
7would assume primary responsibility for matters regarding children under 6 years of age 
8in the State, including the care, health care and education of the children that are now the 
9responsibility of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of 
10Education.  The major components of the bill are as follows.
111.  Definitions.  As used in this bill, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
12following terms have the following meanings.
13A. "Board" means the Board of Early Care and Learning.
14B. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Early Care and Learning.
15C. "Department" means the Department of Early Care and Learning.
16D. "Early care and education" means programs and services relating to high-quality 
17care, health care and education of children under 6 years of age.
182.  Department; commissioner.  The department is created as a department of the 
19executive branch of State Government and a separate budget unit that has the duties, 
20responsibilities, functions, powers and authority accorded to state agencies under state 
21law.  The department is administered by a commissioner who is the chief administrative 
22and executive officer of the department required by law to be appointed by the Governor 
23and confirmed by the Senate and reports directly to the Governor. The commissioner is 
24responsible for the performance and exercise of the duties, responsibilities, powers, 
25functions and authority of the department.  The commissioner has the power to distribute 
26the functions and duties given to the commissioner among the various units of the 
27department to integrate the work properly and to promote the most economical and 
28efficient administration of the department. The powers and duties given to the 
29commissioner or the department are assumed and carried out by the units that the 
30commissioner designates and may in turn be delegated to subordinates by those unit 
31directors with the approval of the commissioner.
323. Programs and services of department.  The department is directed to provide 
33children and families with programs and services to assist the children and families in 
34meeting essential needs, including:
35A. Head Start and child care services;
36B. Maternal and child health services, including home visiting programs;
37C. Prekindergarten programs and services;
Page 2 - 129LR0215(01)-11D. Child care services licensing, subsidies and quality control management;
2E. Preschool special education under Part B of the federal Individuals with 
3Disabilities Education Act; and
4F. Early intervention services for infants and toddlers under Part C of the federal 
5Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
64. Duties and responsibilities of department.  The department has the following 
7duties and responsibilities:
8A. Administering programs and services necessary for the operation and management 
9of voluntary prekindergarten;
10B. Administering programs and services necessary for the operation and management 
11of preschool and child development programs, including Head Start and child care 
12regulation;
13C. Acting as the agent of the Federal Government to ensure that state programs and 
14services conform with federal requirements and to administer federal funds granted to 
15the State to assist in the activities of the department;
16D. Assisting local units of administration in the State to ensure the availability of the 
17programs and services provided by the department;
18E. Regulating early care and learning programs, including licensing and inspecting 
19the programs to ensure adherence to state law and department rules;
20F. Performing functions relating to improvement in the quality, availability and 
21affordability of child care in the State;
22G. Serving as the Head Start state collaboration office;
23H. Administering the licensure and regulation of day care centers, group day care 
24homes and family day care homes;
25I. Providing consultation and making recommendations concerning the establishment 
26and implementation of early care and learning services and programs;
27J. Reporting and making recommendations to the Governor and the Legislature as 
28required by law or as determined necessary by the commissioner;
29K. Performing any other duties, responsibilities or functions agreed upon between the 
30department and the Department of Health and Human Services; and
31L. Performing any other duties, responsibilities or functions agreed upon between the 
32department and the Department of Education.
335. Powers of department.  The department has the following powers:
34A. Adopting rules and procedures to carry out department duties and responsibilities;
35B. Contracting for services;
36C. Hiring or assigning employees and staff;
Page 3 - 129LR0215(01)-11D. Applying for and accepting from any other agency of government, person, group 
2or corporation any funds that may be available to carry out the duties and 
3responsibilities of the department;
4E. In an adjudicatory proceeding conducted by the department, issuing subpoenas to 
5require the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence or 
6discovery relating to an issue of fact in the proceeding and designating employees of 
7the department to issue such subpoenas;
8F. Suing and being sued; and
9G. Performing any legal act relating to the care, health care or education of children 
10under 6 years of age in the State.
116. Board of Early Care and Learning.  The Board of Early Care and Learning is 
12established within the department to assist the department and commissioner in carrying 
13out the duties and responsibilities of the department.
14A. The board consists of 9 members, including:
15(1) The Commissioner of Health and Human Services as an ex officio member;
16(2) The Commissioner of Education as an ex officio member;
17(3) The Chancellor of the University of Maine System as an ex officio member;
18(4) A representative of the business community with a demonstrated commitment 
19to education, appointed by the Governor;
20(5) An early care and education teacher selected from a list of 3 nominees 
21provided by the Maine Education Association, appointed by the Governor;
22(6) A parent or legal guardian of a child under 6 years of age receiving early care 
23and education services or services from a family child care provider, appointed 
24by the Governor;
25(7) A person representing a provider of early care and education services who has 
26practical experience in the management and administration of early care and 
27education services, appointed by the Governor;
28(8) A person with expertise in the evaluation and assessment of successful 
29preschool education programs, appointed by the Governor; and
30(9) A pediatrician with a focus on child development or a person who is 
31nationally recognized for research in the field of educational psychology, 
32appointed by the Governor.
33In making appointments, the Governor is directed to seek to appoint members who 
34are from geographically diverse regions of the State, who are familiar with the 
35differing interests, perspectives and needs of urban, rural and suburban regions and 
36who reflect the ethnic and racial diversity of the children of the State.  Each member 
37chosen must have a demonstrated interest in and commitment to early care and 
38learning.
39In appointing members to initial terms, the Governor is directed to designate 3 
40members for 5-year terms and 3 members for 4-year terms.  Subsequent appointments 
Page 4 - 129LR0215(01)-11must be for 5-year terms.  An appointed member may not serve more than 3 
2consecutive 5-year terms.  A member serves until the member's successor is 
3appointed.
4The board elects a chair from the board's membership and other officers that the 
5board considers necessary.  A quorum consists of 5 members, and a quorum is 
6necessary for the board to conduct business. The board is directed to adopt bylaws to 
7govern the conduct of the board's activities. Appointed members of the board receive 
8per diem and reimbursement of expenses in conformity with the rates and allowances 
9determined for members of other state boards who receive per diem and 
10reimbursement of expenses.
11B. The purposes of the board include:
12(1) Consolidating and coordinating resources and public funding for early care 
13and learning to ensure the sound and coordinated development of related 
14programs and services;
15(2) Ensuring that parents of children under 6 years of age have a decisive role in 
16the planning, operation and evaluation of programs and services that aid families 
17in the care of children under 6 years of age;
18(3) Providing consumer education and accessibility to early care and learning 
19resources for all communities in the State;
20(4) Advancing the quality of early care and learning to support the healthy 
21development of and preparation for success in school for children;
22(5) Developing a seamless delivery system of early care and learning 
23administered by federal, state and local agencies and providers through local 
24points of entry;
25(6) Developing and managing effective data collection to support necessary 
26functions of and accurately evaluate a coordinated early child care and learning 
27distribution system; and
28(7) Reviewing and making recommendations regarding the budget of the 
29department.
30C. The duties and responsibilities of the board include:
31(1) Developing and overseeing the management of:
32(a) The administration of a high-quality system of public and private early 
33care and learning;
34(b) Subject to available funding, the implementation of a program of 
35voluntary and universally accepted high-quality early childhood education 
36for all preschool-age children in the State; 
37(c) A kindergarten readiness assessment for preschool-age children and a 
38comprehensive evaluation of early care and learning, including the 
39establishment of baseline data to inform the design and implementation of a 
40universally accessible, high-quality early care and learning program for all 
41preschool-age children in the State; and
Page 5 - 129LR0215(01)-11(d) A workforce development system designed to support the education, 
2training and compensation of the early care and learning workforce, 
3including all family child care, infant, toddler, preschool and school-age 
4children program and services centers and providers; and
5(2) Reporting biannually to the Governor, the Secretary of the Senate, the Clerk 
6of the House of Representatives, the joint standing committee of the Legislature 
7having jurisdiction over health and human services matters and the joint standing 
8committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over education matters on the 
9board's and the department's activities, progress in achieving goals and 
10implementing programs of the department and progress in the State regarding 
11moving toward a system of universal early care and learning for preschool 
12children 3 to 5 years of age.
137. Assistance and coordination.  All other state departments, agencies, officers and 
14employees are directed upon the request of the commissioner or board and to the extent 
15permissible by law to make available department and agency services, resources, 
16personnel and facilities to ensure the most effective coordination and use of state 
17resources, personnel and facilities for the benefit of families and children under 6 years of 
18age and to assist the department in carrying out the department's duties and 
19responsibilities.
208. Transition.  By October 1, 2020, the transition regarding the reassignment of the 
21duties and responsibilities of the Department of Health and Human Services and 
22Department of Education to the department takes effect in the following ways.
23A.  All references to, responsibilities of and authority conferred upon the Department 
24of Health and Human Services and the Department of Education and the predecessors 
25of those departments regarding the powers, duties, responsibilities, programs, 
26services and functions assigned to the department are deemed to refer to and vest in 
27the department.  The department is the successor in every way to the powers, duties, 
28responsibilities, programs, services and functions assigned to the Department of 
29Health and Human Services and the Department of Education as the powers, duties, 
30responsibilities, programs, services and functions pertain to the powers, duties, 
31responsibilities, programs, services and functions assumed by the department.
32B.  All accrued expenditures, assets, liabilities, balances of appropriations, 
33allocations, transfers, revenues or other available funds in an account or subdivision 
34of an account of the Department of Health and Human Services or the Department of 
35Education that pertain to the powers, duties, responsibilities, programs, services and 
36functions assumed by the department are transferred in the transition to the proper 
37accounts of the department by the State Controller or by financial order upon the 
38request of the State Budget Officer and with the approval of the Governor.
39C.  All rules of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of 
40Education, as they pertain to the duties of the department, that are in effect on the 
41effective date of the transition remain in effect until rescinded, revised or amended.
42D.  All contracts, agreements and compacts of the Department of Health and Human 
43Services and the Department of Education, as they pertain to the powers, duties, 
44responsibilities, programs, services and functions of the department, that are in effect 
Page 6 - 129LR0215(01)-11on the effective date of the transition remain in effect until the contracts, agreements 
2and compacts expire or are altered by the parties involved in the contracts, 
3agreements or compacts.
4E.  All records of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department 
5of Education as they pertain to the powers, duties, responsibilities, programs, services 
6and functions of the department are transferred to the department as necessary to 
7implement the transition.
8F. All employees and positions of the Department of Health and Human Services and 
9the Department of Education necessary to carry out the powers, duties, 
10responsibilities, programs, services and functions of the department are transferred to 
11the department.
12G. All office equipment, furniture and other property or assets of the Department of 
13Health and Human Services and the Department of Education that are used or held 
14exclusively or principally by personnel transferred under paragraph F are transferred 
15to the department.
16H. All transfers of employees and assets from the Department of Health and Human 
17Services and the Department of Education to the department are subject to the 
18approval of the commissioner, and a transfer of an employee or asset may not occur if 
19the commissioner determines that the employee or asset should remain with the 
20transferring department.
21I. Employees of the department who were employees of the Department of Health 
22and Human Services or the Department of Education immediately prior to the 
23effective date of the transition retain all employee rights, privileges and benefits, 
24including sick leave, vacation and seniority, provided under the Civil Service Law or 
25collective bargaining agreements.  The Department of Administrative and Financial 
26Services, Bureau of Human Resources is directed to assist the affected departments 
27with the orderly implementation of the transition under this paragraph.
28J.  The Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of the Budget is 
29directed to work with the employees of the Department of Health and Human 
30Services and the Department of Education with regard to the powers, duties, 
31responsibilities, programs, services and functions transferred to the department to 
32develop the budget for the department.
