 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1714
H.P. 1225 House of  Representatives, May 14, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Secretary of State To Enter into a Reciprocal  
Agreement between the State and Taiwan Regarding Driver's Licenses
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative STEWART of  Presque Isle.
Cosponsored by Senator KEIM of Oxford and
Representatives: McLEAN of Gorham, PERKINS of Oakland, Senators: DESCHAMBAULT 
of York, DIAMOND of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR1256(01)-11Sec. 1.  Reciprocal agreement. Resolved:  That the Secretary of State shall 
2begin negotiations toward the development of a reciprocal agreement between the 
3Department of the Secretary of State, Bureau of Motor Vehicles and Taiwan for 
4reciprocity, beginning January 1, 2021, in issuing driver's licenses to residents of this 
5State who reside in Taiwan and to Taiwanese citizens who reside in this State.  Any 
6agreement negotiated pursuant to this section must be in writing and signed by the 
7Secretary of State and the Director General of the Taipei Economic and Cultural Office. 
8The Secretary of State shall adopt any rules necessary to implement this section.  Rules 
9adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in the Maine 
10Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
11SUMMARY
12This resolve directs the Secretary of State to begin negotiations toward the 
13development of a reciprocal agreement between the Department of the Secretary of State, 
14Bureau of Motor Vehicles and Taiwan for reciprocity, beginning January 1, 2021, in 
15issuing driver's licenses to residents of this State who reside in Taiwan and to Taiwanese 
16citizens who reside in this State.
