 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 532
H.P. 389 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2019
Resolve, Directing Professional Licensing and  Certification Boards  
To Study the Barriers To Obtaining Professional Licensure and Certification
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MORALES of South Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: ACKLEY of Monmouth, HYMANSON of York, MEYER of Eliot, SHARPE of Durham, Senator: CARPENTER  of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR1847(01)-11Sec. 1.  Review.  Resolved:   That each professional licensing and certification 
2board under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 32, in consultation with the Department of 
3the Attorney General, shall undertake a thorough review of its rules and procedures and 
4survey its licensees and certificate holders and applicants for licensure or certification to 
5research barriers to obtaining licensure and certification, including existing deficiencies 
6in reciprocity provisions.  Each board shall submit a report to the Joint Standing 
7Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business by 
8January 15, 2020 with its findings under this section and any proposed alterations to its 
9rules and procedures.  The joint standing committee shall review the reports and suggest 
10changes to the licensing and certification boards, which may submit rules pursuant to 
11Title 5, chapter 375.  The joint standing committee may submit legislation related to any 
12report under this section to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
13SUMMARY
14This resolve directs each professional licensing and certification board under the 
15Maine Revised Statutes, Title 32, in consultation with the Department of the Attorney 
16General, to undertake a thorough review of its rules and procedures and survey its 
17licensees and certificate holders and applicants for licensure or certification to research 
18barriers to obtaining licensure and certification, including existing deficiencies in 
19reciprocity provisions.  Each board is directed to submit a report to the Joint Standing 
20Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business by 
21January 15, 2020 with its findings and any proposed changes to its rules and procedures.  
22The joint standing committee is directed to review and suggest alterations to the licensing 
23and certification boards, which may submit rules pursuant to Title 5, chapter 375.  The 
24joint standing committee is authorized to submit legislation related to any report under 
25this section to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
