 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 645
H.P. 466 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Cap the Property Tax on the Primary Residence of Certain Residents Who Are 65 Years of Age or  Older
Reference to the Committee on Taxation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CRAVEN of Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BRYANT of  Windham, CLOUTIER of Lewiston, FAY of 
Raymond, HANDY of  Lewiston, MAREAN of Hollis, PERRY of Calais.

Page 1 - 129LR0565(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved:   Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IX, §8, first ¶ is amended to read:
5Section 8.  Taxation.  All taxes upon real and personal estate, assessed by authority 
6of this State, shall be apportioned and assessed equally according to the just value thereof, 
7except as provided in this section.
8Constitution, Art. IX, §8, sub-§6 is enacted to read:
96. Certain property owned by person 65 years of age or older.  The 
10Legislature has the power to provide that municipalities may not increase the taxes 
11imposed on real property that is owned and occupied as the primary residence by a person 
12at least 65 years of age if the income for all persons living in that residence does not 
13exceed 400% of the federal poverty level.  The rate of tax that may be imposed is the rate 
14in effect during the property tax year in which the owner attains 65 years of age or 
15purchases the property after attaining 65 years of age, whichever occurs later.  If title to 
16the property is transferred to someone other than a family member of the owner, the 
17property assumes the tax rate at the time of that transfer. Revenue lost by a municipality 
18due to the operation of this subsection must be reimbursed by the State.
19Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
20Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
21respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
22holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
23following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
24proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
25“Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to authorize the Legislature to 
26require real property that is owned and occupied as a primary residence by a person 
2765 years of age or older and at which the residents of that property have a household 
28income that does not exceed 400% of the federal poverty level to be taxed at the same 
29rate as the tax imposed on that property on the later of the property tax year during 
30which the person attains 65 years of age or a person at least 65 years of age purchases 
31such property and to require the State to reimburse municipalities for revenue lost due 
32to the operation of this program?”
33The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
34and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
35square below the word “Yes” or “No.”  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
36declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
37State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
38review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
39amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
40becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
Page 2 - 129LR0565(01)-11Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
2shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
3of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
4SUMMARY
5This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to authorize the 
6Legislature to require municipalities to cap property taxes on property owned and 
7occupied as a person’s primary residence if that person is at least 65 years of age and the 
8household income for the residents of the property does not exceed 400% of the federal 
9poverty level.  The tax would be stabilized at the amount assessed on the property on the 
10later of the date by which the person attained 65 years of age or purchased the property.  
11Upon transfer of the property to someone other than a family member of the owner, the 
12property would assume the just value at the time of transfer. The State would be required 
13to reimburse a municipality for any revenue lost due to the cap on property taxes.
