 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1477
H.P. 1079 House of  Representatives,  April 2, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Facilitate  the Use of Ranked-choice Voting for Governor  
and Members of the Legislature
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative COOPER  of Yarmouth.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox.

Page 1 - 129LR1660(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. First, §5 is amended to read:
5Section 5.  Election of Representatives; records of votes delivered 
6forthwith; records of votes examined by Governor; summons of persons who 
7appear to be elected; records shall be laid before the House.  The meetings 
8within this State for the choice of Representatives shall be warned in due course of law by 
9qualified officials of the several towns and cities 7 days at least before the election, and 
10the election officials of the various towns and cities shall preside impartially at such 
11meetings, and receive the votes of all the qualified electors, sort, count and declare them 
12in.  Those officials shall, in open meeting; and a list of the persons voted for shall be 
13formed, with the number of votes for each person against that person's name, form a 
14record of the votes received.  Cities and towns belonging to any Representative District 
15shall hold their meetings at the same time in the respective cities and towns; and such 
16meetings shall be notified, held and regulated, the votes received, sorted, counted and 
17declared and the record formed in the same manner.  Fair copies of the lists of votes 
18records shall be attested and sealed by the municipal officers and the clerks of the cities 
19and towns and the city and town clerks respectively shall cause the same to be delivered 
20into the office of the Secretary of State forthwith.  The Governor shall examine the 
21returned copies of such lists records, together with the ballots cast if the Governor so 
22elects, and 7 days before the first Wednesday of December biennially, shall issue a 
23summons to such persons as shall appear to have been elected by a plurality of all votes 
24returned, to attend and take their seats.  All such lists records shall be laid before the 
25House of Representatives on the first Wednesday of December biennially, and they shall 
26finally determine who are elected.
27Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Second, §§3, 4 and 5 are amended to read:
28Section 3.  Election of Senators; records of votes delivered forthwith.  The 
29meetings within this State for the election of Senators shall be notified, held and regulated 
30and the votes received, sorted, counted, declared and recorded, in the same manner as 
31those for Representatives.  Fair copies of the lists records of votes shall be attested by the 
32clerks of the cities and towns or other duly authorized officials and sealed up in open 
33meetings and such officials shall cause said lists records to be delivered into the office of 
34the Secretary of State forthwith.
35Section 4.  Records of votes examined by Governor; summons to persons 
36who appear to be elected.  The Governor shall, as soon as may be, examine the copies 
37of such lists records, together with the ballots cast if the Governor so elects, and at least 7 
38days before the said first Wednesday of December, issue a summons to such persons, as 
39shall appear to be elected by a plurality of the votes in each senatorial district, to attend 
40that day and take their seats.
Page 2 - 129LR1660(01)-11Section 5.  Determination of Senators elected; procedure for filling 
2vacancies.  The Senate shall, on said first Wednesday of December, biennially 
3determine who is elected by a plurality of votes to be Senator in each district.  All 
4vacancies in the Senate arising from death, resignation, removal from the State or like 
5causes, and also vacancies, if any, which may occur because of the failure of any district 
6to elect by a plurality of votes the Senator to which said district shall be entitled shall be 
7filled by an immediate election in the unrepresented district.  The Governor shall issue a 
8proclamation therefor and therein fix the time of such election.
9Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, §24 is enacted to read:
10Section 24.  Elections by plurality or majority.  The Legislature, or the people 
11acting pursuant to Section 18, shall predetermine by law whether the electors choose the 
12Governor, Senators and Representatives by a plurality or majority of the votes.
13Constitution, Art. V, Pt. First, §3 is amended to read:
14Section 3.  Election; votes to be returned to Secretary of State; Secretary 
15of State to lay records before the Senate and House of Representatives; 
16provision in case of tie.  The meetings for election of Governor shall be notified, held 
17and regulated and votes shall be received, sorted, counted and declared and recorded, in 
18the same manner as those for Senators and Representatives.  Copies of lists records of 
19votes shall be sealed and returned to the secretary's office in the same manner and at the 
20same time as those for Senators and Representatives.  The Secretary of State for the time 
21being shall, on the first Wednesday after the first Tuesday of January then next, lay the 
22lists records returned to the secretary's office before the Senate and House of 
23Representatives to be by them examined, together with the ballots cast if they so elect, 
24and they shall determine the number of votes duly cast for the office of Governor, and in 
25case of a choice by plurality of all of the votes returned they shall declare and publish the 
26same.  If there shall be a tie between the 2 persons having the largest number of votes for 
27Governor the final result of an election for Governor is a tie vote, the House of 
28Representatives and the Senate meeting in joint session, and each member of said bodies 
29having a single vote, shall elect one of said 2 the persons having so received an equal 
30number of votes and the person so elected by the Senate and House of Representatives 
31shall be declared the Governor.
32Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
33Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
34respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
35holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
36following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
37proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
38"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to allow the 
39Legislature, or the people by using the direct initiative, to determine 
40whether the Governor, State Senators and State Representatives are 
41elected by a plurality or majority of the votes?"
Page 3 - 129LR1660(01)-11The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
2and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
3square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
4declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
5State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
6review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
7amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
8becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
9Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
10shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
11of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
12SUMMARY
13This resolution proposes an amendment to the Constitution of Maine to allow the 
14Legislature, or the people by using the direct initiative, to determine whether the 
15Governor, State Senators and State Representatives are elected by a plurality or majority 
16of the votes.
