 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1228
H.P. 889 House of  Representatives, March 14, 2019
Resolve, Requiring the  Department of Health and Human Services 
To Create  a Limited  Benefit MaineCare Card for Individuals 
Eligible for the Medicare Savings Program
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative McCREIGHT  of Harpswell.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Representatives: HEAD  of Bethel, HYMANSON of York, KORNFIELD of Bangor,  PERRY  
of Calais,  SCHNECK of Bangor, STOVER of Boothbay, TEPLER  of Topsham, Senator: 
MOORE of Washington.

Page 1 - 129LR1199(01)-11Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to create a limited 
2benefit MaineCare card.  Resolved:  That, no later than January 1, 2020, the 
3Department of Health and Human Services shall create a limited benefit MaineCare card 
4for individuals who qualify for the Medicare Savings Program.  If the department 
5determines that an individual is eligible for the Medicare Savings Program, also known as 
6the Medicare Buy-in Program, as a Qualified Medicare Beneficiary, a Specified Low-
7income Medicare Beneficiary or a Qualifying Individual, the department shall issue the 
8limited benefit MaineCare card to the individual for use with providers of services, 
9including but not limited to pharmacies, medical providers, hospitals, primary care 
10providers and behavioral health providers, referred to in this resolve as "the providers."  
11The card serves as notification to providers that the cardholder is eligible for the 
12Medicare Savings Program.  The department shall monitor the implementation of the 
13limited benefit MaineCare card to assess the ease of use for both the cardholder and the 
14providers.
15Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services 
16shall submit a report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction 
17over health and human services matters describing the implementation of the limited 
18benefit MaineCare card under section 1 and including data regarding the ease of use by 
19cardholders and providers for the first full year.  The report must be submitted by 
20February 1, 2021.
21SUMMARY
22This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to create a new 
23limited benefit MaineCare card for individuals who qualify for the Medicare Savings 
24Program, also known as the Medicare Buy-in Program.  The department must issue the 
25card to qualified individuals for use at pharmacies and providers of medical, behavioral 
26health and other services.  The department must assess the ease of use of the card to 
27cardholders and providers of services and submit a report regarding the limited benefit 
28MaineCare card to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction 
29over health and human services matters by February 1, 2021.
