 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 534
H.P. 391 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2019
An Act  To Make  Ballot Questions Easier To Read and Understand 
for Maine  Voters
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ANDREWS of Paris.
Cosponsored by Senator LUCHINI of Hancock and
Representatives: DILLINGHAM of Oxford, HICKMAN  of Winthrop,  MOONEN  of Portland, 
PICKETT of  Dixfield,  STEWART of Presque Isle,  STROM of Pittsfield, Senators: KEIM of 
Oxford, LIBBY  of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 129LR1686(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, the ability of voters to make informed choices on ballot questions is 
4essential for the proper functioning of the State's citizen democracy; and
5Whereas, this Act makes necessary improvements to the process of presenting 
6referendum questions to the voters; and
7Whereas, it is possible that referenda may be sent to the voters before the 90-day 
8period has expired; and
9Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
10the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
11immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
12therefore,
13Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
14Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA §906, sub-§6, ¶B, as repealed and replaced by PL 1993, c. 
15352, §3, is amended to read:
16B.    The Secretary of State shall write the question in a simple, clear, concise and 
17direct manner that describes the subject matter of the people's veto or direct initiative.  
18The question must have a readability score, as determined by a recognized instrument 
19for measuring adult literacy levels, equivalent to no higher than a 6th-grade reading 
20level and unambiguously state what the effect of a "yes" or "no" vote may have.
21Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
22legislation takes effect when approved.
23SUMMARY
24This bill requires that ballot questions be written in a manner that is understandable to 
25the greatest number of voters possible, determined to be for adult literacy at the 6th-grade 
26reading level, which is the standard used for other important official state documents, 
27including for the Maine Residents Property Tax Program, notices regarding child support, 
28municipal property tax deferral programs for seniors and temporary assistance for needy 
29families.  This bill also requires ballot questions to unambiguously state what the effect of 
30a "yes" or "no" vote may have.
