 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1223
H.P. 884 House of  Representatives, March 14, 2019
An Act  To Amend the Traffic Movement Permit Process  To 
Incorporate a Multimodal Approach  to Infrastructure Planning
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MORALES of South Portland.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BRYANT of  Windham, COLLINGS of Portland, KESSLER 
of South  Portland, McLEAN of  Gorham, SYLVESTER of Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR1752(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  23 MRSA §704-A, sub-§2, ¶¶A and B, as enacted by PL 1999, c. 468, 
3§2, are amended to read:
4A.  For any project that generates 100 or more passenger car equivalents at peak hour, 
5the person responsible for the project is required to make adequate provision for 
6traffic movement of all types into and out of the project area.  Before issuing a 
7permit, the department shall determine that any traffic increase attributable to the 
8proposed project will not result in unreasonable congestion or unsafe conditions on a 
9road in the vicinity of the proposed project.:
10(1) Determine that any traffic increase attributable to the proposed project will 
11not result in unreasonable congestion or unsafe conditions on a road in the 
12vicinity of the proposed project;
13(2) Require all reasonable traffic mitigation measures related to the project that 
14could avoid the expansion of the state highway system at the expense of the 
15public;
16(3) Require an analysis of all modes of transportation affected by the project and 
17a design to ensure that the project balances the modes of transportation in a way 
18that is appropriate to the context of the project;
19(4)  Require the applicant to demonstrate how the project conforms with each 
20requirement listed under section 73, subsection 3; and
21(5) For any project that generates over 200 passenger car equivalents at peak 
22hour, hold a public hearing and require the applicant to incorporate any 
23enhancements to infrastructure for modes of transportation other than passenger 
24cars that appear warranted based on the information presented at the public 
25hearing.
26B.  The department, together with the appropriate representative of the municipality 
27or municipalities where the project is located, shall discuss with the applicant at a 
28meeting, referred to in this paragraph as a "scoping meeting," the scope of impact 
29evaluation required for the proposed project and the type of proceedings warranted.  
30The scope of impact evaluation for the proposed project must include an analysis 
31estimating the amount of traffic that will be generated by the project for all relevant 
32modes of transportation as determined by the commissioner, including, but not 
33limited to, traffic generated by vehicles, pedestrians, bicyclists, transit and trail use.  
34The scope of impact evaluation must also provide an analysis of the project's effect 
35on the quality and level of service for all modes of transportation that are planned as 
36part of the project or impacted by the project.  The applicant shall provide notice to 
37abutting municipalities.  If the department determines as a result of these 
38communications that the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed project 
39satisfies the requirements of this section, including, but not limited to, standards 
40adopted for projects that generate 100 to 200 passenger car equivalents at peak hour 
41and the department determines that there are no other significant traffic-related issues 
42presented, the department may issue a permit to the applicant without further 
43proceedings.  The department shall adopt rules establishing the submission 
Page 2 - 129LR1752(01)-11requirement requirements for a scoping meeting.  Those rules must, at a minimum, 
2establish 2 submission standards: one for an expedited review without further 
3proceedings and one for a preliminary review with further proceedings anticipated.  
4The rules must also establish the level of professional certification required by any 
5submission and may not impose undue professional liability on the applicant. Rules 
6adopted by the department pursuant to this paragraph must:
7(1) Establish at least 2 submission standards:  one for an expedited review 
8without further proceedings and one for a preliminary review with further 
9proceedings anticipated;
10(2) Incorporate by reference as determined by the department trip analysis 
11standards and procedures from the most recent editions of authoritative works 
12and publications on trip generation such as the Institute of Transportation 
13Engineers Trip Generation Manual; and
14(3) Establish the level of professional certification required for any submission 
15and in a manner that does not impose undue professional liability on the 
16applicant.
17SUMMARY
18This bill amends the requirements for a traffic movement permit for a project by 
19requiring the Department of Transportation to require all reasonable traffic mitigation 
20measures that could avoid the expansion of a roadway. This bill requires an analysis of all 
21modes of transportation affected by the project and a design to ensure that the project 
22does not promote one mode of transportation in a way that negatively impacts another. 
23This bill also requires the department to include within the scope of impact evaluation an 
24analysis estimating the amount of vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle, transit and trail use that 
25could be generated by the project.
