 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 88
H.P. 74 House of  Representatives, January 15, 2019
An Act  To Require  the Truthful Display  of Gasoline Prices
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BEEBE-CENTER of  Rockland.
Cosponsored by President  JACKSON  of Aroostook and
Representatives: DUNPHY of Old Town,  JORGENSEN  of Portland, MATLACK of St. 
George, PIERCE of Falmouth, STOVER  of Boothbay,  Senators: LIBBY of  Androscoggin, 
VITELLI of Sagadahoc.

Page 1 - 129LR1081(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  10 MRSA ยง1661-B, sub-ยง1, as amended by PL 2007, c. 86, ยง1, is further 
3amended to read:
41.  Posting required.  A retail seller of fuel to be used by vehicles on public 
5highways shall make clearly visible on each pump the price of the fuel available at that 
6pump, either by posting a sign of no less than 64 square inches or by a price reading, 
7digital or analog, built into the pump that must reflect the actual price of the fuel pumped.  
8The pump must have a sign of no less than 64 square inches on it if either the price on the 
9pump differs from the price posted on the roadside sign due to a difference in grade of 
10fuel or service or the retailer does not have a roadside sign.  On multi-grade pumps, the 
11posted price must be for the lowest priced lowest-priced unleaded regular gasoline.  The 
12posting must indicate the difference in price for full-service, mini-service and self-service 
13if more than one grade of service is available at that pump.  The posted price on a pump 
14sign or a roadside sign must be the full price of the fuel and may not reflect a price  
15reduction due to factors such as method of payment, participation in a rewards program 
16or a discount for the purchase of other goods or services from the retail seller.
17SUMMARY
18This bill requires posted gasoline prices on pumps or on roadside signs of a retail 
19seller to be the full price of the fuel and prohibits posting a price reduced due to factors 
20such as method of payment, participation in a rewards program or a discount for the 
21purchase of other goods or services from the retail seller.
