 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 5
H.P. 6 House of  Representatives, January 2, 2019
An Act  To Require  Notification of Proposed Rate Increases for 
Long-term Care Policies
Reference to the Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TEPLER of Topsham.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, COLLINGS of Portland, DOORE of Augusta, FOLEY of  Biddeford,  Senators: SANBORN, H. of  Cumberland, VITELLI of Sagadahoc.

Page 1 - 129LR0393(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง5084 is enacted to read:
3ยง5084.  Notice to policyholders of rate increase
4An insurer shall notify a policyholder of a long-term care insurance policy of a 
5proposed premium rate increase that affects the policyholder no later than 10 business 
6days after the filing by the insurer of the premium rate increase. An insurer shall provide 
7written notice by first-class mail to the last known mailing address of the policyholder. 
8The notice must also inform a policyholder of the policyholder's right to request a hearing 
9pursuant to section 229.
10SUMMARY
11This bill requires the insurer to notify a policyholder of a long-term care insurance 
12policy of a proposed premium rate increase that affects the policyholder no later than 10 
13business days after the filing of the premium rate increase.  The bill also requires that the 
14notice inform the policyholder of the policyholder's right to contact the Department of 
15Professional and Financial Regulation, Bureau of Insurance to request a hearing on the 
16proposed rate increase.
