 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 397
H.P. 306 House of  Representatives, January 29, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Commissioner  of Professional and Financial 
Regulation To Conduct  a Sunrise  Review Regarding the Proposal 
To License Building Contractors, Insulation  Installers  and Energy  
Auditors
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CAIAZZO of  Scarborough.  (BY  REQUEST)
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BABINE of  Scarborough, BERRY of Bowdoinham, 
CROCKETT of Portland, KESSLER of South Portland,  RYKERSON of Kittery.

Page 1 - 129LR0538(01)-11Sec. 1.  Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation to 
2conduct a sunrise review regarding the proposal to license building 
3contractors, insulation installers and energy auditors. Resolved:  That the 
4Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation shall conduct an independent 
5assessment pursuant to the sunrise review requirements in the Maine Revised Statutes, 
6Title 32, chapter 1-A, subchapter 2 of the proposal to license building contractors, 
7insulation installers and energy auditors.
8Sec. 2.  Reporting date established. Resolved:  That no later than January 10, 
92020 the Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation shall submit a report 
10with any necessary legislation following the independent assessment under section 1 to 
11the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
12Commerce. The committee is authorized to submit legislation on the subject matter of the 
13report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature. 
14SUMMARY
15This bill requires the Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation to 
16conduct an assessment pursuant to the sunrise review requirements in the Maine Revised 
17Statutes, Title 32, chapter 1-A, subchapter 2 of the licensing of building contractors, 
18insulation installers and energy auditors.  The bill requires the commissioner to submit a 
19report to the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
20Advancement and Commerce and allows the committee to submit legislation to the 
21Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
