 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 2035
H.P. 1445 House of  Representatives, January 14, 2020
An Act  To Modify Teacher Certification Expiration Dates for 
Teachers Who  Use Family Medical Leave
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed pursuant to Joint Rule  218.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FECTEAU of Augusta.
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland  and
Representatives: COREY of  Windham, DILLINGHAM of Oxford, DRINKWATER of 
Milford, KORNFIELD of  Bangor, McCREA of Fort Fairfield, RUDNICKI of Fairfield, 
SAMPSON of Alfred.

Page 1 - 129LR2842(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง13011-A is enacted to read:
3ยง13011-A.  Certification extension for family medical leave
4Notwithstanding the term of a conditional, provisional or professional certificate 
5under this chapter, upon the request of a school administrative unit, the commissioner 
6shall grant an extension on an individual's conditional, provisional or professional 
7certificate if the individual uses family medical leave during the final year of the 
8individual's certificate and the school administrative unit provides the commissioner with 
9sufficient proof of the use of family medical leave.  An extension under this section is for 
10the same number of days as the family medical leave used during the final year of the 
11individual's certificate.  For the purposes of this section, "family medical leave" has the 
12same meaning as in Title 26, section 843, subsection 4.
13SUMMARY
14This bill provides that, upon the request of a school administrative unit, the 
15Commissioner of Education must grant an extension on a teacher's conditional, 
16provisional or professional certificate if the teacher uses family medical leave within the 
17teacher's final year of certification and the school administrative unit provides sufficient 
18proof of the use of family medical leave.  The extension is for the same number of days 
19as the family medical leave used during the final year of the teacher's certificate.
