 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 576
H.P. 420 House of  Representatives, February 5, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Education  To Develop and 
Implement an Online  Learning  Platform for Students and 
Educators
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BRENNAN of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland  and
Representatives: DODGE  of Belfast, FARNSWORTH of Portland,  FECTEAU of Biddeford, 
JORGENSEN of Portland, KORNFIELD of Bangor,  MASTRACCIO of Sanford, McCREA of 
Fort Fairfield, TALBOT  ROSS of Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR0974(01)-11Sec. 1.  Online learning platform.  Resolved:  That the Department of 
2Education shall establish a working group to develop and implement an online platform 
3to facilitate the provision of online, virtual instruction by state-certified teachers to 
4students in every public school in the State and the provision of a variety of high-quality 
5professional development opportunities to educators across the State.  The Department of 
6Education shall report to the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
7by January 1, 2020 on the progress toward and obstacles to the development and 
8implementation of the online platform.  The joint standing committee may report out a 
9bill to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature to address any obstacles to the 
10development and implementation of the online platform and any other concerns.
11SUMMARY
12This resolve directs the Department of Education to develop and implement an online 
13platform to facilitate the provision of online, virtual instruction by state-certified teachers 
14to students in every public school in the State and the provision of a variety of high-
15quality professional development opportunities to educators across the State.  It directs 
16the department to report to the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural 
17Affairs by January 1, 2020 on the progress toward and obstacles to the development and 
18implementation of the online platform.  The joint standing committee is authorized to 
19report out a bill to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature to address any 
20obstacles to the development and implementation of the online platform and any other 
21concerns.
