 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 476
S.P. 140 In Senate,  January  29, 2019
Resolve, To  Review the Delivery of Services to the Citizens of the 
State by the  Department of Health and Human Services
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator WOODSOME of York.
Cosponsored by Senators:  DESCHAMBAULT of York, FOLEY  of York,  Representative: 
O'NEIL of  Saco.

Page 1 - 129LR2065(01)-11Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services review.  Resolved:  
2That the Commissioner of Health and Human Services shall review the programs, 
3services and operations of the Department of Health and Human Services and determine 
4if any of those programs, services and operations can be delivered more efficiently at the 
5county level.  In performing the review, the commissioner shall work with health and 
6human services providers in York County and Cumberland County as well as with other 
7stakeholders as the commissioner determines appropriate.
8Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That, by December 4, 2019, the Commissioner of 
9Health and Human Services shall submit a report detailing the findings of the review 
10under section 1, including suggested legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on 
11Health and Human Services.  The committee is authorized to submit legislation based on 
12the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
13SUMMARY
14This resolve requires the Commissioner of Health and Human Services, working with 
15health and human services providers in York County and Cumberland County as well as 
16with other stakeholders, to review the programs, services and operations of the 
17Department of Health and Human Services and determine if any of those programs, 
18services and operations can be delivered more efficiently at the county level.  The 
19commissioner is required to submit a report to the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
20and Human Services detailing the findings of the review.  The committee is authorized to 
21submit legislation based on the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th 
22Legislature.
