 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1388
S.P. 432 In Senate,  March  26, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Attorney General To Pursue the State's Claim That It Holds Title to Maine's Intertidal Lands
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator DOW of Lincoln.
Cosponsored by Representative EVANGELOS of Friendship.

Page 1 - 129LR1412(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas,  both the date of adjournment of the 129th Legislature and the date of the 
4pending Law Court's decisions involving title to Maine's intertidal lands are unknown; 
5and
6Whereas, it is unknown whether the State's claim of title to its intertidal lands will 
7be fully vindicated by pending decisions of the Law Court; and
8Whereas, the State's claim of title to its intertidal lands is rooted in part in 
9provisions and doctrines within the United States Constitution, federal laws and United 
10States Supreme Court case law; and
11Whereas, a final determination of the scope and meaning of these federal 
12provisions, doctrines, laws and cases that leads to the conclusion that Maine in fact holds 
13title to its intertidal lands can be made only by the United States Supreme Court; and
14Whereas, prior Law Court cases, said to cede Maine's intertidal lands to upland 
15owners, were not appealed to the United States Supreme Court, thus leaving unresolved 
16these federally rooted claims that Maine holds title to its intertidal lands; and
17Whereas, petitions for certiorari to the United States Supreme Court must be timely 
18filed in order to raise these federally rooted claims that Maine holds title to its intertidal 
19lands; and
20Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts and uncertainties create an 
21emergency within the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following 
22legislation as immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and 
23safety; now, therefore, be it
24Sec. 1.  Certiorari review by the United States Supreme Court of 
25unresolved federal questions related to intertidal lands in Maine.  Resolved:  
26That, inasmuch as prior Law Court cases have ceded title to all of this State's intertidal 
27land to upland owners in contexts where certiorari review by the United States Supreme 
28Court of contrary claims of title by the State to these lands, rooted in part in federal 
29constitutional provisions and doctrines, congressional enactments and United States 
30Supreme Court cases, was not sought, and recognizing that the United States Supreme 
31Court is the final arbiter of the scope and meaning of all federally rooted claims of land 
32ownership, the Attorney General shall seek United States Supreme Court review of any 
33future Law Court decision that does not fully vindicate the State's claim of title to its 
34intertidal lands.  In any such review the Attorney General shall raise not only the full 
35range of federally rooted claims of title by the State to its intertidal lands but also the 
36failure of the State's present judge-made intertidal land law to adhere to provisions of the 
37Constitution of Maine requiring reasonableness in the alienation of trust property and 
38imposing separation of powers limitations on the judicial branch of this State's 
39government.
Page 2 - 129LR1412(01)-11Sec. 2.  An alternative to certiorari review by the United States Supreme 
2Court of a future Law Court decision that does not fully vindicate the State's 
3claim of title to its intertidal lands.  Resolved:  That, if present law of this State 
4ceding title to all of the State's intertidal lands to upland owners remains in place without 
5an opportunity within 2 years after the effective date of this resolve for certiorari review 
6by the United States Supreme Court of federal constitutional provisions and doctrines, 
7congressional enactments and United States Supreme Court cases that leads to the 
8conclusion that the State does in fact hold title to its intertidal lands, the Attorney General 
9shall commence in federal court an original proceeding in the form of a declaratory 
10judgment action, asserting the State's claim of title to its intertidal lands based on these 
11ignored federal grounds, and pointing out that the State's present judge-made intertidal 
12lands law fails to adhere to provisions of the Constitution of Maine requiring 
13reasonableness in the alienation of trust property and imposing separation of powers 
14limitations on the judicial branch of this State's government.
15Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
16legislation takes effect when approved.
17SUMMARY
18Pending before the Law Court are cases addressing the State's title to intertidal lands.  
19This resolve directs the Attorney General to seek review in the United States Supreme 
20Court of any decision by the Law Court that does not fully vindicate the State's title to 
21intertidal lands.  If there is no Law Court decision to appeal within 2 years, the Attorney 
22General shall bring a declaratory judgment action in federal court to declare the State's 
23title to intertidal lands, pursuing the case through to an appeal to the Supreme Court if 
24necessary.
