 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1365
H.P. 987 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Provide  for the Election of the  Governor by Majority  
Vote
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BABBIDGE of Kennebunk.
Cosponsored by Senator SANBORN, L. of Cumberland and
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, COLLINGS of Portland, DOUDERA of Camden, EVANGELOS of  Friendship, FARNSWORTH of Portland, KESSLER of South Portland, 
VEROW of Brewer.

Page 1 - 129LR0726(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. V, Pt. First, ยง3 is amended to read:
5Section 3.  Election; votes to be returned to Secretary of State; Secretary 
6of State to lay lists before the Senate and House of Representatives; provision 
7in case of tie.  The meetings for election of Governor shall be notified, held and 
8regulated and votes shall be received, sorted, counted and declared and recorded, in the 
9same manner as those for Senators and Representatives, except that the Governor must be 
10elected by majority vote.  Copies of lists of votes shall be sealed and returned to the 
11secretary's office in the same manner and at the same time as those for Senators.  The 
12Secretary of State for the time being shall, on the first Wednesday after the first Tuesday 
13of January then next, lay the lists returned to the secretary's office before the Senate and 
14House of Representatives to be by them examined, together with the ballots cast if they so 
15elect, and they shall determine the number of votes duly cast for the office of Governor, 
16and in case of a choice by plurality majority of all of the votes returned they shall declare 
17and publish the same.  If there shall be the final result of an election is a tie between the 2 
18persons having the largest number of votes for Governor, the House of Representatives 
19and the Senate meeting in joint session, and each member of said bodies having a single 
20vote, shall elect one of said 2 the persons having so received an equal number of votes 
21and the person so elected by the Senate and House of Representatives shall be declared 
22the Governor.
23Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
24Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
25respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
26holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
27following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
28proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
29"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require that the 
30Governor be elected by majority vote?"
31The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
32and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
33square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
34declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
35State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
36review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
37amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
38becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
39Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
40shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
41of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
Page 2 - 129LR0726(01)-11SUMMARY
2This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require that the 
3Governor be elected by majority vote.
