 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1734
S.P. 576 In Senate,  May 14, 2019
An Act  To Create a Postsecondary Educational  Institution Program 
License for the Purchase of Liquor  for Certain Curricula
Submitted by the Department of  Administrative  and Financial Services pursuant to  Joint  
Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LUCHINI of Hancock.

Page 1 - 129LR2380(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  28-A MRSA ยง1553 is enacted to read:
3ยง1553.  Postsecondary educational institution program license
4The bureau may issue a postsecondary educational institution program license to a 
5state-supported postsecondary educational institution operating under federal law and 
6federal supervision for research, educational and business development purposes as 
7described by this section.
81.  Eligible licensees.  The bureau may issue a license to a state-supported 
9postsecondary educational institution, or its agent, that submits an application to the 
10bureau in a manner prescribed by the bureau.  The bureau may issue a license under this 
11section only to an educational institution, or its agent, that offers a course or courses for a 
12degree program for hospitality industry, culinary arts or food sciences.
132.  Purchase of liquor limited to certain purposes.  A licensee under this section 
14may purchase liquor for educational programs provided by the licensee.  A licensee may 
15purchase liquor for educational course work as part of the educational institution's 
16curriculum for a degree program for hospitality industry, culinary arts or food sciences.
17Nothing in this subsection prohibits a licensee under this section from charging a fee for 
18the purchase of liquor for the purposes described in this subsection.
193.  Consumption of liquor on premises; transport of liquor to premises.  A 
20licensee under this section is governed by the provisions of this subsection regarding the 
21consumption of liquor on the educational institution's premises and the transport of liquor 
22to the educational institution's premises.
23A.  A licensee may permit sampling of the liquor used in conjunction with the 
24educational institution's curriculum for a degree program for hospitality industry, 
25culinary arts or food sciences by a person at least 21 years of age who is:
26(1)  A member of the faculty or staff of the educational institution who teaches or 
27assists with course work or a program related to the educational institution's 
28curriculum for a degree program for hospitality industry, culinary arts or food 
29sciences; or
30(2)  A student enrolled in a course or program related to the educational 
31institution's curriculum for a degree program for hospitality industry, culinary 
32arts or food sciences.
33B.  Liquor purchased and transported to the educational institution's premises used in 
34conjunction with the educational institution's curriculum for a degree program for 
35hospitality industry, culinary arts or food sciences must be clearly labeled with the 
36educational institution's name, license number, date of purchase and course or 
37program with which the liquor is associated.
384.  License fee.  The annual fee for a postsecondary educational institution program 
39license is $100.
Page 2 - 129LR2380(01)-11SUMMARY
2This bill creates a new license type for state-supported postsecondary educational 
3institutions that offer a course or courses for a degree program for hospitality industry, 
4culinary arts or food sciences.  The license authorizes a state-supported postsecondary 
5educational institution to purchase and permit sampling of liquor in conjunction with the 
6educational institution's curriculum.
