 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 320
H.P. 245 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2019
An Act  To Amend the Scope of Practice of Podiatric Medicine
Reference to the Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative KESCHL of Belgrade.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BRADSTREET of Vassalboro, RUDNICKI of  Fairfield, 
Senators: BLACK of  Franklin,  SANBORN, L. of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR1362(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง3551, sub-ยง4, as amended by PL 2017, c. 14, ยง1, is further 
3amended to read:
44.  Practice of podiatric medicine.  "Practice of podiatric medicine" means the 
5diagnosis and treatment of maladies of the human foot and, ankle and soft tissue of the 
6lower leg by medical, surgical or mechanical means and the evaluation, diagnosis, 
7management and prevention of conditions of the lower extremities, which may include 
8osseous and soft tissue procedures that address the pathology of the foot, ankle and 
9contiguous attachments below the tibial tuberosity. "Practice of podiatric medicine" 
10includes the performance of a history and physical on a podiatrist's preoperative patient 
11and upon the patient's admission into a hospital or ambulatory surgical center. "Practice 
12of podiatric medicine" includes the administration of local anesthesia in conjunction with 
13the practice of podiatry.  The use of general anesthesia is permitted in conjunction with 
14the practice of podiatry when administered or supervised by a medical or osteopathic 
15physician who assumes responsibility for the administration of that anesthesia to a patient 
16being treated by a podiatrist.
17SUMMARY
18This bill amends the scope of practice of podiatric medicine to include the diagnosis 
19and treatment of maladies of the soft tissue of the lower leg and the evaluation, diagnosis, 
20management and prevention of conditions of the lower extremities.
