 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 527
H.P. 384 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau  of Parks and Lands To  Establish a Law  
Enforcement Training Program for Park  Managers and Certain  
Bureau Staff
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SKOLFIELD of Weld.
Cosponsored by Senator BLACK of Franklin  and
Representatives: ACKLEY of Monmouth, HANINGTON of Lincoln, MAREAN  of Hollis,  
MARTIN of  Sinclair, PICKETT of Dixfield, STANLEY of Medway, TUELL of East Machias,  
Senator: GUERIN of Penobscot.

Page 1 - 129LR0886(01)-11Sec. 1.  Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of 
2Parks and Lands to establish a law enforcement training program for certain 
3bureau staff.  Resolved:  That the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
4Forestry, Bureau of Parks and Lands shall establish a law enforcement training program 
5for bureau employees and agents who manage lands or waters within the bureau's 
6jurisdiction and who exercise law enforcement powers of the bureau in enforcing bureau 
7rules and state law within the jurisdiction of the bureau.
8Sec. 2.  Training program criteria.  Resolved:  That the training program in 
9section 1 must include, but is not limited to, training in:
10A. Self-defense;
11B. The use of nonlethal self-defense equipment;
12C. The use of motor vehicle emergency lights;
13D. Requesting identification from persons;
14E. The issuance of summonses; and
15F. Arresting and detaining a person when there is probable cause to believe the 
16person has committed or is committing a crime.
17Sec. 3.  Implementation date.  Resolved:  That the training program in section 1 
18must be implemented no later than January 1, 2020.
19SUMMARY
20This resolve directs the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, 
21Bureau of Parks and Lands to implement a training program for bureau employees and 
22agents who manage lands or waters and exercise law enforcement powers within the 
23bureau's jurisdiction on various law enforcement practices, to be implemented no later 
24than January 1, 2020.
