 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1039
H.P. 769 House of  Representatives, February 28, 2019
Resolve, To  Establish and  Fund  Interventions for At-risk Families 
and Children
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MADIGAN of Waterville.
Cosponsored by Senator MOORE  of Washington  and
Representatives: BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland, CRAVEN of Lewiston, DENNO  of 
Cumberland, DOORE of Augusta, Senator: CLAXTON of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 129LR0881(01)-11Sec. 1.  Evidence-based practices services for at-risk families and 
2children.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services shall provide 
3grants to behavioral health providers to fund the costs of attracting, retaining and training 
4new professional employees to deliver evidence-based outpatient psychosocial treatment 
5services for children and families involved in the child protective services known as 
6"functional family therapy - child welfare" and "multisystemic therapy for child abuse 
7and neglect."  The department shall consult with behavioral health providers to develop a 
8rate of reimbursement for these services under MaineCare and amend its rules under rule 
9Chapter 101: MaineCare Benefits Manual, Sections 28 and 65 accordingly.  The rate 
10must take into account the costs to providers of delivering services, including for 
11additional training and maintenance of fidelity to the treatment models.  The department 
12shall seek federal funding including under the Family First Prevention Services Act of 
132017 to cover the costs to develop and provide the services under MaineCare.  If federal 
14funding is not available for the costs to attract, retain and train new professional 
15employees, the department shall provide grants using general funds.
16SUMMARY
17This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to provide grants 
18to behavioral health providers to fund costs to attract, retain and train new professional 
19employees to provide treatment services known as "functional family therapy - child 
20welfare" and "multisystemic therapy for child abuse and neglect" to children and families 
21involved in the child protective services.  The department is required to develop a rate of 
22reimbursement for these services under MaineCare and amend its rules in rule Chapter 
23101: MaineCare Benefits Manual, Sections 28 and 65 accordingly.  The department is 
24required to seek federal funding including under the Family First Prevention Services Act 
25of 2017 for the grants.  If federal funding is not available, the department is required to 
26provide grants using general funds.
