 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 934
H.P. 689 House of  Representatives, February 21, 2019
Resolve, To  Review the Implementation of the Maine Background  
Check Center  Act
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PERRY of Calais.
Cosponsored by Senator CLAXTON of Androscoggin and
Representatives: BRENNAN  of Portland, CRAVEN of Lewiston, MADIGAN of Waterville, 
McCREIGHT of Harpswell.

Page 1 - 129LR1614(01)-11Sec. 1.  Background check system study.  Resolved:  That the Commissioner 
2of Health and Human Services shall convene a study group consisting of representatives 
3of child care facilities, child placing agencies, children's residential care facilities, family 
4child care providers, nursery schools, hospice providers, home health care providers, 
5nursing facilities, personal care agencies and placement agencies, temporary nurse 
6agencies, adult day care programs, assisted housing programs, residential care facilities, 
7intermediate care facilities for individuals with intellectual disabilities, mental health 
8services facilities and providers, drug treatment centers and other interested stakeholders 
9to assess the effects of the implementation of the system of background checks 
10established by the Maine Background Check Center Act.  In conducting the assessment, 
11the study group shall consider:
121.  A cost and comprehensiveness comparison to background check systems in other 
13states to determine the efficiency of the background check system used in this State;
142.  Any instances of discrimination within the waiver process;
153.  Ways to allow for a background check to travel with an employee from one job to 
16another within a 5-year time frame; and
174.  The necessity of subjecting current employees to the background check system 
18who were already subject to a background check within the previous 5 years.
19Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That the study group convened pursuant to section 1 
20shall develop recommendations regarding improvements to the background check system 
21and possible alternatives and options for greater cost-effectiveness.  The Commissioner of 
22Health and Human Services shall submit a report regarding the study group's 
23recommendations, including any recommended legislation, to the Joint Standing 
24Committee on Health and Human Services no later than December 15, 2019.  The 
25committee may submit legislation based on the report to the Second Regular Session of 
26the 129th Legislature. 
27SUMMARY
28This resolve directs the Commissioner of Health and Human Services to convene a 
29study group to assess the effects of the implementation of the system of background 
30checks established by the Maine Background Check Center Act.  The commissioner is 
31required to submit a report, including any recommended legislation, by December 15, 
322019 to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, which may submit 
33legislation based on the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
