 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 395
H.P. 304 House of  Representatives, January 29, 2019
An Act  To Protect  Access to Outside-of-school Enrichment 
Opportunities
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BERRY of Bowdoinham.
Cosponsored by Senator LUCHINI of Hancock.

Page 1 - 129LR0439(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง4013 is enacted to read:
3ยง4013.  Enrichment opportunities outside of school
4A school administrative unit may not:
51.  Prohibit student access.  Prohibit a student from accessing any legal academic, 
6athletic, cultural or other enrichment opportunity outside of school unless the school 
7administrative unit determines that involvement of the student in the enrichment 
8opportunity interferes with the student's ability to meet the academic standards of the 
9school administrative unit; or
102.  Prohibit staff involvement.  Prohibit or otherwise restrict a teacher, coach, other 
11employee or school volunteer who has written authorization from a student and the 
12student's parent from involvement in any of the opportunities identified in subsection 1 
13unless:
14A.  The school administrative unit determines that involvement of the student in the 
15enrichment opportunity interferes with the student's ability to meet the academic 
16standards of the school administrative unit; or
17B.  The enrichment opportunity is sponsored by a corporate or other entity and the 
18teacher's, coach's, other employee's or school volunteer's involvement is inconsistent 
19with the educational policy of the school administrative unit.
20SUMMARY
21This bill establishes that a school administrative unit may not prohibit a student from 
22accessing outside-of-school enrichment opportunities unless the student is failing to meet 
23academic standards and that a school administrative unit may not prohibit or otherwise 
24restrict an authorized school employee or volunteer from involvement unless the student 
25is failing to meet academic standards or the enrichment opportunity is part of a corporate 
26sponsorship and the employee's or volunteer's involvement is inconsistent with the 
27educational policy of the school administrative unit.
