 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1436
H.P. 1048 House of  Representatives,  April 2, 2019
Resolve, Directing Coordinated State Agencies To  Negotiate  with  
the Governing Leaderships  of Portland Pipe Line Corporation  and 
Montreal Pipe  Line Limited  for Sustainability-centered 
Repurposing of Stranded and At-risk Infrastructure Assets  in 
Maine
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative KESSLER of South Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland  and
Representatives: FAY of  Raymond,  MORALES of South  Portland, RECKITT of South 
Portland, RISEMAN of Harrison,  RYKERSON  of Kittery.

Page 1 - 129LR1645(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, this legislation needs to take effect before the end of the 90-day period in 
4order that the negotiations described in the legislation may begin as soon as possible; and
5Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
6the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
7immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
8therefore, be it
9Sec. 1.  Coordinated state agencies to negotiate with the governing 
10leaderships of Portland Pipe Line Corporation and Montreal Pipe Line 
11Limited for sustainability-centered repurposing of stranded and at-risk 
12infrastructure assets in Maine.  Resolved:  That the Department of Economic and 
13Community Development, the Governor's Energy Office, the Department of 
14Environmental Protection, the Bureau of Land Resources within the Department of 
15Environmental Protection, the Maine Land Use Planning Commission and the Public 
16Utilities Commission in coordination shall negotiate directly with the executive and board 
17leaderships of the Portland Pipe Line Corporation and Montreal Pipe Line Limited parent 
18companies Suncor Energy, Shell Oil Company and Imperial Oil Limited a proposal for 
19repurposing the Portland-Montreal pipeline and related real estate holdings in the State.  
20The proposal, building on the sustainability language promulgated by the companies, 
21must include a redevelopment strategy and revenue model acceptable to those companies' 
22investors in accordance with the companies' own sustainability goals.  The asset to be 
23addressed by the proposal is the pipeline itself, which is to be repurposed as a conduit for 
24high-voltage electric transmission lines such as those that serve Hydro-Quebec and which 
25will act as a timely alternative to the proposed New England Clean Energy Connect 
26transmission project.
27Under the proposal, existing Portland Pipe Line Corporation and Montreal Pipe Line 
28Limited employees would have their efforts directed toward the technical and 
29management opportunities created by implementation of the proposal.
30The Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
31and Business shall appoint a project liaison or project liaisons to coordinate the proposal 
32over a 6-month period, which may be extended as needed.  The scope of project 
33coordination undertaken by the project liaison or project liaisons may include 
34coordination with state agencies and local jurisdictions as well as coordination with land 
35use regulators in New Hampshire, Vermont and the provincial government of Quebec, 
36Canada.
37Sec. 2.  Moratorium.  Resolved:  That a state agency may not issue any further 
38permits related to the New England Clean Energy Connect transmission project before 
39the proposal under section 1 is complete, as determined by the Department of Economic 
40and Community Development.
Page 2 - 129LR1645(01)-11Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
2legislation takes effect when approved.
3SUMMARY
4This resolve directs the Department of Economic and Community Development, the 
5Governor's Energy Office, the Department of Environmental Protection, the Bureau of 
6Land Resources within the Department of Environmental Protection, the Maine Land Use 
7Planning Commission and the Public Utilities Commission in coordination to negotiate 
8directly with the executive and board leaderships of the Portland Pipe Line Corporation 
9and Montreal Pipe Line Limited parent companies Suncor Energy, Shell Oil Company 
10and Imperial Oil Limited a proposal for repurposing the Portland-Montreal pipeline and 
11related real estate holdings in the State.  It directs the Joint Standing Committee on 
12Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business to appoint a project 
13liaison or project liaisons to coordinate the proposal over a 6-month period, which may be 
14extended as needed.  
15It also prohibits any state agency from issuing any further permits related to the New 
16England Clean Energy Connect transmission project before the proposal is complete, as 
17determined by the Department of Economic and Community Development
