 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1138
H.P. 827 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2019
An Act  To Ensure Health Insurance Coverage for Treatment  for 
Childhood Postinfectious Neuroimmune  Disorders Including 
Pediatric Autoimmune  Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with 
Streptococcal Infections and Pediatric Acute-onset Neuropsychiatric Syndrome
Reference to the Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BAILEY of  Saco.
Cosponsored by Senator DESCHAMBAULT  of York and
Representative: DENK of Kennebunk,  Senator:  BELLOWS of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 129LR1308(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง4320-L is enacted to read:
3ยง4320-L.  Coverage for treatment of childhood postinfectious neuroimmune 
4disorders including pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders 
5associated with streptococcal infections and pediatric acute-onset 
6neuropsychiatric syndrome
71.  Required coverage.  A carrier offering a health plan in this State shall provide 
8coverage for treatment of childhood postinfectious neuroimmune disorders including 
9pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections 
10and pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome.  Treatments that must be covered 
11include, but are not limited to, long-term antibiotics, intravenous immunoglobulin 
12therapy, steroids, plasmapheresis and psychopharmacological interventions.  Coverage 
13may not be excluded due to the diagnosis of autoimmune encephalopathy or autoimmune 
14encephalitis.
152.  Application.  The requirements of this section apply to all policies, contracts and 
16certificates executed, delivered, issued for delivery, continued or renewed in this State. 
17For purposes of this section, all contracts are deemed to be renewed no later than the next 
18yearly anniversary of the contract date.
19Sec. 2.  Application.  The requirements of this Act apply to all policies, contracts 
20and certificates executed, delivered, issued for delivery, continued or renewed in this 
21State on or after January 1, 2020.  For purposes of this Act all contracts are deemed to be 
22renewed no later than the next yearly anniversary of the contract date.
23SUMMARY
24This bill requires health insurance coverage for treatment of childhood postinfectious 
25neuroimmune disorders, a group of medical conditions that includes autoinflammatory 
26encephalopathic conditions including pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders 
27associated with streptococcal infections and pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric 
28syndrome.  The treatments authorized include certain treatments described as the standard 
29of care in a series of articles in the 2017 Journal of Child and Adolescent 
30Psychopharmacology, Volume 27, Number 7.  The requirements apply to all individual 
31and group policies and contracts issued or renewed on or after January 1, 2020.
