 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1047
S.P. 307 In Senate, February 28, 2019
An Act  To Prohibit Consideration  of Naloxone Purchases in  Life 
Insurance Underwriting
Reference to the Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator SANBORN,  H. of  Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative TEPLER of Topsham and
Senators: CLAXTON of Androscoggin, FOLEY of York, GRATWICK  of Penobscot, 
SANBORN, L. of  Cumberland, Representatives:  FOLEY of Biddeford, MASTRACCIO of 
Sanford, MELARAGNO  of Auburn.

Page 1 - 129LR1919(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง2159-E is enacted to read:
3ยง2159-E.  Discrimination against naloxone purchases prohibited in life insurance
4Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an insurer authorized to do business in 
5this State may not:
61.  Limit coverage.  Limit coverage or refuse to issue or renew coverage of an 
7individual under any life insurance policy due to the fact that the individual has been 
8issued a prescription for naloxone or has purchased naloxone;
92.  Determine rate for coverage.  Consider the fact that an individual has been 
10issued a prescription for naloxone or has purchased naloxone in determining the premium 
11rate for coverage of that individual under a life insurance policy; or
123.  Otherwise discriminate.  Otherwise discriminate in the offering, issuance, 
13cancellation, amount of coverage, price or any other condition of a life insurance policy 
14based solely and without any additional actuarial justification upon the fact that an 
15individual has been issued a prescription for naloxone or has purchased naloxone.
16SUMMARY
17This bill prohibits a denial or limitation of coverage or an increase in insurance 
18premiums under a life insurance policy based on the fact that an individual has been 
19issued a prescription for naloxone or has purchased naloxone.
