 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1837
H.P. 1308 House of  Representatives, June 6, 2019
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review  of Chapter 1: Adult Use 
Marijuana, a Late-filed Major Substantive  Rule of the Department 
of Administrative and Financial Services,  Office of Marijuana  
Policy
(EMERGENCY)
Reported by Representative SCHNECK of Bangor for the Department  of Administrative 
and Financial  Services pursuant  to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title  5, section 8072 and 
approved for introduction  by a majority of the Legislative Council.
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed 
pursuant to Joint Rule 218.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk

Page 1 - 129LR2560(01)-11Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A requires 
4legislative authorization before major substantive agency rules may be finally adopted by 
5the agency; and
6Whereas, a major substantive rule has been submitted to the Legislature outside the 
7legislative rule acceptance period; and
8Whereas, immediate enactment of this resolve is necessary to record the 
9Legislature's position on final adoption of the rule; and
10Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
11the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
12immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
13therefore, be it
14Sec. 1.  Adoption.  Resolved:  That final adoption of Chapter 1: Adult Use 
15Marijuana, a provisionally adopted major substantive rule of the Department of 
16Administrative and Financial Services, office of marijuana policy that has been submitted 
17to the Legislature for review pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, 
18subchapter 2-A outside the legislative rule acceptance period, is authorized.
19Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
20legislation takes effect when approved.
21SUMMARY
22This resolve provides for legislative review of Chapter 1: Adult Use Marijuana, a 
23major substantive rule of the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, office 
24of marijuana policy that was filed outside the legislative rule acceptance period.
