 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1005
H.P. 747 House of  Representatives, February 26, 2019
Resolve, To  Establish a Pilot Project To Save Lives and Support 
People with  Substance  Use Disorder  in Washington County
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PERRY of Calais.
Cosponsored by Senator MOORE  of Washington  and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, JAVNER of Chester, NEWELL of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, STOVER of Boothbay,  TUELL of East  Machias.

Page 1 - 129LR0775(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, substance use disorder is a crisis in Washington County requiring a 
4systems approach to combat the issue; and
5Whereas, a pilot project in Washington County developed without the need for state 
6General Fund money must be evaluated and provide data allowing for replication in other 
7rural areas of the State; and
8Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
9the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
10immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
11therefore, be it
12Sec. 1.  Washington County Substance Use Disorder Pilot Project 
13established.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services shall 
14establish the Washington County Substance Use Disorder Pilot Project, referred to in this 
15resolve as "the pilot project," to develop a systems approach to providing services in a 
16rural area for residents of Washington County with substance use disorder through 
17helping to coordinate service needs among organizations and providers to help bridge any 
18gaps in services and ultimately assisting individuals in accessing treatment and recovery 
19services when the individuals are ready.  The department shall work with Healthy Acadia 
20as the lead agency in Washington County for developing the pilot project.  The 
21department shall provide advice and assistance to Healthy Acadia in applying for federal 
22grant funding from the United States Department of Health and Human Services, 
23Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration to fund the pilot project, 
24including any requests for proposals required by this resolve.
25Sec. 2.  Telephone system.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and 
26Human Services shall work with Healthy Acadia to establish a central coordinating 
27telephone system located in Washington County no later than October 1, 2019.  The 
28department may expand an existing hotline or use some other strategy to establish the 
29telephone system.  The telephone system must be staffed at all times so that it is available 
30at any time to any person in Washington County.  The telephone system must be made 
31widely available to organizations in Washington County, including law enforcement, 
32medical and emergency personnel, public officials, educational staff and members of the 
33public, to connect those in need of substance use disorder treatment with counseling, 
34referral services, peer services and recovery coaches and other related assistance.  
35Telephone system staff answering the telephone calls must be qualified to provide 
36counseling in addition to referral services.  The department and the coordinating council 
37shall develop a system that coordinates the central coordinating telephone system with the 
38State's 2-1-1 system to ensure maximum access for any person who calls the telephone 
39system.  The coordinating council shall determine a method to collect data relating to 
40calls received by the telephone system.
41Sec. 3.  Washington County Coordinating Council.  Resolved:  That the 
42Department of Health and Human Services shall work with Healthy Acadia to establish 
Page 2 - 129LR0775(01)-11and support the Washington County Coordinating Council, referred to in this resolve as 
2"the coordinating council," consisting of up to 15 members representing the community 
3and organizations in Washington County and surrounding areas involved in substance use 
4disorder prevention, treatment and recovery, including a representative from Healthy 
5Acadia as lead agency; a representative from the Department of Health and Human 
6Services; members of organizations representing health care, including primary care, 
7emergency care, hospitals, mental health agencies and providers of substance use disorder 
8treatment, including faith-based treatment; members of law enforcement, including 
9county jails; organizations involved in education, prevention and advocacy; a person 
10involved in the local business community; and persons in recovery living in the area.  The 
11coordinating council shall choose a chair to preside over meetings, and it shall meet at 
12least once every 2 months.  The Department of Health and Human Services shall work 
13with Healthy Acadia to ensure that an executive assistant coordinates record keeping and 
14meetings and other administrative tasks.  The coordinating council shall coordinate 
15services in the pilot project, including access to the telephone system established pursuant 
16to section 2 and accuracy of information relating to services, medication-assisted 
17treatment, detoxification, residential and other treatment services, peer recovery and 
18coaching services, education programs in schools, pain and chronic disease self-
19management classes, jail treatment programs and other programs as well as tracking 
20barriers to treatment and recovery, facilitating system improvements to reduce or 
21eliminate identified barriers and implementing the recovery resource fund pursuant to 
22section 4.
23Sec. 4.  Recovery resource fund.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health 
24and Human Services shall assist the coordinating council with developing a recovery 
25resource fund offering flexible funds as part of a wraparound continuum of supports and 
26services to increase success for individuals in recovery from substance use disorder.  The 
27use of the fund is in accordance with the United States Department of Health and Human 
28Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration requirements, 
29with an individualized approach, building on family strengths and filling gaps in the 
30system of care to purchase goods and services not otherwise available to the family.  The 
31coordinating council shall implement and administer the fund, including recovery 
32coaches or other similar persons in the process, and work with organizations and 
33volunteers to secure additional funding.  Payments from the fund are disbursed directly to 
34providers of services and not as cash payments to the individual in recovery.
35Sec. 5.  Peer services and recovery coaching.  Resolved:  That the 
36Department of Health and Human Services shall establish and support recovery coaching 
37services to individuals with substance use disorder and to the families of those individuals 
38in Washington County.  A coordinator chosen by the coordinating council shall assist in 
39developing, training and establishing peer supports and recovery coaches who provide 
40volunteer services around Washington County, including ensuring that peers and 
41recovery coaches are connected to persons in treatment and recovery, including through 
42the telephone system established pursuant to section 2, and that peers and recovery 
43coaches are available at all times, and in keeping track of the system of peers and 
44recovery coaches.  The department and the coordinator chosen by the coordinating 
45council shall endeavor to provide assistance to volunteers such as recruiting, training, 
Page 3 - 129LR0775(01)-11transportation assistance, facilitating connections to community organizations and other 
2assistance.
3Sec. 6.  Evaluation program.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and 
4Human Services shall provide a report to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
5Human Services no later than November 30, 2020 outlining the planning and 
6implementation of the pilot project, services provided pursuant to the pilot project, details 
7regarding funding expenditures, quantitative and qualitative evaluation, including data 
8collected from the telephone system, and replicability of the pilot project.  The joint 
9standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services 
10matters may report out legislation associated with the report to the First Regular Session 
11of the 130th Legislature.
12Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
13legislation takes effect when approved.
14SUMMARY
15This resolve establishes a pilot project in Washington County to provide treatment 
16and recovery services for people with substance use disorder.  The pilot project is 
17established under the Department of Health and Human Services.  The department is 
18required to work with Healthy Acadia to develop the pilot project.  The department is 
19required to assist Healthy Acadia with seeking federal funding for the pilot project.  The 
20pilot project requires the establishment of a central coordinating telephone system 
21available to anyone in Washington County at any time to assist individuals with accessing 
22services related to substance use disorder treatment and recovery.  Individuals receiving 
23the phone calls must be qualified to provide counseling services to all callers in addition 
24to providing referrals.  The pilot project establishes a coordinating council made up of 
25representatives of the community and organizations in the area involved in the health and 
26welfare of Washington County residents.  The council is responsible for providing a 
27coordinated system of services for substance use disorder prevention, treatment and 
28recovery and for developing and implementing a recovery resource fund to provide 
29additional individualized services as part of a wraparound continuum of support and 
30services.  It requires the department to report on the pilot project to the joint standing 
31committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters 
32no later than November 30, 2020.
