 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 171
H.P. 134 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
Resolve, To  Establish a Pilot Project To Evaluate and Address the 
Transportation Needs  of Maine's Veterans
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SHEATS of Auburn.
Cosponsored by Senator CARSON of Cumberland and
Representatives: AUSTIN of Skowhegan, BICKFORD of Auburn,  SCHNECK  of Bangor,  
Senators: CLAXTON of Androscoggin, FARRIN of Somerset, LIBBY of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 129LR0106(01)-11Sec. 1.  Pilot project.  Resolved: That, beginning January 1, 2020 and ending 
2June 30, 2022, the Department of Transportation, in consultation with the Department of 
3Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management, shall establish a pilot project in Oxford, 
4Franklin and Androscoggin counties to provide transportation to veterans, including a 
5veteran's caregiver or dependent, to and from employment or employment-related 
6services, medical appointments, mental health services, social services and community 
7activities.  The pilot project must be administered by a regional transportation agency in a 
8manner that will supplement existing public transit services.  For purposes of the pilot 
9project, "veteran" means any person who served on active duty, inclusive of active duty 
10for training purposes, in the United States Armed Forces or served in the Maine National 
11Guard or the reserve components of the United States Armed Forces and who received a 
12discharge other than dishonorable.
13Sec. 2.  Funding. Resolved: That the Department of Transportation may receive 
14funds from any public or private source for the purposes for which the pilot project has 
15been established.
16Sec. 3.  Report. Resolved: That by July 1, 2021 the Department of Transportation 
17shall submit an initial written report on the progress of the pilot project, including number 
18of trips and number of veterans served, and by October 1, 2022 the Department of 
19Transportation shall submit a final written report, including findings and 
20recommendations, to the joint standing committees of the Legislature having jurisdiction 
21over transportation, health and human services, and labor and veterans matters.  The joint 
22standing committees of the Legislature having jurisdiction over transportation, health and 
23human services and labor and veterans matters may each submit a bill to the First Regular 
24Session of the 131st Legislature relating to the subject matter of the final report.
25SUMMARY
26This resolve establishes a 30-month pilot project in Oxford, Franklin and 
27Androscoggin counties to provide transportation to veterans and their caregivers or 
28dependents to and from employment or employment-related services, medical 
29appointments, mental health services, social services and community activities.
