 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 620
H.P. 448 House of  Representatives, February 5, 2019
An Act  Regarding Licensing of Land-based Aquaculture  Facilities
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DODGE of Belfast.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland, DOUDERA of Camden,  
HEPLER of Woolwich, HICKMAN of Winthrop, McCREA of Fort Fairfield, McCREIGHT of Harpswell, Senator: GRATWICK of Penobscot.

Page 1 - 129LR0666(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  7 MRSA §1501, sub-§§3 and 4, as enacted by PL 2017, c. 94, §3, are 
3amended to read:
43.  License denial.  The commissioner shall refuse to issue a license under this 
5section if the commissioner receives information from the Commissioner of Marine 
6Resources or the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife that the aquaculture 
7activity alone in the use of a body of water or in combination with the aquaculture 
8activity of any other land-based aquaculture operations using the same body of water 
9presents an unreasonable risk to indigenous marine or freshwater life or its environment. 
10The Commissioner of Marine Resources and the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and 
11Wildlife shall consider factors, including, but not limited to:
12A.  Risk of accidental or intentional introduction of marine or freshwater organisms 
13or organism products into the waters of the State;
14B.  Risk of the introduction or spread of disease within the State; and
15C.  Interference with the enforcement of possession, size or season limits for wild 
16marine or freshwater organisms.
174.  Monitoring and revocation.  The commissioner shall monitor licensed facilities 
18under this section on an annual basis.  The commissioner shall provide the findings to the 
19Commissioner of Marine Resources and the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and 
20Wildlife. If the commissioner determines following an annual review or at any other time 
21that the licensed aquaculture activity alone in the use of a body of water or in 
22combination with the aquaculture activity of any other land-based aquaculture operations 
23using the same body of water presents an unreasonable risk to indigenous marine or 
24freshwater life or its environment, the commissioner may revoke the license after the 
25licensee has been given an opportunity for a hearing before the department.
26SUMMARY
27This bill amends the law allowing the Commissioner of Agriculture, Conservation 
28and Forestry to refuse to issue a land-based aquaculture license, or revoke an existing 
29license, when the aquaculture activity presents an unreasonable risk to indigenous marine 
30or freshwater life or its environment and specifies that the activity is either alone in the 
31use of a body of water in combination with the aquaculture activity of any other land-
32based aquaculture operations using the same body of water. 
