 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1017
S.P. 296 In Senate, February 26, 2019
An Act  Regarding the  Elimination of Highly Toxic and Hazardous 
Chemicals in the Workplace
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CARSON of  Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR1154(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to create statutory and regulatory requirements that are designed to 
6prevent harm to employees by substituting for or eliminating highly toxic and hazardous 
7chemicals in the workplace.  The bill would:
81.  Apply to industries, including, but not limited to, manufacturing, retail and 
9service; automotive; auto body repair; shipbuilding; paper manufacturing; manufacturing 
10of apparel or apparel components; medical equipment; construction; personal care 
11product or feminine product manufacturing; coatings; textiles; lumber; plastics; 
12technology services; and cleaning and janitorial services. The bill would not apply to 
13agricultural employers in the State;
142.  Define "highly toxic and hazardous chemical" as a chemical that, based on 
15credible scientific evidence, has a significant potential for harm to human health;
163.  Define "priority highly toxic and hazardous chemical" to include a chemical for 
17which there is credible scientific evidence that the chemical is a carcinogen, a mutagen, a 
18reproductive toxin, a developmental toxin, an endocrine disruptor or a neurotoxin;
194.  Define "safer alternative" as an alternative that, when compared to a highly toxic 
20and hazardous chemical that it could replace, would reduce the potential for harm to 
21human health or that has not been shown to pose the same or greater potential harm to 
22human health as the highly toxic and hazardous chemical;
235.  Require employers in the State to identify and evaluate highly toxic and hazardous 
24chemicals and, if feasible, eliminate those highly toxic and hazardous chemicals or 
25substitute safer alternatives.  Specifically, it would require employers to:
26A.  Identify and evaluate highly toxic and hazardous chemicals and eliminate the 
27highly toxic and hazardous chemicals or substitute safer alternatives if feasible;
28B.  Implement a plan for the elimination and substitution of highly toxic and 
29hazardous chemicals in the workplace;
30C.  Consult publicly accessible website lists and online databases that identify highly 
31toxic and hazardous chemicals;
32D.  Consult safety data sheets required by the federal Department of Labor, 
33Occupational Safety and Health Administration to identify highly toxic and 
34hazardous chemicals;
35E.  Consult chemical suppliers and manufacturers to identify highly toxic and 
36hazardous chemicals;
Page 2 - 129LR1154(01)-11F.  Consult publicly accessible websites and databases that identify safer alternatives 
2that may be substituted for highly toxic and hazardous chemicals;
3G.  Contact chemical suppliers and manufacturers for possible safer alternatives;
4H.  Identify steps necessary to be followed for the elimination or substitution of a 
5highly toxic and hazardous chemical;
6I.  Decide, with justification, whether substituting a highly toxic and hazardous 
7chemical is feasible for business operations;
8J.  In transitioning from a highly toxic and hazardous chemical to a safer alternative, 
9use a transition team composed of employees and management;
10K.  Together with the transition team, develop a priority ranking for all highly toxic 
11and hazardous chemicals identified for transition to safer alternatives; and
12L.  Conduct an alternatives analysis of the anticipated difficulty of transitioning to a 
13safer alternative and a financial analysis of costs;
146.  Require the Commissioner of Labor to adopt rules and provide guidelines to assist 
15employers in how to identify and evaluate highly toxic and hazardous chemicals and how 
16to determine if safer alternatives exist. Specifically, it would require the commissioner to 
17adopt rules:
18A.  To define terms, including "affected employee," "alternative chemical," 
19"alternative chemical work plan" and "chemical";
20B.  To develop procedures to assist employers in implementing a program for the 
21substitution of highly toxic and hazardous chemicals in the workplace; and
22C.  Governing the implementation of safer alternatives; discontinuation of safer 
23alternatives, justification and reporting; self-audits by employers; reporting 
24requirements; records retention requirements; access to information, including 
25employee access and access by the State; and provision of annual employee training 
26and informational materials; and
277.  Require the Commissioner of Labor to:
28A.  Identify publicly accessible website lists of online databases that identify highly 
29toxic and hazardous chemicals;
30B.  Make employers aware that safety data sheets required by the federal Department 
31of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration are a source for identifying 
32highly toxic and hazardous chemicals;
33C.  Identify publicly accessible websites that identify safer alternatives that may be 
34substituted for highly toxic and hazardous chemicals currently employed in industry 
35and business operations;
36D.  Identify steps required for the elimination or substitution of a highly toxic and 
37hazardous chemical, including the criteria for justification of whether eliminating or 
38substituting for a highly toxic and hazardous chemical is feasible for employers' 
39business operations; and
Page 3 - 129LR1154(01)-11E.  Enforce the provisions of the law.
