 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 1934
H.P. 1378 House of  Representatives, January 8, 2020
An Act  Regarding Prior  Authorization for Medication-assisted 
Treatment for Opioid Use Disorder under  the MaineCare  Program
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative STOVER of Boothbay.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Representatives: CRAVEN of Lewiston,  DOUDERA of Camden, FARNSWORTH of 
Portland, FAY of Raymond, FECTEAU of Biddeford, GRAMLICH of Old Orchard  Beach,  
McCREIGHT of Harpswell, MEYER of Eliot.

Page 1 - 129LR2990(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3174-EEE is enacted to read:
3ยง3174-EEE.  Prior authorization of medication-assisted treatment for opioid use 
4disorder
5The department may not require under the MaineCare program prior authorization for 
6medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorder for the prescription of at least one 
7drug for each therapeutic class of medication used in medication-assisted treatment, 
8except that the department may not impose any prior authorization requirements on a 
9pregnant woman for medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorder.  For the 
10purposes of this section, "medication-assisted treatment" means an evidence-based 
11practice that combines pharmacological interventions with substance use disorder 
12counseling.
13SUMMARY
14This bill prohibits the Department of Health and Human Services from requiring 
15under the MaineCare program prior authorization for medication-assisted treatment for 
16opioid use disorder for the prescription of at least one drug for each type of medication 
17used in medication-assisted treatment, except that the department may not require prior 
18authorization for medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorder for a pregnant 
19woman.
