 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1249
H.P. 910 House of  Representatives, March 14, 2019
An Act  To Prohibit the Abuse and Isolation  of Older and Dependent 
Adults
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative VEROW of  Brewer.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  STANLEY  of Medway, WHITE of Waterville, Senator:  
CARPENTER of  Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR1110(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง214 is enacted to read:
3ยง214.  Abuse or isolation of elder person or dependent adult
41.  As used in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following terms 
5have the following meanings.
6A.  "Abuse" means physical abuse, sexual abuse, emotional abuse or financial abuse 
7of an elder person or dependent adult.
8(1)  "Emotional abuse" means a pattern of intentional or knowing infliction of 
9mental or emotional harm upon an elder person or dependent adult by threat, 
10intimidation, isolation or other abusive conduct.
11(2)  "Financial abuse" means the fraudulent or otherwise illegal, unauthorized or 
12improper act or process of an individual, including a caregiver or fiduciary, that 
13uses the resources of an elder person or dependent adult for monetary or personal 
14benefit, profit or gain or that results in depriving an elder person or dependent 
15adult of rightful access to, or use of, benefits, resources, belongings or assets.
16(3)  "Physical abuse" means the intentional or knowing infliction of physical pain 
17or injury, including, but not limited to, slapping, striking or restraining an elder 
18person or dependent adult.
19(4)  "Sexual abuse" means the infliction of nonconsensual sexual contact of any 
20kind upon an elder person or dependent adult. "Sexual abuse" includes, but is not 
21limited to, gross sexual assault, unlawful sexual contact and unlawful sexual 
22touching of an elder person or dependent adult, as well as threats of sexual abuse 
23when the actor has the intent and the capacity to carry out the threatened abuse.
24B.  "Caregiver" means a person who has been entrusted with or has assumed 
25responsibility for the care, custody or control of, or who stands in a position of trust 
26with, an elder person or dependent adult, whether for pecuniary gain, by contract, by 
27court order or on the basis of friendship.  "Caregiver" includes, but is not limited to, 
28caretakers, relatives, court-appointed guardians, adult household members, 
29conservators, attorneys-in-fact, neighbors, health care providers and employees and 
30volunteers of facilities dedicated to the care of elder persons.
31C.  "Dependent adult" means any individual who has attained 18 years of age who 
32has a physical or mental impairment that restricts the individual's ability to carry out 
33normal activities of daily living or to protect the individual's rights.  "Dependent 
34adult" includes, but is not limited to, individuals who have physical or developmental 
35disabilities or whose physical or mental abilities have diminished.
36D.  "Elder person" means an individual who has attained 60 years of age.
37E.  "Isolate" means to restrict personal rights of association retained by the elder 
38person or dependent adult, including, but not limited to, the right to receive visitors, 
39telephone calls and personal mail, unless the restriction of personal rights is 
40authorized by court order.
Page 2 - 129LR1110(01)-11F.  "Neglect" means the willful failure by a caregiver or other person with a duty of 
2care to provide goods or services necessary to avoid physical harm, mental harm or 
3mental illness to an elder person or dependent adult, including, but not limited to, 
4withdrawal of necessary assistance and denial of food or health-related services.
5G.  "Position of trust" means, with regard to a relationship with an elder person or 
6dependent adult:
7(1) Being the spouse, an adult child or another relative by blood or marriage of 
8the elder person or dependent adult; or
9(2)  Having a legal or fiduciary relationship with the elder person or dependent 
10adult, including, but not limited to, a court-appointed or voluntary guardian, 
11trustee, attorney or conservator.
122.  An actor, including a caregiver, is guilty of abuse or isolation of an elder person or 
13dependent adult if the actor intentionally or knowingly abuses, isolates or neglects an 
14elder person or a dependent adult.
153.  Abuse or isolation of an elder person or dependent adult is a Class C crime.  When 
16sentencing a defendant convicted of violating this section, the court may require that the 
17defendant participate in appropriate counseling as a part of the sentence, with the costs of 
18counseling to be paid by the defendant.
19SUMMARY
20This bill prohibits abuse and isolation of elder persons and dependent adults.  Abuse 
21or isolation of an elder person or dependent adult is a Class C crime.  A person commits 
22the crime if the person has or has assumed responsibility for the care, custody or control 
23of an elder person or a dependent adult and subjects the elder person or dependent adult 
24to isolation, neglect, physical abuse, sexual abuse, emotional abuse or financial abuse, 
25including threats of abuse.  The new crime is allocated to the chapter of the Maine 
26Criminal Code that establishes crimes against the person.
27The bill defines "elder person" to mean a person who is at least 60 years of age.  The 
28bill also defines "isolate" to mean to restrict personal rights of association retained by the 
29elder person or dependent adult, including, but not limited to, the right to receive visitors, 
30telephone calls and personal mail, unless the restriction of personal rights is authorized by 
31court order.
32When a person is convicted of the crime of abuse or isolation of an elder person or 
33dependent adult, the court may require that the person convicted of the crime participate 
34in appropriate counseling at the convicted person's expense.
35The bill is based on similar law in Rhode Island.
