 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1565
S.P. 501 In Senate, April 16, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Protect Voter-approved Measures
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CHENETTE of  York.
Cosponsored by Representative:  BAILEY of Saco.

Page 1 - 129LR1712(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง19 is amended to read:
5Section 19.  Effective date of measures approved by people; veto power 
6limited.  Any measure referred to the people and approved by a majority of the votes 
7given thereon shall, unless a later date is specified in said measure, take effect and 
8become a law in 30 days after the Governor has made public proclamation of the result of 
9the vote on said measure, which the Governor shall do within 10 days after the vote 
10thereon has been canvassed and determined; provided, however, that any such measure 
11which entails expenditure in an amount in excess of available and unappropriated state 
12funds shall remain inoperative until 45 days after the next convening of the Legislature in 
13regular session, unless the measure provides for raising new revenues adequate for its 
14operation.  The veto power of the Governor shall not extend to any measure approved by 
15vote of the people, and any measure initiated by the people and passed by the Legislature 
16without change, if vetoed by the Governor and if the veto is sustained by the Legislature 
17shall be referred to the people to be voted on at the next general election.  A measure that 
18takes effect and becomes a law pursuant to this section may be changed by the 
19Legislature if the change clarifies or further advances the original intent of the measure.  
20A change to such a measure made by the Legislature no later than one year after the 
21measure takes effect that frustrates the effectuation or implementation of the measure 
22does not go into effect until submitted to a vote of the electors and approved by a 
23majority of those voting on the question.  The Legislature may enact measures expressly 
24conditioned upon the people's ratification by a referendum vote.
25Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง20 is amended to read:
26Section 20.  Meaning of words "electors," "people," "recess of 
27Legislature," "statewide election," "measure," "circulator," and "written 
28petition"; written petitions for people's veto; written petitions for direct 
29initiative.  As used in any of the 3 preceding sections or in this section the words 
30"electors" and "people" mean the electors of the State qualified to vote for Governor; 
31"recess of the Legislature" means the adjournment without day of a session of the 
32Legislature; "statewide election" means any election held throughout the State on a 
33particular day; "measure" means an Act, bill, resolve or resolution proposed by the 
34people, or 2 or more such, or part or parts of such, as the case may be; "circulator" means 
35a person who solicits signatures for written petitions, and who must be a resident of this 
36State and whose name must appear on the voting list of the city, town or plantation of the 
37circulator's residence as qualified to vote for Governor; "written petition" means one or 
38more petitions written or printed, or partly written and partly printed, with the original 
39signatures of the petitioners attached, verified as to the authenticity of the signatures by 
40the oath of the circulator that all of the signatures to the petition were made in the 
41presence of the circulator and that to the best of the circulator's knowledge and belief 
42each signature is the signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and 
43accompanied by the certificate of the official authorized by law to maintain the voting list 
Page 2 - 129LR1712(01)-11or to certify signatures on petitions for voters on the voting list of the city, town or 
2plantation in which the petitioners reside that their names appear on the voting list of the 
3city, town or plantation of the official as qualified to vote for Governor.  The oath of the 
4circulator must be sworn to in the presence of a person authorized by law to administer 
5oaths.  Written petitions for a people's veto pursuant to Article IV, Part Third, Section 17 
6must be submitted to the appropriate officials of cities, towns or plantations, or state 
7election officials as authorized by law, for determination of whether the petitioners are 
8qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the 5th day before the petition must be filed 
9in the office of the Secretary of State, or, if such 5th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a 
10legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal 
11holiday.  Written petitions for a direct initiative pursuant to Article IV, Part Third, 
12Section 18 must be submitted to the appropriate officials of cities, towns or plantations, or 
13state election officials as authorized by law, for determination of whether the petitioners 
14are qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the 10th day before the petition must be 
15filed in the office of the Secretary of State, or, if such 10th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or 
16a legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal 
17holiday.  Such officials must complete the certification of only those petitions submitted 
18by these deadlines and must return them to the circulators or their agents within 2 days 
19for a petition for a people's veto and within 5 days for a petition for a direct initiative, 
20Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, of the date on which such petitions were 
21submitted to them.  Signatures on petitions not submitted to the appropriate local or state 
22officials by these deadlines may not be certified.  The petition shall set forth the full text 
23of the measure requested or proposed.  Petition forms shall be furnished or approved by 
24the Secretary of State upon written application signed and notarized and submitted to the 
25office of the Secretary of State by a resident of this State whose name must appear on the 
26voting list of the city, town or plantation of that resident as qualified to vote for Governor.  
27The Legislature may provide a process for the review of a measure requested or proposed 
28before petition forms are furnished or approved by the Secretary of State.  The full text of 
29a measure submitted to a vote of the people under the provisions of the Constitution need 
30not be printed on the official ballots, but, until otherwise provided by the Legislature, the 
31Secretary of State shall prepare the ballots in such form as to present the question or 
32questions concisely and intelligibly.
33Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
34Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
35respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
36holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
37following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
38proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
39"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to provide that a 
40change made by the Legislature to a direct initiative no later than one 
41year after the direct initiative takes effect that frustrates the 
42implementation of the direct initiative does not go into effect until 
43approved by the voters at referendum?"
44The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
45and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
Page 3 - 129LR1712(01)-11square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
2declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
3State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
4review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
5amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
6becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
7Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of 
8State shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and 
9copies of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
10SUMMARY
11This resolution proposes an amendment to the Constitution of Maine to allow the 
12Legislature to change a direct initiative approved by the voters at referendum if the 
13change clarifies or further advances the original intent of the direct initiative.  A change 
14to such a direct initiative made by the Legislature no later than one year after the direct 
15initiative takes effect that frustrates the effectuation or implementation of the direct 
16initiative does not go into effect until submitted to the voters at referendum and approved 
17by a majority of those voting on the question.  The resolution also authorizes the 
18Legislature to provide a process for the review of a direct initiative before petition forms 
19are furnished or approved by the Secretary of State.
