 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 982
H.P. 737 House of  Representatives, February 26, 2019
Resolve, To  Expand the Use of the Women,  Infants and Children 
Special Supplemental Food Program  at Farmers' Markets
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DAUGHTRY of Brunswick.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  ACKLEY  of Monmouth, FOLEY of Biddeford,  
HYMANSON of York, MADIGAN of Waterville,  McCREIGHT of Harpswell,  TEPLER  of 
Topsham, TERRY of  Gorham, TIPPING of Orono.

Page 1 - 129LR1899(01)-11Sec. 1.  Commissioner of Health and Human Services to amend rules 
2regarding the Women, Infants and Children Special Supplemental Food 
3Program to expand the program at farmers' markets.  Resolved:  That the 
4Commissioner of Health and Human Services shall amend the rules regarding the 
5Women, Infants and Children Special Supplemental Food Program of the United States 
6Child Nutrition Act of 1966 by expanding the permitted use of the program at farmers' 
7markets to include all 12 months of the calendar year and to remove the limitations on the 
8food products that may be purchased at farmers' markets to permit the purchase of all 
9food products allowed to be purchased through the program in general.
10SUMMARY
11This resolve directs the Commissioner of Health and Human Services to amend the 
12rules regarding the use of the Women, Infants and Children Special Supplemental Food 
13Program at farmers' markets by expanding the program from seasonal to include all 12 
14months of the calendar year and by expanding the scope of food products that may be 
15purchased through the program at a farmers' market from only fresh fruits and vegetables 
16to all food products allowed to be purchased through the program in general.
