 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 1860
H.P. 1331 House of  Representatives, December  23, 2019
An Act  To Establish a Process  for the Consideration and 
Implementation of  Changes to School Curricula
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Received by the Clerk of the House on December 19, 2019.  Referred to  the Committee on 
Education and  Cultural Affairs pursuant to Joint Rule  308.2 and ordered printed  pursuant to  
Joint Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative KORNFIELD of Bangor.
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland  and
Representatives: BRENNAN  of Portland, DODGE of  Belfast, FARNSWORTH of Portland, 
INGWERSEN of Arundel, McCREA of Fort Fairfield, SAMPSON of Alfred.

Page 1 - 129LR2724(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง4710-C is enacted to read:
3ยง4710-C.  Establishment or substantial expansion of mandated instruction or 
4training
5A joint standing committee of the Legislature that considers proposed legislation to 
6establish mandated instruction or training for students in elementary or secondary school 
7not required under this Title or rules adopted pursuant to this Title or substantially expand 
8mandated instruction or training for students in elementary or secondary school shall 
9evaluate the proposed legislation in accordance with this section.
101.  Request to commissioner.  Upon referral to a joint standing committee of the 
11Legislature of legislation that proposes new or substantially expanded mandated 
12instruction or training, the joint standing committee shall, without a public hearing, 
13briefly and informally review the proposal.  Following this informal review, the 
14committee shall request that the commissioner convene a review committee composed of 
15teachers, administrators, and content specialists within the department to conduct an 
16evaluation of the proposal.
172.  Evaluation.  The review committee established by the commissioner pursuant to 
18subsection 1 shall review the legislation that proposes to establish or substantially expand 
19mandated instruction or training and shall identify whether the subject of the proposal is 
20already addressed within existing courses of study aligned with the system of learning 
21results as established in section 6209.  If the subject of the proposal is not already 
22addressed within existing courses of study, the review committee shall analyze the impact 
23of establishing or substantially expanding the mandated instruction or training contained 
24in the proposal and shall specifically consider issues of availability of resources, staff 
25expertise, the number of required courses of study that exist in accordance with the 
26system of learning results and the available hours of instruction.
273.  Recommendations.  The commissioner shall submit a final report containing the 
28commissioner's recommendations to the joint standing committee of the Legislature that 
29requested the review pursuant to this section that includes any legislation required to 
30implement the commissioner's recommendations.  The commissioner may recommend 
31that no legislative action be taken on a proposal.
324.  Rulemaking.  The commissioner shall adopt rules to implement this section.  
33Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, 
34chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
35SUMMARY
36This bill requires that, upon referral of proposed legislation to establish or 
37substantially expand mandated instruction or training in public schools, the joint standing 
38committee of the Legislature considering the proposal must request that the 
39Commissioner of Education convene a review committee to review whether the subject of 
Page 2 - 129LR2724(01)-11the proposal is already addressed within existing courses of study aligned with the system 
2of learning results and, if it is not, analyze the impact of establishing or substantially 
3expanding the mandated instruction or training, including the availability of resources, 
4staff expertise, the number of required courses of study that already exist and the 
5available hours of instruction.  The commissioner is directed to submit a final report to 
6the joint standing committee that includes any legislation required to implement the 
7commissioner's recommendations.
