 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
2 Date: S /;.1/ / 
3 STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT L.D. 1568 
(Filing No. H-]31 ) 
4 Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
s STATE OF MAINE 
6 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
7 129TH LEGISLATURE 
8 FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
9 COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 'll" to H.P. 1130, L.D. 1568, Bill, "An Act 
10 Authorizing the Deorganization of Magalloway Plantation" 
11 Amend the bill by incorporating the attached fiscal note. 
12 SUMMARY 
13 This amendment incorporates a fiscal note. 
Page 1 -129LR2294(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Fiscal Detail and Notes Approved: 05/12/19 feac=.. 
129th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 1568 LR 2294(02) 
An Act Authorizing the Deorganization of Magalloway Plantation 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment ,.;/,( //· JJ'!) 
Committee: State and Local Government 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Contingent future biennium savings -General Fund 
This bill will become effective only if approved by the voters of Magalloway Plantation at the next general election to 
be held in November. If approved, the deorganization of Magalloway Plantation would take effect on July 1, 2021. 
For purposes of this analysis, all other factors in the calculation of the total cost ofK-12 public education and the 
State's contribution are assumed to be held constant. Given this assumption, the deorganization of Magalloway 
Plantation, currently a member of Regional School Unit (RSU) 78, will lower the total cost ofK-12 public education 
beginning in fiscal year 2021-22 and result in savings to the General Purpose Aid for Local Schools program within 
the Department of Education. The amount of savings can not be determined at this time. For comparison purposes, the 
preliminary total cost allocation for Magalloway for the 2019-2020 school year is $169,071. However, because 
Magalloway's required local contribution is expected to exceed its total allocation for this school year, the only state 
funding anticipated to be allocated for Magalloway is approximately $14,264 for the minimum special education 
adjustment. The estimated Joss in revenue to RSU 78 from local assessments to Magalloway Plantation is estimated to 
be approximately $200,000 per year. 
The Division of State Schools -Education in the Unorganized Territories program in the Department of Education 
will incur future General Fund expenditures to provide services to the Unorganized Territories. These expenditures 
would be ongoing and would be to provide schooling to students from Magalloway. The cost can not be determined at 
this time. The General Fund would be fully reimbursed for these costs by higher collections made through the 
Municipal Cost Component program. 
Any additional costs incurred by Maine Revenue Services related to the deorganization of Magalloway Plantation can 
be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. The minor additional costs associated with the filing of certain 
election results can be absorbed by the Secretary of State utilizing existing budgeted resources. Any additional costs 
incurred by the Office of the State Auditor are expected to be minor and can be absorbed within existing budgeted 
resources. 
LR2294(02) -Fiscal Note -Page I of I 
