 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 302
H.P. 226 House of  Representatives, January 22, 2019
An Act  To Amend the Laws Governing Post-conviction Review in 
Order To  Facilitate the  Fair Hearing of  All Evidence  in Each Case 
Involving a Claim of Innocence
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative EVANGELOS of Friendship.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, FARNSWORTH of Portland, GATTINE of Westbrook, HARNETT of Gardiner, LANDRY of Farmington, PLUECKER of Warren,  
WARREN of Hallowell, Senator: BELLOWS of  Kennebec.

Page 1 - 129LR1340(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  15 MRSA ยง2133 is enacted to read:
3ยง2133.  Claim of actual innocence
4Notwithstanding sections 2128 and 2128-B, a petition for post-conviction review 
5claiming actual innocence may be filed at any time during the period of direct 
6impediment, except that it may not be filed within one year of a judgment on a petition 
7filed for the same conviction under this chapter or chapter 305-B.  A petition for post-
8conviction review under this section must receive at least one evidentiary hearing in 
9which the petitioner may submit new evidence and evidence submitted in prior 
10proceedings on the same matter.
11SUMMARY
12This bill amends the statutory provisions regarding criminal post-conviction review 
13to allow the filing of a petition for post-conviction review claiming actual innocence at 
14any time during the period of direct impediment, except that it may not be filed within 
15one year of a judgment on a prior petition for post-conviction review on the same 
16conviction.  This bill requires that a petition for post-conviction review claiming actual 
17innocence receive at least one evidentiary hearing in which the petitioner may submit 
18new evidence and evidence submitted in prior proceedings on the same matter.
