 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1009
H.P. 751 House of  Representatives, February 26, 2019
An Act  To Provide  Protections for Maine Patients  Facing Step  
Therapy
Reference to the Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WARREN of Hallowell.
Cosponsored by Senator SANBORN, H. of Cumberland and
Representatives: GRAMLICH  of Old Orchard Beach, PIERCE of Falmouth,  PRESCOTT  of 
Waterboro, TEPLER of Topsham, Senators: FOLEY of York, ROSEN of Hancock,  
SANBORN, L. of  Cumberland, VITELLI  of Sagadahoc.

Page 1 - 129LR1137(01)-11 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2 Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง4320-L is enacted to read:
3 ยง4320-L.  Step therapy
4 1. Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the
5 following terms have the following meanings.
6 A.  "Clinical practice guidelines" means a systematically developed statement to 
7 assist prescriber and enrollee decisions about appropriate health care for specific 
8 clinical circumstances and conditions.
9 B.  "Clinical review criteria" means the written screening procedures, decision 
10 abstracts, clinical protocols and practice guidelines used by a carrier or utilization 
11 review organization to determine the medical necessity and appropriateness of health 
12 care services.
13 C.  "Medically necessary," with respect to health services and supplies, means 
14 appropriate, under the applicable standard of care, to improve or preserve health, life 
15 or function; to slow the deterioration of health, life or function; or for the early 
16 screening, prevention, evaluation, diagnosis or treatment of a disease, condition, 
17 illness or injury.
18 D.  "Pharmaceutical sample" means a unit of a prescription drug that is not intended 
19 to be sold and is intended to promote the sale of the drug.
20 E.  "Step therapy override exception determination" means a determination based on 
21 a review of an enrollee's or prescriber's request for an override, along with supporting 
22 rationale and documentation, that the step therapy protocol should be overridden in 
23 favor of immediate coverage of the health care provider's selected prescription drug.
24 F.  "Step therapy protocol" means a protocol that establishes a specific sequence in 
25 which prescription drugs for a specified medical condition are medically necessary 
26 for a particular enrollee and are covered under a pharmacy or medical benefit by a 
27 carrier, including self-administered and physician-administered drugs.
28 G.  "Utilization review organization" means an entity that conducts a utilization 
29 review, other than a carrier performing a utilization review for its own health benefit 
30 plans.
31 2. Clinical review criteria.  Clinical review criteria used to establish a step therapy
32 protocol must be based on clinical practice guidelines that:
33 A.  Recommend that the prescription drugs be taken in the specific sequence required 
34 by the step therapy protocol;
35 B.  Are developed and endorsed by a multidisciplinary panel of experts that manages 
36 conflicts of interest among the members of the writing and review groups by:
37 (1)  Requiring members to disclose any potential conflicts of interest with 
38 entities, including carriers and pharmaceutical manufacturers, and recuse 
39 themselves from voting if they have a conflict of interest;
Page 2 - 129LR1137(01)-11(2)  Using a methodologist to work with writing groups to provide objectivity in 
2data analysis and ranking of evidence through the preparation of evidence tables 
3and facilitating consensus; and
4(3)  Offering opportunities for public review and comments;
5C.  Are based on high-quality studies, research and medical practice;
6D.  Are created by an explicit and transparent process that:
7(1)  Minimizes biases and conflicts of interest;
8(2)  Explains the relationship between treatment options and outcomes;
9(3)  Rates the quality of the evidence supporting recommendations; and
10(4)  Considers relevant patient subgroups and preferences; and
11E.  Are continually updated through a review of new evidence, research and newly 
12developed treatments.
133.  Absence of clinical practice guidelines.  In the absence of clinical practice 
14guidelines that meet the requirements in subsection 2, peer-reviewed publications may be 
15substituted.
164.  Consideration of atypical populations and diagnoses.  When establishing a step 
17therapy protocol, a utilization review organization shall also take into account the needs 
18of atypical patient populations and diagnoses when establishing clinical review criteria.
195.  Construction.  This section may not be construed to require carriers or the State 
20to set up a new entity to develop clinical review criteria used for step therapy protocols.
216.  Exceptions process.  When coverage of a prescription drug for the treatment of 
22any medical condition is restricted for use by a carrier or utilization review organization 
23through the use of a step therapy protocol, the enrollee and prescriber must have access to 
24a clear, readily accessible and convenient process to request a step therapy override 
25exception determination from that carrier or utilization review organization.
26A.  A carrier or utilization review organization may use its existing medical 
27exceptions process to provide step therapy override exception determinations, and the 
28process established must be easily accessible on the carrier's or utilization review 
29organization's website.
30B.  A carrier or utilization review organization shall expeditiously grant a step 
31therapy override exception determination if:
32(1)  The required prescription drug is contraindicated or will likely cause an 
33adverse reaction in or physical or mental harm to the enrollee;
34(2)  The required prescription drug is expected to be ineffective based on the 
35known clinical characteristics of the enrollee and the known characteristics of the 
36prescription drug regimen;
37(3)  The enrollee has tried the required prescription drug while under the 
38enrollee's current or previous health insurance or health plan, or another 
Page 3 - 129LR1137(01)-11 prescription drug in the same pharmacologic class or with the same mechanism 
2 of action, and the prescription drug was discontinued due to lack of efficacy or 
3 effectiveness, diminished effect or an adverse reaction;
4 (4)  The required prescription drug is not in the best interest of the enrollee, based 
5 on medical necessity; or
6 (5)  The enrollee is stable on a prescription drug selected by the enrollee's health 
7 care provider for the medical condition under consideration while on a current or 
8 previous health insurance or health plan.
9 Nothing in this paragraph may be construed to encourage the use of a pharmaceutical 
10 sample for the sole purpose of meeting the requirements for the granting of a step 
11 therapy override exception determination.
12 C.  Upon the granting of a step therapy override exception determination, the carrier 
13 or utilization review organization shall authorize coverage for the prescription drug 
14 prescribed by the prescriber.
15 D.  A carrier or utilization review organization shall grant or deny a request for a step 
16 therapy override exception determination or an appeal of a determination within 48 
17 hours after receipt of the request.  If exigent circumstances exist, a carrier or 
18 utilization review organization shall grant or deny the request within 24 hours after 
19 receipt of the request.  If a carrier or utilization review organization does not grant or 
20 deny the request within the time required under this paragraph, the exception or 
21 appeal is granted.
22 E.  An enrollee may appeal a step therapy override exception determination.
23 F.  This section does not prevent:
24 (1)  A carrier or utilization review organization from requiring an enrollee to try a 
25 generic drug, as defined in Title 32, section 13702-A, subsection 14, prior to 
26 providing coverage for the equivalent brand-name prescription drug; or
27 (2)  A health care provider from prescribing a prescription drug that is 
28 determined to be medically necessary.
29 7. Rules.  The superintendent may adopt rules to implement this section.  The
30 superintendent shall adopt a rule defining the circumstances under which a carrier or 
31 utilization review organization is required to grant or deny a request within 24 hours 
32 pursuant to subsection 6, paragraph D.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are 
33 routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
34 Sec. 2.  Application.  The requirements of this Act apply to all policies, contracts 
35 and certificates executed, delivered, issued for delivery, continued or renewed in this 
36 State on or after January 1, 2020.  For purposes of this Act, all contracts are deemed to be 
37 renewed no later than the next yearly anniversary of the contract date.
38 SUMMARY
39 This bill requires health insurance carriers to establish a process for prescription drug 
40 step therapy exceptions.
