 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1221
H.P. 881 House of  Representatives, March 12, 2019
An Act  To Allow Deductions from  Prison Sentences for 
Rehabilitative Activities
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TALBOT ROSS  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator CLAXTON of Androscoggin and
Representatives: BAILEY  of Saco, COOPER of Yarmouth, DeVEAU of Caribou,  
GRAMLICH of Old Orchard Beach, MORALES of South Portland, RECKITT of  South  
Portland, WARREN of  Hallowell, Senator: CARPENTER of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR1377(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง1253, sub-ยง15 is enacted to read:
315.  In addition to any other time deducted from a sentence under this section, for a 
4person who commits a crime and is subsequently sentenced to a term of imprisonment for 
5that crime to a county or state facility, up to 7 days and 12 hours per calendar month may 
6be deducted from that term, calculated from the date of commencement of that term as 
7specified under subsection 1, if that person's satisfactory performance in the completion 
8of an educational program leading to a high school equivalency diploma, completion of 
9another educational or vocational training program or a work release program or work for 
10a county or state facility industry leads directly to the rehabilitation of that person as 
11determined by the sheriff or chief administrative officer of the county or state facility.  
12This subsection applies to the unserved portion of a sentence for a person on probation if 
13the person's probation officer determines that the educational or work program leads 
14directly to the rehabilitation of that person.  This subsection does not apply to a person 
15serving a sentence imposed by the State in a facility of another state or the Federal 
16Government or to a person in a county or state facility serving a sentence imposed by 
17another state or the Federal Government.
18SUMMARY
19This bill allows, in addition to existing deductions in time from a prison or jail 
20sentence, a deduction in time of up to 7.5 days per calendar month for a person's 
21satisfactory performance, while in custody or on probation, in the completion of an 
22educational program leading to a high school equivalency diploma, completion of another 
23educational or vocational training program or a work release program or work for a 
24county or state facility industry that leads directly to the rehabilitation of that person.
