 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1372
H.P. 993 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Ensure That  Voting Rights Belong Only to Citizens in  
Municipal or Other Local  Elections
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WADSWORTH  of Hiram.
Cosponsored by Representative:  STANLEY of Medway.

Page 1 - 129LR1349(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. II, ยง1 is amended to read:
5Section 1.  Qualifications of electors; written ballot; military servicemen; 
6students.  Only a citizen of the United States may vote in a municipal or other local 
7election.  Every citizen of the United States of the age of 18 years and upwards, excepting 
8persons under guardianship for reasons of mental illness, having his or her residence 
9established in this State, shall be an elector for Governor, Senators and Representatives, 
10and local or municipal office in the city, town or plantation where his or her residence has 
11been established, if he or she continues to reside in this State; and the elections shall be 
12by written ballot.  But persons in the military, naval or marine service of the United 
13States, or this State, shall not be considered as having obtained such established residence 
14by being stationed in any garrison, barrack or military place, in any city, town or 
15plantation; nor shall the residence of a student at any seminary of learning entitle the 
16student to the right of suffrage in the city, town or plantation where such seminary is 
17established.  No person, however, shall be deemed to have lost residence by reason of the 
18person's absence from the state in the military service of the United States, or of this 
19State.
20Indians.  Every Indian, residing on tribal reservations and otherwise qualified, shall 
21be an elector in all county, state and national elections.
22Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
23Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
24respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
25holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
26following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
27proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
28"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to permit only 
29citizens of the United States to vote in municipal or other local 
30elections?"
31The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
32and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
33square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
34declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
35State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
36review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
37amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
38becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
39Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
40shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
41of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
Page 2 - 129LR1349(01)-11SUMMARY
2This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to specify that only a 
3person who is a citizen of the United States may vote in a municipal or other local 
4election.
