 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 782
S.P. 226 In Senate, February 12, 2019
An Act  Relating  to Animals in Pulling  Events
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CARPENTER  of Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Representative McCREA of Fort Fairfield and
Senators: DILL of  Penobscot, ROSEN of Hancock, Representatives: DOORE of Augusta, 
HICKMAN of Winthrop,  JOHANSEN of Monticello, MAREAN  of Hollis.

Page 1 - 129LR0996(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  7 MRSA §97, sub-§4, ¶S is enacted to read:
3S.  A person handling or responsible for an animal may not use on the animal any 
4technique, force or method of preparing the animal for pulling that subjects the 
5animal to pain, fear or undue stress, including but not limited to electric shock, 
6physical punishment or artificial sweating to achieve weight.
7Sec. 2.  7 MRSA §101, sub-§4 is enacted to read:
84.  Pulling event participation banned.  A person who engages in the activity 
9described in section 97, subsection 4, paragraph S may not participate as an animal owner 
10or handler or in any other capacity, directly or indirectly, in a pulling event for a period of 
11one year for the first offense and is subject to a lifetime ban from pulling events for a 2nd 
12offense.
13SUMMARY
14This bill prohibits a person handling or responsible for an animal in a pulling event 
15from using on the animal any technique, force or method of preparing the animal for 
16pulling that subjects the animal to pain, fear or undue stress, including but not limited to 
17electric shock, physical punishment or artificial sweating to achieve weight.  A person 
18who engages in that activity is banned from participating in pulling events for one year 
19for the first offense and permanently for a 2nd offense.
