 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1003
H.P. 745 House of  Representatives, February 26, 2019
An Act  To Ensure Accurate Explanations  of Electric Bills
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BERRY of Bowdoinham.
Cosponsored by Senator CHENETTE of York and
Representatives: ACKLEY of Monmouth, CAIAZZO of Scarborough, COLLINGS of Portland, CROCKETT of Portland, KESSLER of South Portland, RILEY of Jay, RISEMAN  of 
Harrison, Senator: GRATWICK  of Penobscot.

Page 1 - 129LR2230(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  35-A MRSA ยง3106 is enacted to read:
3ยง3106.  Written rate and charge information
4An investor-owned transmission and distribution utility may not provide any 
5information to a customer that explains electricity rate components without the approval 
6of the commission.  The commission shall ensure that the information provided by an 
7investor-owned transmission and distribution utility accurately reflects the overall rate 
8structure and cost components for the supply and delivery of electricity.  Information 
9provided by an investor-owned transmission and distribution utility under this section 
10must include a graph or chart that displays trends over the past 10 years and an 
11explanation of how the electricity is competitively supplied while delivery is provided 
12through a transmission and distribution utility.  Prior to approving or disapproving any 
13written information under this section, the commission must receive input from the Public 
14Advocate and other interested parties.
15SUMMARY
16This bill requires an investor-owned transmission and distribution utility to obtain the 
17approval of the Public Utilities Commission before providing information explaining 
18electricity rate components to a customer.  The bill requires the commission to ensure that 
19the information provided to a customer accurately reflects the overall rate structure and 
20cost components for the supply and delivery of electricity.  The bill also requires the 
21commission to receive input from the Public Advocate and other interested parties before 
22approving or disapproving any written information provided by an investor-owned 
23transmission and distribution utility to a customer.
