 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1598
H.P. 1157 House of  Representatives,  April 18, 2019
An Act  To Define the Responsibilities of Property Owners for  the 
Maintenance and Repair of Private Roads
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative McLEAN of Gorham.
Cosponsored by Senator POULIOT of Kennebec and
Representatives: BAILEY  of Saco, MARTIN of Sinclair, Senator: LIBBY of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 129LR1831(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  23 MRSA ยง3107 is enacted to read:
3ยง3107.  Responsibility for cost of repairs and maintenance of private roads and ways
41.  Benefited property defined.  "Benefited property" means real estate consisting of 
5at least one but not more than 4 residential dwelling units that is benefited by a private 
6road or private way, as an easement or by fee ownership, providing access to that real 
7property.
82.  Obligation.  An owner of benefited property is responsible for the cost of repairs 
9and maintenance to a private road or private way providing access to that owner's 
10benefited property.
113.  Cost sharing.  If more than one benefited property benefits from a private road or 
12private way, each owner of that benefited property is responsible for a share of the cost of 
13repairs and maintenance to that private road or private way determined pursuant to the 
14terms of any enforceable written agreement entered into to determine the share of the cost 
15of repairs and maintenance of the private road or private way, any deed restriction or 
16covenant applicable to the benefited property or any road association created pursuant to 
17this subchapter or otherwise. In the absence of any such agreement, restriction, covenant 
18or road association, each owner of a benefited property shall share, in proportion to the 
19benefit received by that owner's benefited property, the cost of repairs and maintenance of 
20the private road or private way providing access to that benefited property.
214.  Damage.  Notwithstanding any provision of subsection 2 to the contrary, any 
22owner of benefited property who directly or indirectly damages a portion of a private road 
23or private way providing access to a benefited property that benefits from the private road 
24or private way is solely responsible for repairing or restoring the portion of the private 
25road or private way damaged by that owner.
265.  Enforcement.  If an owner of a benefited property refuses to repair or restore a 
27damaged portion of a private road or private way in accordance with subsection 3, or 
28fails, after a demand in writing, to pay that owner's proportion of the cost of repairs and 
29maintenance of a private road or private way in accordance with subsection 2, an action 
30for specific performance or contribution may be brought against that owner by an owner 
31or owners of benefited properties, either jointly or severally.
326.  Conflict.  In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this section and 
33an agreement, restriction, covenant or road association described in subsection 2 existing 
34on or entered into after the effective date of this section, the terms of the agreement, 
35restriction, covenant or road association control.
36SUMMARY
37This bill establishes responsibility for the repair and maintenance of private roads and 
38private ways that benefit residential properties.  Unless there is an agreement, restriction, 
39covenant or road association that specifies the cost to be paid by each owner of a 
Page 2 - 129LR1831(01)-11benefited property, the cost is shared in proportion to the benefit received by each owner 
2of benefited property.  An owner who damages a private road or private way that benefits 
3other residential properties is solely responsible for the cost of repairs to fix the damage.  
4An owner who fails to comply may be forced to comply through an action brought by 
5other owners on the private road or private way.
