 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1283
H.P. 925 House of  Representatives, March 14, 2019
Resolve, To  Advance  College Affordability by Convening a Task  
Force To  Recommend a Sustainable Funding  Model for  Maintaining  
Maine's Public Higher Education Infrastructure
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative JORGENSEN of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland  and
Representatives: DUNPHY of Old Town,  HUBBELL of Bar Harbor, KORNFIELD of Bangor, 
MARTIN of  Eagle Lake, PIERCE of Falmouth, STEWART of Presque  Isle.

Page 1 - 129LR1826(01)-11Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, the Task Force To Recommend a Sustainable Funding Model for 
4Maintaining Maine's Public Higher Education Infrastructure is convened by this 
5legislation to study how to adequately fund the infrastructure and related needs of public 
6higher education institutions in the State; and
7Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90-day period expires in order that 
8the study may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 
9legislative session; and
10Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
11the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
12immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
13therefore, be it
14Sec. 1.  Task force established.  Resolved:  That the Chancellor of the 
15University of Maine System shall convene a task force, to be known as the Task Force To 
16Recommend a Sustainable Funding Model for Maintaining Maine's Public Higher 
17Education Infrastructure, referred to in this resolve as "the task force."
18Sec. 2.  Task force membership.  Resolved:  That the task force consists of 7 
19members as follows:
201.  The Chancellor of the University of Maine System or the chancellor's designee, 
21who shall serve as the task force chair;
222.  The President of the Maine Community College System or the president's 
23designee;
243.  The President of the Maine Maritime Academy or the president's designee;
254.  The Director of the Bureau of General Services within the Department of 
26Administrative and Financial Services or the director's designee;
275.  The director of school facilities within the Department of Education;
286.  The Chief Executive Officer of the Finance Authority of Maine or the chief 
29executive officer's designee; and
307.  A member appointed by the Chancellor of the University of Maine System with 
31relevant experience or expertise in finance or facilities management and planning.
32Sec. 3.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the task force shall study how to provide 
33adequate supplemental funding to sustain the State's public higher education 
34infrastructure without burdening students who are residents of the State with 
35unreasonable tuition and fee increases.  The task force shall consider, but may not be 
36limited to considering, infrastructure improvements, health and safety repairs, technology 
Page 2 - 129LR1826(01)-11improvements, energy efficiency and equipment upgrades and, when necessary, new 
2construction.
3Sec. 4.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the University of Maine System, the 
4Maine Community College System and the Maine Maritime Academy shall provide 
5necessary staffing services to the task force, as well as all requested and available data.
6Sec. 5.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than January 2, 2020, the task force 
7shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 
8legislation, for presentation to the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and 
9Financial Affairs and the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs.  
10The joint standing committees may submit legislation to the Second Regular Session of 
11the 129th Legislature related to the subject matter of the report.
12Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
13legislation takes effect when approved.
14SUMMARY
15This resolve directs the Chancellor of the University of Maine System to convene a 
16task force, to be named the Task Force To Recommend a Sustainable Funding Model for 
17Maintaining Maine's Public Higher Education Infrastructure, to study how to provide 
18adequate supplemental funding to sustain the State's public higher education 
19infrastructure without burdening students who are residents of the State with 
20unreasonable tuition and fee increases.  The task force is directed to consider, but is not 
21limited to considering, infrastructure improvements, health and safety repairs, technology 
22improvements, energy efficiency and equipment upgrades and, when necessary, new 
23construction.  The task force is directed to report to the Joint Standing Committee on 
24Appropriations and Financial Affairs and the Joint Standing Committee on Education and 
25Cultural Affairs by January 2, 2020.  The joint standing committees are authorized to 
26submit legislation to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
