 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 186
H.P. 149 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Specify the  Qualifications of Electors
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor.
Cosponsored by Senator GUERIN of Penobscot and
Representatives: DILLINGHAM of Oxford, FECTEAU of Augusta, HANLEY  of Pittston,  
O'CONNOR of Berwick, REED of Carmel, STETKIS of Canaan, STEWART of Presque Isle, STROM of  Pittsfield.

Page 1 - 129LR1724(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. II, ยง1 is amended to read:
5Section 1.  Qualifications of electors; written ballot; military servicemen; 
6students.  Only a citizen of the United States may vote in a state, county or municipal or 
7other local election.  Every citizen of the United States of the age of 18 years and 
8upwards, excepting persons under guardianship for reasons of mental illness, having his 
9or her residence established in this State, shall be an elector for Governor, Senators and 
10Representatives, and county, local or municipal office in the city, town or plantation 
11where his or her residence has been established, if he or she continues to reside in this 
12State; and the elections shall be by written ballot.  But persons in the military, naval or 
13marine service of the United States, or this State, shall not be considered as having 
14obtained such established residence by being stationed in any garrison, barrack or 
15military place, in any city, town or plantation; nor shall the residence of a student at any 
16seminary of learning entitle the student to the right of suffrage in the city, town or 
17plantation where such seminary is established.  No person, however, shall be deemed to 
18have lost residence by reason of the person's absence from the state in the military service 
19of the United States, or of this State.
20Indians.  Every Indian, residing on tribal reservations and otherwise qualified, shall 
21be an elector in all county, state and national elections.
22Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
23Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
24respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
25holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
26following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
27proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
28"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to permit only 
29citizens of the United States to vote in state, county or municipal or other 
30local elections?"
31The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
32and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
33square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
34declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
35State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
36review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
37amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
38becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
39Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
40shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
41of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
Page 2 - 129LR1724(01)-11SUMMARY
2This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to specify that only a 
3person who is a citizen of the United States may vote in a state, county or municipal or 
4other local election.
