 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 361
S.P. 101 In Senate,  January  24, 2019
An Act  To Amend the Laws Governing Political Action Committees
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CHENETTE of  York.
Cosponsored by Representative SYLVESTER  of Portland and
Senator: CHIPMAN of Cumberland,  Representatives: ACKLEY  of Monmouth,  MAXMIN  of 
Nobleboro.

Page 1 - 129LR0482(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA §1006 is enacted to read:
3§1006.  Participation in political action committees by legislative candidates
41.  Establishing a political action committee prohibited.  A legislative candidate 
5may not establish a political action committee for which the candidate is a treasurer or 
6principal officer or for which the candidate is primarily responsible for fund-raising or 
7decision making.  This prohibition applies between April 1st immediately preceding a 
8general election through:
9A.  The date on which the candidate withdraws from a race;
10B.  The date of the primary election or general election for a candidate who loses 
11either election; or
12C.  January 1st immediately preceding the next general election for a candidate who 
13wins the general election.
14This prohibition also applies to a legislative candidate in a special election, except that 
15the prohibition begins on the date of the candidate's nomination.  This subsection does not 
16prohibit a legislative candidate, including a legislative candidate who wins a general or 
17special election, from engaging in fund-raising or decision making for a party caucus 
18political action committee, a ballot question committee or a political action committee 
19formed for the purpose of promoting or opposing a ballot question.  This prohibition 
20applies to a legislative candidate regardless of the date on which the political action 
21committee was established.
22Sec. 2.  21-A MRSA §1125, sub-§6-F, as enacted by PL 2015, c. 116, §1 and 
23affected by §2, is amended to read:
246-F.  Gubernatorial candidate participation in political action committees.  A 
25participating gubernatorial candidate or a certified gubernatorial candidate may not 
26establish a political action committee for which the gubernatorial candidate is a treasurer 
27or principal officer or for which the gubernatorial candidate is primarily responsible for 
28fund-raising or decision making.  This prohibition applies between April 1st immediately 
29preceding a general election through:
30A.  The date on which the gubernatorial candidate withdraws from a race;
31B.  The date of the primary election or general election for a gubernatorial candidate 
32who loses either election; or
33C.  January 1st immediately preceding the next general election for a gubernatorial 
34candidate who wins the general election.
35This prohibition also applies to a participating gubernatorial candidate or certified 
36gubernatorial candidate in a special election, except that the prohibition begins on the 
37date of the gubernatorial candidate's nomination.  This subsection does not prohibit a 
38participating gubernatorial candidate or certified gubernatorial candidate, including a 
39certified gubernatorial candidate who wins a general or special election, from engaging in 
Page 2 - 129LR0482(01)-11fund-raising or decision making for a party caucus political action committee, a ballot 
2question committee or a political action committee formed for the purpose of promoting 
3or opposing a ballot question.  This prohibition applies to a participating gubernatorial 
4candidate or certified gubernatorial candidate regardless of the date on which the political 
5action committee was established.
6SUMMARY
7This bill prohibits a legislative candidate from establishing a political action 
8committee for which the candidate is a treasurer or principal officer or for which the 
9candidate is primarily responsible for fund-raising or decision making.  The bill also 
10makes a change to a provision under the Maine Clean Election Act, which includes the 
11same prohibition, to specify that the prohibition in that Act applies only to participating 
12gubernatorial candidates and certified gubernatorial candidates.
