 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1695
S.P. 560 In Senate,  May 7, 2019
An Act  Regarding the  Law Governing the Disclosure of Vital 
Records
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MIRAMANT of Knox.

Page 1 - 129LR1499(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง2706, as amended by PL 2015, c. 393, ยง1, is further amended 
3to read:
4ยง2706.  Disclosure of vital records
5Custodians of certificates and records of birth, marriage and death shall permit 
6inspection of records, or issue certified or noncertified copies of certificates or records, or 
7any parts thereof, when satisfied that the applicant has a direct and legitimate interest in 
8the matter recorded, the decision of the state registrar or the clerk of a municipality being 
9subject to review by the Superior Court, under the limitations of this section upon request.  
10Custodians of certificates and records of birth, marriage and death shall issue certified 
11copies of certificates or records, or any parts thereof, to those persons specified in 
12subsection 5.
13For the purposes of this section, "inspection" includes visual and physical access to 
14the original certificate or record when no alternative method of inspection is available.  
15The state registrar or municipal clerk shall require that original, paper certificates or 
16records be handled in accordance with rules adopted by the department, which are routine 
17technical rules pursuant to Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A, designed to protect the 
18physical integrity and condition of the certificates and records.
192.  Statistical research.  The state registrar may permit the use of data contained in 
20vital records for purposes of statistical research. Such data may not be used in a manner 
21that will identify any individual. 
223.  National statistics.  The national agency responsible for compiling national vital 
23statistics may be furnished such copies or data as it may require for national statistics. 
24The State must be reimbursed for cost of furnishing such copies or data, and such data 
25may not be used in a manner that will identify any individual, except as authorized by the 
26state registrar. 
274.  Unlawful disclosure of data.  It is unlawful for any employee of the State or of 
28any municipality in the State to disclose data contained in such vital records, except as 
29authorized in this section and except that a clerk of a municipality may cause to be 
30printed in the annual town report the births reported within the year covered by the report, 
31by number of births and location by city or town where birth occurred, deaths reported 
32within the year covered by the report, by date of death, name, age and location by city or 
33town where death occurred, and marriages reported within the year covered by the report 
34by names of parties and date of marriage. All other details of birth, marriage, divorce or 
35death may not be available to the general public, except as specified in department rules 
36subsections 5 and 7.
375.  Records disclosed.  Certified or noncertified copies of vital records of a person 
38must be made available at any reasonable time upon that person's request or the request of 
39that person's spouse, registered domestic partner, descendant, parent or guardian, 
40grandparent, sibling, stepparent, stepchild, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, mother-in-law, 
41father-in-law, personal representative or that person's duly designated attorney or agent or 
Page 2 - 129LR1499(01)-11attorney for an agent designated by that person or by a court having jurisdiction over that 
2person whether the request be made in person, by mail, by telephone or otherwise, if the 
3state registrar is satisfied as to the identity of the requester and, if an attorney or agent, if 
4the state registrar is satisfied as to the attorney's or agent's authority to act as that person's 
5agent or attorney.  If the agent or attorney has been appointed by a court of competent 
6jurisdiction, or the attorney's or agent's appearance for the person is entered therein, the 
7state registrar shall upon request so ascertain by telephone call to the register, clerk or 
8recorder of the court, and this must be deemed sufficient justification to compel 
9compliance with the request for the record.  Certified or noncertified copies of the death 
10certificate of a minor's parent must be made available at any reasonable time upon the 
11request of that minor's living parent, as defined in Title 19-A, section 1832, subsection 
1213, if the requester's parental rights with respect to that minor have not been terminated 
13and the state registrar is satisfied as to the identity of the requester.  The state registrar 
14shall, as soon as possible, designate persons in the Office of Data, Research and Vital 
15Statistics who may act in the state registrar's absence or, in case of the state registrar's 
16disqualification, to carry out the intent of this subsection. A record of birth, death, fetal 
17death, marriage, divorce or domestic partner registration may be disclosed as necessary 
18for the department to carry out its responsibilities.
196.  Address Confidentiality Program.  Access to vital records may be further 
20restricted within the parties listed in subsection 5 according to procedures of the Address 
21Confidentiality Program under Title 5, section 90-B.
227.  Public records.  After 75 years from the date of birth for birth certificates, after 
2350 years from the date of death for fetal death certificates, after 25 years from the date of 
24death for death certificates, after 50 years from the date of marriage for marriage 
25certificates and after 50 years from the registration of domestic partnerships, any 
26Certificates and records of birth, marriage, intentions to marry, domestic partnerships and 
27death, including fetal death, are open to the public without restriction.  Any person may 
28obtain inspect and purchase noncertified copies of these vital records in accordance with 
29the department's rules.  Certified copies of these records may be purchased only by those 
30persons specified in subsection 5.  Certificates and records of birth, marriage, intentions 
31to marry and death, including fetal death, created prior to 1892 are open to the public 
32without restriction.  All persons may purchase a copy on municipal letterhead or a 
33noncertified copy of a vital record created prior to 1892.
348.  Genealogical research.  Custodians of certificates and records of birth, marriage 
35and death, including applications regarding notice of intentions to marry, shall permit 
36inspection of records by and issue noncertified copies to researchers engaged in 
37genealogical research who hold researcher identification cards, as specified by rule 
38adopted by the department.  The department shall adopt rules to implement this 
39subsection. Rules adopted by the department pursuant to this subsection are routine 
40technical rules as defined by Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
419.  Indices.  Indices to certificates and records of birth, marriage, intentions to marry, 
42domestic partnerships and death, including fetal death, at the municipal and state levels 
43are open to the public without restriction.
Page 3 - 129LR1499(01)-11The state registrar shall enter into a long-term nonexclusive contract with a private entity 
2experienced in maintaining genealogical research databases to create, maintain and 
3update at no direct cost to the State an online index to records of birth, marriage, 
4intentions to marry, domestic partnerships and death, including fetal death, in exchange 
5for allowing the private entity to also provide that index to its subscribers and customers.  
6The online index must include the names of persons appearing on the certificate or 
7record, the municipality in which the certificate or record was recorded, the date of the 
8event and the certificate number for the certificate or record number for the record.
9SUMMARY
10This bill makes the following changes to the laws governing vital records.
111.  It provides that certificates and records of birth, marriage, intentions to marry, 
12domestic partnerships and death, including fetal death, are open to the public without 
13restriction.  It allows any person to inspect and purchase noncertified copies of these vital 
14records.  Certified copies of these records may be purchased only by those persons 
15specified in law.
162.  It provides that inspection of certificates and records includes visual and physical 
17access to the original certificate or record when no alternative method of inspection is 
18available, subject to rules designed to protect the physical integrity and condition of the 
19certificates and records.
203.  It provides that indices to certificates and records of birth, marriage, intentions to 
21marry, domestic partnerships and death, including fetal death, at the municipal and state 
22levels are open to the public without restriction.
234.  It directs the State Registrar of Vital Statistics to enter into a long-term 
24nonexclusive contract with a private entity experienced in maintaining genealogical 
25research databases to create, maintain and update at no direct cost to the State an online 
26index to records of birth, marriage, intentions to marry, domestic partnerships and death, 
27including fetal death, in exchange for allowing the private entity to also provide that 
28index to its subscribers and customers.  The online index must include the names of 
29persons appearing on the certificate or record, the municipality in which the certificate or 
30record was recorded, the date of the event and the certificate number for the certificate or 
31record number for the record.
