 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 667
H.P. 488 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Require  That the Governor Be Elected by  a Majority 
Vote
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative KESCHL of Belgrade.
Cosponsored by Senator BLACK of Franklin  and
Representatives: BRADSTREET  of Vassalboro, COREY of Windham,  MARTIN of Greene,  
MILLETT of  Waterford,  TUELL of East Machias,  Senators: DAVIS of Piscataquis,  HAMPER  
of Oxford.

Page 1 - 129LR0910(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved:  Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. V, Pt. First, ยง3 is amended to read:
5Section 3.  Election; votes to be returned to Secretary of State; Secretary 
6of State to lay lists before the Senate and House of Representatives; provision 
7in case of tie.  The meetings for election of Governor shall be notified, held and 
8regulated and votes shall be received, sorted, counted and declared and recorded, in the 
9same manner as those for Senators and Representatives.  Copies of lists of votes shall be 
10sealed and returned to the secretary's office in the same manner and at the same time as 
11those for Senators.  The Secretary of State for the time being shall, on the first 
12Wednesday after the first Tuesday of January then next, lay the lists returned to the 
13secretary's office before the Senate and House of Representatives to be by them 
14examined, together with the ballots cast if they so elect, and they shall determine the 
15number of votes duly cast for the office of Governor, and in case of a choice by plurality 
16of all of the votes returned they shall declare and publish the same.  If no person received 
17more than 50% of the votes duly cast for the office of Governor, the Senate and House of 
18Representatives meeting in joint session shall order a runoff, to be held within 2 weeks, 
19between the 2 persons who received the largest number of votes duly cast for the office of 
20Governor.  The person who receives the larger number of votes in the run-off election is 
21declared the Governor.  If there shall be a tie between the 2 persons having the largest 
22number of votes for Governor in the run-off election, the House of Representatives and 
23the Senate meeting in joint session, and each member of said bodies having a single vote, 
24shall elect one of said 2 persons having so received an equal number of votes and the 
25person so elected by the Senate and House of Representatives shall be declared the 
26Governor.
27Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
28Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
29respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
30holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
31following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
32proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
33"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require a run-off 
34election between the 2 candidates for Governor who received the largest 
35number of votes in a gubernatorial election if no candidate received more 
36than 50% of the votes?"
37The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
38and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
39square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
40declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
41State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
42review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
Page 2 - 129LR0910(01)-11amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
2becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
3Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
4shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
5of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
6SUMMARY
7This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require that a 
8candidate for Governor receive more than 50% of the votes cast to be elected.  Currently, 
9the candidate who receives the largest number of votes, regardless of that number's 
10percentage of the total number of votes cast, becomes Governor.  This resolution requires 
11a run-off election between the 2 persons who received the largest number of votes when 
12no candidate received more than 50% of the total number of votes cast.  The person who 
13receives the larger number of votes in the run-off election is declared Governor.
