 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1437
H.P. 1049 House of  Representatives,  April 2, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine Concerning Alternative Signatures Made by  Persons with 
Disabilities
Submitted by the Secretary of State pursuant to Joint Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WHITE of Waterville.
Cosponsored by Senator LUCHINI of Hancock and
Representatives: DOLLOFF of Rumford, DUNPHY of Old Town, HICKMAN of Winthrop, MARTIN of  Eagle Lake, STROM of Pittsfield, Senators: CYRWAY of Kennebec,  DIAMOND 
of Cumberland, HERBIG of Waldo.

Page 1 - 129LR2290(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง20 is amended to read:
5Section 20.  Meaning of words "electors," "people," "recess of 
6Legislature," "statewide election," "measure," "circulator," and "written 
7petition"; written petitions for people's veto; written petitions for direct 
8initiative.  As used in any of the 3 preceding sections or in this section the words 
9"electors" and "people" mean the electors of the State qualified to vote for Governor; 
10"recess of the Legislature" means the adjournment without day of a session of the 
11Legislature; "statewide election" means any election held throughout the State on a 
12particular day; "measure" means an Act, bill, resolve or resolution proposed by the 
13people, or 2 or more such, or part or parts of such, as the case may be; "circulator" means 
14a person who solicits signatures for written petitions, and who must be a resident of this 
15State and whose name must appear on the voting list of the city, town or plantation of the 
16circulator's residence as qualified to vote for Governor; "written petition" means one or 
17more petitions written or printed, or partly written and partly printed, with the original 
18signatures of the petitioners, except when the Legislature by proper enactment has 
19authorized alternative signatures for persons with disabilities, attached, verified as to the 
20authenticity of the signatures by the oath of the circulator that all of the signatures to the 
21petition were made in the presence of the circulator and that to the best of the circulator's 
22knowledge and belief each signature is the signature of the person whose name it purports 
23to be, and accompanied by the certificate of the official authorized by law to maintain the 
24voting list or to certify signatures on petitions for voters on the voting list of the city, 
25town or plantation in which the petitioners reside that their names appear on the voting 
26list of the city, town or plantation of the official as qualified to vote for Governor.  The 
27oath of the circulator must be sworn to in the presence of a person authorized by law to 
28administer oaths.  Written petitions for a people's veto pursuant to Article IV, Part Third, 
29Section 17 must be submitted to the appropriate officials of cities, towns or plantations, or 
30state election officials as authorized by law, for determination of whether the petitioners 
31are qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the 5th day before the petition must be 
32filed in the office of the Secretary of State, or, if such 5th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a 
33legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal 
34holiday.  Written petitions for a direct initiative pursuant to Article IV, Part Third, 
35Section 18 must be submitted to the appropriate officials of cities, towns or plantations, or 
36state election officials as authorized by law, for determination of whether the petitioners 
37are qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the 10th day before the petition must be 
38filed in the office of the Secretary of State, or, if such 10th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or 
39a legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal 
40holiday.  Such officials must complete the certification of only those petitions submitted 
41by these deadlines and must return them to the circulators or their agents within 2 days 
42for a petition for a people's veto and within 5 days for a petition for a direct initiative, 
43Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, of the date on which such petitions were 
44submitted to them.  Signatures on petitions not submitted to the appropriate local or state 
45officials by these deadlines may not be certified.  The petition shall set forth the full text 
Page 2 - 129LR2290(01)-11of the measure requested or proposed.  Petition forms shall be furnished or approved by 
2the Secretary of State upon written application signed and notarized and submitted to the 
3office of the Secretary of State by a resident of this State whose name must appear on the 
4voting list of the city, town or plantation of that resident as qualified to vote for Governor.  
5The full text of a measure submitted to a vote of the people under the provisions of the 
6Constitution need not be printed on the official ballots, but, until otherwise provided by 
7the Legislature, the Secretary of State shall prepare the ballots in such form as to present 
8the question or questions concisely and intelligibly.
9Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
10Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
11respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
12holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
13following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
14proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
15"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to allow persons with 
16disabilities to sign petitions in an alternative manner as authorized by the 
17Legislature?"
18The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
19and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
20square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
21declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
22State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
23review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
24amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
25becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
26Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
27shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
28of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
29SUMMARY
30This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to allow alternative 
31signatures for persons with disabilities signing a petition for a people's veto and for a 
32direct initiative as authorized by proper enactment by the Legislature.
