 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 761
H.P. 566 House of  Representatives, February 12, 2019
An Act  To Clarify and Affirm Medicaid Eligibility for  Incarcerated  
Individuals
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TALBOT ROSS  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Representative STANLEY of Medway, Senator CARPENTER of Aroostook  
and Representatives:  BROOKS of Lewiston,  DUNPHY of Old Town, EVANGELOS  of 
Friendship, McCREIGHT of Harpswell,  McLEAN  of Gorham,  O'NEIL of Saco, STOVER of 
Boothbay, Senator:  DESCHAMBAULT  of York.

Page 1 - 129LR0773(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3174-CC, as enacted by PL 2001, c. 659, Pt. B, ยง1, is repealed 
3and the following enacted in its place:
4ยง3174-CC.  Medicaid eligibility during incarceration
5The department shall establish procedures to ensure that:
61.  Coverage prior to incarceration; reapplying for coverage.  A person receiving 
7federally approved Medicaid services prior to incarceration does not lose Medicaid 
8eligibility as a result of that incarceration and receives assistance with reapplying for 
9benefits if that person's Medicaid coverage expires during the term of incarceration; and
102.  Applying for coverage after incarceration.  A person who is not receiving 
11federally approved Medicaid services prior to incarceration but meets the eligibility 
12requirements for Medicaid receives assistance with applying for federally approved 
13Medicaid services.
14The provisions of this section apply even if Medicaid coverage is limited during the 
15period of incarceration.  The department shall provide Medicaid coverage for treatment 
16received outside a correctional facility, including retroactive coverage, as long as, at the 
17time treatment is provided, the incarcerated person is eligible for Medicaid.   Nothing in 
18this section requires or permits the department to maintain an incarcerated person's 
19Medicaid eligibility if the person no longer meets eligibility requirements.
20SUMMARY
21This bill clarifies current law regarding Medicaid eligibility for incarcerated 
22individuals to ensure that individuals who are eligible for Medicaid coverage are able to 
23renew their coverage while they are incarcerated and also establishes a mechanism to 
24ensure that individuals who are uninsured and eligible for Medicaid coverage are able to 
25apply for coverage while they are incarcerated.   The bill also requires the Department of 
26Health and Human Services to provide Medicaid coverage for treatment received by an 
27incarcerated person outside a correctional facility as long as, at the time treatment is 
28provided, the person is eligible for Medicaid.
