 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 252
S.P. 64 In Senate,  January  22, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Prohibit New  or Increased Fees  or Taxes by  Means of 
Direct Initiatives of Legislation
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator TIMBERLAKE of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Representative DILLINGHAM of Oxford and
Senator: DOW of  Lincoln, Representatives: BICKFORD of Auburn,  STEWART of Presque  
Isle.

Page 1 - 129LR1720(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub-ยง1 is amended to read:
5Section 1.  Petition procedure.  The electors may propose to the Legislature for 
6its consideration any bill, resolve or resolution, including bills to amend or repeal 
7emergency legislation but not an amendment of the State Constitution or a direct 
8initiative that contains a new or increased tax or fee, by written petition addressed to the 
9Legislature or to either branch thereof and filed in the office of the Secretary of State by 
10the hour of 5:00 p.m., on or before the 50th day after the date of convening of the 
11Legislature in first regular session or on or before the 25th day after the date of convening 
12of the Legislature in second regular session, except that the written petition may not be 
13filed in the office of the Secretary of State later than 18 months after the date the petition 
14form was furnished or approved by the Secretary of State.  If the applicable deadline falls 
15on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period runs until the hour of 5:00 p.m., of the 
16next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
17Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
18Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
19respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
20holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
21following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
22proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
23"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to prohibit the 
24imposition of any new or increased taxes or fees through the citizen 
25initiative process?"
26The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
27and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
28square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
29declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
30State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
31review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
32amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
33becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
34Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
35shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
36of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
37SUMMARY
38This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to prohibit the 
39imposition of any new or increased taxes or fees through the direct initiative process.
