 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 297
H.P. 221 House of  Representatives, January 22, 2019
An Act  To Strengthen Brain Injury Resources for  Underserved 
Populations, Including Opioid  Overdose Brain  Injury Survivors
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HEPLER of Woolwich.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, HYMANSON of York, MATLACK of St. George,  
O'CONNOR of Berwick, STOVER of Boothbay, WARREN of Hallowell, Senator: MOORE of Washington.

Page 1 - 129LR0811(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3088-A is enacted to read:
3ยง3088-A.  Support for underserved populations
4Within the limits of its available resources, the department may enter into contracts 
5with organizations representing individuals with a brain injury and their families, 
6bringing together state and national expertise to provide core brain injury support for 
7underserved populations of individuals with an acquired brain injury, including, but not 
8limited to, individuals who experienced an opioid drug overdose resulting in anoxic or 
9hypoxic brain injury, who are veterans, who are experiencing homelessness, who are 
10ineligible for MaineCare and who have a newly acquired brain injury.  For the purposes 
11of this section, "core brain injury support" includes, but is not limited to, resource 
12facilitation, brain injury support groups, outreach designed for individuals who have a 
13newly acquired brain injury, access to a joint state and national helpline, information and 
14resource education and family caregiver training.  The department shall adopt rules to 
15implement this section.  Rules adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules 
16as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
17SUMMARY
18This bill authorizes the Department of Health and Human Services to enter into 
19contracts with organizations representing individuals with a brain injury and their 
20families, bringing together state and national expertise to provide core brain injury 
21support for underserved populations of individuals with an acquired brain injury.
