 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1174
S.P. 360 In Senate,  March  12, 2019
An Act  To Facilitate  Remote Learning during  School Cancellations
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MIRAMANT of Knox.
Cosponsored by Senators:  FARRIN of Somerset, LAWRENCE of York, LIBBY of 
Androscoggin, Representatives: BERRY  of Bowdoinham,  DOUDERA of Camden, 
EVANGELOS of  Friendship, LANDRY of  Farmington,  McCREIGHT of  Harpswell.

Page 1 - 129LR1604(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง4801, sub-ยง4 is enacted to read:
34.  Online alternative for unscheduled school closures.  If a school day is cancelled 
4due to weather or another emergency reason, the day is counted as a school day under 
5subsection 1 if the students of the school receive adequate online instruction pursuant to a 
6plan agreed upon and adopted by the school board and the superintendent of the school 
7administrative unit of the school and forwarded to the department.  A plan adopted under 
8this subsection must include an alternative instruction method for a student who does not 
9have the technical capability to participate in online instruction.  The department may 
10make recommendations on a plan submitted by a school administrative unit under this 
11subsection and the school administrative unit shall consider the recommendations at the 
12next scheduled meeting of the unit's school board.  A school administrative unit is not 
13required to accept or implement a recommendation concerning a plan from the 
14department under this subsection.
15SUMMARY
16This bill allows a school to receive credit for a school day that is cancelled due to 
17weather or another emergency reason if the students of the school receive adequate online 
18instruction or alternative method for students without the technical capability to 
19participate in online instruction pursuant to a plan agreed upon and adopted by the school 
20board and the superintendent of the school administrative unit of the school.  The school 
21administrative unit is directed to forward the plan to the Department of Education, which 
22may make recommendations on the plan.  The school administrative unit is not required 
23to implement a recommendation concerning the plan made by the department.
