 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 125
H.P. 107 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry To  Convey  Certain Lands  to Roosevelt Conference Center 
Doing Business as Eagle Lake Sporting Camps
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MARTIN of Sinclair.
Cosponsored by Senator BLACK of Franklin  and
Representatives: McCREA of  Fort  Fairfield,  STEWART of Presque Isle,  Senator: DAVIS of 
Piscataquis.

Page 1 - 129LR1224(01)-11Preamble.  The Constitution of Maine, Article IX, Section 23 requires that real 
2estate held by the State for conservation or recreation purposes may not be reduced or its 
3uses substantially altered except on the vote of 2/3 of all members elected to each House.
4Whereas, certain real estate authorized for conveyance under this resolve is under 
5the designations described in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 12, section 598-A; and
6Whereas, the Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands within the Department of 
7Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry may sell or exchange lands with the approval of 
8the Legislature in accordance with Title 12, sections 1837 and 1851; and
9Whereas, Aroostook County has experienced significant economic reductions over 
10the last 20 years, with an unemployment rate higher than the state average, an aging 
11workforce and a declining population; and
12Whereas, an existing business, Eagle Lake Sporting Camps, established in 1889 and 
13located on Eagle Lake Public Reserve Lands east of Route 11, desires to invest 
14significantly in its business to grow into a year-round operation and to upgrade facilities 
15and improve amenities, thus stimulating the economy, creating jobs and increasing local 
16and state tax revenues; and
17Whereas, such investment would not be feasible nor would such a commitment be 
18made without the acquisition of fee simple ownership of sufficient land to develop and 
19expand the business and without the lease of additional adjoining land to support a 
20modern wilderness destination resort; and
21Whereas, the subject land is now used as a developed commercial sporting camp 
22property, and no vital conservation land or wildlife habitat nor outdoor recreation 
23opportunities, such as hunting and fishing, are affected by the change in land ownership, 
24and the investment permitted by this conveyance would increase access and opportunities 
25for public use of the Eagle Lake Public Reserve Lands; now, therefore, be it
26Sec. 1.  Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands to convey certain land 
27in T16 R6.  Resolved:  That the Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands within the 
28Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, referred to in this resolve as "the 
29director," shall convey, by quitclaim deed without covenant and at appraised fair market 
30value agreed to jointly by the director and the purchaser, to Roosevelt Conference Center, 
31doing business as Eagle Lake Sporting Camps, and its successors and assigns, the land 
32described in the lease of land in Township 16, Range 6 current as of the effective date of 
33this resolve from the State to Eagle Lake Sporting Camps and such additional contiguous 
34land as agreed to by the director and the purchaser to the east of the leased land for a total 
35of 12.86 acres, subject to the State's retaining or withholding any rights to subdivide the 
36land conveyed.  In addition, the director shall convey to Eagle Lake Sporting Camps, for 
37the appraised fair market value agreed to jointly by the director and the purchaser, an 
38access right-of-way that is no greater than 66 feet wide along the service road to the 
39Square Lake Road.  The conveyance of the right-of-way must include conditions that 
40allow Eagle Lake Sporting Camps to maintain the road and make road improvements 
41after acquiring prior written approval from the State.  The conveyances required by this 
Page 2 - 129LR1224(01)-11section must contain conditions granting the State the right of first refusal, within 90 days 
2following notice by Eagle Lake Sporting Camps of intent to transfer the land or the 
3right-of-way, to reacquire the parcel and the right-of-way at the appraised fair market 
4value agreed to jointly by the director and the purchaser, if the use of the land for a 
5year-round sporting camp or Class A restaurant, as defined in the Maine Revised Statutes, 
6Title 28-A, section 2, subsection 15, and lodge open to the public is discontinued or if 
7Eagle Lake Sporting Camps fails to maintain appropriate licenses to conduct those 
8activities from the Department of Health and Human Services.
9If the director intends to lease any land to Eagle Lake Sporting Camps other than that 
10required by this resolve, the director shall provide an opportunity for and consider 
11comments regarding public access to the Eagle Lake Public Reserve Lands from 
12representatives authorized by the Town of Eagle Lake.
13SUMMARY
14This resolve requires the Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands within the 
15Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to convey to Roosevelt 
16Conference Center, doing business as Eagle Lake Sporting Camps, a 12.86-acre parcel of 
17land in Township 16, Range 6.  The resolve requires the director to sell the land at fair 
18market value and to retain or withhold any rights to subdivide.  The director is also 
19required by the resolve to convey to Eagle Lake Sporting Camps a right-of-way along the 
20service road to the Square Lake Road for appraised fair market value.  The resolve also 
21stipulates that the State must retain a right of first refusal to reacquire the parcel and 
22right-of-way from the owner if the use of the parcel for a year-round sporting camp or 
23Class A restaurant and lodge is discontinued or appropriate licenses are not maintained.
