 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1336
H.P. 964 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Governor  To Renominate Penobscot  Bay for 
Inclusion in the United States Environmental  Protection Agency  
National Estuary  Program
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DODGE of Belfast.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland, DOUDERA of Camden,  EVANGELOS  of 
Friendship, HUTCHINS of Penobscot, MATLACK of St. George, PLUECKER of Warren.

Page 1 - 129LR0667(01)-11Preamble. Whereas, Penobscot Bay and its coastal forests, shores and islands 
2attract immense numbers of visitors by land and by sea every year, supporting a thriving 
3and robustly diverse tourism industry; and
4Whereas, Penobscot Bay supports a profitable, well-managed lobster fishery that 
5sustains coastal communities around the bay; and
6Whereas, it is possible that Penobscot Bay will host substantial land-based salmon 
7aquaculture operations; and
8Whereas, Penobscot Bay and the Penobscot River support dozens of plant, fish, 
9shellfish, seabird and marine mammal species, including 11 diadromous fishes: shad, 
10salmon, alewife, blueback herring, shortnose sturgeon, Atlantic sturgeon, sea lamprey, 
11American eel, striped bass, rainbow smelt and tomcod; and
12Whereas, Penobscot Bay faces increasing commercial, residential and industrial 
13development pressures to replace natural forestland and farmland with buildings, parking 
14lots, roads and other artificial surfaces, which will increase licensed discharges and 
15stormwater runoff; and
16Whereas, more than 30 licensed outfalls pump industrial and sewage treatment 
17plant wastewater into Penobscot Bay and more are on the way; and
18Whereas, wastes left on, in or near the shore by 19th and 20th century fertilizer and 
19chemical factories, mining, coal gas production and poultry processers, as well as waste 
20oils and other fluids from automobiles and from oil spills, large and small, pollute 
21Penobscot Bay; and
22Whereas, it is impossible to protect and restore the environments that support 
23Penobscot Bay's fisheries and scenic and forest tourism unless we treat the entire bay as a 
24single entity when it comes to decisions on developments that could have effects on the 
25bay as a whole; and
26Whereas, the United States Environmental Protection Agency has developed a 
27National Estuary Program to focus research attention on special places like Penobscot 
28Bay and provides funding to pay for local estuary programs; and
29Whereas, in 1995, Governor Angus King unsuccessfuly nominated Penobscot Bay 
30for inclusion in the National Estuary Program; and
31Whereas, the problems and opportunities that drove Governor King to nominate 
32Penobscot Bay for the National Estuary Program have only increased; now, therefore be 
33it
34Sec. 1.  Governor to renominate Penobscot Bay for National Estuary 
35Program.  Resolved:  That the Governor shall renominate Penobscot Bay for inclusion 
36in the United States Environmental Protection Agency National Estuary Program by:
Page 2 - 129LR0667(01)-111.  Identifying Penobscot Bay as an estuary of national significance;
22.  Convening a management conference at which public and private agencies may 
3develop both short-term and long-term action plans for Penobscot Bay; and
43.  Committing to implementing those plans and to creating a Penobscot Bay 
5partnership with the funds that the United States Environmental Protection Agency will 
6make available.
7SUMMARY
8This resolve directs the Governor to renominate Penobscot Bay for inclusion in the 
9United States Environmental Protection Agency National Estuary Program.
