 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1741
H.P. 1240 House of  Representatives, May 16, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Public Utilities Commission To Examine Performance-based Rates for Electric  Utilities
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Speaker GIDEON  of Freeport.
Cosponsored by Senator LAWRENCE of York and
Representative: BERRY  of Bowdoinham.

Page 1 - 129LR2427(01)-11Sec. 1.  Proceeding to examine rate plans of investor-owned transmission 
2and distribution utilities.  Resolved: That the Public Utilities Commission, referred 
3to in this resolve as "the commission," shall open a proceeding to examine the rate plans 
4of each investor-owned transmission and distribution utility in the State.
5In accordance with the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 35-A, section 3195, the 
6commission shall examine rate design, existing performance metrics and any incentives 
7for efficient operation that are currently in place for each investor-owned transmission 
8and distribution utility.  In its assessment of performance metrics, the commission shall 
9specifically consider issues including, but not limited to, a utility's reliability as measured 
10by amount of service interruption, billing accuracy, level of renewable energy generation 
11integration and customer satisfaction.
12Based on its review, the commission shall determine the appropriateness of any 
13reasonable rate-adjustment mechanisms, including enhanced positive and negative 
14financial incentives linked to performance.
15SUMMARY
16This resolve requires the Public Utilities Commission to open a proceeding to 
17examine the rate plans of each investor-owned transmission and distribution utility in the 
18State.  The commission is directed to examine rate design, existing performance metrics 
19and any incentives for efficient operation that are currently in place for each 
20investor-owned transmission and distribution utility and to specifically consider 
21performance measures including a utility's reliability, billing accuracy, level of renewable 
22energy generation integration and customer satisfaction.  Based on its review, the 
23commission shall determine the appropriateness of any reasonable rate-adjustment 
24mechanisms, including enhanced positive and negative financial incentives linked to 
25performance.
