 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 619
H.P. 447 House of  Representatives, February 5, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine Regarding Early  Voting
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SCHNECK of Bangor.
Cosponsored by Senator LUCHINI of Hancock and
Representatives: CARDONE  of Bangor, CUDDY of Winterport, DUNPHY of Old Town, 
FARNSWORTH of  Portland, KORNFIELD of Bangor, MARTIN of Sinclair, McCREA of  
Fort Fairfield, TALBOT  ROSS of Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR0239(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. II, ยง4 is amended to read:
5Section 4.  Time of state election; early voting; absentee voting.  The 
6election of Senators and Representatives shall be on the Tuesday following the first 
7Monday of November biennially forever and the election of Governor shall be on the 
8Tuesday following the first Monday of November every 4 years.  The Legislature by 
9proper enactment may authorize a process by which municipalities may conduct early 
10voting by allowing voters to vote in the same manner as on election day during a 
11prescribed period immediately preceding an election. The Legislature under by proper 
12enactment shall authorize and provide for voting by absentee ballot by citizens of the 
13State absent therefrom in the Armed Forces of the United States or of this State and for 
14voting by absentee ballot by other citizens absent or physically incapacitated for any 
15reasons deemed sufficient.
16Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
17Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
18respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
19holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
20following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
21proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
22"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to allow the 
23Legislature to authorize a process by which a municipality may conduct 
24early voting in the same manner as on election day during a period 
25immediately preceding an election?"
26The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
27and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
28square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
29declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
30State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
31review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
32amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
33becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
34Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
35shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
36of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
37SUMMARY
38This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to allow the Legislature 
39to authorize a process by which municipalities may conduct early voting by allowing 
Page 2 - 129LR0239(01)-11voters to vote in the same manner as on election day during a period immediately 
2preceding an election and to allow absentee voting for any sufficient reason.
