 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 298
H.P. 222 House of  Representatives, January 22, 2019
An Act  To Establish a Conditional Presumption of Compensability 
for Corrections Employees in Cases of Impairment from 
Hypertension or Heart  Disease
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HANDY of Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  DOORE  of Augusta, RECKITT of South Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR0761(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  39-A MRSA ยง328-C is enacted to read:
3ยง328-C.  Heart disease or hypertension suffered by a corrections officer
4There is a rebuttable presumption that an employee of the State or of a county whose 
5regular or incidental duties require the care, supervision or custody of a person confined 
6in a jail, prison or state correctional facility pursuant to an order of a court or as a result of 
7an arrest and who contracts heart disease or hypertension has contracted the heart disease 
8or hypertension in the course of employment and as a result of that employment, that 
9sufficient notice of the heart disease or hypertension has been given and that the heart 
10disease or hypertension was not occasioned by any willful act of that employee to cause 
11the heart disease or hypertension, as long as the employee successfully passed a physical 
12examination upon entry into that employment, or during the time of that employment, 
13that failed to reveal any evidence of that condition.
14SUMMARY
15This bill amends the workers' compensation laws by adding a presumption that heart 
16disease or hypertension suffered by a state or county corrections employee was caused in 
17the course of that employment, as long as the employee had successfully passed a 
18physical examination upon entry into or during the course of that employment that failed 
19to reveal any evidence of that condition.
