 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 1977
S.P. 679 In Senate,  January  8, 2020
An Act  To Ensure a Consumer's Right To  Repair  Certain Electronic 
Products
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CARPENTER  of Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Representative HUBBELL of Bar Harbor and
Senators: BELLOWS of Kennebec, President JACKSON of  Aroostook,  Representative: 
ZEIGLER of  Montville.

Page 1 - 129LR2712(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  10 MRSA c. 233 is enacted to read:
3CHAPTER 233
4RIGHT TO REPAIR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
5ยง1500-O.  Definitions
6As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms 
7have the following meanings.
81.  Authorized repair provider.  "Authorized repair provider" means a business that 
9has an arrangement with an original equipment manufacturer that grants the business 
10license to use a trade name, service mark or related characteristic for the purposes of 
11offering repair services under the name of the original equipment manufacturer.
122.  Department.  "Department" means the Department of Economic and Community 
13Development.
143.  Digital electronic equipment.  "Digital electronic equipment" means any product 
15that depends for its functioning, in whole or in part, on digital electronics embedded in or 
16attached to the product but does not include a motor vehicle, as defined in Title 29-A, 
17section 101, subsection 42, or any part of a motor vehicle.
184.  Embedded software.  "Embedded software" means any programmable 
19instructions provided on firmware included with digital electronic equipment for the 
20purpose of equipment operation, including all patches and fixes to that software that are 
21offered or included by the original equipment manufacturer for this purpose.
225.  Fair and reasonable terms.  "Fair and reasonable terms" means a price for digital 
23electronic equipment, information or tools that is fair and reasonable based on the 
24following factors:
25A.  The net cost to the authorized repair provider for similar digital electronic 
26equipment, information or tools obtained from an original equipment manufacturer, 
27less any discounts, rebates or other incentive programs;
28B.  The cost to the original equipment manufacturer of preparing and distributing the 
29digital electronic equipment, information or tools, excluding any research and 
30development costs incurred in designing and implementing, upgrading or altering the 
31product, but including amortized capital costs for the preparation and distribution of 
32the digital electronic equipment, information or tools;
33C.  The price charged by other original equipment manufacturers for similar digital 
34electronic equipment, information or tools;
35D.  The price charged by other original equipment manufacturers for similar digital 
36electronic equipment, information or tools prior to the launch of original equipment 
37manufacturer websites;
Page 2 - 129LR2712(01)-11E.  The ability of aftermarket technicians or shops to afford the digital electronic 
2equipment, information or tools;
3F.  The means by which the digital electronic equipment, information or tools are 
4distributed;
5G.  The extent to which the digital electronic equipment, information or tools are 
6used, including the number of users and frequency, duration and volume of use; and
7H.  Inflation.
86.  Independent repair provider.  "Independent repair provider" means a business 
9operating in this State that is not affiliated with the original equipment manufacturer of 
10digital electronic equipment or that original equipment manufacturer's authorized repair 
11provider and is engaged in the diagnosis, service, maintenance or repair of that digital 
12electronic equipment.
137.  Original equipment manufacturer.  "Original equipment manufacturer" means a 
14business that, in the ordinary course of its business, is engaged in selling or leasing new 
15digital electronic equipment or parts of equipment to an individual or business in this 
16State and is engaged in the diagnosis, service, maintenance or repair of that equipment.
178.  Owner.  "Owner" means an individual or business that owns or leases a digital 
18electronic product purchased or used in this State.
199.  Service parts.  "Service parts" means any replacement parts for digital electronic 
20equipment, either new or used, made available by the original equipment manufacturer to 
21an authorized repair provider for repairing the digital electronic equipment.
2210.  Trade secret.  "Trade secret" means anything tangible or intangible or 
23electronically stored or kept that constitutes, represents, evidences or records intellectual 
24property, including secret or confidentially held designs, processes, procedures, formulas, 
25inventions or improvements or secret or confidentially held scientific, technical, 
26merchandising, production, financial, business or management information, or anything 
27within the definition of "trade secret" under 18 United States Code, Section 1839(3), as in 
28effect on January 1, 2019.
29ยง1500-P.  Right to repair
301.  Requirement for original equipment manufacturers to make diagnostic and 
31repair information and parts available.  An original equipment manufacturer of digital 
32electronic equipment sold or used in this State shall:
33A.  Make available diagnostic and repair information, including technical updates for 
34repairs and updates and corrections to embedded software, to an independent repair 
35provider or an owner at no charge or in the same manner as the original equipment 
36manufacturer makes such information available to its authorized repair provider; and
37B.  Make service parts, including updates to the embedded software of the service 
38parts, available for purchase upon fair and reasonable terms by an owner, the owner's 
39authorized agent or an independent repair provider working on the digital electronic 
40equipment.
Page 3 - 129LR2712(01)-112.  Requirement for original equipment manufacturers to make diagnostic and 
2repair tools available for purchase.  An original equipment manufacturer of equipment 
3sold or used in this State shall make available for purchase by owners and independent 
4repair providers all diagnostic repair tools incorporating the same diagnostic, repair and 
5remote communications capabilities that the original equipment manufacturer makes 
6available to its own repair or engineering staff or any authorized repair provider.  An 
7original equipment manufacturer shall offer the tools for sale to owners and to 
8independent repair providers upon fair and reasonable terms.  An original equipment 
9manufacturer that provides diagnostic repair information to aftermarket tool, diagnostics 
10or 3rd-party service information publications and systems is not responsible for the 
11content and functionality of aftermarket tool, diagnostics or 3rd-party service information 
12publications not provided by the original equipment manufacturer.
133.  Sale of equipment used for security-related functions.  Original equipment 
14manufacturer equipment or parts sold or used in this State for the purpose of providing 
15security-related functions must include diagnostic, service and repair information 
16necessary to reset a security-related electronic function with information provided to 
17owners and independent repair facilities, or the original equipment manufacturer shall 
18make that information obtainable by owners and independent repair facilities through the 
19appropriate secure data release systems.
204.  Nonapplicability to trade secrets.  This section may not be construed to require 
21an original equipment manufacturer to divulge a trade secret.
225.  Effect on original equipment manufacturer agreements.  This section may not 
23be interpreted to abrogate, interfere with, contradict or alter the terms of an agreement 
24executed and in force between an authorized repair provider and an original equipment 
25manufacturer, including, but not limited to, the performance or provision of warranty or 
26recall repair work by an authorized repair provider on behalf of an original equipment 
27manufacturer pursuant to an authorized repair agreement, except that any provision in the 
28agreement that purports to waive, avoid, restrict or limit an original equipment 
29manufacturer's compliance with this section is void and unenforceable.
306.  Nonapplicability to nondiagnostic and repair information.  This section may 
31not be construed to require an original equipment manufacturer or authorized repair 
32provider to provide an owner or an independent repair provider access to nondiagnostic 
33and repair information provided by an original equipment manufacturer to an authorized 
34repair provider pursuant to the terms of an authorizing agreement.
357.  Notification to owners.  An independent repair provider that purchases or 
36acquires embedded software or service parts shall, prior to performing any services on 
37digital electronic equipment, notify the owner of the equipment in writing that:
38A.  The independent repair provider is not an authorized repair provider for the digital 
39electronic equipment;
40B.  The owner should review the terms and conditions of the warranty for the digital 
41electronic equipment and that repairs not performed by an authorized repair provider 
42could affect the terms and conditions of the warranty;
Page 4 - 129LR2712(01)-11C.  A warrantor cannot require that only parts manufactured by the original 
2equipment manufacturer be used with the product in order to retain the warranty;
3D.  A warrantor is required to demonstrate that a defect or damage was caused by the 
4independent repair provider in order to affect the warranty; and
5E.  A warrantor is governed by the federal Magnuson-Moss Warranty - Federal Trade 
6Commission Improvement Act.
7ยง1500-Q.  Duties of the department
8The department shall develop, establish and implement a public outreach campaign 
9directed at independent repair providers, owners and original equipment manufacturers to 
10inform them of their rights and responsibilities under this chapter.
11ยง1500-R.  Violations
12A violation of this chapter constitutes an unfair or deceptive act or practice in 
13violation of Title 5, chapter 10.
14SUMMARY
15This bill establishes a consumer's right to repair electronic devices, excluding motor 
16vehicles.  It requires manufacturers of electronic equipment to make available the 
17information and equipment necessary for diagnosis and repair of electronic equipment 
18problems.  It prohibits original equipment manufacturers from limiting access to 
19diagnostic equipment and tools to authorized repair providers and requires manufacturers 
20to make this information and equipment available to independent repair providers under 
21fair and reasonable terms.  The bill provides that a violation constitutes an unfair trade 
22practice.
