 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 796
H.P. 584 House of  Representatives, February 12, 2019
An Act  To Reestablish the Department of Agriculture, Food and  
Rural Resources and the Department of Conservation
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HICKMAN of Winthrop.
Cosponsored by Senator BLACK of Franklin  and
Representative: DUNPHY  of Old Town.

Page 1 - 129LR2011(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This emergency bill proposes to reestablish the Department of Agriculture, Food and 
6Rural Resources and the Department of Conservation, or "the departments," which were 
7merged into the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry pursuant to Public 
8Law 2011, chapter 657.  In addition to reestablishing the departments as separate entities 
9with separate commissioners, this bill would:
101.  Reestablish the original missions of the Department of Agriculture, Food and 
11Rural Resources and the Department of Conservation;
122.  Reestablish critical administrative and program positions in the departments, 
13including positions charged with responsibilities associated with economic development;
143.  Address deficiencies in the departments in staffing and funding;
154.  Address stagnation in the departments in program development and planning;
165.  Allow the reestablished Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources the 
17ability to devote resources to aid farmers and to devise solutions to present-day 
18challenges facing agricultural industries in the State;
196.  Establish new goals for promoting and protecting Maine's natural beauty and the 
20unique character of its land, waterways, wildlife habitats and wilderness resources;
217.  Establish new goals for improving the agricultural economy in Maine, maintaining 
22and strengthening rural life and values and enhancing the preservation of the rural skills, 
23food supply, health and nutrition of the people of the State; and
248.  Demonstrate Maine's commitment to its goal of becoming the "bread basket" for 
25New England.
