 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1825
S.P. 615 In Senate,  June 3, 2019
An Act  To Authorize Limited Disclosure of Cigarette Sales 
Information To Ensure  Continued Receipt of Tobacco Settlement 
Funds
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator SANBORN,  L. of Cumberland.  (GOVERNOR'S BILL)

Page 1 - 129LR2524(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง1580-L, sub-ยง10, as enacted by PL 2003, c. 439, ยง1, is 
3repealed and the following enacted in its place:
410.  Disclosure of information.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the 
5contrary, the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of Revenue 
6Services is authorized to disclose to the Attorney General any tax information received by 
7the Bureau of Revenue Services and requested by the Attorney General for purposes of 
8determining compliance with and enforcing the provisions of this section. The Attorney 
9General may share any information received under this section, other than information 
10received from the Bureau of Revenue Services, with:
11A.  Federal, state or local agencies but only for purposes of enforcement of this 
12section, subchapter 3 or corresponding laws of other states; and
13B.  Courts, arbitrators, data clearinghouses or similar entities for the purpose of 
14assessing compliance with, resolving disputes arising under or making calculations 
15required by the Master Settlement Agreement or agreements resolving disputes 
16arising under the Master Settlement Agreement, and with counsel for the parties or 
17expert witnesses in any such proceeding, if the information otherwise remains 
18confidential.
19The Attorney General shall provide notice to the Department of Administrative and 
20Financial Services, Bureau of Revenue Services of those persons certified under this 
21section.
22SUMMARY
23This bill authorizes the Attorney General to share information received under the 
24laws governing tobacco product manufacturers, other than information received from the 
25Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of Revenue Services, with 
26courts, arbitrators, data clearinghouses or similar entities for the purpose of assessing 
27compliance with, resolving disputes arising under or making calculations required by the 
28Master Settlement Agreement or agreements resolving disputes arising under the Master 
29Settlement Agreement, and with counsel for the parties or expert witnesses in any such 
30proceeding, if the information otherwise remains confidential.
