 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 177
H.P. 140 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
Resolve, To  Improve Access to Bariatric Care
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PERRY of Calais.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Representatives: COREY of  Windham, CRAVEN of Lewiston, MEYER of Eliot.

Page 1 - 129LR1004(01)-11Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to provide specialized 
2bariatric care beds. Resolved:  That, by September 1, 2020, the Department of 
3Health and Human Services shall provide 16 new specialized bariatric care beds in one or 
4more nursing facilities to serve individuals with a body mass index greater than 40 who 
5are eligible for long-term care.  A nursing facility with a specialized bariatric care bed 
6must be reimbursed at a rate that considers the special needs of individuals with a body 
7mass index greater than 40, including, but not limited to, additional staffing for safety in 
8transfers, transportation needs, specialized equipment, private rooms, extensive 
9environmental modifications and mental health services.  The department shall ensure 
10that staff of a nursing facility with a specialized bariatric care bed have mental health 
11training and that the facility provides safe and adequate space for free movement and 
12transportation for activities in the community.
13SUMMARY
14This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services to provide 16 new 
15specialized bariatric care beds in one or more nursing facilities to serve individuals with a 
16body mass index greater than 40.
