 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 255
S.P. 67 In Senate,  January  22, 2019
Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of Maine 
To Require That Signatures on  a Direct  Initiative of Legislation 
Come from Each Congressional  District
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator FARRIN of Somerset.
Cosponsored by Representative STROM  of Pittsfield,  Representative STETKIS of Canaan and
Senators: CARPENTER of Aroostook, LUCHINI of  Hancock,  TIMBERLAKE of 
Androscoggin, Representatives: ARATA of New Gloucester, BRADSTREET of Vassalboro, DILLINGHAM of Oxford, GRIGNON of Athens, HANINGTON of Lincoln.

Page 1 - 129LR0848(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub-ยง2 is amended to read:
52. Referral to electors unless enacted by the Legislature without change; 
6number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating 
7signatures on petitions; competing measures.  For any measure thus proposed by 
8electors, the number of signatures of voters from each congressional district shall not be 
9less than 10% of the total vote for Governor cast in that congressional district in the last 
10gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition.  The date each signature was 
11made shall be written next to the signature on the petition.  A signature is not valid if it is 
12dated more than one year prior to the date that the petition was filed in the office of the 
13Secretary of State.  The measure thus proposed, unless enacted without change by the 
14Legislature at the session at which it is presented, shall be submitted to the electors 
15together with any amended form, substitute, or recommendation of the Legislature, and in 
16such manner that the people can choose between the competing measures or reject both.  
17When there are competing bills and neither receives a majority of the votes given for or 
18against both, the one receiving the most votes shall at the next statewide election to be 
19held not less than 60 days after the first vote thereon be submitted by itself if it receives 
20more than 1/3 of the votes given for and against both.  If the measure initiated is enacted 
21by the Legislature without change, it shall not go to a referendum vote unless in 
22pursuance of a demand made in accordance with the preceding section.  The Legislature 
23may order a special election on any measure that is subject to a vote of the people.
24Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
25Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
26respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
27holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
28following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
29proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
30"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require signatures 
31on direct initiative petitions from voters from each congressional district 
32of this State?"
33The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
34and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
35square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
36declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
37State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
38review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
39amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
40becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on March 1, 2020.
Page 2 - 129LR0848(01)-11Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
2shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
3of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
4SUMMARY
5This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require that the 
6signatures on a petition to directly initiate legislation be of voters from each of the State's 
72 congressional districts and that the number of signatures from each congressional 
8district be not less than 10% of the total vote for Governor cast in that congressional 
9district in the previous gubernatorial election. This resolution provides that, if the 
10required votes are cast in favor of the proposed amendment to the Constitution, the 
11proposed amendment becomes part of the Constitution on March 1, 2020 instead of on 
12the date of the Governor's proclamation.
