 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1631
H.P. 1174 House of  Representatives,  April 25, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine Concerning Early  Voting, Voting by Absentee Ballot and 
Voting by  Mail
Submitted by the Secretary of State pursuant to Joint Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SCHNECK of Bangor.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, DUNPHY of Old Town, EVANGELOS  of Friendship,  
Speaker GIDEON of Freeport,  HEPLER of Woolwich, HICKMAN  of Winthrop, MOONEN of 
Portland, Senator:  President JACKSON  of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR2288(01)-11Constitutional amendment.  Resolved:  Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. II, ยง4 is amended to read:
5Section 4.  Time of state election; absentee ballot; early voting.  The 
6election of Senators and Representatives shall be on the Tuesday following the first 
7Monday of November biennially forever and the election of Governor shall be on the 
8Tuesday following the first Monday of November every 4 years.  The Legislature by 
9proper enactment may authorize a process of early voting that allows voting to occur in 
10the same manner as on election day during a period immediately preceding an election.  
11The Legislature under by proper enactment shall authorize and provide for voting by 
12absentee ballot by citizens of the State absent therefrom in the Armed Forces of the 
13United States or of this State and for voting by absentee ballot by other citizens absent or 
14physically incapacitated for reasons deemed sufficient.  The Legislature also may by 
15proper enactment authorize voting by mail for all citizens of the State as an alternative to 
16voting by absentee ballot.
17Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
18Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
19respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
20holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
21following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
22proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
23"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to authorize the 
24Legislature to adopt a process of early voting and voting by mail?"
25The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
26and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
27square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
28declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
29State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
30review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
31amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
32becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
33Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
34shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
35of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
36SUMMARY
37This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to allow the Legislature 
38to authorize a process to allow voting to occur in the same manner as on election day 
39during a period immediately preceding an election.  It also allows for voting by absentee 
40ballot by citizens for reasons deemed sufficient without requiring in the Constitution of 
Page 2 - 129LR2288(01)-11Maine that the citizens be absent or physically incapacitated.  Additionally, this resolution 
2allows the Legislature to authorize a process of voting by mail for all citizens of the State 
3as an alternative to voting by absentee ballot.
