 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 364
S.P. 104 In Senate,  January  24, 2019
An Act  To Establish the Right To Practice  Complementary  and 
Alternative Health  Care Act
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MIRAMANT of Knox.
Cosponsored by Representative BROOKS  of Lewiston and
Senators: BREEN of  Cumberland, CHENETTE  of York, CLAXTON of Androscoggin,  
VITELLI of Sagadahoc,  Representatives: BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland, BERRY of 
Bowdoinham, MASTRACCIO of Sanford, TEPLER of Topsham.

Page 1 - 129LR0583(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  32 MRSA c. 113-B, sub-c. 5 is enacted to read:
3SUBCHAPTER 5
4COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE HEALTH CARE
5ยง12601.  Short title
6This subchapter may be known and cited as "the Right To Practice Complementary 
7and Alternative Health Care Act."
8ยง12602.  License not required
9A person who provides health care services in accordance with this subchapter but 
10who is not licensed, certified or registered in this State as a health care professional or 
11practitioner under this Title does not violate any law relating to the licensing of health 
12care professionals under this Title as long as the person complies with the requirements of 
13this subchapter.  For the purposes of this subchapter, "health care services" means 
14complementary or alternative health care services.
151.  Prohibited acts.  A person providing health care services under this subchapter 
16may not engage in any of the following activities:
17A.  Performing surgery, setting fractures or performing any other procedure on a 
18person that punctures the skin;
19B.  Administering or prescribing radiation, including x-ray radiation;
20C.  Prescribing or administering medications, drugs or devices that require a 
21prescription from a licensed health care professional;
22D.  Recommending the discontinuance of medications or drugs or the use of devices 
23prescribed by a licensed health care professional;
24E.  Performing chiropractic adjustment of joints or spine; or
25F.  Acting in any way that suggests, advertises or implies that the person providing 
26health care services is licensed as a health care professional under any other chapter 
27of this Title.
282.  Required disclosures.  A person who provides health care services under this 
29subchapter and is advertising or charging a fee for those services shall, prior to providing 
30services, disclose the following in writing to the person receiving services:
31A.  The name, business address and telephone number of the person providing health 
32care services;
33B.  The fact that the person providing health care services is not a licensed health care 
34professional;
Page 2 - 129LR0583(01)-11C.  The nature of the health care services to be provided; and
2D.  The degrees, training, experience, credentials or other qualifications of the person 
3providing health care services.
4A written copy of the disclosures required under this subsection must be posted in a 
5prominent location on the premises where the health care services are being provided.
63.  Acknowledgment required.  Prior to providing health care services to another 
7person for the first time, the person providing services shall obtain a written, signed 
8statement that the disclosures required in subsection 2 have been provided and 
9understood.  The written, signed statement must be retained for 2 years by the person 
10providing the health care services.
114.  Relief.  This subchapter does not limit the right of any person to seek relief for 
12negligence or other civil remedy against a person providing health care services subject to 
13this subchapter.
145.  Scope of practice.  This subchapter does not affect the scope of practice of a 
15health care professional licensed under this Title.
16This subchapter may not be construed to prevent a person from providing health care 
17services that would otherwise be exempt under this Title.  This subchapter may not be 
18construed to require a person to be licensed to provide services that would be exempt 
19under this Title.
20SUMMARY
21This bill establishes the Right To Practice Complementary and Alternative Health 
22Care Act.  The bill provides that a person providing alternative or complementary health 
23care services who is not licensed under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 32 may provide 
24health care services as long as the person does not perform surgery, prescribe 
25medications, drugs or devices that require a prescription, perform chiropractic 
26manipulation or falsely state that the person is a licensed health care professional.  The 
27person providing services must disclose certain information to the person receiving 
28services and must collect and retain a signed statement granting permission to provide 
29services.
