 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 167
H.P. 130 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
An Act  To Prevent  Food  Shaming in Maine's Public  Schools
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DODGE of Belfast.
Cosponsored by Senators:  BELLOWS  of Kennebec, MOORE of Washington, Senator 
MILLETT of  Cumberland  and Representatives:  CARNEY of  Cape Elizabeth, COLLINGS of 
Portland, HIGGINS of  Dover-Foxcroft, INGWERSEN  of Arundel,  MADIGAN of Waterville, 
MEYER of  Eliot, ROBERTS-LOVELL of  South  Berwick, TUELL of East Machias.

Page 1 - 129LR0675(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA c. 223, sub-c. 11 is enacted to read:
3SUBCHAPTER 11
4FOOD RIGHTS
5ยง6681.  Access to food and use of food discipline
6This section governs student access to and school use of food, including as a 
7disciplinary tool, in public schools.
81.  Serving of reimbursable meals.  A public school that provides free and reduced-
9price meals or other meals to students pursuant to subchapter 7 or otherwise provides to 
10students meals eligible for reimbursement under a program administered by the United 
11States Department of Agriculture shall provide such a meal to a student who requests the 
12meal and is otherwise eligible for the meal regardless of the student's inability to pay for 
13the school meal or failure in the past to pay for school meals.  The principal, assistant 
14principal or guidance counselor of the public school shall contact the parent or guardian 
15of a student who requests a meal in accordance with this subsection to offer the parent or 
16guardian assistance with any necessary applications.  The principal, assistant principal or 
17guidance counselor may also inquire of the parent or guardian if there are other issues 
18within the student's household that have caused the student to have insufficient funds to 
19purchase school meals and may offer other assistance.
202.  Punishment related to meals.  A public school may not:
21A.  Because of a student's inability to pay for a meal or because of any payments due 
22for meals served previously to the student, require the student:
23(1)  To throw away a meal after it has been served to the student; or
24(2)  To undertake chores or work as a means of paying for one or more meals or 
25as punishment for not paying for one or more meals; or
26B.  Refuse a meal to a student as a form of or as part of a disciplinary action.
273.  Stigmatization.  A public school may not openly identify or otherwise stigmatize 
28a student who cannot pay for a meal or who has payments due for previous meals by 
29requiring the student to wear a wristband, hand stamp or other identifying mark or sign 
30noticeable by others.
314.  Required communications.  A public school's communications about a student's 
32meal debts must be made to the parent or guardian of the student rather than to the 
33student directly.  A public school may ask a student to carry to the student's parent or 
34guardian a letter regarding the student's meal debt.
Page 2 - 129LR0675(01)-11SUMMARY
2This bill does the following.
31.  It requires a public school that provides free and reduced-price meals or other 
4meals to students pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20-A, chapter 223, 
5subchapter 7 or otherwise provides to students meals eligible for reimbursement under a 
6program administered by the United States Department of Agriculture to provide such a 
7meal to a student who requests the meal and is otherwise eligible for the meal regardless 
8of the student's inability to pay for the school meal or failure in the past to pay for school 
9meals. It also requires the school to take certain actions to assist the parent or guardian of 
10a student who requests such a meal.
112.  It prohibits a public school from punishing a student in certain ways solely 
12because of the student's inability to pay for a meal or because of any payments due for 
13previous meals.  It also prohibits a public school from refusing a meal to a student as a 
14form of or as part of a disciplinary action.
153.  It prohibits a public school from openly identifying or stigmatizing a student who 
16cannot pay for a meal or who has payments due for previous meals by requiring the 
17student to wear a wristband, hand stamp or other identifying mark or sign noticeable by 
18others.
194.  It requires a public school to communicate about a student's meal debts directly to 
20the parent or guardian of the student rather than to the student.  A public school may ask a 
21student to carry to the student's parent or guardian a letter regarding a student's meal debt.
