 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 2113
H.P. 1506 House of  Representatives, February 20, 2020
An Act  To Prevent  Charter Schools  from Using State Funds for 
Anti-union Campaigns
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SYLVESTER of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland  and
Representatives: BABBIDGE of Kennebunk, DODGE of Belfast,  DUNPHY of Old Town, 
HANDY of  Lewiston, McCREA of Fort Fairfield, PLUECKER of Warren, RISEMAN  of 
Harrison, TALBOT  ROSS of Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR3178(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA §2412, sub-§4, ¶F is enacted to read:
3F.  A public charter school may not use or expend funds received pursuant to section 
42413-A, subsection 2, paragraph A, B or C to engage in, or retain legal counsel for 
5the purpose of engaging in, activities that interfere with, restrain or coerce employees 
6of the public charter school in their exercise of rights under the National Labor 
7Relations Act, Section 7.
8SUMMARY
9Under current law, public charter school employees are covered by the National 
10Labor Relations Act, 29 United States Code, Chapter 7, Subchapter II.  This bill prohibits 
11a public charter school from using funds received from the State or Federal Government 
12to engage in, or to retain legal counsel for the purpose of engaging in, activities that 
13interfere with, restrain or coerce employees of the public charter school in their exercise 
14of rights granted under the National Labor Relations Act, Section 7.  Under Section 7, 
15covered employees are given the right to self-organization; to form, join or assist labor 
16organizations; to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing; and 
17to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other 
18mutual aid or protection and also have the right to refrain from any of those activities 
19except to the extent that such a right may be affected by an agreement requiring 
20membership in a labor organization as a condition of employment.
