 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 374
H.P. 283 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Require  That Signatures on a Direct Initiative of 
Legislation Come from  Each State Senatorial District
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative STEWART of  Presque Isle.
Cosponsored by Representative STETKIS of Canaan  and
Representatives: ANDREWS of  Paris, DeVEAU  of Caribou, DILLINGHAM of Oxford, 
HEAD of  Bethel, KINNEY of Knox, MILLETT of Waterford, WADSWORTH of Hiram.

Page 1 - 129LR0100(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub-ยง2 is amended to read:
52.  Referral to electors unless enacted by the Legislature without change; 
6number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating signatures on 
7petitions; competing measures.  For any measure thus proposed by electors, the number 
8of signatures of voters from each state senatorial district shall not be less than 10% of the 
9total vote for Governor cast in that state senatorial district in the last gubernatorial 
10election preceding the filing of such petition.  The date each signature was made shall be 
11written next to the signature on the petition.  A signature is not valid if it is dated more 
12than one year prior to the date that the petition was filed in the office of the Secretary of 
13State.  The measure thus proposed, unless enacted without change by the Legislature at 
14the session at which it is presented, shall be submitted to the electors together with any 
15amended form, substitute, or recommendation of the Legislature, and in such manner that 
16the people can choose between the competing measures or reject both.  When there are 
17competing bills and neither receives a majority of the votes given for or against both, the 
18one receiving the most votes shall at the next statewide election to be held not less than 
1960 days after the first vote thereon be submitted by itself if it receives more than 1/3 of 
20the votes given for and against both.  If the measure initiated is enacted by the Legislature 
21without change, it shall not go to a referendum vote unless in pursuance of a demand 
22made in accordance with the preceding section.  The Legislature may order a special 
23election on any measure that is subject to a vote of the people.
24Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
25Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
26respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
27holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
28following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
29proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
30"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require that 
31signatures on direct initiative petitions come from voters from each state 
32senatorial district?"
33The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
34and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
35square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
36declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
37State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
38review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
39amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
40becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on March 1, 2020.
Page 2 - 129LR0100(01)-11Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
2shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
3of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
4SUMMARY
5This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require that the 
6signatures on a petition to directly initiate legislation be of voters from each of the State's 
7senate districts and that the number of signatures from each senate district be not less than 
810% of the total votes for Governor cast in that senate district in the previous 
9gubernatorial election. The resolution provides that, if the required votes are cast in favor 
10of the proposed amendment to the Constitution, the proposed amendment becomes part of 
11the Constitution on March 1, 2020 instead of on the date of the Governor's proclamation.
