 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 2104
H.P. 1500 House of  Representatives, February 13, 2020
An Act  To Support  and Increase  the Recycling  of Packaging
Reported by Representative TUCKER of Brunswick for the Joint  Standing Committee  on 
Environment and  Natural  Resources pursuant to Resolve 2019, chapter 42, section 2.
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed pursuant to Joint Rule  218.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk

Page 1 - 129LR3165(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  38 MRSA ยง2146 is enacted to read:
3ยง2146.  Stewardship program for packaging
41.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
5following terms have the following meanings.
6A.  "Alternative collection program" means a program for the management of 
7packaging material that is operated by an individual producer or group of producers 
8and that has been approved by the department in accordance with subsection 9.
9B.  "Brand" has the same meaning as in section 1771, subsection 1.
10C.  "Franchisee" means a person that is granted a license by a franchisor to use the 
11franchisor's trade name, service mark or related characteristic and to share in the 
12franchisor's proprietary knowledge or processes pursuant to an oral or written 
13arrangement for a definite or indefinite period.
14D.  "Franchisor" means a person that grants to a franchisee a license to use the 
15person's trade name, service mark or related characteristic and to share in the person's 
16proprietary knowledge or processes pursuant to an oral or written arrangement for a 
17definite or indefinite period.
18E.  "Municipality" means a city, town, township, village or plantation.
19F.  "Packaging material" means a discrete type of material, or a category of material 
20that includes multiple discrete types of material with similar management 
21requirements and similar commodity values, used for the containment, protection, 
22delivery, presentation or distribution of a product at the time that the product leaves a 
23point of sale with the end user of the product.  "Packaging material" does not include:
24(1)  A discrete type of material, or a category of material that includes multiple 
25discrete types of material, intended to be used for the long-term storage or 
26protection of a durable product and that can be expected to be usable for that 
27purpose for a period of at least 5 years; or
28(2)  A discrete type of material, or a category of material that includes multiple 
29discrete types of material, that is a beverage container, as defined in section 3102, 
30subsection 2, subject to the requirements of chapter 33.
31G.  "Packaging stewardship fund" or "fund" means a privately held account 
32established and managed by the stewardship organization pursuant to subsection 11.
33H.  "Packaging stewardship organization" or "stewardship organization" means the 
34entity contracted by the department under subsection 2 to operate the packaging 
35stewardship program.
36I.  "Packaging stewardship plan" or "plan" means the plan submitted to the 
37department for approval pursuant to subsection 3 to be implemented by the 
38stewardship organization.
Page 2 - 129LR3165(01)-11J.  "Packaging stewardship program" or "program" means the program implemented 
2under this section by the stewardship organization to assess and collect payments 
3from producers based on the weight of packaging material sold, offered for sale or 
4distributed for sale in the State by each producer and to reimburse participating 
5municipalities for certain incurred municipal recycling and waste management costs.
6K.  "Participating municipality" means a municipality that has complied with the 
7requirements of subsection 10 and is eligible for reimbursement of certain costs in 
8accordance with subsection 11.
9L.  "Producer" means a person that:
10(1)  Has legal ownership of the brand of a product sold, offered for sale or 
11distributed for sale in the State contained, protected, delivered, presented or 
12distributed in or using packaging material;
13(2)  Imports into the State for sale or distribution in the State a product contained, 
14protected, delivered, presented or distributed in or using packaging material that 
15is branded by a person that meets the requirements of subparagraph (1) and has 
16no physical presence in the United States; or
17(3)  Sells, offers for sale or distributes for sale in the State, at wholesale or retail, 
18a product contained, protected, delivered, presented or distributed in or using 
19packaging material; that does not have legal ownership of the brand of the 
20product; and that elects to fulfill the responsibilities of the producer under this 
21section for that product.
22"Producer" includes a franchisor of a franchise located in the State, but does not 
23include the franchisee operating that franchise.
24M.  "Proprietary information" has the same meaning as in section 1771, subsection 
256-A.
26N.  "Readily recyclable" means, with respect to a type of packaging material, that the 
27type of packaging material, as annually determined by the department pursuant to 
28subsection 12, paragraph C:
29(1)  Can be sorted by entities that process recyclable material generated in the 
30State; and
31(2)  Has a consistent market for purchase, as based on data from the prior 2 
32calendar years.  For the purposes of this subparagraph, "consistent market for 
33purchase" means, with respect to a type of packaging material, that entities 
34processing recyclable material are willing to purchase full bales of that type of 
35fully sorted packaging material in quantities equal to or in excess of the supply of 
36that fully sorted packaging material.
37"Readily recyclable" does not include types of packaging material that entities that 
38process recyclable material generally accept only in small quantities or that such 
39entities typically sort out from other recyclable material during processing.
40O.  "Recycling" has the same meaning as in section 1771, subsection 7.
Page 3 - 129LR3165(01)-11P.  "Similar municipalities" means 2 or more municipalities that, as annually 
2determined by the department pursuant to subsection 12, paragraph D, have similar 
3population sizes and similar geographic locations.
4Q.  "Toxicity" means, with respect to packaging material, the presence in packaging 
5material of prohibited chemicals, food contact chemicals of high concern or priority 
6food contact chemicals regulated pursuant to Title 32, chapter 26-B.
72.  Selection of stewardship organization; contract.  Consistent with the 
8requirements of this subsection, the department shall select and enter into a contract with 
9a packaging stewardship organization to operate the packaging stewardship program 
10under this section.
11A.  Consistent with applicable competitive bidding requirements under state 
12purchasing laws, on or before April 1, 2021, the department shall issue a request for 
13proposals for the operation of the packaging stewardship program by a packaging 
14stewardship organization.  The proposals must be required to cover a 10-year 
15operation of the packaging stewardship program by the successful applicant and must 
16be required to include, at a minimum:
17(1)  A description of how the applicant will administer the stewardship 
18organization, including evidence that the individuals who will administer the 
19stewardship organization have adequate training and qualifications for such 
20administration;
21(2)  A description of how the applicant intends to solicit and consider input from 
22interested persons regarding the development of the applicant's packaging 
23stewardship plan and regarding the applicant's operation of the packaging 
24stewardship program, if selected;
25(3)  A description of how the applicant intends to establish and manage the 
26packaging stewardship fund consistent with the requirements of subsection 11, 
27including, but not limited to:
28(a)  The staffing the applicant intends to use for management of the fund, for 
29providing technical support to producers and municipalities regarding 
30program requirements and for administering payments to and 
31reimbursements from the fund; and
32(b)  The intended allocation and disbursement of funds for education and 
33infrastructure purposes consistent with subsection 11, paragraph F, 
34subparagraph (3), including identification of strategies for improving 
35recycling infrastructure in the State, a description of how the applicant will 
36solicit and consider input from interested persons regarding the prioritization 
37of such allocations and disbursements and a description of how the allocation 
38and disbursement process will use a grant system that allows municipalities, 
39producers and alternative collection program operators to receive the 
40allocations and disbursements;
41(4)  A proposed financial assurance plan that ensures all funds held in the 
42packaging stewardship fund are immediately and exclusively forfeited and 
43transferred to or otherwise made immediately available to the department when 
Page 4 - 129LR3165(01)-11the stewardship organization's contract with the department is terminated by the 
2department or expires, unless the stewardship organization enters into a new 
3contract with the department in accordance with paragraph B prior to the 
4expiration of the stewardship organization's existing contract;
5(5)  A proposed budget outlining the anticipated costs of operating the packaging 
6stewardship program, including identification of any start-up costs that will not 
7be ongoing and a description of the method by which the applicant intends to 
8determine and collect producer payments during the first year of program 
9operation to fund the program's operational costs during that first year and to 
10reimburse or require additional payments by those producers subsequent to that 
11first year based on producer reporting of the actual amount of packaging material 
12sold, offered for sale or distributed for sale in the State by each producer during 
13that first year.  The proposed budget under this subparagraph may overestimate 
14the cost of operating the program during its first year of operation but must 
15describe the method and basis for any overestimate;
16(6)  A certification that the applicant will not share, except with the department, 
17information provided to the applicant by a producer that is proprietary 
18information and that is identified by the producer as proprietary information.  The 
19certification must include a description of the methods by which the applicant 
20intends to ensure the confidentiality of such information; and
21(7)  Any additional information required by the department.
22B.  In accordance with applicable requirements of state purchasing laws, the 
23department shall enter into a contract with an applicant that has submitted a proposal 
24in accordance with the requirements of this subsection, the term of which must cover 
2510 years of operation of the packaging stewardship program by the stewardship 
26organization.  The contract must, at a minimum, include:
27(1)  Provisions requiring the stewardship organization to operate the program 
28pursuant to that contract until the contract expires, the stewardship organization is 
29unable to continue to perform its duties under the contract or the department 
30terminates the contract as described in subparagraph (2).  These provisions must 
31include, but are not limited to:
32(a)  A requirement that the stewardship organization submit a packaging 
33stewardship plan to the department for review and approval in accordance 
34with subsection 3 within a specified time frame, implement that plan in 
35accordance with subsection 5 within a specified time frame if approved and, 
36as necessary and in accordance with subsection 4, implement amendments to 
37the plan or corrective actions to the program;
38(b)  A requirement that the stewardship organization operate the packaging 
39stewardship program under this section in a manner consistent with the 
40approved plan and applicable provisions of the contract;
41(c)  A requirement that the stewardship organization establish and manage a 
42packaging stewardship fund in accordance with subsection 11; and
Page 5 - 129LR3165(01)-11(d)  A requirement that the stewardship organization report annually to the 
2department in accordance with subsection 6;
3(2)  Provisions ensuring the ability of the department to terminate the contract if 
4the stewardship organization fails to comply with all provisions of the contract 
5and with the provisions of the packaging stewardship plan, to be approved by the 
6department under subsection 4, or if the department, pursuant to subsection 4, 
7requires the stewardship organization to implement an amendment to the 
8approved plan or a corrective action and the stewardship organization fails to 
9implement the amendment or corrective action within the required time frame; 
10and
11(3)  Provisions requiring all funds held in the packaging stewardship fund to be 
12immediately and exclusively forfeited and transferred to or otherwise made 
13immediately available to the department at the time that the stewardship 
14organization's contract with the department expires or is terminated by the 
15department in accordance with the financial assurance plan as described in 
16paragraph A, subparagraph (4).
17If, at the close of the competitive bidding process under this subsection, the department 
18determines that no applicant has submitted, in accordance with this subsection, a proposal 
19that meets the requirements of this subsection, the department may reopen a new 
20competitive bidding process under this subsection.
213.  Submission of plan.  In accordance with the time frame for submission of a plan 
22included within the stewardship organization's contract with the department pursuant to 
23subsection 2, paragraph B, the stewardship organization shall submit a plan for the 
24establishment of the packaging stewardship program to the department for approval.  The 
25plan must include, at a minimum:
26A.  The information described in subsection 2, paragraph A, updated as necessary and 
27as may be required by the department;
28B.  A proposed schedule for implementation of the plan, which must incorporate 
29input solicited from interested persons by the stewardship organization;
30C.  A proposed schedule of adjustments to be used in determining the amount of 
31producer payments under subsection 7, paragraph A, subparagraph (3) that reflects a 
32producer's use of recycled content in packaging material or the toxicity of a 
33producer's packaging material and other incentives consistent with generally accepted 
34industry standards.  The schedule must:
35(1)  Reward changes to recycled content at multiple levels with benefits of 
36sufficient magnitude to incentivize implementation of those changes, as 
37supported by evidence from past fee adjustments or similar incentives employed 
38in other jurisdictions;
39(2)  Incentivize reductions in or other modifications to the toxicity of packaging 
40material; and
41(3)  Provide for input from interested parties regarding the inclusion of additional 
42adjustments consistent with generally accepted industry standards;
Page 6 - 129LR3165(01)-11D.  Information regarding the determination and collection of producer payments, 
2including:
3(1)  A description of the information to be collected from producers to determine 
4those payments;
5(2)  An analysis of the extent to which producer reporting of such information is 
6consistent with similar reporting requirements in other jurisdictions;
7(3)  A description of how such information will be provided to the stewardship 
8organization, which must include a mechanism or process, developed with input 
9from producers, by which producers may request and receive assistance from the 
10stewardship organization in the reporting of such information; and
11(4)  A description of the time frame, developed with input from producers, for 
12gathering and analyzing such information and requiring and receiving such 
13payments;
14E.  A description of how the stewardship organization, using the information reported 
15by municipalities pursuant to subsection 10, will determine:
16(1)  A collection cost for each type of packaging material that is readily 
17recyclable and is collected by a municipality through a curbside collection 
18process;
19(2)  A collection cost and an on-site processing cost for each type of packaging 
20material that is readily recyclable and is collected by a municipality using a drop-
21off site for source-separated packaging material that is processed on site and for 
22packaging material sent to an off-site facility for processing as part of a recycling 
23stream that contains multiple types of packaging material;
24(3)  A transportation cost for the recycling of each type of packaging material that 
25is readily recyclable and is collected by a municipality; and
26(4)  A collection cost and a transportation cost for each type of packaging 
27material that is not readily recyclable and is collected by a municipality as 
28municipal solid waste.
29The method of determining costs under this paragraph that is used by the stewardship 
30organization must, to the extent feasible, reflect best available data with input from 
31interested persons and may not require the collection of information from 
32municipalities in the State that such municipalities are generally unable to provide;
33F.  Information regarding the determination and payment of reimbursements to 
34municipalities in accordance with subsection 11, including:
35(1)  A copy of a form, developed with input from municipalities, that the 
36stewardship organization intends to use to facilitate the collection of the 
37information needed to calculate the costs described in paragraph E, which must 
38be designed to collect all municipal information necessary to ensure accurate 
39producer payments;
40(2)  A description of how the stewardship organization intends to engage 
41municipalities in providing such information, which must include a mechanism 
Page 7 - 129LR3165(01)-11or process, developed with input from municipalities, by which municipalities 
2may request and receive assistance from the stewardship organization in the 
3reporting of such information;
4(3)  A description of the time frame, developed with input from municipalities, 
5for gathering and analyzing this information from municipalities; and
6(4)  A description of the time frame and process for reimbursing municipalities in 
7accordance with subsection 11, including a copy of a form that will accompany 
8reimbursement payments from the stewardship organization to a municipality 
9that describes the method by which the stewardship organization determined the 
10amount of the reimbursement;
11G.  A description of how the stewardship organization will facilitate representative 
123rd-party audits of baled recyclable material processed and sold by facilities that 
13process recyclable material generated in the State, which must include:
14(1)  Information regarding the proposed frequency of, coordination of, funding 
15for and sampling techniques to be used in the audits, which must include random 
16sampling;
17(2)  Information regarding how the audits, at a minimum, will be designed to 
18solicit information regarding the extent to which baled recyclable material 
19processed and sold by the facilities may be deemed to represent the tons of each 
20type of packaging material recycled in the State and regarding the ultimate 
21destination of and intended use for that material;
22(3)  A description of how the audits will be designed so that information obtained 
23through the audit of one facility will not be used to infer information about a 
24different facility that uses different processing equipment, different sorting 
25processes or different staffing levels to conduct such processing;
26(4)  A description of how a facility that has not been audited will be allowed to 
27request and receive an audit if it can credibly demonstrate that an audit result 
28being applied to its material output is not representative of its current operations; 
29and
30(5)  A description of how the audits, with input from facilities that may be subject 
31to audit, will be designed to limit the disruptiveness of the audits; and
32H.  Any additional information required by the department.
334.  Approval of plan; plan amendments; corrective actions; contract 
34termination.  In accordance with the applicable provisions of this subsection, the 
35department shall review all packaging stewardship plans and amendments to such plans 
36submitted by the stewardship organization, shall require the implementation of corrective 
37actions by the stewardship organization to the packaging stewardship program and may 
38terminate its contract with the stewardship organization.
39A.  The department shall review a packaging stewardship plan submitted by a 
40stewardship organization pursuant to subsection 3 and approve or deny the plan 
41within 120 days of receipt.  The department shall approve the plan if the department 
42determines that the plan meets the requirements of subsection 3 and is otherwise 
Page 8 - 129LR3165(01)-11consistent with all applicable requirements of this section and applicable provisions 
2of the stewardship organization's contract with the department.  If the department 
3approves the plan, the department shall transmit written notice of that approval to the 
4stewardship organization.  An approval under this subsection must terminate 5 years 
5from the date of that approval but may be extended for an additional 5-year period 
6following the submission by the stewardship organization of an updated plan 
7consistent with subsection 3 that is approved by the department consistent with this 
8subsection.  A stewardship organization that has had a plan approved under this 
9subsection and that intends to submit an updated plan under this subsection before the 
10expiration of its current approved plan must submit that updated plan no later than 
11120 days prior to the date its current plan expires.
12B.  If the department determines that a submitted plan fails to meet all applicable 
13requirements of this section and applicable provisions of the stewardship 
14organization's contract with the department, the department shall provide written 
15notice to the stewardship organization describing the reasons for rejecting the plan.  
16No later than 45 days after receiving written notice rejecting a submitted plan, the 
17stewardship organization may revise and resubmit the plan to the department.  The 
18department shall review the revised plan, decide whether to approve it and provide 
19written notice of the department's decision within 45 days of receipt of the revised 
20plan.
21C.  If the department rejects a submitted plan and the stewardship organization fails 
22to submit a revised plan to the department that the department approves in accordance 
23with paragraph B, the department shall terminate the contract with the stewardship 
24organization entered into pursuant to subsection 2 and may reopen a new competitive 
25bidding process pursuant to subsection 2.
26D.  An amendment to an approved plan proposed by the stewardship organization 
27must be submitted to the department for review and approval prior to the 
28implementation of that change.  The department shall review and approve or deny 
29plan amendments in the same manner as it reviews and approves or denies a plan 
30under paragraphs A and B.  The department may waive payment of any fees 
31associated with review and approval of an amendment to an approved plan.
32E.  If, based on its review of the stewardship organization's annual report required 
33under subsection 6 or on a different basis, the department determines that the 
34stewardship organization is not operating the packaging stewardship program in a 
35manner consistent with its approved plan, its contract with the department or the 
36provisions of this section, the department may require the stewardship organization to 
37implement amendments to the plan or corrective actions to the program.  If the 
38stewardship organization fails to implement a department-required amendment to the 
39plan or corrective action to the program within the time frame for implementation 
40required by the department and the department determines that termination of the 
41contract is warranted due to that failure, the department shall terminate the contract.
42F.  If the department for any reason terminates the stewardship organization's contract 
43after the stewardship organization has implemented an approved plan under 
44subsection 5 but prior to the expiration of that contract, until such time as a successor 
Page 9 - 129LR3165(01)-11stewardship organization is contracted by the department following a competitive 
2bidding process conducted in accordance with subsection 2, the department may:
3(1)  Take all necessary steps to ensure that the stewardship organization 
4immediately transfers to the department all remaining funds in the packaging 
5stewardship fund consistent with the financial assurance plan described in 
6subsection 2, paragraph A, subparagraph (4), as incorporated into the stewardship 
7organization's contract with the department and the approved plan;
8(2)  Deposit the transferred funds into an appropriate departmental account; and
9(3)  Manage or expend the transferred funds in a manner consistent with the 
10provisions of this section.
115.  Implementation of plan; prohibition; producer compliance information.  In 
12accordance with the schedule for implementation included in the stewardship 
13organization's plan under subsection 3, paragraph B and any applicable terms of its 
14contract with the department, the stewardship organization shall implement the plan 
15following department approval under subsection 4.
16A.  Following implementation of the plan under this subsection:
17(1)  A producer not in compliance with all applicable requirements of this section 
18may not sell, offer for sale or distribute for sale in the State a product contained, 
19protected, delivered, presented or distributed in or using packaging material and 
20must provide all necessary support to retailers in the State to ensure that such 
21products are not sold, offered for sale or distributed for sale in the State; and
22(2)  A retailer in the State may not sell, offer for sale or distribute for sale in the 
23State a product contained, protected, delivered, presented or distributed in or 
24using packaging material if, based on the information made available by the 
25department pursuant to paragraph C, the producer of that product is not in 
26compliance with all applicable requirements of this section.
27B.  Following implementation of the plan under this subsection, the stewardship 
28organization shall provide to the department a list of producers that are participating 
29in the program and are compliant with the program's requirements and, if known to 
30the stewardship organization, a list of producers that are not participating in the 
31program and are not compliant with the program's requirements.  The stewardship 
32organization shall in a timely manner provide to the department any updated 
33information regarding producer compliance when such information becomes known 
34to the stewardship organization.
35C.  Based on the information provided to the department under paragraph B and any 
36other information considered by the department, the department shall make available 
37on its publicly accessible website a list of producers that the department has 
38determined are compliant with all applicable requirements of this section and a list of 
39producers that the department has determined are not compliant with all applicable 
40requirements of this section.  The department shall periodically update that 
41information based on additional information provided by the stewardship 
42organization or any other information available to the department.  The department 
Page 10 - 129LR3165(01)-11shall conduct outreach to retailers to ensure that retailers are aware of the information 
2made available under this paragraph and any changes to that information.
36.  Annual reporting by stewardship organization.  On or before October 1st of the 
4calendar year following the calendar year in which an approved plan is implemented 
5under subsection 5, and annually thereafter, the stewardship organization shall submit a 
6report to the department that includes, at a minimum, the following information:
7A.  Contact information for the stewardship organization;
8B.  A list of participating producers and the brands of products associated with those 
9producers;
10C.  The total amounts of each type of packaging material sold, offered for sale or 
11distributed for sale in the State by each participating producer;
12D.  As applicable, the total amount of each type of packaging material collected and 
13managed by each participating producer through alternative collection programs 
14approved by the department under subsection 9;
15E.  A complete accounting of payments made to and by the stewardship organization 
16during the prior calendar year, including information on how the stewardship 
17organization determined the amount of such payments;
18F.  A list of producers not participating in the program that are required to participate 
19in the program, if known by the stewardship organization;
20G.  An analysis of education and infrastructure investments made by the stewardship 
21organization in prior calendar years, including information on the results of those 
22investments and proposals for investments to be made in the current calendar year 
23consistent with subsection 11, paragraph F, subparagraph (3); and
24H.  Any additional information required by the department.
257.  Producer payments.  In accordance with the provisions of this subsection and the 
26stewardship organization's approved plan, a producer shall make payments to the 
27stewardship organization, to be deposited into the packaging stewardship fund under 
28subsection 11, based on the amount of each type of packaging material sold, offered for 
29sale or distributed for sale in the State by the producer and not managed under an 
30approved alternative collection program.
31A.  For a packaging material type that is readily recyclable, the stewardship 
32organization shall annually determine the amount that a producer is required to pay to 
33the stewardship organization as follows:
34(1)  The stewardship organization shall determine the statewide cost per ton paid 
35by participating municipalities to recycle that type of packaging material in the 
36prior calendar year;
37(2)  The stewardship organization shall determine the total amount in tons of the 
38type of packaging material in question that the producer sold, offered for sale or 
39distributed for sale in the State in the prior calendar year;
Page 11 - 129LR3165(01)-11(3)  The stewardship organization shall adjust the figure determined under 
2subparagraph (2) to account for the use of recycled content in and the toxicity of 
3that type of packaging material that was sold, offered for sale or distributed for 
4sale in the State by the producer in the prior calendar year and shall further adjust 
5the figure based on other incentives consistent with generally accepted industry 
6standards, as provided in the stewardship organization's approved plan;
7(4)  The stewardship organization shall total all of the figures determined in 
8accordance with subparagraph (3) for every producer that sold, offered for sale or 
9distributed for sale in the State the packaging material type in question in the 
10prior calendar year and that is required to make payments under this subsection;
11(5)  The stewardship organization shall divide the figure determined under 
12subparagraph (3) by the figure determined under subparagraph (4);
13(6)  From the figure determined under subparagraph (2), the stewardship 
14organization shall subtract the total amount in tons of the type of packaging 
15material in question that the producer managed under an approved alternative 
16collection program;
17(7)  The stewardship organization shall multiply the figure determined under 
18subparagraph (5) by the figure determined under subparagraph (6); and
19(8)  The stewardship organization shall multiply the figure determined under 
20subparagraph (1) by the figure determined under subparagraph (7).
21B.  For a packaging material type that is not readily recyclable, the stewardship 
22organization shall annually determine the amount that a producer is required to pay to 
23the stewardship organization as follows:
24(1)  The stewardship organization shall determine the total costs paid by all 
25participating municipalities in the prior calendar year to dispose of municipal 
26solid waste;
27(2)  The stewardship organization shall determine the total tons of municipal 
28solid waste disposed of by all participating municipalities in the prior calendar 
29year;
30(3)  The stewardship organization shall divide the figure determined under 
31subparagraph (1) by the figure determined under subparagraph (2);
32(4)  The stewardship organization shall determine the total amount in tons of the 
33type of packaging material in question that the producer sold, offered for sale or 
34distributed for sale in the State in the prior calendar year; and
35(5)  The stewardship organization shall multiply the figure determined under 
36subparagraph (4) by the greater of:
37(a)  Two times the statewide cost per ton paid by participating municipalities 
38in the prior calendar year to recycle the readily recyclable packaging material 
39with the greatest statewide per ton recycling cost; and
40(b)  Two times the figure determined under subparagraph (3).
Page 12 - 129LR3165(01)-118.  Annual reporting by producers.  In accordance with the requirements of the 
2stewardship organization's approved plan, a producer shall annually report to the 
3stewardship organization the total tons of each type of packaging material sold, offered 
4for sale or distributed for sale in the State by the producer in the prior calendar year; the 
5characteristics of that packaging material that are relevant to the fee adjustment criteria 
6contained in the approved plan; and a list of all of the producer's brands associated with 
7that packaging material.
89.  Alternative collection programs.  In accordance with the requirements of this 
9subsection, a producer or group of producers may develop and operate an alternative 
10collection program to collect and manage a type or types of packaging material sold, 
11offered for sale or distributed for sale in the State by the producer or producers.  A 
12producer that manages a type of packaging material under an approved alternative 
13collection program may wholly or partially offset the producer's payment obligations 
14under the packaging stewardship program with respect to that same type of packaging 
15material only.
16A.  A producer or group of producers seeking to implement an alternative collection 
17program shall submit a proposal for the establishment of that program to the 
18department for approval.  The department shall review the proposal and shall approve 
19or deny the proposal within 120 days of receipt.  Any approval under this subsection 
20must terminate 5 years from the date of that approval but may be extended for 
21additional 5-year periods following the submission by the producer or producers of 
22an updated proposal that is approved by the department consistent with this 
23subsection.  A producer or group of producers that has a proposal approved under this 
24subsection and that intends to submit an updated proposal under this subsection 
25before the expiration of its current approved proposal shall submit that updated 
26proposal no later than 120 days prior to the date its current proposal expires.
27B.  In determining whether to approve a proposal for the establishment of an 
28alternative collection program, the department shall consider:
29(1)  Whether the alternative collection program will provide convenient, free, 
30statewide collection opportunities for the types of packaging material to be 
31collected under that program;
32(2)  To what extent the alternative collection program intends to manage those 
33types of packaging material to be collected under the program through reuse for 
34an original purpose, through recycling or through disposal by incineration at an 
35incineration facility.  The department may not approve an alternative collection 
36program that proposes management of a packaging material type through 
37disposal by incineration at an incineration facility unless that packaging material 
38is not readily recyclable and the program proposes a process to begin reuse or 
39recycling of that type of packaging material within a period of 5 years or less;
40(3)  Whether the education and outreach strategies proposed for the alternative 
41collection program can be expected to increase consumer awareness of the 
42program throughout the State; and
Page 13 - 129LR3165(01)-11(4)  How the alternative collection program intends to accurately measure the 
2amount of each packaging material type collected, reused, recycled, incinerated 
3or otherwise managed under the program.
4C.  A change to an approved alternative collection program must be submitted to the 
5department for review and approval prior to implementation of that change.  The 
6department may waive payment of any fees associated with review and approval of a 
7proposed change to an approved program.
8D.  The producer or producers managing an approved alternative collection program 
9shall report annually to the stewardship organization and to the department the 
10following information:
11(1)  The total tons of each type of packaging material collected, reused, recycled, 
12incinerated at an incineration facility or otherwise managed under the alternative 
13collection program in the prior calendar year, including a breakdown of the total 
14tons of each type of material by participating producers;
15(2)  A list of the collection opportunities in the State for the types of packaging 
16material managed under the alternative collection program that were made 
17available in the prior calendar year;
18(3)  A description of the education and outreach strategies implemented by the 
19alternative collection program in the prior calendar year to increase consumer 
20awareness of the program throughout the State; and
21(4)  Any additional information required by the department.
22E.  If, based on its review of the annual report required under paragraph D or on a 
23different basis, the department determines that an approved alternative collection 
24program is not operating in a manner consistent with the proposal approved under 
25this subsection or the provisions of this subsection, the department may require the 
26producer or producers operating the program to implement corrective actions.  If the 
27producer or producers fail to implement a department-required corrective action 
28within the time frame for implementation required by the department, the department 
29may determine that the producer or producers are no longer eligible to offset payment 
30obligations under the packaging stewardship program based on the management of 
31packaging material under the alternative collection program and shall communicate 
32that determination to the stewardship organization.
3310.  Annual reporting by municipalities.  In accordance with the provisions of this 
34subsection, a municipality may elect to, but is not required to, participate in the packaging 
35stewardship program under this section.
36A.  To be eligible for reimbursement of costs under subsection 11 as a participating 
37municipality, a municipality must annually report to the stewardship organization all 
38information necessary for the stewardship organization to determine the 
39municipality's incurred costs for the recycling of recyclable material and for the 
40disposal of municipal solid waste, which must include, but is not limited to:
Page 14 - 129LR3165(01)-11(1)  Any costs incurred by the municipality in collecting, processing on site and 
2transporting recyclable material and the revenue realized by the municipality in 
3selling any recyclable material collected; and
4(2)  Any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing of municipal solid waste, 
5including tipping fees paid, the tons of such waste disposed of, the costs incurred 
6in transporting such waste for disposal and the costs incurred in the collection 
7and processing on site of such waste.
8B.  A municipality shall report the information described in paragraph A on a form 
9provided by the stewardship organization, as approved by the department consistent 
10with subsection 3, paragraph F, subparagraph (1).
11C.  Two or more municipalities may elect to jointly report to the stewardship 
12organization the information described in paragraph A based on aggregated data from 
13the municipalities.
1411.  Packaging stewardship fund; municipal reimbursements; additional 
15authorized expenditures.  In accordance with the provisions of this subsection, the 
16stewardship organization shall establish and manage a packaging stewardship fund.  The 
17stewardship organization shall deposit into the fund all payments received from producers 
18in accordance with subsection 7.  Based on the information in paragraph A and the 
19determinations in paragraph B and in accordance with the determinations in paragraphs C 
20and D, the stewardship organization shall disburse from the fund payments to 
21participating municipalities to reimburse those municipalities for certain costs incurred in 
22the recycling of recyclable material and the disposal of municipal solid waste.
23A.  The stewardship organization shall determine the amount of reimbursements to 
24participating municipalities under this subsection based on the following information:
25(1)  The information provided by participating municipalities in accordance with 
26subsection 10 regarding the costs incurred by those municipalities in recycling 
27recyclable material, the costs incurred in disposing of municipal solid waste and 
28the tons of municipal solid waste disposed of;
29(2)  The information provided to the department by recycling establishments 
30pursuant to section 2145, including the tons of recyclable material received by 
31each recycling establishment from each participating municipality and the tons of 
32processed recyclable material sold by each recycling establishment; and
33(3)  The information obtained by the stewardship organization from 3rd-party 
34audits conducted consistent with subsection 3, paragraph G identifying the 
35amount of each type of packaging material in the average bale processed at 
36facilities that process recyclable material generated in the State.
37B.  The stewardship organization shall use the information described in paragraph A 
38to determine the total tons of recyclable material recycled by all municipalities at 
39each recycling establishment and the percentage of those total tons attributable to 
40each participating municipality.  In the case of 2 or more municipalities that jointly 
41send recyclable material to a recycling establishment, the stewardship organization 
42shall assume that an equal amount of the jointly sent material is attributable to each 
43resident of each municipality unless those municipalities by agreement identify an 
Page 15 - 129LR3165(01)-11unequal per capita division of that jointly sent material for the purposes of this 
2subsection.
3C.  With respect to the recycling of a type of packaging material that is readily 
4recyclable, the stewardship organization shall annually determine the amount of a 
5participating municipality's reimbursement as follows:
6(1)  The stewardship organization shall determine the total cost incurred by all 
7similar municipalities in collecting that type of packaging material and in 
8processing the collected packaging material on site in the prior calendar year;
9(2)  To the figure determined under subparagraph (1), the stewardship 
10organization shall add the total cost incurred by all similar municipalities in 
11transporting the collected and processed packaging material to market for sale in 
12the prior calendar year;
13(3)  From the figure determined under subparagraph (2), the stewardship 
14organization shall subtract the total revenue realized by all similar municipalities 
15in selling that type of packaging material at market in the prior calendar year;
16(4)  The stewardship organization shall divide the figure determined under 
17subparagraph (3) by the total tons of the type of packaging material in question 
18collected, processed on site and transported to market for sale by all similar 
19municipalities in the prior calendar year; and
20(5)  The stewardship organization shall multiply the figure determined under 
21subparagraph (4) by the total tons of that type of packaging material actually 
22recycled by the participating municipality in the prior calendar year.
23D.  With respect to the recycling of a type of packaging material that is not readily 
24recyclable, the stewardship organization shall annually determine the amount of a 
25participating municipality's reimbursement as follows:
26(1)  The stewardship organization shall determine the cost per ton paid by 
27producers for that type of packaging material in accordance with subsection 7, 
28paragraph B; and
29(2)  The stewardship organization shall multiply the figure determined under 
30subparagraph (1) by the total tons of that type of packaging material actually 
31recycled by the participating municipality in the prior calendar year.
32A participating municipality is not eligible for reimbursement under this paragraph if 
33it does not actually recycle packaging material that is not readily recyclable.
34E.  In addition to any reimbursements that may be paid to a participating municipality 
35pursuant to paragraphs C and D, the stewardship organization shall pay to each 
36participating municipality a per capita payment to offset the municipality's costs 
37incurred in collecting, transporting and disposing of types of packaging material that 
38are not readily recyclable.  The stewardship organization shall annually determine the 
39per capita payment to a participating municipality as follows.
40(1)  For a municipality that disposes of its municipal solid waste through 
41landfilling and is located more than 100 miles from an incineration facility with 
Page 16 - 129LR3165(01)-11available capacity or for a municipality that disposes of its municipal solid waste 
2by incineration at an incineration facility, the stewardship organization shall:
3(a)  Divide the total cost in tipping fees paid by all such municipalities for the 
4disposal of municipal solid waste during the prior calendar year by the total 
5tons of municipal solid waste disposed of by all such municipalities in the 
6prior calendar year;
7(b)  Add to the figure determined under division (a) the median cost per ton 
8incurred by similar municipalities in collecting municipal solid waste for 
9disposal in the prior calendar year;
10(c)  Add to the figure determined under division (b) the median cost per ton 
11incurred by similar municipalities in transporting collected municipal solid 
12waste for disposal in the prior calendar year;
13(d)  Multiply the figure determined under division (c) by 0.5;
14(e)  Multiply the figure determined under division (d) by the total tons of all 
15types of packaging material that are not readily recyclable that were sold, 
16offered for sale or distributed for sale in the State and not managed under an 
17approved alternative collection program or under a municipally managed 
18recycling program during the prior calendar year;
19(f)  Divide the population of the municipality in question by the population of 
20the State, as based on population data from the most recent United States 
21census; and
22(g)  Multiply the figure determined under division (e) by the figure 
23determined under division (f).
24(2)  For a municipality that disposes of its municipal solid waste through 
25landfilling and is located 100 miles or less from an incineration facility with 
26available capacity, the stewardship organization shall:
27(a)  Divide the total cost in tipping fees paid by all such municipalities for the 
28disposal of municipal solid waste during the prior calendar year by the total 
29tons of municipal solid waste disposed of by all such municipalities in the 
30prior calendar year;
31(b)  Multiply the figure determined under division (a) by 0.5;
32(c)  Add to the figure determined under division (b) the median cost per ton 
33incurred by similar municipalities in collecting municipal solid waste for 
34disposal in the prior calendar year;
35(d)  Add to the figure determined under division (c) the median cost per ton 
36incurred by similar municipalities in transporting collected municipal solid 
37waste for disposal in the prior calendar year;
38(e)  Multiply the figure determined under division (d) by 0.5;
39(f)  Multiply the figure determined under division (e) by the total tons of all 
40types of packaging material that are not readily recyclable that were sold, 
41offered for sale or distributed for sale in the State and not managed under an 
Page 17 - 129LR3165(01)-11approved alternative collection program or under a municipally managed 
2recycling program during the prior calendar year;
3(g)  Divide the population of the municipality in question by the population 
4of the State, as based on population data from the most recent United States 
5census; and
6(h)  Multiply the figure determined under division (f) by the figure 
7determined under division (g).
8F.  In each calendar year, the stewardship organization shall expend any funds within 
9the fund that remain after payment of all reimbursements to participating 
10municipalities in the prior calendar year for the following purposes:
11(1)  The stewardship organization shall use those remaining funds to cover its 
12actual operating costs, except that such costs may not exceed the estimated 
13operating costs indicated in its contract with the department entered into pursuant 
14to subsection 2 and such costs must be verified through a 3rd-party audit;
15(2)  The stewardship organization shall use any remaining funds not expended 
16pursuant to subparagraph (1) to pay to the department all applicable fees due 
17pursuant to subsection 12, paragraph A;
18(3)  The stewardship organization shall use any remaining funds not expended 
19pursuant to subparagraphs (1) and (2) to propose and, with the approval of the 
20department in accordance with this subparagraph, implement investments in 
21education or infrastructure that support the recycling of packaging material in the 
22State.
23(a)  Investments in education or infrastructure under this subparagraph must 
24first be submitted by the stewardship organization to the department for 
25approval.
26(b)  The department may by rule adopt criteria to be used in determining 
27whether to approve investments in education or infrastructure proposed by 
28the stewardship organization under this subparagraph.
29(c)  The department shall approve or reject a proposal for investment in 
30education or infrastructure within 90 days of receipt of the proposal; and
31(4)  The stewardship organization shall pay to the department any remaining 
32funds not expended pursuant to subparagraphs (1), (2) and (3) and the department 
33shall deposit those funds into the Maine Solid Waste Management Fund 
34established under section 2201 and ensure that all such funds deposited are 
35designated for use in the Maine Solid Waste Diversion Grant Program 
36established under section 2201-B, except that any remaining funds identified 
37under this subparagraph that were received during the first year of program 
38operation that are necessary to cover the stewardship organization's anticipated 
39operating costs during the 2nd year of program operation must be retained by the 
40stewardship organization to cover those operating costs.
41G.  Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection to the contrary, the stewardship 
42organization is required to provide reimbursements to participating municipalities in 
Page 18 - 129LR3165(01)-11accordance with this subsection only to the extent that there are sufficient funds 
2within the fund to provide such reimbursements.
312.  Administration and enforcement; rulemaking; fees; additional agency 
4responsibilities.  The department shall administer and enforce this section and may adopt 
5rules as necessary to implement, administer and enforce this section.  Rules adopted 
6pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, 
7subchapter 2-A.
8A.  The department shall require the stewardship organization, when submitting a 
9plan or amendments to that plan, to pay to the department a reasonable fee associated 
10with the department's review of the plan or amendments.  The department shall 
11require the stewardship organization to pay to the department an annual fee, not to 
12exceed $200,000, to cover the department's costs for review of the stewardship 
13organization's annual report and the oversight, administration and enforcement of the 
14packaging stewardship program.
15B.  The department shall require a producer or group of producers, when submitting a 
16proposal for the establishment of an alternative collection program or proposed 
17changes to an approved program, to pay to the department a reasonable fee associated 
18with the department's review of the proposal or proposed changes.  The department 
19shall require a producer or group of producers operating an approved alternative 
20collection program to pay to the department an annual fee, not to exceed $10,000 per 
21program, to cover the department's costs for review of the producer's or group's 
22annual report and the oversight, administration and enforcement of that program.
23C.  The department shall annually solicit input from recycling establishments and 
24facilities that process recyclable material generated in the State regarding the 
25identification of the types of packaging material managed in the State and whether 
26such packaging material is readily recyclable.  Based on this information and any 
27other information considered by the department, the department shall annually 
28determine what types of packaging material are to be considered readily recyclable 
29for the purposes of subsection 1, paragraph N.
30D.  The department shall annually identify and group municipalities within the State 
31based on geography, population size and the location of recycling establishments and 
32facilities that process recyclable material generated in the State.  Based on this 
33identification and grouping, the department shall annually determine which 
34municipalities are to be considered similar municipalities for the purposes of 
35subsection 1, paragraph P.
3613.  Small producer exemption.  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to 
37the contrary, a producer is exempt from the requirements and prohibitions of this section 
38in any calendar year in which:
39A.  The producer realized less than $1,000,000 in gross revenue during the prior 
40calendar year;
41B.  The producer sold, offered for sale or distributed for sale in the State during the 
42prior calendar year products contained, protected, delivered, presented or distributed 
43in or using less than one ton of packaging material in total; or
Page 19 - 129LR3165(01)-11C.  The producer conducted all of the producer's sales in the State during the prior 
2calendar year at a single point of retail sale.
3A producer claiming an exemption under this subsection shall provide to the department 
4sufficient information to demonstrate that the producer meets the requirements for an 
5exemption under this subsection within 30 days of receiving a request from the 
6department to provide such information.
714.  Antitrust exclusions.  A producer or stewardship organization, including a 
8producer's or stewardship organization's officers, members, employees and agents that 
9organize a packaging stewardship program or an alternative collection program under this 
10section, is immune from liability for the producer's or stewardship organization's conduct 
11under state laws relating to antitrust, restraint of trade, unfair trade practices and other 
12regulation of trade or commerce only to the extent necessary to plan and implement the 
13producer's or stewardship organization's packaging stewardship program or alternative 
14collection program consistent with the provisions of this section.
1515.  Proprietary information.  Proprietary information submitted to the department 
16in a packaging stewardship plan or in a proposal to establish an alternative collection 
17program, in an amendment to an approved plan or a proposed change to an approved 
18alternative collection program or pursuant to the reporting requirements of this section 
19that is identified by the submittor as proprietary information is confidential and must be 
20handled by the department in the same manner as confidential information is handled 
21under section 1310-B.
22SUMMARY
23This bill, which is reported out by the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and 
24Natural Resources pursuant to Resolve 2019, chapter 42, section 2, establishes a 
25stewardship program for packaging to be operated by a stewardship organization 
26contracted by the Department of Environmental Protection following a competitive 
27bidding process.  Under that program, producers of packaging pay into a fund based on 
28the amount by weight of packaging material they sell, offer for sale or distribute for sale 
29in the State.  Producers can wholly or partially offset this payment obligation by 
30implementing independent programs to recycle packaging of the same material type for 
31which they have a payment obligation and can further reduce their payment obligation by 
32reducing the amount of packaging they sell, offer for sale or distribute for sale in the 
33State, by redesigning that packaging to make it more valuable as a recyclable material or 
34by meeting other program incentive requirements.
35Producer payments received by the stewardship organization are used to reimburse 
36eligible municipalities for certain incurred recycling and waste management costs.  To be 
37eligible for such reimbursements, a municipality must share with the stewardship 
38organization certain data regarding its incurred recycling and waste management costs.  
39Recycling-related reimbursements to municipalities will be based on the median 
40recycling costs incurred by similarly situated municipalities, while disposal-related 
41reimbursements will be based on per capita disposal costs.  The stewardship organization 
42is authorized to use producer payments remaining after all reimbursements are paid to 
43cover operational costs for the program, department fees, investments by the organization 
Page 20 - 129LR3165(01)-11in education and infrastructure aimed at improving recycling outcomes in the State and 
2funding for the Maine Solid Waste Diversion Grant Program established under the Maine 
3Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 2201-B.
4The committee has not taken a position on the substance of the bill and by reporting 
5this bill out the committee is not suggesting and does not intend to suggest that it agrees 
6or disagrees with any aspect of this bill. The committee is reporting the bill out for the 
7sole purpose of obtaining a printed bill that can be referred to the committee for a public 
8hearing and subsequent committee action in the normal course.
