 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 401
H.P. 310 House of  Representatives, January 29, 2019
An Act  To Preserve State Landfill Capacity and  Promote Recycling
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TIPPING of Orono.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Senator: BELLOWS of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 129LR1778(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to enact measures to ensure accurate tracking of the origin and type 
6of waste materials disposed of in Maine, to discourage landfilling of recyclable materials, 
7to preserve landfill capacity at state-owned facilities for Maine-generated materials, and 
8to ensure the rights of host communities and abutters of waste disposal facilities. In order 
9to achieve these goals, the bill proposes to:
101.  Ensure there is accurate tracking and record keeping identifying the origin, 
11amounts and types of materials disposed in waste facilities in the State;
122.  Ensure waste is effectively tracked from generation point through processing to 
13final disposal point, including the following types of facilities and disposal sites where 
14tracking is required: landfills; landfill leachate discharge sites; incinerator ash and slag 
15disposal sites; and biosolids disposal sites;
163.  Ensure that waste materials imported from outside the State that are processed at 
17facilities in the State are not classified as Maine-generated waste;
184.  Ensure that waste materials that end up in a landfill, such as construction and 
19demolition debris, which are used for daily cover in a landfill, are not counted toward the 
20State's recycling goals;
215.  Ensure adequate legal standing and strengthen protections for the health and well-
22being of people living in close proximity to waste disposal facilities;
236.  Strengthen conflict-of-interest protections in awarding and management and 
24oversight of state waste contracts to prevent price fixing and market manipulation; and
257.  Direct the Department of Environmental Protection to amend rule Chapter 400, 
26Maine Solid Waste Management Rules to:
27A.  Amend the definition of "bypass" to limit the waste that is considered bypass to 
28solid waste that cannot be disposed of, processed or beneficially used at that facility 
29because of malfunction, insufficient capacity, downtime or inability of the facility to 
30process or burn;
31B.  Amend the definition of "recycle" and "recycling" to add a provision that any 
32material left at a landfill is not considered recycled; and
33C.  Define "Maine-generated waste" as solid waste that is discarded for the first time 
34within the physical confines of the State.
