 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 194
H.P. 157 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
An Act  To Allow the Reduction of a MaineCare Lien
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CARDONE of Bangor.
Cosponsored by Representative:  HARNETT of Gardiner.

Page 1 - 129LR1500(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง14, sub-ยง1, as amended by PL 2007, c. 381, ยง1, is further 
3amended to read:
41.  Recovery procedures.  When benefits are provided or will be provided to a 
5member under the MaineCare program administered by the department pursuant to the 
6United States Social Security Act, Title XIX, including any prescription drug programs 
7administered under the auspices of MaineCare, referred to collectively in this section as 
8MaineCare, for the medical costs of injury, disease, disability or similar occurrence for 
9which a 3rd party is, or may be, liable, the commissioner may recover from that party the 
10cost of the benefits provided.  This right of recovery is separate and independent from any 
11rights or causes of action belonging to a member under the MaineCare program.  For 
12MaineCare recipients who participated in the MaineCare managed care program, "cost" 
13means the total value of coverable medical services provided measured by the amount 
14that MaineCare would have paid to providers directly for such services, were it not for the 
15managed care system.  The MaineCare program  is the payor of last resort and shall 
16provide medical coverage only when there are no other available resources.  The Attorney 
17General, or counsel appointed by the Attorney General, may, to enforce this right, 
18institute and prosecute legal proceedings directly against the 3rd party in the appropriate 
19court in the name of the commissioner.
20In addition to the right of recovery set forth in this subsection, the commissioner must 
21also be subrogated, to the extent of any benefits provided under the MaineCare program, 
22to any cause of action or claim that a member has against a 3rd party who is or may be 
23liable for medical costs incurred by or on behalf of the member.  The Attorney General, 
24or counsel appointed by the Attorney General, to enforce this right may institute and 
25prosecute legal proceedings in the name of the injured person, member, guardian, 
26personal representative, estate or survivor.  If necessary to enforce the commissioner's 
27right of recovery, the Attorney General, or counsel appointed by the Attorney General, 
28may institute legal proceedings against any member, including the agent, representative 
29or attorney of that member, who has received a settlement or award from a 3rd party.
30The commissioner's right to recover the cost of benefits provided constitutes a statutory 
31lien on the proceeds of an award or settlement from a 3rd party if recovery for MaineCare 
32costs was or could have been included in the recipient's claim for damages from the 3rd 
33party to the extent of the recovery for medical expenses.  The commissioner is entitled to 
34recover the cost of the benefits actually paid out when the commissioner has determined 
35that collection will be cost-effective to the extent that there are proceeds available for 
36such recovery after the deduction of reasonable attorney's fees and litigation costs from 
37the gross award or settlement.  In determining whether collection will be cost-effective, 
38the commissioner shall consider all factors that diminish potential recovery by the 
39department, including but not limited to questions of liability and comparative negligence 
40or other legal defenses, exigencies of trial that reduce a settlement or award in order to 
41resolve the recipient's claim and limits on the amount of applicable insurance coverage 
42that reduce the claim to the amount recoverable by the recipient.  The department's 
43statutory lien may not be reduced to reflect an assessment of a pro rata share of the 
44recipient's attorney's fees or litigation costs.  The commissioner may, at the 
Page 2 - 129LR1500(01)-11commissioner's discretion, compromise, or otherwise settle and execute a release of, any 
2claim or waive any claim, in whole or in part, if the commissioner determines the 
3collection will not be cost-effective or that the best possible outcome requires 
4compromise, release or settlement.
5SUMMARY
6Under current law, when MaineCare benefits are provided to an individual for the 
7costs of injury, disability or other occurrence for which a 3rd party is held liable, the 
8Commissioner of Health and Human Services is entitled to recover the costs of 
9MaineCare benefits, and the statutory lien may not be reduced to reflect an assessment of 
10a pro rata share of the recipient's attorney's fees or litigation costs.   This bill amends that 
11provision of law to allow the statutory lien to be reduced.
