 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1337
H.P. 965 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2019
An Act  To Save Lives by Establishing a Homeless  Opioid Users 
Service Engagement Program within the Department of Health and Human Services
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GATTINE of Westbrook.
Cosponsored by Senator SANBORN, L. of Cumberland and
Representatives: CRAVEN of Lewiston,  DUNPHY of  Old Town, HYMANSON of York, 
JORGENSEN of Portland, MADIGAN of Waterville.

Page 1 - 129LR1261(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง2354 is enacted to read:
3ยง2354.  Homeless opioid users service engagement program
4There is established within the department a homeless opioid users service 
5engagement program to provide 50 opioid users who are among the most vulnerable and 
6unstable in the State rapid access to low-barrier treatment for substance use disorder and 
7stable housing to support their recovery.
81.  Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following 
9meanings.
10A.  "Individuals who are experiencing homelessness" means adults, unaccompanied 
11youth and families with children who lack a fixed, regular and adequate nighttime 
12residence or who are at risk of imminently losing their primary nighttime residence 
13including those who are sharing another person's dwelling on a temporary basis under 
14which permission to remain is contingent upon the hospitality of the primary 
15leaseholder or owner and can be rescinded at any time without notice.  "Individuals 
16who are experiencing homelessness" includes individuals and families who are 
17fleeing or attempting to flee domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, 
18stalking or another dangerous or life-threatening situation involving violence against 
19the individual or a member of the family.  "Individuals who are experiencing 
20homelessness" also includes individuals who are exiting an institution where the 
21individual resided for 90 or fewer days and who resided in an emergency shelter or 
22place not meant for human habitation immediately before entering the institution.
23B.  "Lead provider" means a social service or health care provider that is selected by 
24the department and that executes a social service contract with the department to 
25implement the program.
26C.  "Medication-assisted treatment" means the evidence-based, whole-patient 
27approach to the treatment of substance use disorder that combines counseling and 
28behavioral therapies with medications approved by the federal Food and Drug 
29Administration for the treatment of substance use disorder, such as buprenorphine 
30and naloxone combination drugs, methadone or naltrexone.
31D.  "Partner provider" means a social service or health care provider with expertise in 
32all or a portion of the services provided in the program and that executes a 
33subcontract with a lead provider to provide those services.
34E.  "Program" means the homeless opioid users service engagement program 
35established in this section.
36F.  "Recovery" means a process of change through which an individual improves the 
37individual's health and wellness, lives a self-directed life and strives to reach the 
38individual's full potential.
392.  Social service contracts.  The department shall issue a request for proposals and 
40implement the program through social service contracts.
Page 2 - 129LR1261(01)-113.  Service location.  The program must provide services in both an urban area and a 
2rural area of the State where social service and health care providers who can successfully 
3implement the program are located.  In selecting the areas of the State, the department 
4shall determine which areas of the State have the greatest need based upon the geographic 
5location of opioid users who are individuals who are experiencing homelessness and the 
6extent of emergency services use by those individuals.  The department may select one 
7lead provider to implement the program in both the urban area and the rural area or it may 
8select separate lead providers for the urban area and the rural area.
94.  Lead providers.  The lead provider or providers with which the department 
10executes social service contracts are responsible for implementing the program and 
11accounting for program funds.  To qualify for selection by the department as a lead 
12provider, a social service or health care provider must demonstrate the ability to 
13implement all aspects of the program successfully.  A lead provider may subcontract with 
14partner providers to implement portions of the program services that are within the 
15partner providers' expertise.  At a minimum, the lead provider and its partner providers 
16shall demonstrate successful experience in the following activities:
17A.  Engaging with individuals who are experiencing homelessness and who use 
18opioids in the State;
19B.  Administering medication-assisted treatment to vulnerable populations; and
20C.  Providing housing support services to individuals who are experiencing 
21homelessness.
225.  Program design and implementation.  To the extent permitted by resources 
23allocated to the program, the program must be designed and implemented as described in 
24this subsection.
25A.  The program must assist participants in attaining and sustaining recovery, 
26minimize the risk of opiate poisoning among participants and decrease the likelihood 
27of diversion of buprenorphine by increasing participants' access to stable and 
28supportive housing, connecting participants with the recovery community and its 
29resources and providing participants with a safe environment in which the 
30participants can identify individualized short-term and long-term goals and develop 
31new skills to support their recovery.
32B.  To participate in the program, an individual must be an individual who is 
33experiencing homelessness, have a history of drug overdose and meet the criteria for 
34physiological dependence on opioids in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
35Mental Disorders, 5th edition, published by the American Psychiatric Association.  
36The program must give priority to individuals who are being discharged from 
37incarceration or long-term hospitalization due to complications related to substance 
38use disorder.
39The program must include intensive outreach using a collaborative team case review 
40approach to identify and recruit participants.  An individual selected for the program 
41who chooses to participate in the program shall sign a written agreement that explains 
42the requirements for program participation and authorizes initiation of case 
43management and treatment services as well as a release authorizing members of the 
Page 3 - 129LR1261(01)-11program team to share information regularly regarding the participant's progress in 
2recovery and in attaining individual goals.  Participants shall also complete initial 
3assessments regarding substance use disorder, physical health and psychosocial and 
4psychiatric needs as soon as possible.
5C.  Although a lead provider may adapt the structure of the program to meet the 
6needs of the rural area or urban area it serves, the program must include medication-
7assisted treatment, intensive case management and immediate access to stable 
8housing as described in this paragraph.
9(1)  The program must provide participants with medication-assisted treatment in 
10accordance with this subparagraph that is initiated within 48 hours of each 
11participant's enrollment in the program.  The program must seek reimbursement 
12from the MaineCare program for medication-assisted treatment services 
13whenever possible.  The lead provider or partner provider shall employ a medical 
14professional authorized to prescribe for each participant a medication approved 
15by the federal Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of substance use 
16disorder that, in the professional's opinion, is most appropriate given the 
17participant's current medications, substance use and medical history.  The 
18authorized prescriber shall take primary responsibility for managing and refilling 
19the prescription.
20The lead provider or partner provider shall establish a collaborative, interagency 
21staffing model of medication-assisted treatment that includes, to the extent 
22resources permit, the authorized prescriber, a nurse care manager, a licensed 
23clinical social worker or licensed alcohol and drug counselor, a certified 
24psychiatric mental health nurse practitioner and a peer support specialist who 
25meet regularly to plan participant services, review participant progress and 
26implement reenrollment strategies when necessary.  The lead provider or partner 
27provider shall use a shared medical appointment model for medication-assisted 
28treatment that supports participants in decreasing the use of illegal drugs and 
29drugs that are not prescribed to the participant by delivering the following:
30(a)  Office-based, daily observed medication administration to participants;
31(b)  The opportunity to participate in individual and group psychotherapy, 
32pharmacotherapy and support groups;
33(c)  Random drug testing of participants;
34(d)  Ongoing evaluations of participants to optimize treatment, including 
35assessments of psychosocial needs and referrals for psychiatric assessments 
36or treatment as necessary; and
37(e)  Treatment of participants' concomitant psychiatric disorders that either 
38complicate the participants' substance use disorder or act as triggers for 
39relapse.
40(2)  The program must provide participants with intensive case management 
41designed to provide an intensive, comprehensive range of community-based 
42services to address the physical and behavioral health needs of participants and 
Page 4 - 129LR1261(01)-11support their compliance with medication-assisted treatment and other services 
2necessary to recovery.
3The lead provider or partner provider shall establish an intensive case 
4management team that includes, to the extent resources permit, an intensive case 
5management team supervisor, case managers, a housing liaison, a transition 
6liaison and peer support specialists.  The intensive case management team shall 
7provide intensive outreach, assessment, care coordination, advocacy, support, 
8planning and facilitation of services to meet each participant's comprehensive 
9mental health, medical and dental health needs while reducing redundant services 
10and supporting participants in achieving the following goals:
11(a)  Acquiring medical care and material resources, including, but not limited 
12to, food, shelter and clothing;
13(b)  Improving psychosocial functioning and developing greater autonomy;
14(c)  Developing coping and problem-solving skills;
15(d)  Developing a community support system to help participants meet the 
16demands of community life; and
17(e)  Accessing benefits and services for which participants may qualify, 
18including, but not limited to, housing, medical, behavioral health, 
19employment, education, supplemental income, transportation, utility and 
20community and family integration services.
21The peer support specialist shall serve as a role model and shall provide one-on-
22one peer support services to assist participants in reducing harmful behaviors, to 
23identify participants' strengths and skills that can help reduce illegal substance 
24use and to develop participants' recovery goals.  The peer support specialist shall 
25also coordinate and facilitate peer recovery groups.
26The transition liaison shall assist participants who are transitioning out of 
27incarceration or hospitalization. The transition liaison shall recruit individuals 
28who are incarcerated or hospitalized and who expect to be discharged soon for 
29participation in the program and assist those individuals with the enrollment 
30process.  The transition liaison also shall coordinate with staff from the 
31correctional or medical facility to facilitate participants' smooth transition from 
32the facility.  To the extent practicable, the transition liaison shall ensure that 
33participants have access to housing immediately upon discharge from a 
34correctional or medical facility.
35(3)  The program shall provide participants with immediate and continued access 
36to stable housing that promotes recovery, independence and harm reduction.  The 
37intensive case management team shall identify appropriate housing placements 
38for participants, which may include, but are not limited to, housing first 
39developments, which are developments prioritizing providing permanent housing 
40to individuals experiencing homelessness, recovery residences, private 
41nonmedical institutions and private apartments.  The intensive case management 
42team shall collaborate with local housing authorities, affordable housing 
43developers, municipal general assistance offices and housing voucher 
Page 5 - 129LR1261(01)-11administrators to provide program participants with priority in accessing these 
2placements.
3The lead provider or a partner provider shall administer a housing assistance fund 
4to provide participants with immediate access to stable housing.  The housing 
5assistance fund must contain sufficient capital to provide all program participants 
6with 5 months of rent at fair market value based on the location of the housing.  
7The lead provider or partner provider may provide a participant with more or less 
8than 5 months of financial assistance from the housing assistance fund, 
9depending on the participant's individual need for financial assistance to achieve 
10housing stability.
11While participants receive financial assistance from the housing assistance fund, 
12the intensive case management team shall assist participants in securing an 
13alternative financial resource or resources for housing, including but not limited 
14to employment, general assistance, the Bridging Rental Assistance Program 
15established in Title 34-B, section 3011, the federal shelter plus care program 
16authorized by the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, Public Law 
17100-77, as amended by the federal Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid 
18Transition to Housing Act of 2009, Public Law 111-22, Division B (2009) and 
19housing choice vouchers under Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 
201937, Public Law 75-412, 50 Stat. 888, as amended.
21D.  A participant may withdraw from the program at any time.  The lead provider or a 
22partner provider shall reevaluate each participant's enrollment in the program every 
23month.  A participant may receive services from the program for the length of time 
24necessary for the participant to successfully complete the program or to transition to a 
25less intensive model of treatment when considered clinically appropriate.  In 
26determining whether a participant has successfully completed the program or may 
27transition to a less intensive model of treatment, the lead provider or partner provider 
28shall consider the participant's sustained abstinence from illegal substance and 
29alcohol use, employment or involvement in other meaningful community activities, 
30psychosocial supports and willingness to participate in further treatment to maintain 
31recovery.
32Alternatively, a participant may be discharged from the program if the lead provider 
33or a partner provider determines that the program is unable to provide appropriate 
34services due to the participant's physical or mental health or continued illegal 
35substance use.
366.  Program evaluation.  Annually the lead provider shall contract with an 
37independent entity to conduct a rigorous evaluation of the program implemented by that 
38lead provider, including a cost-benefit analysis, in order to inform future interventions 
39and provide a model that can be replicated throughout the State.  The independent entity 
40shall consider, at a minimum, the following information in conducting the evaluation:
41A.  The extent of participant engagement in medication-assisted treatment, 
42maintenance of stable housing, achievement of employment or engagement in 
43community volunteer positions and reconnection with family;
Page 6 - 129LR1261(01)-11B.  The number of overdose incidents, the level of involvement with the criminal 
2justice system and law enforcement and the extent of use of emergency medical 
3services including emergency medical response, crisis intervention services, 
4emergency shelter or food resources and inpatient hospital stays for participants 
5during the evaluation period as compared to the year before the evaluation period 
6began; and
7C.  The number of participants who withdrew from the program voluntarily, who 
8were discharged after successful completion of the program and who were discharged 
9because the program could no longer provide appropriate services.
107.  Report.  The department shall report to the joint standing committee of the 
11Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters regarding the 
12program by March 15, 2020 and each year thereafter.  The joint standing committee may 
13submit legislation regarding the program, including legislation to continue or expand the 
14program.
15Sec. 2.  Authority to submit legislation.  The joint standing committee of the 
16Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters may submit 
17legislation regarding the homeless opioid users service engagement program established 
18in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 22, section 2354 to the Second Regular Session of 
19the 129th Legislature.
20SUMMARY
21This bill establishes within the Department of Health and Human Services a program 
22to provide rapid access to low-barrier treatment for substance use disorders and stable 
23housing to support recovery and create stability for 50 opioid users who are among the 
24most vulnerable and unstable in the State.  The bill details the program objectives, 
25eligibility criteria for program participants and services that must be provided to those 
26participants, including medication-assisted treatment, intensive case management services 
27and financial and case management assistance to ensure immediate and continued access 
28to stable housing.  The bill requires an independent evaluation of the program and directs 
29the department to submit a report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature 
30having jurisdiction over health and human services matters regarding the program by 
31March 15, 2020 and annually thereafter.  The joint standing committee is authorized to 
32submit legislation regarding the program.
