 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1010
H.P. 752 House of  Representatives, February 26, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Education  To Develop a 
Model School Disciplinary Policy
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MORALES of South Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator SANBORN, L. of Cumberland and
Representatives: BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland, PIERCE of Falmouth, Senator:  BREEN  of 
Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR1870(01)-11Sec. 1.  Model school disciplinary policy.  Resolved:  That the Department of 
2Education shall develop a model school disciplinary policy to effectuate the policies in 
3the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20-A, section 1001, subsection 15-A, including, but not 
4limited to, policies that focus on positive and restorative interventions designed to 
5strengthen relationships, improve the connection to school and promote a strong sense of 
6accountability.  The model policy must also promote interventions designed to close 
7economic and racial gaps.  The department shall provide assistance to school 
8administrators, superintendents and school boards to implement the model school 
9disciplinary policy.
10SUMMARY
11This resolve requires the Department of Education to develop a model school 
12disciplinary policy that focuses on positive and restorative interventions designed to 
13strengthen relationships, improve the connection to school, promote a strong sense of 
14accountability and close economic and racial gaps.  It also requires the department to 
15provide support to school administrative units that choose to implement the model policy.
