 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 788
S.P. 232 In Senate, February 12, 2019
An Act  To Authorize the Use of Handheld Narcotics Analyzers
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator KEIM of Oxford.
Cosponsored by Representative STEWART of Presque Isle and
Senators: CARPENTER of Aroostook, DESCHAMBAULT of  York,  MOORE of Washington, 
ROSEN of Hancock.

Page 1 - 129LR1589(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง1112, sub-ยง4 is enacted to read:
34.  A law enforcement agency that has in its possession a drug or substance for 
4analysis as a scheduled drug may, in addition to or instead of analysis of the drug or 
5substance in accordance with subsection 1, submit the drug or substance for analysis by 
6means of a handheld narcotics analyzer that has been evaluated and certified by the 
7Department of Health and Human Services, Health and Environmental Testing 
8Laboratory as reliable for field testing of scheduled drugs.  A law enforcement officer 
9who analyzes a drug or substance pursuant to this subsection shall perform the analysis 
10by means of a handheld narcotics analyzer in accordance with procedures adopted by the 
11Health and Environmental Testing Laboratory and upon completion of the analysis shall 
12issue a signed certificate stating the results of the analysis.  The certificate, when duly 
13signed and sworn to by a person certified as qualified for this purpose by the Department 
14of Health and Human Services under certification standards set by that department, is 
15admissible in evidence in a court of the State, and gives rise to a permissible inference 
16under the Maine Rules of Evidence, Rule 303 that the composition, quality and quantity 
17of the drug or substance are as stated in the certificate, unless, with 10 days' written notice 
18to the prosecution, the defendant requests that a qualified witness testify as to the 
19composition, quality and quantity.
20SUMMARY
21This bill provides that a law enforcement agency that has in its possession a drug or 
22substance for analysis as a scheduled drug may, in addition to or instead of analysis of the 
23drug or substance in a laboratory, submit the drug or substance for analysis by means of a 
24handheld narcotics analyzer that has been evaluated and certified by the Department of 
25Health and Human Services, Health and Environmental Testing Laboratory as reliable for 
26field testing of scheduled drugs.  The bill requires that a law enforcement officer who 
27analyzes a drug or substance by means of a handheld narcotics analyzer in accordance 
28with procedures adopted by the Health and Environmental Testing Laboratory must upon 
29completion of the analysis issue a signed certificate stating the results of the analysis.  
30The bill provides that such a certificate, when duly signed and sworn to by a person 
31certified as qualified for this purpose by the Department of Health and Human Services 
32under certification standards set by that department, is admissible in evidence in a court 
33of the State, and gives rise to a permissible inference under the Maine Rules of Evidence, 
34Rule 303 that the composition, quality and quantity of the drug or substance are as stated 
35in the certificate, unless, with 10 days' written notice to the prosecution, the defendant 
36requests that a qualified witness testify as to the composition, quality and quantity.
