 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 2145
S.P. 772 In Senate,  March  10, 2020
An Act  To Help Veterans  Access  Jobs, Education,  Health Care  and 
Housing and Provide General Support to Veterans
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CARPENTER  of Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Representative MAXMIN of Nobleboro and
Senators: BELLOWS of Kennebec, CLAXTON of  Androscoggin, President JACKSON of 
Aroostook, LUCHINI  of Hancock, VITELLI of Sagadahoc, Representative: Speaker GIDEON 
of Freeport.

Page 1 - 129LR2615(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to establish a bill of rights to help veterans access jobs, education, 
6health care and housing and provide general support to veterans.
71.  The bill would help veterans access jobs by:
8A.  Requiring the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation to waive 
9licensing fees for veterans;
10B.  Requiring licensing boards affiliated with the Department of Professional and 
11Financial Regulation to waive licensing fees for veterans;
12C.  Expanding eligibility of veterans and their spouses for the program that helps 
13veterans and their spouses obtain occupational licenses;
14D.  Requiring each board, commission, office and agency within the Department of 
15Professional and Financial Regulation or affiliated with the department to permit a 
16veteran or spouse who holds a comparable license in another state to acquire a license 
17by endorsement in this State for the remainder of the term of the license from the 
18other state or until a license is obtained in this State or obtain a temporary license in 
19this State for the period of time necessary to obtain a license in this State;
20E.  Requiring each board, commission, office and agency within the Department of 
21Professional and Financial Regulation or affiliated with the department to grant a full 
22or partial exemption from continuing education requirements for a veteran or spouse;
23F.  Obtaining information regarding the implementation of the process established to 
24help qualified veterans and their spouses to obtain occupational licenses, including 
25data concerning how many veterans and their spouses have received assistance;
26G.  Extending renewal dates for occupational licenses for veterans and their spouses;
27H.  Waiving fees for licensing veterans as emergency medical services persons and 
28security guards;
29I.  Extending the period of time allowed between the completion of military service 
30and the favorable treatment of that military service for purposes of occupational 
31licensing; and
32J.  Allowing all veterans to purchase credit for time served in the military for 
33purposes of the Maine Public Employees Retirement System.
342.  The bill would help veterans access education by:
35A.  Extending the amount of time given to veterans to transition from military service 
36to school;
Page 2 - 129LR2615(01)-11B.  Requiring each campus of the University of Maine System and the Maine 
2Community College System to have a dedicated space for veterans with at least one 
3computer where veterans may meet and have the tools available to them that they 
4need to access benefits;
5C.  Providing loans to veterans for books that are required for classes;
6D.  Providing services for veterans who receive other than an honorable discharge 
7from military service;
8E.  Providing easier readmittance to school for veterans who leave school for health-
9related issues; and
10F.  Providing graduate school assistance to veterans.
113.  The bill would help veterans access health care by:
12A.  Continuing and improving the pilot program established in Resolve 2017, chapter 
1324 that provides mental health case management services to veterans;
14B.  Providing mental health treatment in all counties for veterans;
15C.  Waiving the fee for medical marijuana identification cards for veterans;
16D.  Providing that the time limit for veterans who are otherwise eligible for assistance 
17under the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program is twice the time limit 
18that would otherwise apply to the veterans; and
19E.  Supporting programs that provide transportation to medical appointments for 
20veterans.
214.  The bill would help veterans access housing by:
22A.  Providing funding to seek long-term solutions to reduce barriers, such as criminal 
23convictions, substance use, mental illness and physical disabilities, to veterans 
24securing housing;
25B.  Increasing the number of housing vouchers provided to homeless veterans;
26C.  Providing funding to assist landlords to improve substandard apartments and give 
27incentives to landlords to rent to veterans;
28D.  Changing the "Salute ME" mortgage program administered by the Maine State 
29Housing Authority to provide veterans with a greater discount on home mortgage 
30rates;
31E.  Changing the property tax exemption for certain veterans to apply to all veterans;
32F.  Surveying public land, unused public buildings and available private buildings, 
33including closed mills, for opportunities to provide housing or temporary shelter for 
34veterans;
35G.  Providing preference to veterans in the Bridging Rental Assistance Program, 
36which assists persons with mental illness to secure temporary housing; and
37H.  Providing funding for organizations and facilities that provide housing for 
38homeless veterans.
Page 3 - 129LR2615(01)-115.  The bill would provide general support to veterans by:
2A.  Raising the amount of pension income paid under an employee retirement plan 
3that is exempt from the income tax;
4B.  Extending the time for which a driver's license is valid for active duty military 
5members; and
6C.  Increasing the maximum amount of a grant of temporary assistance that may be 
7provided to a veteran from the Veterans Temporary Assistance Fund from $2,000 to 
8$2,500.
