 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 516
H.P. 373 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2019
An Act  To Establish a Statewide Voluntary Firearm Collection Day  
and Ongoing Program
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BROOKS  of Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Representative:  CARDONE of Bangor.

Page 1 - 129LR0546(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  25 MRSA ยง2015 is enacted to read:
3ยง2015.  Statewide voluntary firearm collection day and ongoing program
4The Commissioner of Public Safety, referred to in this section as "the commissioner," 
5in accordance with the provisions of this section shall design, implement and administer 
6an annual statewide voluntary firearm collection day, referred to in this section as the 
7"collection day," and a statewide voluntary firearm collection program, referred to in this 
8section as the "collection program."
91.  Implementation date; notice.  The collection day required under this section 
10must be the 3rd Saturday of each July, beginning July 18, 2020.  The commissioner shall 
11annually ensure that the general public is notified as to date, purpose, collection locations 
12and other parameters of the collection day.  The notification required under this 
13subsection may involve, but is not limited to, print, radio, television and Internet 
14advertising; the distribution of written materials; and the offering or facilitation of public 
15events.
162.  Purpose.  The collection day required under this section must be designed to 
17provide to any person in the State an annual, one-day opportunity to voluntarily turn over 
18firearms or ammunition in the person's possession to a law enforcement officer at a 
19number of sites conveniently located throughout the State.  The commissioner shall 
20require the Bureau of State Police to participate in the collection day and shall coordinate 
21with municipal and county law enforcement agencies, as necessary, to ensure the 
22achievement of the purpose of this section, including, but not limited to, providing 
23technical assistance and, as necessary and as resources allow, financial assistance to any 
24municipal or county law enforcement agency that elects to participate in the collection 
25day within its area of jurisdiction.
263.  Fees prohibited; incentives.  A person may not be charged a fee to turn over a 
27firearm or ammunition to a law enforcement officer during the collection day or through a 
28collection program established pursuant to this section.  The commissioner may accept 
29private donations that may be used to provide monetary payment or other incentives to 
30persons turning over firearms or ammunition during the collection day or through a 
31collection program under subsection 5 or 6.
324.  Information required; disposition of collected firearms and ammunition.  A 
33person who voluntarily turns over a firearm or ammunition to a law enforcement officer 
34during the collection day or through a collection program established pursuant to this 
35section shall provide to the law enforcement officer accepting the firearm or ammunition 
36the person's name, mailing address and telephone number and may not be required by the 
37law enforcement officer to provide any additional information.  A law enforcement 
38officer who collects a firearm during the collection day or through a collection program 
39shall check the serial number of the firearm to ensure that the firearm is not stolen, was 
40not used in the commission of a criminal act and is not otherwise sought as evidence in a 
41criminal investigation or prosecution.  If, after running such a check, the law enforcement 
42officer does not have reason to believe that the firearm is stolen, was used in the 
Page 2 - 129LR0546(01)-11commission of a criminal act or is otherwise sought as evidence in a criminal 
2investigation or prosecution, the officer shall ensure that the firearm is promptly 
3destroyed.  A law enforcement officer who collects ammunition during the collection day 
4or through a collection program shall ensure that the ammunition is promptly destroyed.
55.  Establishment of collection program.  The commissioner shall ensure that, no 
6later than August 1, 2020, a year-round collection program, administered by the Bureau 
7of State Police, is established that, at a minimum, is designed to provide to any person the 
8opportunity to voluntarily turn over any firearm or ammunition in the person's possession 
9to a state police officer at any facility or function of the Bureau of State Police to which 
10members of the public are regularly allowed admission.  The commissioner shall provide 
11notice of the collection program in the same manner as is provided under subsection 1.
126.  Local ongoing voluntary firearm collection programs.  The commissioner shall 
13provide technical assistance and, as necessary and as resources allow, financial assistance 
14to any municipal or county law enforcement agency that elects to establish an ongoing 
15voluntary firearm collection program within its area of jurisdiction.
167.  Report.  Beginning January 15, 2021, and annually thereafter, the commissioner 
17shall submit a report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction 
18over criminal justice and public safety matters that includes:
19A.  The number of firearms and, if available, the amount of ammunition collected by 
20municipal, county and state law enforcement agencies during the prior year's 
21collection day;
22B.  A list of the municipal, county and state law enforcement agencies that 
23participated in and the collection locations made available during the prior year's 
24collection day;
25C.  If available, the number of firearms collected during the prior year's collection 
26day that were retained by a law enforcement agency as stolen or due to their use in 
27the commission of a criminal act or as otherwise sought as evidence in a criminal 
28investigation or prosecution;
29D.  The number of firearms and, if available, the amount of ammunition collected by 
30the Bureau of State Police during the prior calendar year through the collection 
31program required under subsection 5;
32E.  A list of the ongoing voluntary firearm collection programs established by 
33municipal and county law enforcement agencies pursuant to subsection 6 and, if 
34available, the number of firearms and the amount of ammunition collected through 
35such programs during the prior calendar year; and
36F.  Any recommendations, including proposed legislation, for changes to the 
37collection day or collection program required under this section.
38After reviewing the report required under this subsection, the joint standing committee of 
39the Legislature having jurisdiction over criminal justice and public safety matters may 
40report out a bill relating to the report.
Page 3 - 129LR0546(01)-11SUMMARY
2This bill directs the Commissioner of Public Safety to design, implement and 
3administer a statewide voluntary firearm collection day, the purpose of which is to 
4provide to any person an annual, one-day opportunity to voluntarily turn over any firearm 
5or ammunition in the person's possession to a law enforcement officer at a number of 
6sites conveniently located throughout the State.
7The commissioner is also required to facilitate the establishment of a year-round 
8voluntary firearm collection program administered by the Bureau of State Police that, at a 
9minimum, is designed to provide to any person the opportunity to voluntarily turn over 
10any firearm or ammunition in the person's possession to a state police officer at any 
11facility or function of the Bureau of State Police to which members of the public are 
12regularly allowed admission.
13The commissioner is directed to provide technical assistance and, as necessary and as 
14resources allow, financial assistance to municipal and county law enforcement agencies 
15that elect to participate in the voluntary firearm collection day or elect to establish an 
16ongoing local voluntary firearm collection program.  A person may not be charged a fee 
17to turn over a firearm or ammunition to a law enforcement officer during the collection 
18day or through a collection program and is required only to provide the law enforcement 
19officer the person's name, mailing address and telephone number.  Firearms and 
20ammunition collected are to be destroyed, except for those firearms determined to have 
21been stolen or used in the commission of a criminal act or that are otherwise sought as 
22evidence in a criminal investigation or prosecution.
