 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1209
H.P. 873 House of  Representatives, March 12, 2019
An Act  To Require  Legislative Hearings on  Citizen-initiated 
Legislation
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BRADSTREET of Vassalboro.
Cosponsored by Senator TIMBERLAKE of Androscoggin and
Representatives: ARATA of New Gloucester, CAMPBELL of Orrington, KESCHL  of 
Belgrade, LOCKMAN  of Bradley, TUELL of East Machias.

Page 1 - 129LR0950(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง907 is enacted to read:
3ยง907.  Public hearing on direct initiatives
4A petition for direct initiative of legislation under the Constitution of Maine, Article 
5IV, Part Third, Section 18 that is determined valid by the Secretary of State pursuant to 
6section 905, subsection 1 and is submitted to the Legislature in accordance with the 
7procedure established in the Constitution of Maine, Article IV, Part Third, Section 18, 
8Subsection 1 must be afforded a public hearing conducted by the joint standing 
9committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over the subject matter of the petition or 
10by a special legislative committee established for that purpose by the Legislative Council.  
11The public hearing must be conducted in the same manner as other public hearings.
12SUMMARY
13This bill requires a petition for the direct initiative of legislation, once it has been 
14certified by the Secretary of State to be submitted to the Legislature for consideration by 
15the Legislature to receive a public hearing before a joint standing committee of the 
16Legislature or a special legislative committee established by the Legislative Council.  The 
17public hearing must be conducted in the same manner as other public hearings.
