 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1105
H.P. 809 House of  Representatives, March 5, 2019
An Act  To Allow Acupuncture Detoxification Specialists To 
Administer an Auricular Acupuncture Treatment for Addiction
Reference to the Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PERRY of Calais.
Cosponsored by Senator CLAXTON of Androscoggin and
Representatives: BRENNAN  of Portland, CRAVEN of Lewiston, DUNPHY of Old Town, 
O'CONNOR of Berwick, STOVER of Boothbay.

Page 1 - 129LR1877(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง12517 is enacted to read:
3ยง12517.  Auricular acupuncture detoxification; acupuncture detoxification 
4specialists
51.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
6following terms have the following meanings.
7A.  "Acupuncture detoxification specialist" means an individual licensed in this State 
8to practice auricular acupuncture detoxification.
9B.  "Auricular acupuncture detoxification" means the subcutaneous insertion of 
10sterile, disposable acupuncture needles in consistent, predetermined bilateral 
11locations on the ear for the purpose of treatment of addiction.
122.  Auricular acupuncture detoxification.  Auricular acupuncture detoxification 
13may not be provided by an individual other than a licensed acupuncturist or an 
14acupuncture detoxification specialist and must be provided in accordance with standards 
15established by an organization specializing in the training of auricular acupuncture 
16detoxification approved by the board.
173.  Acupuncture detoxification specialist requirements.  An acupuncture 
18detoxification specialist:
19A.  May not perform acupuncture outside of the scope of auricular acupuncture 
20detoxification;
21B.  May provide auricular acupuncture detoxification only under the supervision of a 
22licensed acupuncturist or an acupuncture detoxification specialist who is a member in 
23good standing of an organization specializing in the training of auricular acupuncture 
24detoxification approved by the board.  The supervising practitioner must, at a 
25minimum, be immediately available through phone or electronic means during 
26business hours and must conduct at least 2 in-person visits or visits through 
27videoconferencing with the acupuncture detoxification specialist during the first year 
28the supervising practitioner oversees the work of the acupuncture detoxification 
29specialist; and
30C.  May not use the title "acupuncturist" or represent that the acupuncture 
31detoxification specialist is providing acupuncture services beyond the scope of 
32auricular acupuncture detoxification.
334.  Licensure of acupuncture detoxification specialists.  The board shall license 
34acupuncture detoxification specialists in accordance with the following.
35A.  Applications for licensure under this section must be on forms provided by the 
36board.  The board shall issue a license to an applicant who:
37(1)  Provides documentation demonstrating that the applicant possesses a 
38certificate of training in auricular acupuncture detoxification from an 
Page 2 - 129LR1877(01)-11organization specializing in the training of auricular acupuncture detoxification 
2approved by the board;
3(2)  Is licensed in this State as a certified alcohol and drug counselor, licensed 
4alcohol and drug counselor, physician, physician assistant, nurse, chiropractor, 
5dentist, speech-language pathologist, audiologist, professional counselor, clinical 
6professional counselor, marriage and family therapist, nurse practitioner, physical 
7therapist, occupational therapist, pharmacist, podiatrist, psychologist, licensed 
8social worker, conditional licensed social worker, licensed clinical social worker 
9or licensed master social worker, conditional;
10(3)  Identifies a practitioner who will be supervising the applicant in accordance 
11with subsection 3, paragraph B; and
12(4)  Submits the license fee established by the board by rule.
13B.  Prior to the expiration of a license, a licensee may make an application for 
14renewal. The board shall issue a renewal license to an applicant who:
15(1)  Identifies a practitioner who will be supervising the applicant in accordance 
16with subsection 3, paragraph B; and
17(2)  Submits the renewal fee established by the board by rule.
18An application for renewal made no more than 90 days past the date of expiration of 
19a license must include a late fee in addition to the renewal fee.  The board shall 
20establish the late fee by rule.  An application received more than 90 days past the 
21expiration date is subject to all requirements covering new applicants under this 
22section.
235.  Rulemaking.  The board shall adopt rules to implement and administer the 
24provisions of this section.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical 
25rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
26SUMMARY
27This bill directs the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation, Board of 
28Complementary Health Care Providers to license acupuncture detoxification specialists 
29and establishes standards for the provision of auricular acupuncture detoxification. The 
30bill directs the board to adopt rules to implement the requirements.
