 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 596
S.P. 183 In Senate, February 5, 2019
An Act  To Prevent  the Closure of Maine Businesses
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by President JACKSON of Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Representative SYLVESTER  of Portland and
Senator: BELLOWS of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 129LR1650(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  26 MRSA ยง625-B, sub-ยง6-B is enacted to read:
36-B.  Offer of sale.  The closing of a covered establishment is governed by this 
4subsection.
5A.  A person proposing to close a covered establishment shall make a good faith offer 
6of sale, at fair market value, of the facility and equipment and all inventory, 
7proprietary equipment and software necessary to continue the efficient and successful 
8operation of the covered establishment to an interested employee organization or to a 
9privately owned business entity, government-owned business entity or jointly owned 
10business entity.
11B.  A covered establishment must be listed for sale in accordance with paragraph A 
12for up to one year or until it is purchased, whichever occurs first.
13C.  An employer may not discriminate against an employee regarding the employee's 
14terms and conditions of employment because the employee, acting in good faith, 
15reports to the director information concerning a possible violation of this subsection.
16SUMMARY
17This bill requires that a person proposing to permanently shut down an industrial or 
18commercial facility make an offer of sale, at fair market value, of the facility and 
19equipment to an interested employee organization or to a privately owned business entity, 
20government-owned business entity or jointly owned business entity.
