 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 239
H.P. 202 House of  Representatives, January 22, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services To Explore the Development of a Behavioral Health Unit  at the 
Cumberland County  Jail
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FARNSWORTH  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator SANBORN, H. of Cumberland and
Representatives: BRENNAN  of Portland, BRYANT of Windham, COREY  of Windham, FAY 
of Raymond,  MOONEN  of Portland,  MORALES  of South Portland, RECKITT of South 
Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR0993(01)-11Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services and Cumberland 
2County Sheriff's Office to explore development of behavioral health unit at 
3the Cumberland County Jail.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and 
4Human Services and the Cumberland County Sheriff's Office shall jointly explore the 
5development of a behavioral health unit at the Cumberland County Jail to determine the 
6competency of inmates to stand trial.
7Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services 
8and the Cumberland County Sheriff's Office shall submit a joint report and 
9recommendations, including recommended legislation, resulting from the directive under 
10section 1 to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services no later than 
11January 10, 2020.  The Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services may 
12report out legislation based upon the study and recommendations to the Second Regular 
13Session of the 129th Legislature.
14SUMMARY
15This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services and the 
16Cumberland County Sheriff's Office to jointly explore the development of a behavioral 
17health unit at the Cumberland County Jail to determine the competency of inmates to 
18stand trial. This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services and the 
19Cumberland County Sheriff's Office to submit the results of this directive along with 
20recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, which 
21may report out legislation to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
