 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 1985
S.P. 687 In Senate,  January  8, 2020
Resolve, Directing the Board of Speech, Audiology and Hearing  To 
Adopt Rules To Facilitate Speech-Language  Therapy
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative HARNETT of Gardiner and
Senators: CLAXTON of Androscoggin, GRATWICK of Penobscot,  LIBBY of Androscoggin, 
MILLETT of  Cumberland,  Representative:  DAUGHTRY of Brunswick.

Page 1 - 129LR2964(01)-11Sec. 1.  Rules.  Resolved:  That the Department of Professional and Financial 
2Regulation, Board of Speech, Audiology and Hearing shall adopt rules governing speech-
3language pathology assistants serving children in school districts:
41.  To permit a speech-language pathology assistant to have more than one approved 
5supervisor; and
62.  To permit a supervising speech-language pathologist to supervise up to 3 speech-
7language pathology assistants.
8Rules adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in the 
9Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
10SUMMARY
11This resolve directs the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation, Board 
12of Speech, Audiology and Hearing to adopt rules to permit speech-language pathology 
13assistants serving children in school districts to practice under the supervision of more 
14than one speech-language pathologist and to allow speech-language pathologists to 
15supervise up to 3 speech-language pathology assistants on their license.
