 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 569
H.P. 413 House of  Representatives, February 5, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry To  Submit  to the United States Secretary of Agriculture a 
Plan for Continued Implementation  of the Maine Industrial Hemp 
Program
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HICKMAN of Winthrop.
Cosponsored by President  JACKSON  of Aroostook and
Representatives: LANDRY of Farmington, MAREAN of Hollis, MAXMIN of Nobleboro, STANLEY of Medway,  TALBOT ROSS of  Portland, Senators: BLACK  of Franklin, DILL of 
Penobscot, MIRAMANT of Knox.

Page 1 - 129LR2010(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry currently 
4oversees Maine’s industrial hemp program; and
5Whereas, under the federal Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018, which took 
6effect on January 1, 2019, states that wish to retain primary regulatory authority over the 
7production of hemp must devise and submit a plan to the United States Secretary of 
8Agriculture; and
9Whereas, it is critical that Maine obtain federal approval to continue 
10implementation of Maine's industrial hemp program; and
11Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
12the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
13immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
14therefore, be it
15Sec. 1.  Development and submission of plan. Resolved:  That, in accordance 
16with the federal Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018, the Department of Agriculture, 
17Conservation and Forestry shall submit, within 90 days of the effective date of this 
18resolve, a plan to the United States Secretary of Agriculture to continue the State's 
19industrial hemp program and to regulate hemp in accordance with federal requirements.
20Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
21legislation takes effect when approved.
22SUMMARY
23This resolve directs the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to 
24submit a plan to the United States Secretary of Agriculture to continue Maine's industrial 
25hemp program and to regulate hemp in accordance with federal requirements.
