 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 408
H.P. 317 House of  Representatives, January 29, 2019
Resolve, To  Improve Access to Neurobehavioral  Services
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WARREN of Hallowell.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: COREY of  Windham, DUNPHY of Old Town, GATTINE of Westbrook,  
HEPLER of Woolwich, HYMANSON of  York.

Page 1 - 129LR0418(01)-11Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to provide 
2neurobehavioral beds.  Resolved:  That, no later than September 1, 2020, the 
3Department of Health and Human Services shall provide 16 new neurobehavioral beds in 
4one or more neurobehavioral centers to serve individuals with significant behavioral 
5challenges and complex medical needs who need short-term treatment before 
6transitioning to a long-term care environment.  A center shall serve individuals with brain 
7injury and accompanying behavioral issues who cannot be served appropriately in the 
8community or in a nursing facility lacking specialized neurobehavioral services but are 
9not in need of hospitalization.  A center shall provide short-term evaluation and treatment 
10for no longer than one year and shall facilitate transition to a long-term care environment 
11in the community or in a long-term care facility with appropriate treatment supports.
12SUMMARY
13This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to provide by 
14September 1, 2020 16 new neurobehavioral beds in one or more neurobehavioral centers 
15to serve individuals with significant behavioral challenges and complex medical needs 
16who need short-term evaluation and treatment before transitioning to a long-term care 
17environment in either the community or a long-term care facility.
