 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1369
H.P. 991 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2019
An Act  To Create an Additional  Pathway To  Certify Industrial Arts 
Teachers To Foster Career and  Technical Subjects in Maine Schools
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WADSWORTH  of Hiram.
Cosponsored by Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, DUNPHY of Old Town, HUBBELL  of Bar  Harbor,  
MAREAN of Hollis, ORDWAY of Standish, SAMPSON of Alfred, ZEIGLER  of Montville.

Page 1 - 129LR1680(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง13011, sub-ยง6-C is enacted to read:
36-C.  Additional pathway for industrial arts certification.  The state board shall 
4adopt rules to amend the credentialing of education personnel to create a pathway for a 
5teacher to obtain an endorsement on a teaching certificate for a component of industrial 
6arts as defined by the department with an experiential lab that includes, but is not limited 
7to automotive body repair, diagnostics and mechanics; welding; electrical; carpentry; and 
8computer-aided design.  At a minimum, rules adopted pursuant to this subsection must 
9include the following qualifications in order for a teacher to be eligible for an 
10endorsement:
11A.  A completed apprenticeship registered with a statewide or national apprenticeship 
12and training organization;
13B.  A completed 2-year degree or certificate from a technical institution accredited by 
14a national association of career and technical schools or similar organization;
15C.  Completion of a minimum number of hours of paid applied employment or 
16teaching in the area for which the endorsement is sought; and
17D.  Completion of a minimum number of hours of experience learning the trade or 
18craft in the area for which the endorsement is sought.
19Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are major substantive rules as defined in Title 
205, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
21SUMMARY
22This bill directs the State Board of Education to adopt rules to amend the 
23credentialing of education personnel to create a pathway for a teacher to obtain an 
24endorsement on a teaching certificate for a component of industrial arts with an 
25experiential lab that includes, but is not limited to: automotive body repair, diagnostics 
26and mechanics; welding; electrical; carpentry; and computer-aided design.  Rules must 
27include at least the following qualifications for a teacher to be eligible for an 
28endorsement:  a completed apprenticeship registered with a statewide or national 
29apprenticeship and training organization; a completed 2-year degree or certificate from a 
30technical institution accredited by a national association of career and technical schools or 
31similar organization; completion of a minimum number of hours of paid applied 
32employment or teaching in the endorsement area being sought; and completion of a 
33minimum number of hours of experience learning the trade or craft for which the 
34endorsement is sought.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are major substantive 
35rules as defined in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
