 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 715
H.P. 520 House of  Representatives, February 11, 2019
An Act  To Change the Allocation Formula for  Revenue from Slot 
Machines
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HANDY of Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland  and
Representative: SYLVESTER  of Portland, Senator: LUCHINI of Hancock.

Page 1 - 129LR1381(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to change the allocation of the revenue from slot machines 
6operated by casinos, as established in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 8, section 1036, 
7subsections 2 and 2-A.  This bill would not change the percentage of the net slot machine 
8income being distributed, but would:
91.  Return to the allocation formula established in the legislation allowing casinos that 
10was approved at referendum, which would require reducing the funding of certain items, 
11such as the fund to supplement harness racing purses and the Sire Stakes Fund, and 
12eliminating the funding of other items, such as the Fund to Encourage Racing at Maine's 
13Commercial Tracks and the Fund to Stabilize Off-track Betting Facilities.  Under this 
14proposal, the 14% of the net slot machine income attributable to the reduction or 
15elimination of those allocations would be distributed elsewhere;
162.  Reallocate the net slot machine income among the current receivers of the income, 
17increasing the share of some, such as the Fund for a Healthy Maine, the University of 
18Maine System Scholarship Fund, the Maine Maritime Academy and the Maine 
19Community College System, while decreasing the share of others, such as the fund to 
20supplement harness racing purses, and eliminating the share of others, such as the Fund to 
21Encourage Racing at Maine's Commercial Tracks, the Sire Stakes Fund and the Fund to 
22Stabilize Off-track Betting Facilities; or
233.  Enact a combination of the 2 methods and include different recipients.
