 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 342
H.P. 268 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2019
An Act  To Require  a Person To  Notify  Law Enforcement  Officers of 
the Possession  of a Hypodermic Needle
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HARRINGTON of Sanford.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  CEBRA of Naples,  COREY of Windham, JOHANSEN of 
Monticello, NADEAU of Winslow,  PERKINS  of Oakland, PICKETT  of Dixfield,  Senator: 
DAVIS of Piscataquis.

Page 1 - 129LR0850(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง1111-B is enacted to read:
3ยง1111-B.  Failure to inform law enforcement officer of possession of hypodermic 
4apparatus
51.  A person is guilty of failure to inform a law enforcement officer of a person's 
6possession of a hypodermic apparatus if the person in fact is in possession of a 
7hypodermic apparatus on the person's body and the person in fact fails to inform a law 
8enforcement officer that the person is in possession of a hypodermic apparatus on the 
9person's body during the course of any arrest or detention of the person.
102.  A hypodermic apparatus and any contents of such apparatus are inadmissible as 
11evidence in any prosecution for a violation of this chapter if the hypodermic apparatus 
12was obtained as a result of the person's informing a law enforcement officer of the 
13possession of the hypodermic apparatus as required by subsection 1.
143.  Failure to inform a law enforcement officer of a person's possession of a 
15hypodermic apparatus is a Class D crime.
16SUMMARY
17This bill establishes the failure to inform a law enforcement officer of a person's 
18possession of a hypodermic apparatus as a Class D crime.  Under the bill, if a person 
19discloses the possession of a hypodermic apparatus as required, the hypodermic apparatus 
20and any contents of the apparatus are inadmissible as evidence in a prosecution for a 
21violation of the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 17-A, chapter 45.
