 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 584
H.P. 428 House of  Representatives, February 5, 2019
An Act  To Convert Stipends to Base Pay for  Child Protective 
Workers
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GATTINE of Westbrook.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: DOORE of Augusta, HARNETT of Gardiner,  HICKMAN  of Winthrop,  
PEOPLES of  Westbrook,  SYLVESTER  of Portland, WARREN of Hallowell, Senators: 
LAWRENCE of York, POULIOT of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 129LR2086(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  Stipends included in base pay for child protective services 
3employees.  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the $5 per wage-hour stipend paid 
4to employees in Child Protective Services Caseworker positions, Child Protective 
5Services Caseworker Supervisor positions, Child Protective Services Assistant Program 
6Administrator positions and Child Protective Services Program Administrator positions in 
7the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Child and Family Services and 
8the $1 per wage-hour stipend payment for those employees holding or obtaining a 
9relevant master's degree authorized pursuant to Public Law 2017, chapter 471, section 6 
10must be considered part of those employees' base pay for purposes of retirement benefit 
11calculations.
12SUMMARY
13This bill requires that the $5 per wage-hour stipends provided to child protective 
14services employees in the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Child and 
15Family Services for the purpose of recruitment and retention of such employees and the 
16$1 per wage-hour stipend paid to such child protective services employees who hold or 
17obtain a relevant master's degree must be considered part of the base pay of employees 
18who receive a stipend for purposes of calculating retirement benefits.
