 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1241
H.P. 902 House of  Representatives, March 14, 2019
An Act  To Improve  Survival Rates of Salmon  and Other Migratory 
Fish Transitioning from Freshwater to Saltwater Environments
Reference to the Committee on Marine Resources  suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DODGE of Belfast.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Representatives: AUSTIN of Skowhegan, BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland,  BLUME of York, 
HARNETT of Gardiner,  INGWERSEN of Arundel,  McCREA of Fort Fairfield,  PLUECKER  
of Warren,  Senator: CARSON of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR0665(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  12 MRSA c. 606, sub-c. 2 is enacted to read:
3SUBCHAPTER 2
4SMOLTIFICATION SUCCESS RESEARCH
5ยง6151.  Smoltification success research program
6The commissioner shall establish a smoltification success research program, referred 
7to in this section as "the program," within the department.  The purpose of this program is 
8to develop reliable scientific information for use in management of pollution control 
9efforts and pollution licensing decisions.
101.  Research; data collection.  The program must include investigation of external 
11influences on smoltification success and metamorphosis success of nonsalmonid 
12anadromous species and smolt migration success.  Specific attention must be given to 
13evaluating the effects of industrial and sewage treatment plant effluents and other 
14pollutants on the timing of smoltification.  The program must collect smoltification data 
15and ensure continuity of data collection.
162.  Policy investigations.  The commissioner shall develop in the program the 
17capacity to systematically analyze the effects of a variety of chemicals found in effluents 
18under subsection 1 on the timing of the development and physical health of smolts and 
19recommendations for conservation and management options.  The analysis must include 
20the effluence of biological substances such as pheromones from land-based aquaculture.  
21Analysis of these effects must be conducted cooperatively with the industries and 
22communities that discharge effluents into rivers that are significant for Atlantic salmon 
23and other diadromous fish species.
243.  Cooperation.  The commissioner shall cooperatively develop and coordinate the 
25program with the University of Maine.
264.  Report.  The commissioner shall prepare and submit to the joint standing 
27committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over marine resources matters an annual 
28report on the success of the program.
295.  Funds.  All federal and state funds obtained by the department for smoltification 
30success research must be used to achieve the objectives of this subchapter.
31SUMMARY
32This bill directs the Commissioner of Marine Resources to establish a smoltification 
33success research program to investigate the external influences on smoltification success 
34and metamorphosis success of nonsalmonid anadromous species and smolt migration 
35success.  Specific attention must be given to evaluating the effects of industrial and 
36sewage treatment plant effluents and other pollutants on the timing of smoltification.  The 
Page 2 - 129LR0665(01)-11program must include the capacity to systematically analyze the effect of a variety of 
2chemicals found in effluents on the timing of the development of and physical health of 
3smolts and recommendations for conservation and management options.  The analysis 
4must include the effluence of biological substances such as pheromones from land-based 
5aquaculture.  Analysis of these effects must be conducted cooperatively with the 
6industries and communities that discharge into rivers that are significant for Atlantic 
7salmon and other diadromous fish species.
