 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1278
S.P. 398 In Senate,  March  14, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine Requiring the State To Share Not Less Than 5 Percent of State Sales  and Income Tax Revenue with Municipalities
Reference to the Committee on Taxation  suggested and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MOORE of Washington.
Cosponsored by Representative TUELL  of East  Machias and
Senators: BELLOWS of Kennebec, CLAXTON of  Androscoggin, FARRIN of Somerset, 
GRATWICK of Penobscot,  Representatives:  ALLEY of Beals, GRAMLICH of Old Orchard 
Beach, HARNETT of Gardiner, PERRY of Calais.

Page 1 - 129LR0816(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IX, ยง26 is enacted to read:
5Section 26.  Dedication of not less than 5% of state sales and income tax 
6revenues.  For the purpose of reducing the burden placed on the property tax to finance 
7municipal services, no later than the 10th day of each month the State Controller shall 
8transfer to a fund separate from the General Fund not less than 5% of state sales and 
9income tax receipts received during the previous month.  The revenues transferred to the 
10fund must be distributed to each municipality in the State according to a process 
11established by the Legislature.  Each municipal assessor shall deduct from the total 
12amount required to be assessed on properties an amount equal to the amount the 
13municipal officers estimate will be received during the municipal fiscal year.
14Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
15Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
16respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
17holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
18following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
19proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
20"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require that each 
21month the State Controller distribute to municipalities not less than 5% 
22of all state sales and income tax revenues received by the State during the 
23previous month for the purpose of reducing the burden placed on the 
24property tax to finance municipal services?"
25The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
26and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
27square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
28declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
29State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
30review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
31amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
32becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
33Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
34shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
35of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
36SUMMARY
37For the purpose of reducing the burden placed on the property tax to finance 
38municipal services, this resolution proposes an amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
39to require that not less than 5% of state sales and income tax revenue be distributed to 
40municipalities.
