 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 185
H.P. 148 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
An Act  To Provide  a Method for a Student  To Be Excused  from  
Standardized Testing
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SAMPSON of Alfred.
Cosponsored by Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland and
Representatives: O'CONNOR of  Berwick,  ORDWAY of Standish,  STEWART of Presque Isle, 
TUELL of  East Machias, Senators: CHENETTE of York, LIBBY of Androscoggin, MILLETT 
of Cumberland, WOODSOME  of York.

Page 1 - 129LR0832(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง6215 is enacted to read:
3ยง6215.  Opt-out
41.  Parent's or guardian's right to opt out.  If a student's parent or guardian submits 
5a written request to a school administrative unit to excuse the student from a standardized 
6assessment administered pursuant to this chapter, the school administrative unit shall 
7comply with the request and excuse the student in conformance with the request.
82.  School administrative unit.  A school administrative unit may not penalize a 
9student for being excused from an assessment pursuant to subsection 1 and shall:
10A.  Inform parents and guardians of the option to excuse a student from an 
11assessment;
12B.  Provide a student excused from an assessment with an educational activity while 
13the assessment is being administered; and
14C.  Post the form created by the department under subsection 3, paragraph A on the 
15school administrative unit's publicly accessible website.
163.  Department.  The department may not penalize a school for excusing a student 
17from an assessment pursuant to subsection 1 and shall:
18A.  Create a form that a parent or guardian can use to request that a student be 
19excused from an assessment and shall post the form on the department's publicly 
20accessible website; and
21B.  Notify parents and guardians of the option to excuse a student from an assessment 
22by posting notice on the department's publicly accessible website.
234.  Teachers.  A teacher may inform a parent or guardian of the option to excuse a 
24student from an assessment pursuant to subsection 1.
25SUMMARY
26This bill requires a school administrative unit to excuse a student from a standardized 
27assessment administered pursuant to the State's assessment program at the written request 
28of the student's parent or guardian and establishes requirements for school administrative 
29units and the Department of Education related to excusing a student.
