 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 586
H.P. 430 House of  Representatives, February 5, 2019
An Act  Regarding the  Department of Transportation's Use  of 
Sediment Erosion  Control Systems
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CAMPBELL  of Orrington.
Cosponsored by Senator FOLEY of  York and
Representatives: CARDONE  of Bangor, FAY of Raymond, LYFORD of Eddington, 
PERKINS of  Oakland, TUCKER  of Brunswick,  VEROW of Brewer, Senators: BLACK  of 
Franklin, GRATWICK of Penobscot.

Page 1 - 129LR1394(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  23 MRSA ยง709 is enacted to read:
3ยง709.  Sediment erosion control
4For any Department of Transportation project that involves the use of a sediment 
5erosion control system, the department must specify either a biodegradable or 
6nonbiodegradable sediment erosion control system.  If a nonbiodegradable sediment 
7erosion control system is used in a department project, the sediment erosion control 
8system must be removed within 90 days of the project's completion.
9As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, "biodegradable" means 
10a substance that can be broken down physically or chemically by microorganisms.
11SUMMARY
12This bill requires the Department of Transportation to specify whether a 
13biodegradable or nonbiodegradable sediment erosion control system will be used for a 
14project by the department and requires that nonbiodegradable sediment erosion control 
15systems be removed with 90 days of a project's completion.
