 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 506
H.P. 363 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2019
An Act  To Provide  Architects, Engineers and  Certain Other  
Professionals Immunity from Civil Liability When Volunteering  for 
Evaluating Damage from  Disasters
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative RYKERSON  of Kittery.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BABBIDGE of  Kennebunk, CAIAZZO  of Scarborough, 
DOORE of  Augusta, HARNETT of Gardiner, HUBBELL of Bar  Harbor,  JORGENSEN  of 
Portland, KESSLER of South Portland, Senator: CARPENTER of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR0865(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  14 MRSA ยง172 is enacted to read:
3ยง172.  Liability related to professional services for natural disaster or catastrophe
41.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
5following terms have the following meanings.
6A.  "Architect" means a person licensed as an architect under Title 32, chapter 3-A.
7B.  "Building inspection official" means a public official with executive responsibility 
8to coordinate building inspection in the jurisdiction in which a natural disaster or 
9catastrophe has occurred.
10C.  "Contractor" means a person engaged in the business of designing, developing, 
11constructing, altering, adding to or repairing new or existing structures, buildings, 
12facilities, project utilities, equipment, machines, processes, piping or other engineered 
13systems or infrastructure or their appurtenances.
14D.  "Engineer" means a person licensed as a professional engineer under Title 32, 
15chapter 19.
16E.  "Environmental official" means a public official with executive responsibility for 
17coordinating an environmental response in the jurisdiction in which a natural disaster 
18or catastrophe has occurred.
19F.  "Environmental professional" means a person engaged in the business of 
20providing hazardous waste site clean-up services.  "Environmental professional" 
21includes a hazardous waste transporter licensed according to Title 38, section 
221319-O.
23G.  "Land surveyor" means a person licensed as a professional land surveyor 
24according to Title 32, chapter 141.
25H.  "Landscape architect" means a person licensed as a landscape architect under 
26Title 32, chapter 3-A.
27I.  "Law enforcement official" means a public official with executive responsibility to 
28coordinate law enforcement in the jurisdiction in which a natural disaster or 
29catastrophe has occurred.
30J.  "Natural disaster or catastrophe" means an event, whether natural or human-made, 
31that is declared an emergency by the President of the United States or by the 
32Governor or that results in the deployment of emergency response personnel or the 
33displacement of persons from the area of the event.
34K.  "Planner" means a person certified by the American Institute of Certified 
35Planners, or successor organization, as a certified planner.
36L.  "Public official" means a federal, state or local appointed or elected official with 
37executive responsibility in the jurisdiction in which a natural disaster or catastrophe 
38has occurred.
Page 2 - 129LR0865(01)-11M.  "Public safety official" means a public official with executive responsibility to 
2coordinate public safety in the jurisdiction in which a natural disaster or catastrophe 
3has occurred.
42.  Immunity.  An architect, contractor, environmental professional, land surveyor, 
5landscape architect, planner or engineer who voluntarily, without compensation other 
6than expense reimbursement, and acting in good faith provides, under the applicable 
7license or certification, architectural, structural, electrical, mechanical or other 
8engineering, planning, land surveying, hazardous waste site clean-up, contracting or other 
9professional design services related to a natural disaster or catastrophe at the request of or 
10with the approval of a public official, law enforcement official, public safety official, 
11building inspection official or environmental official believed by the architect, contractor, 
12environmental professional, land surveyor, landscape architect, planner or engineer to be 
13acting in an official capacity is not liable for any personal injury, wrongful death, 
14property damage or other loss of any nature related to the architect's, contractor's, 
15environmental professional's, land surveyor's, landscape architect's, planner's or 
16engineer's acts, errors or omissions in the performance of engineering, architectural, 
17planning, land surveying, hazardous waste site clean-up or contracting services for a site, 
18a structure, a building, a facility, a project utility, equipment, a machine, a process, piping 
19or some other engineered system, either publicly or privately owned.
203.  Voluntary services.  The immunity provided in this section applies to only 
21voluntary architectural, structural, electrical, mechanical or other engineering, planning, 
22land surveying, hazardous waste site clean-up, contracting or other professional design 
23services related to a natural disaster or catastrophe that are provided during the natural 
24disaster or catastrophe or within 90 days following the end of the natural disaster or 
25catastrophe, unless the period of emergency is extended by an executive order issued by 
26the President of the United States or the Governor under the President's or Governor's 
27emergency executive powers.
284.  Reckless or intentional misconduct.  Nothing in this section provides immunity 
29for reckless or intentional misconduct.
305.  State and local liability not affected.  When an architect, contractor, 
31environmental professional, land surveyor, landscape architect, planner or engineer 
32voluntarily renders services at the request of or with the approval of a state or local 
33official and when such services fall within the immunity of this section, the liability of the 
34state or locality, if any, that requested the services is not affected by this section.  The 
35immunity provided in this section is in addition to immunity provided in Title 37-B, 
36section 784-A.
37SUMMARY
38This bill provides civil immunity for architects, contractors, environmental 
39professionals, land surveyors, landscape architects, planners and professional engineers 
40who provide voluntary professional services during or within 90 days of a natural disaster 
41or catastrophe when the services are provided under the applicable license or 
42certification, are related to the natural disaster or catastrophe and are provided at the 
Page 3 - 129LR0865(01)-11request of a federal, state or local public official, law enforcement official, public safety 
2official or building inspection official.  No immunity is provided for reckless or 
3intentional misconduct.
4The bill is based on a similar Massachusetts law.
