 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1018
S.P. 297 In Senate, February 28, 2019
Resolve, To  Review the Laws Governing the Enforcement of 
Protection from Abuse  Orders
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator ROSEN of Hancock.  (BY REQUEST)
Cosponsored by Representative WARREN of Hallowell and
Senators: CYRWAY  of Kennebec, DESCHAMBAULT  of York, KEIM of Oxford,  
TIMBERLAKE of Androscoggin, Representatives: FECTEAU of Biddeford, GROHOSKI of Ellsworth, McCREIGHT of Harpswell.

Page 1 - 129LR0871(01)-11Sec. 1.  Enforcement of protection from abuse orders review.  Resolved:  
2That the Department of Public Safety shall convene a work group to review the laws 
3governing enforcement of protection from abuse orders and how protection from abuse 
4orders are enforced by law enforcement officers.  The review must include a review of 
5penalties for submitting malicious or false allegations, especially for the purpose of 
6retaliation, when filing a request for a protection from abuse order.  The department shall 
7invite to participate in the work group providers of mental health services, representatives 
8of law enforcement and public safety agencies, medical professionals, members of the 
9legal community with experience in matters related to protection from abuse orders and 
10other individuals who have experience or expertise in protection from abuse orders.
11Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That, by December 7, 2019, the Department of Public 
12Safety shall submit a report, including any recommended legislation, to the Joint Standing 
13Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety.  The joint standing committee may 
14report out a bill concerning the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th 
15Legislature.
16SUMMARY
17This resolve requires the Department of Public Safety to convene a work group to 
18review the laws governing enforcement of protection from abuse orders and how those 
19orders are enforced by law enforcement officers.
