 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 664
H.P. 485 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2019
An Act  To Organize Biannual County Meetings  for Local School 
Boards
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SAMPSON of Alfred.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  DeVEAU of Caribou, DOLLOFF  of Rumford, GRIGNON  of 
Athens, ORDWAY of Standish, PERKINS of Oakland, PRESCOTT of Waterboro,  
RUDNICKI of Fairfield, Senator: WOODSOME of York.

Page 1 - 129LR1732(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง1005 is enacted to read:
3ยง1005.  Countywide meetings
4The state board shall organize and oversee a biannual meeting in each county for the 
5school boards in each county to attend for the purpose of engaging in peer-to-peer 
6discussions, developing new ideas and reviewing proposed rule changes by the 
7department and other policies and issues impacting school administrative units.  Each 
8school board may send up to 3 representatives, and the state board shall send at least one 
9representative to the biannual county meeting.  Costs for a biannual county meeting must 
10be split between the state board and the school administrative units in that county.
11SUMMARY
12This bill requires the State Board of Education to organize a biannual meeting in each 
13county for the school boards in each county to engage in peer-to-peer discussions, 
14develop new ideas and review proposed rule changes by the Department of Education and 
15other policies and issues impacting school administrative units.  Each school board may 
16send up to 3 representatives, and the state board shall send at least one representative to 
17the biannual county meeting.  Costs for a biannual county meeting must be split between 
18the state board and the school administrative units in that county.
