 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 439
S.P. 117 In Senate,  January  29, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Commissioner  of Health and Human Services 
To Convene a Task Force To Study the Need for  Long-term Acute 
Care Hospital
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CLAXTON of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Senators:  GRATWICK  of Penobscot, LIBBY of Androscoggin, SANBORN, 
L. of Cumberland,  Representative: CARNEY of Cape Elizabeth.

Page 1 - 129LR1551(01)-11Sec. 1.  Commissioner of Health and Human Services to convene task 
2force.  Resolved:  That the Commissioner of Health and Human Services shall convene 
3a task force to evaluate the need for long-term acute care beds in the State.
4Sec. 2.  Task force duties.  Resolved:  That the evaluation by the task force 
5convened under section 1 must include:
61.  An estimate of the patient population in the State needing services provided by 
7long-term acute care hospitals and where that patient population is receiving care now;
82.  An analysis of the financial impact of the lack of long-term acute care beds on 
9patients, families and facilities in the State;
103.  An evaluation of the best locations in the State for long-term acute care beds; and
114.  An evaluation of the options available regarding the number of long-term acute 
12care beds in the State, including an estimate of the costs to establish a long-term acute 
13care hospital in the State and designating existing beds as long-term acute care beds.
14Sec. 3.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Commissioner of Health and Human 
15Services shall report the findings and conclusions of the task force under section 2, 
16including any recommended legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
17Human Services by December 1, 2019.  The joint standing committee is authorized to 
18submit a bill related to the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
19SUMMARY
20This resolve requires the Commissioner of Health and Human Services to convene a 
21task force to evaluate the need for long-term acute care beds in the State.  The 
22commissioner is required to submit a report detailing findings of the task force and 
23recommended legislation to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
24Services, which may submit a bill related to the report to the Second Regular Session of 
25the 129th Legislature.
