 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 964
H.P. 719 House of  Representatives, February 21, 2019
Resolve, To  Study Housing Options for  Persons with Mental  Health 
Challenges and  Substance Use Disorder
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BEEBE-CENTER of  Rockland.
Cosponsored by Senator MOORE  of Washington  and
Representatives: COREY of  Windham, EVANGELOS of Friendship, HYMANSON of York, 
MADIGAN of Waterville, STOVER of Boothbay, SYLVESTER of Portland,  Senator:  ROSEN 
of Hancock.

Page 1 - 129LR1083(01)-11Sec. 1.  Study Commission to Assess Housing Needs of Persons with 
2Mental Health Challenges and Substance Use Disorder established.  
3Resolved:  That the Study Commission to Assess Housing Needs of Persons with 
4Mental Health Challenges and Substance Use Disorder, referred to in this resolve as "the 
5study commission," is established.
6Sec. 2.  Study commission membership.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding 
7Joint Rule 353, the study commission consists of 9 members as follows:
81.  One member of the Senate who is a member of the Joint Standing Committee on 
9Health and Human Services, appointed by the President of the Senate;
102.  One member of the House of Representatives who is a member of the Joint 
11Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, appointed by the Speaker of the 
12House;
133.  A representative of the Consumer Council System of Maine, appointed by the 
14President of the Senate from a list of members submitted by the Consumer Council 
15System of Maine;
164.  A representative of Homeless Voices for Justice, appointed by the Speaker of the 
17House from a list of advocates submitted by Homeless Voices for Justice;
185.  A representative of Disability Rights Maine, appointed by the President of the 
19Senate from a list of members submitted by Disability Rights Maine;
206.  A representative of the National Alliance on Mental Illness, appointed by the 
21Speaker of the House from a list of advocates submitted by the National Alliance on 
22Mental Illness;
237.  A representative of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
24appointed by the Speaker of the House from a list of advocates submitted by the Alliance 
25for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine; and
268.  Two employees of the Department of Health and Human Services, one from the 
27office of substance abuse and mental health services and one from Riverview Psychiatric 
28Center, both appointed by the Commissioner of Health and Human Services.
29Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the Senate member is the Senate chair and the 
30House of Representatives member is the House chair of the study commission.
31Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of study commission.  Resolved:  That all 
32appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 
33resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 
34Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 
35the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the study commission.  If 30 days or 
36more after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have 
37been made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant 
38authority for the study commission to meet and conduct its business.
Page 2 - 129LR1083(01)-11Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the study commission shall assess the housing 
2needs of persons who are living with mental health challenges and who have substance 
3use disorder.  The study commission shall focus on the needs of such individuals in rural 
4areas of the State.  The study commission shall explore methods of expanding the options 
5and availability of housing for such individuals, including options that support the unique 
6housing needs of such individuals.
7Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the 
8Legislative Council shall provide necessary staffing services to the study commission, 
9except that Legislative Council staff support is not authorized when the Legislature is in 
10regular or special session.
11Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, no later than 
12January 15, 2020, the study commission shall submit a report that includes its findings 
13and recommendations, including suggested legislation, for presentation to the Second 
14Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
15SUMMARY
16This resolve establishes the Study Commission to Assess Housing Needs of Persons 
17with Mental Health Challenges and Substance Use Disorder and requires the study 
18commission to assess the housing needs of persons who are living with mental health 
19challenges and who have substance use disorder, with a focus on the needs of such 
20individuals located in rural Maine.  The study commission is required to explore methods 
21of expanding the options and availability of housing for such individuals, including 
22options that support the unique housing needs of such individuals, and report its findings 
23and recommendations to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
