 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1425
H.P. 1038 House of  Representatives, March 28, 2019
An Act  To Maintain the Integrity of  the Department of Education 
by Prohibiting Its Promotion of Policies and Practices That  Are Not 
Based on Rigorous Peer  Review and  Analysis, Limiting Acceptance 
of Private Funding in Implementing and  Influencing State Policy 
and Retaining  the Home Rule Powers  to School  Administrative 
Units
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SAMPSON of Alfred.
Cosponsored by Senator DOW of Lincoln and
Representatives: FECTEAU of  Augusta, HAGGAN of Hampden, HANDY of Lewiston,  
O'CONNOR of Berwick, ORDWAY of Standish, PICKETT of Dixfield, STEARNS of Guilford, TUELL of East Machias.

Page 1 - 129LR1730(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง256, sub-ยง11 is enacted to read:
311.  Limit on authority.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the 
4commissioner may not:
5A.  Promote policies, programs, procedures or experiments in public schools that do 
6not adhere to rigorous standards of peer review and established statistical procedures 
7for determining the effectiveness in producing clearly identified outcomes;
8B.  Contract with or accept funding from private entities to implement state policies; 
9or
10C.  Maintain membership in regional or national educational organizations or 
11associations that are funded by private entities, including, but not limited to, a 
12consortium of New England secondary schools.
13Sec. 2.  Withdraw from New England Secondary School Consortium.  The 
14Commissioner of Education shall withdraw the State from the New England Secondary 
15School Consortium on the effective date of this Act.
16Sec. 3.  Return to home rule powers; report.  The Department of Education 
17shall, in consultation with school administrative units and the Maine Municipal 
18Association, study how to return home rule powers granted to municipalities by the 
19Maine Revised Statutes, Title 30-A, chapter 111 and by the Constitution of Maine, 
20Article VIII, Part Second to school administrative units. The department shall report to 
21the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs on the department's 
22findings and recommendations, including recommended legislation, no later than January 
231, 2020.  The committee may report out legislation related to the subject matter of the 
24report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
25SUMMARY
26This bill prohibits the Commissioner of Education and Department of Education 
27personnel from promoting policies, programs, procedures or experiments in schools that 
28do not adhere to rigorous standards of peer review and established statistical procedures 
29for determining the effectiveness in producing clearly identified outcomes and from 
30contracting with and accepting funding from private entities to implement state policies.  
31This bill also directs the commissioner to withdraw from the New England Secondary 
32School Consortium and prohibits the commissioner from maintaining membership in 
33regional or national groups that are funded by private entities. The bill also directs the 
34Department of Education, in consultation with school administrative units and the Maine 
35Municipal Association, to study how to return home rule powers to school administrative 
36units.
