 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
,y}}(J,,\ ( 
·, ,I .J 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 Date: ts>µ{) /ti L.D. 1752 
(Filing No. H-5-~~ 
ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY 
Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
129TH LEGISLATURE 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "A" to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752, Bill, "An Act To 
Amend the Charter of the Boothbay Harbor Sewer District" 
Amend the bill by strildng out everything after the enacting clause and inserting the 
following: 
'Sec. 1. P&SL 1961, c. 161, as enacted by P&SL 1961, c. 161; and amended by 
P&SL 1971, c. 54; P&SL 1991, c. 81, §1; P&SL 1993, c. 59, §1; P&SL 1997, c. 14, §1; 
and P&SL 2005, c. 34, §§ 1 and 2, is further amended to read: 
Sec. 1. Territorial limits; incorporation. The territory and the inhabitants of 
the Town of Boothbay Harbor in the County of Lincoln and the territory and the 
inhabitants of the Town of Boothbay in the County of Lincoln constitute a public 
sewerage district and a body politic and corporate under the name of "Boothbay Harbor 
Sewer District." The purpose of this district, subject to the provisions of section 10, is to 
take over, control, operate and manage the sewers now owned by the Town of Boothbay 
Harbor with all appurtenances thereto; to extend, increase, enlarge and improve these 
sewers; to extend the present system or systems so as to furnish sewerage facilities to 
parts of the district not now served with those facilities; to provide for removal and 
treatment of sewage when, as and if that treatment becomes necessary; and generally to 
construct, maintain, operate and provide a system of sewerage, sewage disposal and 
sewage treatment for public purposes and for the health, welfare, comfort and 
convenience of the inhabitants of the district. 
Sec. 2. Authority to locate, construct and maintain; coordination with 
municipal planning. Within said territory and the territory of any adjoining 
municipality, said Boothbay Harbor Sewer District is authorized to lay pipes, drains, 
sewers and conduits, and to take up, repair and maintain the same or to contract for the 
same to be done, in, along and through any public or private ways and public grounds, 
and in, along and through lands of any person or corporation as hereafter provided, to and 
into tidal waters, rivers, watercourses or treatment works or to or into any drain or sewer 
now or hereafter built which empties into tidal waters, rivers, watercourses or treatment 
works, the discharge therefrom to be at such points consistent with the requirements of 
Page 1 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "A" to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
1 public health as shall be found convenient and reasonable for said district and the flow of 
2 existing watercourses; to locate, construct and maintain treatment works, pumping 
3 stations, basins, reservoirs, flush tanlcs and such other appliances for collecting, holding, 
4 purifying, distributing and disposing of sewage matter, commercial and industrial waste 
5 and, subject to the provisions of section 10, of surfase and waste water, all as may be 
6 necessary or proper; and in general, do any or all other things necessary or incidental to 
7 accomplish the purposes of this act. 
8 The coordination of municipal planning and sewer extension planning is governed by 
9 the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 1037, subsection 1. 
10 See. 3. } .. uthority to aequire and hold property; right of eminent domain 
11 eonferred. Upon asoeptanse of this aot as hereafter provided, and subject to the 
12 provisions of section 10, title to all public sewers in the Tovm of Boothbay Harbor shall 
13 fortlr.vith pass to and be vested in said district, and said district thereafter shall maintain 
14 and operate the same. The said district is authorized and empov1ered to acquire and hold 
15 real and personal property necessary or convenient for the purposes of this aot, and is 
16 eJEpressly granted the right of eminent domain, and for the purposes of this aot is 
17 authorized to tab and hold, either by exercising its right of eminent domain, or by 
18 purchase, lease or otherwise, as for public uses any land, real estate, easements or 
19 interests therein, and any sewers, drains or conduits and any se>.ver or drainage rights 
20 necessary for oonstruoting, establishing, maintaining and operating sev,rers, drains, 
21 reservoirs, flush tanks, manholes, oatoh basins, treatment works, pumping stations and 
22 other appliances and property used or useful for oolleoting, holding, purifying, 
23 distributing and disposing of sewage matter and industrial waste and surface and waste 
24 waters. Nothing herein contained should be oonstmed as authorizing said distriot to take 
25 by right of eminent domain any of the property or faoilities of any other public servioe 
26 corporation or district used or required for future use by the owner thereof in the 
27 performanse of a publis duty. unless expressly authorized by subsequent aot of the 
28 Legislature. 
29 Sec. 3-A. Authority to acquire and hold property; right of eminent 
30 domain conferred; procedures; damages. The authority and procedures for the 
31 exercise of eminent domain are governed by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 
32 1040. 
33 See. 4. Notiee; proeedure under eminent domain. In eJEeroising from time to 
34 time the right of eminent domain conferred upon it, said district, by its board of trustees, 
35 shall file in the office of the county commissioners of Lincoln County and cause to be 
36 recorded in the registry of deeds in said county plans of the location of all lands, real 
37 estate, easements or interest therein, and sewers, drains or conduits and any sewer or 
38 drainage rights to be taken, v1ith an appropriate description and the names of the ovmers 
39 thereof, if lmov,n. When for any reason the district fails to acquire property whish it is 
40 authorized to take and whioh is dessribed in suoh location, or if the location so recorded 
41 is defoctive and uncertain, it may, at any time, correct and perfect such location and file a 
42 new description thereof; and in suoh ease the district is liable in damages only for 
43 property for 1.vhioh the owner had not previously been paid, to be assessed as of the time 
44 of the original taking, and the district shall not be liable for any aots 1,vhioh would have 
45 been iustified if the orieinal takine had been lawful. No entrv shall be made on anv 
Page 2 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
private lands, except to make surveys, until the expiration. of 10 days from such filing, 
2 ,,vhereupon possession may be had of all said lands, real estate, easements or interests 
3 therein and other property and rights as aforesaid to be taken. but title thereto shall not 
4 vest in said district until navment therefor. 
5 See. 5. Assessment of damages by eou.nty eommissioners; proeedu.re on 
6 appeals. If any person st1staining damages by any taking as aforesaid shall not agree 
7 with said district upon the sum to be paid therefor, either party, upon petition to the 
8 county commissioners of Lincoln County, may have said damages assessed by them; the 
9 procedl:lfe and all subsequent proceedings and right of appeal thereon shall be had under 
10 the same rnstriotions, conditions and limitations as are or mav be bv law nresoribed in the 
11 case of damages by the laying out of highways. 
12 Sec. 6. Limitations on crossing a public utility. In case of crossing of any 
13 public utility, unless consent is given by the company owning or operating such public 
14 utility as to place, manner and conditions of the crossing within 30 days after such 
15 consent is requested by said district, the Public Utilities Commission shall determine the 
16 place, manner and conditions of such crossing; and all work on the property of such 
17 public utility shall be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of such public 
18 utility, but at the expense of the district. If any sewer line of the district as provided 
19 above crosses the property or line of any railroad corporation, the procedure is the same 
20 as stated in the previous sentence, except that the Department of Transportation must be 
21 substituted for the Public Utilities Commission. Nothing herein contained shall be 
22 construed as authorizing said district to take by right of eminent domain any of the 
23 property or facilities of any other public service corporation or district used or acquired 
24 for future use by the owner thereof in the performance of a public duty unless expressly 
25 authorized herein or by subsequent act of the Legislature. 
26 Sec. 7. Rights of abutters or others to enter. A person not otherwise required 
27 to connect a private sewer into a sewer of the district may connect to the district's sewer if 
28 that person obtains a permit from the district and pays any charges required by this 
29 section. Any such person may enter his the private sewer into any sewer of the district 
30 while the same is under construction and before completion of said sewer at the point of 
31 entry, and before an entrance charge is established, on obtaining a permit in writing from. 
32 the trustees superintendent of the district; but after the sewer is completed to the point of 
33 entry and an entrance charge established on that location, no such person shall enter his 
34 the private sewer into such sewer until he the person has paid the entrance charge and 
35 obtained a permit in writing from the trustees superintendent as aforesaid. All such 
36 permits shall be recorded by the clerk of the district in its records before the same are 
37 issued. 
38 Sec. 8. Contracts with municipalities authorized. The said district is 
39 authorized to contract with persons, corporations, districts and other, utilities, 
40 municipalities, ooth the State or other governmental entity whether located inside and or 
41 outside the boundaries of the district, including the Town of Boothbay Harbor and the 
42 Town of Boothbay, to provide for disposal of sewage and commercial and industrial 
43 waste through the district's system and through the system of any such person, 
44 corporation, district or other, utility or municipality or the State or other governmental 
45 entity; and said Town of Boothbay Harbor is and Town of Boothbay are authorized to 
Page 3 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEEAMENDMENT"/1 "toH.P.1247,L.D.1752 
1 contract, individually or together, with said district for the collection, distribution and 
2 disposal of sewage, surfaoe water and other waste matter, and for said purposes, said 
3 teWfl: towns may raise money as for other municipal charges. 
4 Sec. 9. Excavation or repair work, closing of ways. Whenever said district 
5 shall enter, dig up or excavate any public way or other land for the purpose of laying its 
6 sewers, drains or pipes, constructing manholes or catch basins or their appurtenances, or 
7 maintaining the same, or for any other purpose, the work shall be expeditiously done with 
8 the least possible interruption, and on completion of the work, the district shall restore 
9 said way or land to the condition it was in prior to such work, or to a condition equally as 
10 good. 
11 Whenever the character of the work is such as to endanger travel on any public way, 
12 the municipal officers of the Town of Boothbay Harbor, the Town of Boothbay or the 
13 Department of Transportation, as appropriate, may order a temporary closing of such 
14 way, and of any intersecting way, upon request of said district, and the way shall remain 
15 closed to public travel until said municipal officers or officials of the department deem it 
16 is restored to a condition safe for traffic. 
17 Sec. 10. Surface water facilities; joint facilities; separation of same. Any 
18 other provision of this act to the contrary notwithstanding, the said district shall be under 
19 no duty or obligation to construct, maintain, improve, extend or provide drains, pipes, 
20 catch basins or any other facilities for storm or surface water drainage, and all drains, 
21 pipes, catch basins or other facilities owned by said the Town of Boothbay Harbor or the 
22 Town of Boothbay and used exclusively for storm or surface water drainage shall remain 
23 the property of said the town, and no such drain, pipe, catch basin or other facility shall 
24 be transferred to the district to be thereafter maintained and operated by the district 
25 without the joint approval of the selectmen municipal officers of said the Town of 
26 Boothbay Harbor or the Town of Boothbay and the trustees of said district. Any sewer or 
27 drain owned by said Town of Boothbay Harbor at the time of acceptance of this act and 
28 used for both sanitary sewage disposal and storm and surface water drainage shall pass to 
29 and be vested in said district, and said district shall be entitled to charge said town for the 
30 use of the same for storm or surface water drainage at such rates as the trustees may 
31 determine. No additional catch basins or other facilities draining into any such combined 
32 sewer or drain shall be constructed without the approval of said trustees. If and when the 
33 district shall construct and provide a sewer or drain which permits separation of sanitary 
34 sewage previously disposed of through any such combined sewer or drain, the said 
35 district, by vote of the trustees, shall transfer and convey back to said Town of Boothbay 
36 Harbor the facilities for storm and surface water drainage. 
37 Sec. 10-A. Lease of property. The lease of property by the district is governed 
38 by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 1045. 
39 Sec. 11. Free access to premises. The officers or agents of the district shall have 
40 free access to all premises served by its sewers, at all reasonable hours, for inspection of 
41 plumbing and sewage fixtures, to ascertain the quality and quantity of sewage discharged 
42 and the manner of discharge, and to enforce the provisions of this act and the rules and 
43 regulations prescribed by the trustees hereunder. 
Page 4 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 'A" to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
Sec. 12. Buildings to connect with sewer if available. Eveey Except as 
2 provided in this section, upon receiving a request from the district to connect a building in 
3 the district intended for industrial, business or recreational use or for human habitation or 
4 occupancy whieh or that has facilities for discharge or disposal of waste water or 
5 commercial or industrial waste and that is located within -1-00 200 feet of a public sewer 
6 on property abutting on a street or way in which there is a public sewer, or any such 
7 building within -1-00 200 feet of a public sewer, shall have a house drainage system vAtleh 
8 shall be eaused to be eonneoted vl:ith the sev1ei· by the ovmer or person against v,rhom 
9 taxes on the premises am assessed in the most direst manner possible the owner of that 
10 building shall arrange to have the building connected through a sanitary sewer or 
11 drainage system to the district's accessible sewer or drain within 90 days after receiving 
12 request therefor from the district, or within such further time as the trustees of the district 
13 may grant, and, if feasible~ with a separate connection for each house or building; 
14 provided, however, that existing buildings whieh are already served by a satisfactory 
15 private sewer system 1,vhieh meets and continues to meet, in the judgment of the trustees, 
16 the applicable requirements of the State Plumbing Code and all applieable laws and 
17 ordinanees shall not be required to eonneet with the publie sev,rer connections for existing 
18 buildings which are already served by a private sewer system are governed by the Maine 
19 Revised Statutes, Title 38. section 1046, subsection 4. A person who receives a notice in 
20 accordance with this section to connect to a building and fails to connect to the building 
21 in accordance with this section is subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $2.500, payable 
22 to the district. This penalty is recoverable in a civil action. 
23 Sec. 13. Sanitary provisions and penalty for violations. Any A person woo 
24 shall may not place, discharge or leave any offensive or injurious matter or material on or 
25 in the conduits, catch basins or receptacles of said district contrary to its regulations, or 
26 shall willfully knowingly injure any conduit, pipe, reservoir, flush tank, catch basin, 
27 manhole, outlet, engine, pump or other property held, owned or used by said district for 
28 the purposes of this act shall-be liable to pay twiee the amount of the damages to said 
29 district, to be reeovered in any proper aotion; and sueh person, on eonvietion of any of 
30 said aets or willful injury aforesaid and any person vmo violates the provisions of seetions 
31 11 or 12, shall be punished by a fine not exeeeding $200 or by imprisonment not 
32 6*eeeding one year, or by both. A person who violates this section is liable to pay twice 
33 the amount of the damages to the district to be recovered in any proper action and is 
34 subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $2.500 for each violation, payable to the district. 
35 The civil penalty is recoverable in a civil action. Penalty for violation of standards by an 
36 industrial user is governed by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 1046, 
37 subsection 1. 
38 Sec. 14. Trustees and officer; tenure of office; election to office; 
39 organization; vacancies; compensation. All of the affairs of said the district shall 
40 be are managed by a board of 3 trustees, who must be residents therein. ,vho shall be 
41 ehosen as hereinafter provided of the district. 
42 As soon as may be after aeeeptanee of this aet, the munieipal offieers of the Tov.r,a of 
43 Boothbay Harbor shall appoint 3 trustees of said district to hold offiee as foll01tVs: one to 
44 serve until the first annual meeting of said tovm follovling the aeoeptanee of this aet; one 
45 to serve until the 2nd ammal meeting of said tovm following such aeeeptanee; and one to 
46 serve until the 3rd annual meetine of said tovm followine sueh aemmtanee. At eaeh 
Page 5 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT fi "to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
annual meeting of said tovm, beginning with the first annual meeting after aoseptanse of 
2 this aot, one trustee shall be elected by ballot as hereafter provided to serve until the 
3 annual meeting of said tovm oosurring 3 years thereafter and until his suooessor is eleoted 
4 and qualified. When any trustee ceases to be a resident of said district, he vacates his 
5 office as trustee. l..11 trnstees. if rssidents of said district. shall be elieible for reeleotion 
6 or reappointment. 
7 The nomination of all candidates for trustee to be elected as provided by this aot shall 
8 be by nomination papers signed in the aggregate for eaoh sandidate by not less than 25 
9 nor more than 50 qualified voters resident in said district. Bash voter signing a 
10 nomination paper shall make his signature in person, and eaoh voter may subsoribe to as 
11 many nominations as there are trustees to be elested in said district and no more. Sush 
12 nomination papers, before being filed, shall be submitted to the tovm clerk of the Town of 
13 Boothbay Harbor, 1.vho shall forthwith certify thereon that number of the signatures whish 
14 are names of qualified voters resident in said district. One of the signers to eaoh such 
15 separate paper shall sv1ear to the ttuth thereon, and the oertifisate of sush oath shall be 
16 annexed to or made upon the nomination papers. Such nomination papers shall be filed 
17 with the tovm olork of the Town of Boothbay Harbor not less than 14 days, exclusive of 
18 Sundays, previous to the day of suoh election. With sush nomination papers shall also be 
19 filed the consent in 1.vriting of the person or persons nominated. All nomination papers, 
20 being filed and being in apparent conformity 1.vith the foregoing provisions, shall be 
21 deemed to be valid. If not in apparent sonformity, they may be seasonably amended 
22 under oath. In ease any candidate 1.vho has been duly nominated under the provisions 
23 hereof shall die before the day of election, or shall withdra.1.v in vmting, or shall remove 
24 his place of residence from said district, the vasaney may be supplied in the manner 
25 herein provided for such nominations, except that the time limit for filing sush 
26 nomination papers shall not apply. The name so supplied for the vaoaney shall, if the 
27 ballots have not been printed, be placed on the ballots instead of the original nomination; 
28 or if the ballots have been printed, nO\v ballots oontaining the nevi nomination shall, if 
29 praotioal, be furnished, or slips eontaining the new nomination shall be printed under the 
30 direstion of the tovm olerk which shall be pasted upon said ballots and over the name of 
31 the eandidate ·whose nomination has been vasated as aforesaid, and thereafter shall 
32 beeome part of said ballots as if originally printed thonmn. The ballot in said district 
33 shall contain the names of all candidates so nominated in such district alphabetically 
34 arranged, printed in one column under the heading "For Trustee of the Boothbay Harbor · 
35 Se>,ver District." } .. hove suoh heading shall be printed "Vote for ???? (the number to be 
36 elected to be inserted therein). Make a oross or a check mark to the right of the name(s) 
37 voted for." As many blank spaoes shall be left after the names of the candidates as there 
38 are trustees to be eleoted in vAlioh the voter may, by vmting, insert the name of any 
39 person or persons for 1.vhom he desires to vote. In preparing his ballot the voter shall 
40 mark a cross (X) or a sheck mark (v) against and to the right of such names on the ballot 
41 as he desires to vote for, not to exceed the number of trustees so to be elected in said 
42 district. A.t eaoh annual meeting of said Tov,rn of Boothbay Harbor, balloting for trustee 
43 of said district shall take place concurrently v;ith balloting for the municipal officers of 
44 said town, but separate ballots shall be provided for the balloting for trnstee of the district 
45 as hereinbefore provided. The resuk of suoh eleotion shall be declared by the selectmen 
46 of said Town of Boothbav Harbor and due certificate thereof filed v;rith the town clerk 
Page 6 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 'fi "to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
and the clerk of the district. The district shall reimbl:lfse the tovm for the expense of any 
2 distriot eleotion. 
3 As soon as convenient after their appointment, the first board of trustees shall hold a 
4 meeting at some convenient place in the district, to be called by any member thereof in 
5 writing, designating the time and place and delivered in hand to the other 2 members not 
6 less than 2 full days before the meeting; provided, however, that they may meet by 
7 agreement without such notice. At this original meeting the trustees shall organize by 
8 electing from their ovm members a chairman, a treasurer and a clerk and adopting a 
9 corporate seal. The trustees may adopt and establish by lav,rs, consistent 1.vith the laws of 
10 the State of Maine and necessary for their ovm convenience and the proper management 
11 of the affairs of the district. and nerform anv other acts vlithin the nowers dele!:tated to 
12 them by law. 
13 Within one week after eaoh annual election, the trustees shall meet for the purpose of 
14 electing a chairman, treasurer and clerk to serve for the ensuing year and until their 
15 successors are elected and qualified. The trustees from time to time may choose and 
16 employ, and fix the compensation of, any other necessary officers and agents vlllO shall 
17 servo at their pleasure. The treasut·er shall furnish bond in such sum and ·.vi.th such 
18 sl:lfeties as the trustees shall approve, the cost thereof to be paid by the district. 
19 Members of the board of trustees shall be eligible to any office under the board. The 
20 trustees, as such, shall serve vtithout compensation: but the treasl:lfer may be allowed such 
21 compensation as the trustees shall determine. 
22 The trustees shall be sworn to the faithful performance of their duties as such, villi.ch 
23 shall include the duties of any member 1.vho shall serve as olerk or clerk pro tern. They 
24 shall make and publish an annual repo1t, including a report of the treasl:lfer. and such 
25 report may be inoluded in, and published as part of, the tovm repo1t. 
26 Vacancies in the office of trustee from whatever cause shall be filled by appointment 
27 by the remaining trustees until the next annual election. If at any annual election there 
28 shall exist a vacancy in an uneRpired term, a trnstee shall be elected to fill such vacancy 
29 for such unexpired term, and the voters of the district shall cast their ballots as 
30 hereinbefore prescribed, voting for as many candidates as there are offices to be filled. 
31 1. Nominations and elections of trustees must be conducted in accordance with the 
32 laws relating to municipal elections in the Maine Revised Statutes. Title 30-A, chapter 
33 121. and all elections must be conducted by secret ballot in accordance with Title 30-A. 
34 section 2528. 
35 When the term of office of a trustee expires, the trustee's successor is elected at large by a 
36 plurality vote of the voters of the district. For the purpose of election, a special election 
37 must be called and held on the date established by the trustees. The election must be 
38 called by the trustees of the district in the same manner as town meetings are called and, 
39 for this purpose, the trustees are vested with the powers of municipal officers. 
40 The trustees shall acquire a complete list of all the registered voters residing in the 
41 district. The trustees may acquire this list from the registrar of any town within the 
42 district. The towns may charge a fee for providing the list. The list acquired by the 
43 trustees governs the eligibility of a voter, since a voter eligible to vote for trustees and on 
44 district matters generally must be a voter in the town from which the trustee is elected. 
Page 7 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT"/!" to H.P. 1247,L.D. 1752 
1 Voters who reside outside the territorial limits of the district, as defined in this act. are not 
2 eligible voters. All warrants issued for elections by the trustees must show that only the 
3 voters residing within the territorial limits of the district are entitled to vote. 
4 2. When any tmstee ceases to be a resident of the district, that trustee vacates the 
5 office as trustee. A trustee, if a resident of the district, is eligible for reelection or 
6 reappointment. A person who is a municipal officer, as defined in the Maine Revised 
7 Statutes. Title 30-A, section 2001, subsection 10. of either of the towns located within the 
8 district is not eligible for appointment. nomination or election as a trustee of the district. 
9 3. The tmstees may adopt and establish bylaws, consistent with the laws of the State 
10 of Maine and necessary for their own convenience and the proper management of the 
11 affairs of the district. and perform any other acts within the powers delegated to them by 
12 law. 
13 4. Within 2 weeks after each annual election, the trustees shall meet for the purpose 
14 of electing a chair, treasurer and clerk to serve for the ensuing year and until their 
15 successors are elected and qualified. The tmstees from time to time may choose and 
16 employ, and fix the compensation of, any other necessary officers and agents who shall 
17 serve at their pleasure. The treasurer shall furnish bond in such sum and with such 
18 sureties as the tmstees shall approve. the cost thereof to be paid by the district. 
19 5. The trustees of the district receive compensation in accordance with the Maine 
20 Revised Statutes, Title 38. section 1036. subsection 7. 
21 6. The tmstees must be sworn to the faithful performance of their duties as such, 
22 which must include the duties of any member who serves as clerk or clerk pro tern. They 
23 shall make and publish an annual report, including a report of the treasurer, and such 
24 report may be included in. and published as part of, the town report. 
25 7. Business of the district must be conducted in accordance with the applicable 
26 provisions of the Freedom of Access Act. 
27 8. Vacancies in the office of trnstee from whatever cause must be filled by 
28 appointment by the remaining trustees until the next annual election. If at any annual 
29 election there exists a vacancy in an unexpired term. a trustee must be elected to fill such 
30 vacancy for such unexpired term, and the voters of the district shall cast their ballots as 
31 hereinbefore prescribed, voting for as many candidates as there are offices to be filled. 
32 See. 15. Special meetings; qualifieations of voters of distriet. Special 
33 meetings of tho district may bo called by the board of trustees at any time, and notice of 
34 special meetings, stating the place and time thereof and the business to be transacted 
35 thereat, shall be signed by the chairman or clerk of the board of trustees and shall be 
36 conspicuously posted in at least 2 public places within the district, not less than 7 days 
37 inclusive of Sundays, before the meeting. Any such meeting may be adjourned from time 
38 to time by vote of the qaalified voters present thereat, though less than a quorum, and 
39 without notice of the time and place of the adjourned session, other than announcement at 
40 the meeting. Twenty five persons qualified to vote in such meetings shall constitute a 
41 quorum. }...11 meetings of the district shall be presided over by a moderator chosen in tho 
42 same manner and vlith the same authority as moderators of town meetings. All persons 
43 rm:irlr,mt in Raid rliRtrict and aualified to vote for Govemor under the laws of this State 
Page 8 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
,-..,1; _,' 
1 
2 COMMITTEEAMENDMENT} "toH.P.1247,L.D.1752 
shall be entitled to yote in any meeting of the district, including the meeting for 
accentance of this charter. 
3 Sec. 16. Property tax exempt. The property, both real and personal, rights and 
4 franchises of said district shall be forever exempt from taxation. 
5 Sec. 17. Authorized to receive government aid, borrow money, issue 
6 bonds and notes. For accomplishing the purposes of this act, said district, by vote of 
7 its board of trustees, without district vote exoept as hereinafter provided, is hereby 
8 authorized to borrow money temporarily and to issue therefor its negotiable notes, and for 
9 the purpose of renewing and refunding the indebtedness so created, of paying any 
1 O necessary expenses and liabilities ineurred under the provisions of this act, including 
11 organizational and other neoessary expenses and liabilities whether incurred by the 
12 district or the Town of Boothbay Harbor, the district being authorized to reimburse said 
13 Town of Boothbay Harbor for any such expense ineurred or paid by it, and in aoquiring 
14 properties, paying damages, laying se>tvers, drains and oonduits, oonstructing, maintaining 
15 and-eperating a sewage plant or system and making rene111als, additions, extensions and 
16 improvements to the same and to cover interest payments during the period of 
17 eonstruetion, said Boothbay Harbor Sewer Distriot, by votes of its board of trustees. 
18 without distriot Yote exeept as hereinafter provided, is also hereby authorized to issue, 
19 from time to time, bonds, notes or other evidenoes of indebtedness of the distriet in suoh 
20 amount or amounts, bearing interest at such rate or rates, and having sueh tetms and 
21 provisions as the trustees shall determine receive government aid. borrow money, hold 
22 funds and issue, secure and refund bonds and notes as set forth in the Maine Revised 
23 Statutes. Title 38, section 1052 and subject to all requirements therein. All bonds, notes 
24 or other evidences of indebtedness issued under this act and the transfer of and the 
25 income from those bonds. notes or other evidences of indebtedness, including any profit 
26 made on the sale, are exempt from taxation in the State. Bonds and notes issued by the 
27 district under this section are securities in which all public officers and public bodies of 
28 the State and its political subdivisions. all insurance companies and associations and other 
29 persons carrying on an insurance business. trust companies, banks, bankers, banking 
30 associations, savings banks and savings associations. including savings and loan 
31 associations, credit unions, building and loan associations, investment companies, 
32 executors, administrators. trustees and other fiduciaries, pension, profit-sharing and 
33 retirement funds, and other persons carrying on a banking business. and all other persons 
34 authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the State may properly and legally 
35 invest funds, including capital in their control or belonging to them. The bonds and notes 
36 are securities that may properly and legally be deposited with and received by any state, 
37 municipal or public officer, or any agency or political subdivision of the State, for any 
38 purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is authorized by 
39 law. The total indebtedness of the district at any one time outstanding may not exceed 
40 the sum of $8,500,000. In the ease of a vote by the trustees to authorize bonds or notes to 
41 pay for the acquisition of property, for the eost of a sewage plant or system or part 
42 thereof, for rene:i11als or additions or for other improvements in the nature of capital easts, 
43 the estimated cost of 1.vhich singly or in the aggregate is $50,000 or more, but not for 
44 renevt'ing or refunding existing indebtedness or to pay for maintenanoe, repairs or for 
45 eurrent expenses, notioe of the proposed debt, the general purpose or purposes for vmieh 
46 it was authorized and of the date of a soeoial distriet meetini;r for the ournose of voters of 
Page 9 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 'A" to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
1 the distriet voting thereon shall be given by the elerk by publieation at least onee in a 
2 newspaper having a general oiroulation in the Town of Boothbay Harbor. f.1.fter 7 full 
3 days follovling the date on vmieh suoh notiee v1as first published the trustees shall hold a 
4 speoial distriet meeting for the purpose of permitting the voters of the distriet to express 
5 approval or disapproval of the amount of debt so authorized. If at sueh distriet meeting a 
6 majority of voters present and voting thereon expresses disapproval of the amount of debt 
7 authorized by the trustees, the said debt shall not be inourred and the vote of the trustees 
8 authorizing the same shall be void and of no offset. If at sueh district meeting a majority 
9 of voters present and voting thereon expresses disapproval of the amount of debt 
10 authorized by the trustees, the said debt shall not be inourred and the vote of the trustees 
11 authorizing the same shall be void and of no effeet. Said bonds, notes and e:rlidences of 
12 indebtedness may be issued to mature serially in annual installments of not less than 1 % 
13 of the face amount of the issue and beginning not later than 2 years from the date thereof, 
14 or made to run for such periods as the trustees may determine, but no issue thereof shall 
15 run for a longer period than 40 years from the date of original issue thereof. Bonds, notes 
16 or evidences of indebtedness may be issued with or ·without provision for calling the same 
17 prior to maturity, and if oallable may be made callable at par or at such premium as the 
18 trustees may determine. fJl bonds, notes or other e:rlidences of indebtedness shall have 
19 insoribed upon their faee the words "Boothbay Harbor Sewer Distriet,11 shall be signed by 
20 the treasrn·er and countersigned by the ehairman of the board of trustees of the distriet, 
21 and if ooupon bonds are issued, the interest eoupons attaohed thereto shall bear the 
22 facsimile of the signature of the treasrn·er. All sueh bonds, notes and evidences of 
23 indebtedness so issued by the district shall be legal obligations of the district, 1.vhioh is 
24 hereby deolared to be a quasi munioipal oorporation within the meaning of the Re:rlised 
25 Statutes of 195 4, ohapter 90 A, section 23, as amended, and all provisions of said section 
26 shall be applioable thereto. The said district may, from time to time, issue in one series or 
27 in separate series, its bonds, notes and other evidences of indebtedness, for the purpose of 
28 paying, redeeming or refunding outstanding bonds, notes or evidences of indebtedness, 
29 and each authorized issue shall constitute a separate loan. fAl bonds, notes and e:rt'idenoes 
30 of indebtedness issued by said distriet shall be legal investments for savings banks in the 
31 State of Maine and shall be tml eJtempt. The said district is authorized and empowered to 
32 enter into agreements with the State or Federal Government, or any agency of either, or 
33 any oorporation, eommission or board authorized by the State or Federal Government to 
34 grant or loan money to or otherwise assist in the finanoing of projeots suoh as the distriot 
35 is authorized to earry out, and to accept grants and borrow money from any suoh 
36 government agency, oorporation, commission or board as may be neoessary or desirable 
37 to enforoe the provisions of this aet. The district may increase this debt limit by 
38 referendum as provided by Title 38, section 1054. 
39 Sec. 18. Sinking fund provided for; investments. In case any of said bonds or 
40 notes are made to run for a period of years, a sinking fund shall be established by the 
41 trustees of said district for the purpose of redeeming said bonds or notes when they 
42 become due and a sum equal to not less than 1 % of the aggregate principal of the 
43 outstanding bonds or notes issued on account of or in behalf of said district, as aforesaid, 
44 shall be turned into said sinking fund each year to provide for the final extinguishment of 
45 said district funded debt. 
Page 10 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "A" to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
The money set aside for the sinking fund shall be devoted to the retirement of said 
2 notes and bonds, and shall be used for no other purposes, and shall be invested in such 
3 securities as savings banks are allowed to hold. 
4 Whenever any bonds of said district become due, or can be purchased by said trustees 
5 on favorable terms, said trustees shall, if sufficient funds have accumulated in said 
6 sinking fund, redeem or purchase said bonds, and cancel them. In no case shall bonds so 
7 cancelled or redeemed be reissued. 
8 In case the amount in said sinking fund shall not be sufficient to pay the total amount 
9 of the bonds falling due at any one time, authority to issue new bonds sufficient to 
10 redeem so many of said bonds as cannot be redeemed from the sinking fund is hereby 
11 granted to said trustees. 
12 The district may invest its funds. including the sinking fund, reserve funds and trust 
13 funds, in accordance with the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 1055. 
14 Sec. 19. Rates and tolls; application of revenues. All persons, firms and 
15 corporations, whether public, private or municipal, shall pay to the treasurer of said 
16 district the rates, tolls, rents, entrance charges and other lawful charges established or 
17 revised by the trustees for the sewer or drainage service used or available with respect to 
18 their real estate, which rates shall be fair and reasonable charges for connection with and 
19 for the use of the sewer or drainage service and may include a charge for the district's 
20 readiness to serve to be charged against owners of real estate abutting on or accessible to 
21 sewers or drains of the district but not actually connected thereto, whether or not such real 
22 estate is improved. In establishing or revising such rates, tolls, rents or charges, the 
23 trustees may classify the property connected or to be connected with the sewerage or 
24 drainage system and may give consideration to any factors relating to kind, quality or 
25 extent of use of any such property or qualification of property including: ( a) the volume 
26 of water discharged into the sewerage or drainage system; (b) the type and size of 
27 buildings connected with such system; ( c) the number of plumbing fixtures connected 
28 with such system; ( d) the number of persons customarily using the property served by 
29 such system; ( e) in the case of commercial or industrial property, the average number of 
30 employees, customers and guests using the property; and (f) the quality and character of 
31 the material discharged into the sewerage or drainage system. The trustees may establish 
32 minimum charges in connection with and for the use of a sewerage or drainage system. 
33 Rates, tolls, rents and entrance charges shall be uniform within the district whenever 
34 the cost to the district of installation and maintenance of sewers and drains and their 
35 respective appurtenances and the cost of service is are substantially uniform; but nothing 
36 in this aot shall preclude except that the district from establishing may establish a higher 
37 rate, toll, rent or entrance charge than the regular rates, tolls, rents and entrance charges in 
38 sections where, for any reason, the cost to the district of construction and maintenance, or 
39 the cost of service, exceeds the average, but suoh as long as the higher rates, tolls, rents 
40 and entrance charges shall be are uniform throughout the sections where they apply, and 
41 trustees may reduce the impact or connection fee for sewer service to newly constructed 
42 affordable housing in accordance with the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 1048, 
43 subsection 1, paragraph B. 
44 Adoption of a new rate schedule is governed by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38. 
45 section 1048, subsection 5. 
Page 11 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT"/}" to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
1 The sewer rates, tolls, rents and entrance charges shall be so established as to provide 
2 revenue for the following purposes: 
3 I. To pay the current expenses for operating and maintaining the sewerage, drainage 
4 and treatment system; 
5 II. To provide for the payment of interest on the indootedness ereated pay the 
6 principal of and premium, if any, and interest on all bonds and notes issued by the 
7 district; 
8 III. To provide eaeh year a sum equal to not less than 1 % nor more than 5% of the 
9 entire indebtedness ereated by said district, whieh sum shall be used to pay serial bonds 
1 O or notes v,rhen due or be turned into a sinking fund and there kept to provide for the 
11 6*1:inguishment of said indebtedness. Money set aside for the sinking fund shall be 
12 devoted to the rstirement of the obligations of said sev1er district, and invested in such 
13 securities as savings banks in this State are allowed to hold create and maintain reserves 
14 as may be required by any trust agreement or resolution securing bonds and notes; 
15 IV. If any surplus remains at the end of the year, it may be turned into the sinking 
16 fun&. To provide funds for paying the cost of all necessary repairs, replacements and 
17 renewals of the sewerage, drainage and treatment systems of the district: 
18 V. To pay or provide for all amounts that the district may be obligated to pay or 
19 provide for by law or contract, including any resolution or contract with or benefit of the 
20 holder of its bonds and notes: and 
21 VI. To provide each year a sum equal to not less than 1 % nor more than 5% of the 
22 entire indebtedness created by said district, which sum shall be used to pay serial bonds 
23 or notes when due or be turned into a sinking fund and there kept to provide for the 
24 extinguishment of said indebtedness. Money set aside for the sinking fund shall be 
25 devoted to the retirement of the obligations of said sewer district and invested in such 
26 securities as savings banks in this State are allowed to hold. If any surplus remains at the 
27 end of the year, it may be tumed into the sinking fund. 
28 Sec. 20. Sewer extensions; assessment against lot benefited. Sewer 
29 extensions are governed by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 1042. When the 
30 district has constructed and completed a common sewer, the trustees may, if they so 
31 determine, in order to defray a portion of the expense thereof, determine what lots or 
32 parcels of land, whether or not buildings or other structures are located thereon or 
33 whether or not they are otherwise improved, are benefited by such main or sewer, and 
34 estimate and assess upon such lots and parcels of land, and against the owner thereof, or 
35 person in possession or against whom taxes thereon are assessed, whether said person to 
36 whom the assessment is so made shall be the owner, tenant, lessee or agent, and whether 
37 the same is occupied or not, such sum not exceeding such benefit as they may deem just 
38 and equitable towards defraying the expenses of constructing and completing such sewer, 
39 together with such sewage disposal units and appurtenances as may be necessary, the 
40 whole of such assessments not to exceed 1/2 of the cost of such sewer and sewage 
41 disposal units. The trustees shall file with the clerk of the district the location of such 
42 sewer and sewage disposal unit, with a profile description of the same, and a statement of 
43 the amount assessed upon each lot or parcel of land so assessed, a description of each lot 
44 or parcel, and the name of the owner of such lots or parcels of land of person against 
Page 12 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
whom said assessment shall be made, and the clerk of such district shall record the same 
2 in a book kept for that pmpose, and within 10 days after such filing, each person so 
3 assessed shall be notified of such assessment by having an authentic copy of said 
4 assessment, with an order or notice signed by the olerk of said distriot chair of the board 
5 of trustees, stating the time and place for a hearing upon the subject matter of said 
6 assessments, given to each person so assessed or left at hi& the person's usual place of 
7 abode in said district. If oo such person has no place of abode in said disu'ict, then such 
8 notice shall be given or left at the abode of hi& the person's tenant or lessee if oo the 
9 person has one in said district. If he such person has no such tenant or lessee in said 
10 district, then notice must be given by posting said notice in some conspicuous place in the 
11 vicinity of the lot or parcel of land so assessed, at least 30 days before said hearing, or 
12 such notice may be given by publishing the same once a week, for 3 successive weeks in 
13 any newspaper of general circulation in said district, the first publication to be at least 30 
14 days before said hearing. A retmn made upon a copy of such notice by any constable in 
15 said Town of Boothbay Harbor or the Town of Boothbay or the production of the paper 
16 containing such notice shall be conclusive evidence that said notice has been given, and 
17 upon such hearing the trustees shall have power to revise, increase or diminish any of 
18 such assessments, and all such revisions, increases or diminutions shall be in writing and 
19 recorded by the clerk of the district. 
20 Sec. 21. Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by dissatisfied with the decision 
21 of said trustees as it relates to any assessment for sewer construction shall have the same 
22 rights of appeal as are provided in the ease of laying out of town ways by the Maine 
23 Revised Statutes, Title 30-A, section 3443, as amended. 
24 Sec. 22. Assessments; lien; enforcement. All assessments made under the 
25 provisions of section 20 shall create a lien upon each and every lot or parcel of land so 
26 assessed and the buildings upon the same, which lien shall take effect when the trustees 
27 file with the clerk of the district the completed assessment, and shall continue for one 
28 year thereafter; and vt'ithin. Within 10 days after the date of hearing on said assessment, 
29 the clerk of the district shall make out a list of all such assessments, the amount of each, 
30 and the name of the person against whom the same is assessed, and he shall certify the list 
31 and deliver it to the treasmer of said district. If said assessments are not paid within 3 
32 months from the date thereof, the treasurer may bring an a civil action of debt for the 
33 collection of said assessment in the name of the district against the person against whom 
34 said assessment is made and for the enforcement of said lien. Suoh aotion shall be begun 
35 by writ of attachment oommanding the offioer serving it to specially attaoh t)1e real estate 
36 upon whioh the fom is claimed, v1hich shall be served as other v:rits of attachment to 
37 enforoe liens on real estate. The deolaration complaint in such action shall contain a 
38 statement of such assessment, a description of the real estate against which the 
39 assessment is made, and an allegation that a lien is claimed on said real estate to secure 
40 the payment of the assessment. If no service is made upon the defendant or it shall 
41 appear that any other persons are interested in such real estate, the court shall order such 
42 further notice of such action as appears proper, and shall allow such other persons to 
43 become parties thereto. If it shall appear upon trial of such action that such assessment 
44 was legally made against said real estate, and is unpaid, and that there is an existing lien 
45 on said real estate for the payment of such assessment, judgment shall be rendered for 
46 such assessment, interest and costs of suit against the defendants and against the real 
Page 13 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "A" to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
1 estate upon which the assessment was made, and execution issued thereon to be enforced 
2 by sale of such real estate in the manner provided for a sale on execution of real estate 
3 attached on original writs process; provided that in making said sale, the officer shall 
4 follow the procedure in selling and conveying and there shall be the same rights of 
5 redemption as are provided in the Maine Revised Statutes of 1954, chapter 91 A Title 36, 
6 section 87, as amended 941. 
7 Sec. 23. Additional method of collection of assessments. If assessments 
8 under section 20 are not paid, and said district does not proceed to collect unpaid 
9 assessments by a sheriff's sale of the real estate upon 1,vhich such assessments are made 
10 proceedings under section 22, or does not collect or is any manner delayed or defeated in 
11 collecting such assessments by a sheriffs sale of said real estate proceedings under 
12 section 22, then the treasurer district, in the its name of said district, may maintain an g 
13 civil action against the party so assessed for the amount of said assessment, as for money 
14 paid, laid out and expended, in any court of competent jurisdiction, and in such suit may 
15 recover the amount of such assessment with 10% interest on the same from the date of 
16 said assessment and costs. 
17 Sec. 24. Assessments paid by other than owner, how recovered. When any 
18 assessment under section 20 shall be paid by any person against whom such assessment 
19 has been made, who is not the owner of such lot or parcel of land, then the person so 
20 paying the same shall have a lien upon such lot or parcel of land with the buildings 
21 thereon for the amount of said assessment so paid by said person, and incidental charges, 
22 which lien shall continue for one year and which lien may be enforced in an a civil action 
23 of assumpsit as for money paid, laid out and expended, and by attachment in the way and 
24 manner provided for the enforcement of liens upon buildings and lots under the Maine 
25 Revised Statutes of 1954, chapter 178 Title 10. 
26 Sec. 25. Lien for payment of rates. There shall be a lien on real estate served or 
27 benefited by the sewers of the district to secure the payment of rates established and due 
28 under section 19, which shall take precedence of all other claims on such real estate, 
29 excepting only claims for taxes. Real estate for the purposes of this act shall have the 
30 same definition as given in the R@lised Statutes of 1954, chapter 91 A, section 4, as 
31 amended means an identified parcel of land and its improvements. if any, including. but 
32 not limited to, a mobile home. 
33 When a rate, toll, rent or other charge has been committed to the treasurer of the 
34 Boothbay Sewer District for collection, the treasurer may, after the ~(piration of 3 
35 months and 1tvithin one year after the date when the charge became due and payable, give 
36 to the ovmer of the real estate served, or leave at the owner's last and usual place of 
37 abode, or send by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the ovme1·1s last known 
38 address, a vlritten notice signed by the treasurer or bearing the treasurer's facsimile 
39 signature stating the amount of that rate, toll, rent or other charge, describing the real 
40 estat6 upon 1,vhich the lien is claimed and stating that a lien is claimed to secure payment 
41 of the charge and demanding payment vlithin 30 days after service or mailing of the 
42 notice plus $1 for the treasurer for mailing the notice together 1.vith the certified mail, 
43 return receipt requested fee. The notice must contain a statement that the district is 
44 vlilling to arrange installment payments of the outstanding debt. For the purpose of this 
45 seotior1. a mobile home is defined as real estate. After the c:Jmiration of the 30 dav neriod 
Page 14 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
1 and 1vvithin one year, the treasurer shall record in the Lincoln County Registry of Deeds a 
2 certificate signed by the treasurer setting forth the amount of the rate, toll, rent or other 
3 charge, and a desoription of the real estate on which the lien is claimed, stating that a lien 
4 is claimed to secure payment of the charge and that notice and demand for payment of the 
5 charge has been given or made in accordance with the provisions of this section, and that 
6 the charge remains unpaid. At the time of the recording of a certificate in the Registry of 
7 Deeds, the treasurer shall file in the office of the district a true copy of the certificate and 
8 shall mail a true copy of the certificate by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each 
9 record holder of any mortgage on the real estate, addressed to the record holder at the 
10 record holder's last and usual place of abode. 
11 The filing of the eertifieate in the Registry of Deeds is deemed to create, and oreates, 
12 a mortgage on the real estate described in the deed for the district that has priority over all 
13 other mortgages, liens, attachments and enoumbranoes of any nature, except liens, 
14 attachments and claims for taxes, and gives to the district all the rights usually possessed 
15 by mortgagees, exospt that the district as mortgagee does not have a right to possession of 
16 the real estate until the right of redemption provided for has expired. If the mortgage, 
17 together with interest and costs, is not paid v1ithin 18 months after the date of filing of the 
18 certificate in the Registry of Deeds, the mortgage is deemed foreclosed and the right of 
19 redemption expired. The filing of the certificate in the Registry of Deeds is sufficient 
20 notice of the existence of the mortgage. In the event that the rate, toll, rent or other 
21 charge, with interest and costs, is paid vlithin the period of redemption, the treasurer of 
22 the district shall dischanrn the morte:ae:e in the same manner as Oi'ovided for disohare:e of 
23 real estate mmtgages. 
24 The cost to be paid by the ovmer of the real estate served is the sum of the fees for 
25 receiving, recording and indexing the lien, or its discharge, as established by the Maine 
26 Revised Statutes. Title 33. section 751. nlus $13 and all certified mail. return reoeint 
27 reqmisted fees. 
28 The district shall pay the treasurer $1 for filing the lien certificate and the amount 
29 paid for certified mail, return receipt requested fees. The fees for recording the lien 
30 certificate must be paid by the district to the Register of Deeds. 
31 A discharge of the certificate given after the right of redemption has expired and that 
32 has-been recorded in the Registry of Deeds for more than one year terminates all title of 
33 the sev,rer district derived from that certificate or any other recorded certificate for which 
34 the right of redemption expired 10 years or more prior to the foreclosure date of this 
35 discharge lien, unless the sewer district has conveyed any interest based upon the title 
36 acquired from any of the affected liens. 
3 7 The treasurer of the district has full and complete authority and power to collect rates 
38 and fees established under section 19 or otherwise authorized by law. The treasurer may, 
39 after demand for paym,ent, sue in the name of the district in a civil action in any court of 
40 competent jurisdiction for any rates remaining unpaid. In addition to other methods 
41 established by law for the collection of rates and without waiver of the right to sue for the 
42 collection of rates, the lien created under this section may be enforced in the following 
43 manner. 
44 1. The treasurer may, after the expiration of 3 months and within one year after the 
45 date when the rates became due and payable, give to the owner of the real estate served, 
Page 15 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT" A" to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
leave at the owner's last and usual place of abode or send by certified mail, return receipt 
2 requested, to the owner's last known address a notice in writing signed by the treasurer or 
3 bearing the treasurer's facsimile signature, stating the amount of the rates due, describing 
4 the real estate upon which the lien is claimed, stating that a lien is claimed on the real 
5 estate to secure the payment of the rates and demanding the payment of the rates within 
6 30 days after service or mailing, with $1 added to the demanded rate for the treasurer and 
7 an additional fee to cover mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
8 The notice must contain a statement that the district is willing to arrange installment 
9 payments of the outstanding debt. 
10 2. After the expiration of 30 days and within one year after giving notice pursuant to 
11 subsection 1, the treasurer of the district shall record in the Lincoln County Registry of 
12 Deeds a certificate signed by the treasurer setting forth the amount of the rates due, 
13 describing the real estate on which the lien is claimed and stating that a lien is claimed on 
14 the real estate to secure payment of the rates and that a notice and demand for payment 
15 has been given or made in accordance with this section and stating further that the rates 
16 remain unpaid. At the time of the recording of the certificate in the registry of deeds, the 
17 treasurer shall file in the office of the district a true copy of the certificate and shall mail a 
18 true copy of the certificate by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each record 
19 holder of any mortgage on the real estate, addressed to the record holder at the record 
20 holder's last and usual place of abode. 
21 3. The filing of the certificate in the Lincoln County Registry of Deeds creates a 
22 mortgage held by the district on the real estate described in the certificate that has priority 
23 over all other mortgages, liens, attachments and encumbrances of any nature, except 
24 liens, attachments and claims for taxes, and gives to the district all the rights usually 
25 possessed by mortgagees, except that the district as mortgagee does not have any right to 
26 possession of that real estate until the right of redemption has expired. 
27 4. If the mortgage created under subsection 3, together with interest and costs, has 
28 not been paid within 18 months after the date of filing the certificate in the Lincoln 
29 County Registry of Deeds in accordance with subsection 2, the mortgage is foreclosed 
30 and the right of redemption expires. The filing of the certificate in the registry of deeds is 
31 sufficient notice of the existence of the mortgage, In the event that the rate, with interest 
32 and costs, is paid within the period of redemption, the treasurer of the district shall 
33 discharge the mortgage in the same manner as provided for discharge of real estate 
34 mortgages. 
35 5. The owner of the real estate shall pay the sum of the fees for receiving, recording 
36 and indexing the lien, or its discharge, as established by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 
37 33, section 751, plus $13, plus all certified mail, return receipt requested, fees. 
38 6. Not more than 45 days or less than 30 days before the foreclosing date of the 
39 mortgage created under subsection 3, the treasurer of the district shall notify the party 
40 named on the mortgage and each record holder of a mortgage on the real estate in a 
41 writing signed by the treasurer or bearing the treasurer's facsimile signature and left at the 
42 holder's last and usual place of abode or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to 
43 the holder's last known address of the impending automatic foreclosure and indicating the 
44 exact date of foreclosure. For sending this notice, the district is entitled to receive $3 plus 
45 all certified mail, return receipt requested, fees, which must be added to and become a 
Page 16 -129LR1999(02)-l 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 COMMITTEEAMENDMENT"A"toH.P.1247, L.D. 1752 
part of the amount due under subsection 5. If notice is not given in the time period 
specified in this subsection, the person not receiving timely notice has up to 30 days after 
the treasurer provides notice as specified in this subsection in which to redeem the 
mortgage. The notice of impending automatic foreclosure must be substantially in the 
following form: 
STATE OF MAINE 
BOOTHBAY HARBOR SEWER DISTRICT 
NOTICE OF IMPENDING AUTOMATIC FORECLOSURE 
SEWER LIEN 
M.R.S.A. Title 38, section 1050 
IMPORTANT: DO NOT DISREGARD THIS NOTICE 
YOU WILL LOSE YOUR PROPERTY UNLESS 
YOU PAY THE CHARGES, COSTS AND INTEREST FOR WHICH 
A LIEN ON YOUR PROPERTY HAS BEEN CREATED BY THE 
BOOTHBAY HARBOR SEWER DISTRICT. 
TO: ................ . 
IF THE LIEN FORECLOSES, 
THE BOOTHBAY HARBOR SEWER DISTRICT WILL OWN 
YOUR PROPERTY, SUBJECT ONLY TO 
MUNICIPAL TAX LIENS. 
.................................... 
District Treasurer 
7. The district shall pay the treasurer $1 for the notice. $1 for filing the lien 
certificate and the amount paid for certified mail. return receipt requested, fees. The fees 
for recording the lien certificate must be paid by the sewer district to the Lincoln County 
Registry of Deeds. 
8. A discharge of the certificate given after the right of redemption has expired, 
which discharge has been recorded in the Lincoln County Registry of Deeds for more 
than one year, terminates all title of the sewer district derived from that certificate or any 
other recorded certificate for which the right of redemption expired 10 years or more 
prior to the foreclosure date of this discharge lien, unless the district has conveyed any 
interest based upon the title acquired from any of the affected liens. 
9. The district has had and continues to have the authority to collect rates and fees in 
this manner without having to become a qualified sewer district under Title 38, section 
1050, and all liens issued and recorded under the district's authority prior to and 
subsequent to the effective date of this subsection remain valid. 
10. The district may waive a lien foreclosure in accordance with the Maine Revised 
Statutes, Title 38, section 1049. 
Page 17 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT" A "to H.P. 1247, L.D. 1752 
Sec. 25-A. Landlord access to tenant bill payment information. Landlord 
2 access to information regarding the current status of a tenant's account is governed by the 
3 Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38. section 1051. 
4 Sec. 26. Construction of this act; bylaws and regulations authorized; 
5 incidental powers and rights. This act shall be construed as authorizing a charge by 
6 said district for the use of sewers, sewer systems and treatment works in addition to any 
7 other assessments now lawfully imposed by general law. The trustees may adopt such 
8 rules and regulations and bylaws as may be necessary or convenient to carry out the 
9 provisions of this act. All incidental powers, rights and privileges necessary to the 
10 accomplishment of the main objects of this act as set forth herein are granted to said 
11 district; including the right of the trustees to determine when and where sewerage 
12 facilities are most needed, and when and how sewers shall be built. 
13 Sec. 27. Existing statutes not affected; rights conferred subject to 
14 provisions of law. Nothing herein contained is intended to repeal or shall be construed 
15 as repealing the whole or any part of any existing statute, and all the rights and duties 
16 herein mentioned shall be exercised and performed in accordance with any applicable 
17 provisions of the Revised Statutes of 1954, chapters 44 and 79 and any aots amendatory 
18 thereof or additional thereto laws of the State of Maine. 
19 Sec. 2. Referendum; effective date. This Act takes effect when approved only 
20 for the purpose of permitting its submission to the legal voters of the Boothbay Harbor 
21 Sewer District at an election called for that purpose and held by November 5, 2020. The 
22 election must be called, advertised and conducted according to the law relating to 
23 municipal elections, except that the registrar of voters is not required to prepare or the 
24 clerk to post a new list of voters. For the purpose ofregistration of voters, the registrar of 
25 voters must be in session the regular workday preceding the election. The subject matter 
26 of this Act is reduced to the following question: 
27 "Do you favor adopting the 2019 revision of the Boothbay Harbor Sewer 
28 District charter?" 
29 The voters shall indicate by a cross or check mark placed against the word "Yes" or 
30 "No" their opinion of the same. 
31 The results must be declared by the municipal officers of the Town of Boothbay 
32 Harbor and the Town of Boothbay and due certificate of the results filed by the clerk with 
33 the Secretary of State. 
34 This Act takes effect for all other purposes immediately upon its approval by a 
35 majority of the legal voters voting at the election. Failure to achieve the necessary 
36 approval in any referendum does not prohibit subsequent referenda consistent with this 
37 section as long as the referenda are held within 2 years after the effective date of this Act.' 
38 Amend the bill by relettering or renumbering any nonconsecutive Part letter or 
39 section number to read consecutively. 
Page 18 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEEAMENDMENT"fi"toH.P.1247,L.D.1752 
1 SUMMARY 
2 This amendment removes the provision of the bill that required one trustee on the 
3 board of trustees of the Boothbay Harbor Sewer District to be elected from the Town of 
4 Boothbay and 2 from the Town of Boothbay Harbor. The amendment also makes a 
5 number of technical changes and adds cross-references to bring the charter into 
6 conformance with the Standard Sewer District Enabling Act. 
Page 19 -129LR1999(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
