 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 896
S.P. 262 In Senate, February 19, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation To Study a Voluntary Licensing System  for General 
Contractors for Home Improvement and  Construction
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CHENETTE of  York.
Cosponsored by Representative CAIAZZO of Scarborough and
Representative: GRAMLICH of  Old Orchard Beach.

Page 1 - 129LR1711(01)-11Sec. 1.  Voluntary licensing system for general contractors for home 
2improvement and construction.  Resolved:  That the Department of Professional 
3and Financial Regulation, in conjunction with the Department of Labor, shall study the 
4development of a voluntary licensing system for general contractors for home 
5improvement and construction.  The study must address costs of the voluntary licensing 
6system, state agency resources, system implementation and the potential impact on the 
7construction industry.
8Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Department of Professional and Financial 
9Regulation shall submit a report on the study conducted under section 1, including 
10suggested legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
11Economic Advancement and Business by December 4, 2019.  The committee is 
12authorized to submit a bill based on the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th 
13Legislature. 
14SUMMARY
15This resolve directs the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation, in 
16conjunction with the Department of Labor, to study the development of a voluntary 
17licensing system for general contractors for home improvement and construction.  The 
18department is required to submit a report to the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, 
19Development, Economic Advancement and Business by December 4, 2019, and the 
20committee is authorized to submit a bill based on the report to the Second Regular 
21Session of the 129th Legislature.
