 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 668
H.P. 489 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Transportation To Convene a Work Group  To Study Improving Traffic  Safety  for Color-blind 
Drivers
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ARATA of New  Gloucester.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  GATTINE of Westbrook, KESCHL  of Belgrade.

Page 1 - 129LR1714(01)-11Sec. 1.  Department of Transportation study.  Resolved:  That the 
2Department of Transportation shall convene a work group of interested parties and 
3persons with expertise in traffic light systems and technology to study requiring new 
4traffic lights to accommodate color-blind drivers.  The study must include an analysis of 
5the effectiveness of the available technology and its costs.  The department shall submit a 
6report on its study, including any suggested legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee 
7on Transportation by December 4, 2019.  The joint standing committee may report out a 
8bill related to the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
9SUMMARY
10This resolve directs the Department of Transportation to convene a work group of 
11interested parties and persons with expertise in traffic light systems and technology to 
12study requiring new traffic lights to accommodate color-blind drivers.  It requires the 
13study to include an analysis of the effectiveness of the available technology and its costs.  
14The department is directed to submit a report on its study, including any suggested 
15legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation by December 4, 2019.  
16The joint standing committee is authorized to report out a bill related to the report to the 
17Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
