 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1392
H.P. 1006 House of  Representatives, March 26, 2019
An Act  To Establish a Formal Tribal Consultation Process  with the 
State
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative NEWELL of the Passamaquoddy Tribe.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: ACKLEY of Monmouth, COLLINGS of Portland, EVANGELOS of Friendship, MARTIN of Sinclair,  MOONEN of Portland, PLUECKER of Warren, RISEMAN  
of Harrison, Senator: CARPENTER of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR2027(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง59 is enacted to read:
3ยง59.  Promotion of communication between state agencies and federally recognized 
4Indian tribes
51.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
6following terms have the following meanings.
7A.  "Federally recognized Indian tribes" means the Passamaquoddy Tribe, Penobscot 
8Nation, Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians and Aroostook Band of Micmacs.
9B.  "State agency" means a department, commission, board, office or other entity that 
10is in the executive branch of State Government.
112.  Policy.  A state agency shall develop and implement a policy that:
12A.  Promotes effective communication between the state agency and federally 
13recognized Indian tribes;
14B.  Promotes positive government-to-government relations between the State and 
15federally recognized Indian tribes; and
16C.  Enables federally recognized Indian tribes to consult with the state agency in a 
17meaningful and timely manner regarding the development of legislation, rules and 
18policies proposed by the state agency on matters that significantly or uniquely affect 
19the tribes.
20SUMMARY
21This bill requires a state agency to develop and implement a policy that:
221.  Promotes effective communication between the state agency and federally 
23recognized Indian tribes in the State;
242.  Promotes positive government-to-government relations between the State and 
25federally recognized Indian tribes in the State; and
263.  Enables federally recognized Indian tribes in the State to consult with the state 
27agency in a meaningful and timely manner regarding the development of legislation, rules 
28and policies proposed by the state agency on matters that significantly or uniquely affect 
29the tribes.
