 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1040
H.P. 770 House of  Representatives, February 28, 2019
An Act  To Waive  the Variance Process for Harvesting Timber in a 
Shoreland Zone
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ARATA of New  Gloucester.
Cosponsored by Representative:  SKOLFIELD of Weld.

Page 1 - 129LR1696(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  12 MRSA ยง8867-B, as amended by PL 2013, c. 405, Pt. D, ยง10, is further 
3amended by adding at the end a new paragraph to read:
4If a professional forester employed by a landowner determines there exists a 
5condition on the landowner's property adjacent to a river, stream, pond, wetland or tidal 
6water that requires timber harvesting activity that exceeds limits established by rules 
7adopted under this section in order to meet acceptable forestry standards, the landowner 
8may conduct the timber harvesting activity recommended by the professional forester 5 
9business days after the landowner gives notice to the bureau stating the area where the 
10timber harvesting activity is to take place and the name of the professional forester, the 
11professional forester's license number and the professional forester's determination of the 
12need for the timber harvesting activity.
13SUMMARY
14This bill allows a landowner to conduct timber harvesting activities on property 
15adjacent to a river, stream, pond, wetland or tidal water that exceed limits established by 
16Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of Forestry rules if 
17determined necessary by a professional forester in order to meet acceptable forestry 
18standards upon a 5-day notice to the bureau by the landowner stating the area where the 
19timber harvesting activity is to take place, the name of the professional forester, the 
20professional forester's license number and the professional forester's determination of the 
21need for the timber harvesting activity.
