 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 184
H.P. 147 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
An Act  To Amend the Veterans' Homelessness Prevention 
Coordination Program
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DeVEAU of Caribou.
Cosponsored by Senator FARRIN of Somerset and
Representatives: ANDREWS of  Paris, DOLLOFF  of Rumford,  FAULKINGHAM of Winter  
Harbor, FECTEAU of Augusta, HANINGTON  of Lincoln, JOHANSEN of Monticello, 
MORRIS of  Turner, STROM of Pittsfield.

Page 1 - 129LR0312(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  37-B MRSA ยง513, as enacted by PL 2011, c. 329, ยง1, is repealed.
3Sec. 2.  37-B MRSA ยง513-A is enacted to read:
4ยง513-A.  Veterans' homelessness prevention coordination
51.  Veterans' homelessness prevention partnership.  The director shall establish 
6partnerships with human services-based volunteer organizations to coordinate efforts to 
7remedy and prevent homelessness among veterans in this State.  The volunteer 
8organizations must have as their core programs addressing homelessness and veterans' 
9services and have been active in the State for at least 2 years.  Priority must be given to an 
10organization founded, chartered or organized in the State.  The director may accept 
11donations from outside sources and state and federal funding to accomplish the priorities 
12of the partnerships. If state, federal or outside funding is available, the priorities of these 
13partnerships, listed in order of priority, include, but are not limited to:
14A.  Identifying homeless veterans in the State;
15B.  Identifying and securing temporary or permanent living space for veterans within 
16the veterans' communities; and
17C.  Conducting annual outreach events, targeted to reach the maximum number of 
18veterans in need, to disseminate information on resources and services available to 
19assist homeless veterans.
202.  Fund established.  The Veterans' Homelessness Prevention Partnership Fund, a 
21nonlapsing fund, is established under the bureau for the purpose of receiving funds from 
22state, federal and other sources, including donations from private citizens, corporations 
23and entities for the purpose of this section.  The bureau, in collaboration with the 
24Department of Economic and Community Development, shall distribute any available 
25funds in the fund to support the priorities described in this section.
26SUMMARY
27This bill repeals the current provisions regarding veterans' homelessness prevention 
28coordination and instead enacts a provision that allows for multiple partnerships rather 
29than a single partnership.  It removes the requirement that the organizations chosen for 
30the partnerships be national organizations in existence for at least 30 years.  It requires 
31that the organizations chosen be active in the State for at least 2 years, with priority given 
32to organizations founded, chartered or organized in Maine.  It changes the order of 
33priorities for the partnerships, prioritizing identifying and securing temporary or 
34permanent living space for veterans within the veterans' communities over conducting 
35annual outreach events.  It establishes a nonlapsing fund to support services for homeless 
36veterans and directs the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management, 
37Bureau of Maine Veterans' Services to collaborate with the Department of Economic and 
38Community Development to distribute any funds.
