 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1548
S.P. 485 In Senate, April 11, 2019
Resolve, To  Promote  Quality and  Transparency in the Provision of 
Services by Assisted Housing Programs That Provide Memory Care
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LIBBY of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 129LR1486(01)-11Sec. 1.  Time study of needs of residents in assisted housing programs.  
2Resolved:  That, in order to determine the needs of residents in assisted housing 
3programs as defined in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 22, section 7852, subsection 2, 
4the Department of Health and Human Services shall contract with the University of 
5Southern Maine's Edmund S. Muskie School of Public Service to conduct a study to 
6determine the amount of time assisted housing program staff devote to meeting the needs 
7of residents in assisted housing programs.  The time study must focus on the time 
8allocated to meeting the needs of residents with Alzheimer's disease or dementia.  The 
9study must document the amount of time assisted housing program staff engage in all 
10tasks required to meet the needs of residents, including, but not limited to, hands-on care 
11and redirection, cueing and reminders provided to residents experiencing symptoms of 
12distress.
13Sec. 2.  Rulemaking regarding Alzheimer's and dementia care and other 
14memory care in assisted housing programs.  Resolved:  That the Department of 
15Health and Human Services shall amend its rule Chapter 113: Regulations Governing the 
16Licensing and Functioning of Assisted Housing Programs to:
171.  Require assisted housing programs to provide disclosure statements to prospective 
18and current residents of Alzheimer's and dementia care units or other memory care units 
19and to post the statements in a conspicuous place in each unit.  The disclosure statements 
20must include:
21A.  A description of the care and services relevant to specialized Alzheimer's and 
22dementia care or other memory care provided by the unit;
23B.  Information on staffing in the unit to meet residents' needs;
24C.  A description of therapeutic activities provided by the unit;
25D.  Information on staff training specific to Alzheimer's and dementia care and other 
26memory care; and
27E.  Other information the department determines necessary to adequately inform 
28consumers and family members about specialized services provided by the unit;
292.  Change a requirement that facilities with Alzheimer's or dementia care units or 
30other memory care units provide classroom training to new employees on dealing with 
31difficult behaviors to a requirement that facilities with Alzheimer's or dementia care units 
32or other memory care units provide classroom training to new employees on 
33understanding behavior as communication;
343.  Require all facilities with Alzheimer's or dementia care units or other memory care 
35units to offer individual or group activities in accordance with assessed individual person-
36centered needs of each resident; and
374.  Require staffing agencies, including agencies that provide temporary staffing, to 
38provide evidence to facilities with Alzheimer's or dementia care units or other memory 
39care units that the staff provided to the units have received training required by 
40department rule. 
Page 2 - 129LR1486(01)-11Sec. 3.  Department of Health and Human Services; Alzheimer's and 
2dementia care and other memory care work group.  Resolved:  That the 
3Department of Health and Human Services' division of licensing and certification shall 
4establish a work group including providers, advocates and family members of persons 
5with Alzheimer's disease or dementia to review the adequacy of current training for direct 
6care staff in Alzheimer's and dementia care units or other memory care units within 
7assisted housing programs required by department rules.  The work group shall:
81.  Consider the development and implementation of a written or oral competency 
9exam or evaluation to demonstrate skill competency and knowledge gained through the 
10training curriculum for direct care staff.  The work group shall also consider the inclusion 
11of care recipient and family surveys as part of the evaluation of training competency;
122.  Review current rules regarding training for direct care staff in Alzheimer's or 
13dementia care units and other memory care units within assisted housing programs to 
14ensure that training includes:
15A.  A basic introduction to the foundations of Alzheimer's and dementia care and 
16other memory care;
17B.  Communicating and connecting with residents with Alzheimer's disease or 
18dementia;
19C.  Techniques and approaches to care of persons with Alzheimer's disease or 
20dementia;
21D.  Person-centered care;
22E.  Understanding the needs of and working with families;
23F.  The dietary needs of residents with Alzheimer's disease or dementia;
24G.  The social needs and appropriate activities in the care of residents with 
25Alzheimer's disease or dementia;
26H.  Recognizing and responding to caregiver stress;
27I.  Preventing, recognizing and responding to abuse and neglect of residents with 
28Alzheimer's disease or dementia; and
29J.  Interactive training;
303.  Review ongoing training requirements for direct care staff in Alzheimer's or 
31dementia care units and other memory care units and consider whether:
32A.  An additional 4 to 8 hours of annual training should be provided; and
33B.  Management and other staff should be included in training; and
344.  Make recommendations to the department for amendments to the rules governing 
35assisted housing programs that focus on person-centered care.  The recommendations 
36must include a definition of "person-centered care."  The review must include a review of 
37life stories of residents and their habits and preferences as approaches to better 
38understand resident needs to plan and provide care.
Page 3 - 129LR1486(01)-11SUMMARY
2This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to contract with 
3the University of Southern Maine's Edmund S. Muskie School of Public Service to 
4conduct a study to determine the amount of time assisted housing program staff devote to 
5meeting the needs of residents in assisted housing programs, with a focus on residents 
6with Alzheimer's disease or dementia.  It requires the department to amend certain 
7provisions in the department's rule governing the licensing and functioning of assisted 
8housing programs.  It requires the department to establish a work group to review 
9department rules governing training for direct care staff in Alzheimer's or dementia care 
10units and other memory care units to determine the adequacy of the training.
