 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1614
H.P. 1166 House of  Representatives,  April 23, 2019
Resolve, Establishing the Commission To Study the Economic, Environmental and Energy  Benefits  of Energy Storage to the Maine 
Electricity Industry
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative RILEY of  Jay.
Cosponsored by Senator WOODSOME of York and
Representatives: BERRY of Bowdoinham, CAIAZZO of Scarborough, DOUDERA of Camden, GROHOSKI of  Ellsworth.

Page 1 - 129LR2452(01)-11Sec. 1.  Commission To Study the Economic, Environmental and Energy 
2Benefits of Energy Storage to the Maine Electricity Industry established.  
3Resolved:  That the Commission To Study the Economic, Environmental and Energy 
4Benefits of Energy Storage to the Maine Electricity Industry, referred to in this resolve as 
5"the commission," is established.
6Sec. 2.  Membership.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the 
7commission consists of 13 members appointed as follows:
81.  Two members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, including a 
9member from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the Legislature;
102.  Three members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the 
11House, including members from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats 
12in the Legislature;
133.  Four public members appointed by the President of the Senate as follows:
14A.  A representative of the energy storage industry;
15B.  A representative of the hydroelectric energy storage industry;
16C.  A representative of an electric utility in the State; and
17D.  An academic in the field of energy storage; and
184.  Four public members appointed by the Speaker of the House as follows:
19A.  A representative of a conservation organization;
20B.  A representative of a business that uses significant electric power in the State;
21C.  A representative of a large-scale battery storage owner; and
22D.  A representative of a small-scale battery storage owner.
23Sec. 3.  Commission chairs.  Resolved:  That the first-named Senator is the 
24Senate chair of the commission and the first-named member of the House is the House 
25chair of the commission.
26Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of commission.  Resolved:  That all 
27appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 
28resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 
29Council once all appointments have been made.  When the appointment of all members 
30has been completed, the chairs of the commission shall call and convene the first meeting 
31of the commission.  If 30 days or more after the effective date of this resolve a majority 
32of but not all appointments have been made, the chairs may request authority and the 
33Legislative Council may grant authority for the commission to meet and conduct its 
34business.
35Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the commission shall hold at least 4 meetings and 
36shall:
Page 2 - 129LR2452(01)-111.  Review and evaluate the economic, environmental and energy benefits of energy 
2storage to the State's electricity industry, as well as public policy and economic proposals 
3to create and maintain a sustainable future for energy storage in the State;
42.  Consider the challenges of the broad electricity market in the State, including 
5challenges with transmission and stranded renewable energy generation in the northern 
6part of the State, and analyze whether energy storage is part of the transmission solution;
73.  Consider whether the environmental, economic, resiliency and energy benefits of 
8energy storage support updating the State's energy policy to strengthen and increase the 
9role of energy storage throughout the State;
104.  Consider the economic benefits of energy storage systems procurement targets, 
11including benefits of cost savings to ratepayers from the provision of services, including 
12energy price arbitrage, capacity, ancillary services and transmission and distribution asset 
13deferral or substitution; direct cost savings to ratepayers that deploy energy storage 
14systems; an improved ability to integrate renewable resources; improved reliability and 
15power quality; the effect on retail electric rates over the life of a given energy storage 
16system compared to the effect on retail electric rates using a nonenergy storage system 
17alternative over the life of the nonenergy storage system alternative; reduced greenhouse 
18gas emissions; and any other value reasonably related to the application of energy storage 
19system technology and compare those economic benefits to the effects of leaving current 
20policies in place; and
215.  Examine any other issues to further the purposes of the study.
22In conducting the duties under this section, the commission shall seek public input 
23and shall consult and collaborate with stakeholders and experts in the fields of economic 
24development, natural resources and energy policy.
25Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the 
26Legislative Council shall provide necessary staffing services to the commission, except 
27that Legislative Council staff support is not authorized when the Legislature is in regular 
28or special session.  The commission may invite the Department of Economic and 
29Community Development, the Public Utilities Commission, the Office of the Public 
30Advocate, the Governor's Energy Office and the Efficiency Maine Trust and other 
31appropriate agencies of State Government to provide additional staff support or assistance 
32to the commission.
33Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 4, 2019, the commission 
34shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 
35legislation, to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.  The suggested 
36legislation must include, but is not limited to, adopting procurement targets for the State 
37for energy storage systems, both behind a customer meter and connected to transmission 
38and distribution facilities, if proven beneficial for ratepayers in the cost-benefit analysis 
39under section 5.
Page 3 - 129LR2452(01)-11SUMMARY
2This resolve establishes the Commission To Study the Economic, Environmental and 
3Energy Benefits of Energy Storage to the Maine Electricity Industry.
