 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1700
H.P. 1215 House of  Representatives, May 8, 2019
Resolve, To  Promote  the Inclusion of African-American History and 
Culture in  the Curricular Offerings of School Administrative Units
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TALBOT ROSS  of Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR2236(01)-11Sec. 1.  African-American history and culture in schools.  Resolved:  That 
2the Department of Education shall, within existing budgeted resources, collect 
3information and prepare and make available materials that promote the rationale for 
4adding African-American history and culture, including Maine African-American history 
5and culture, to the curricular offerings of school administrative units.  The department 
6shall include recommendations for curricular themes, resources for teaching African-
7American history and culture, including Maine African-American history and culture, and 
8reviews of materials for teaching African-American history and culture.  The department 
9shall also identify educators in the State who are implementing model approaches to 
10teaching African-American history and culture and highlight these educators in the 
11distributed materials.
12In collecting information and preparing materials under this section, the department 
13shall convene a volunteer advisory group that includes representatives from African-
14American civil rights organizations in the State, African-American history and cultural 
15organizations and the African American Collection at the University of Southern Maine.
16Sec. 2.  African-American students data analyses.  Resolved:  That the 
17Maine Education Policy Research Institute shall provide to the Department of Education 
18analyses of the school achievement, disciplinary actions and special education 
19identification and placement of African-American students.
20Sec. 3.  Harassment and hate crimes data.  Resolved:  That, in collecting 
21information and preparing materials under section 1, the Department of Education may 
22request data on reported harassment and hate crimes based on race occurring in public 
23schools from the Maine Human Rights Commission and the Department of the Attorney 
24General, Civil Rights Team Project.
25SUMMARY
26This resolve directs the Department of Education, with assistance from the Maine 
27Education Policy Research Institute, the Maine Human Rights Commission and the 
28Department of the Attorney General, Civil Rights Team Project, as well as a volunteer 
29advisory group that includes representatives from African-American civil rights 
30organizations in the State, African-American history and cultural organizations and the 
31African American Collection at the University of Southern Maine, to collect information 
32and prepare and make available materials that promote the rationale for adding African-
33American history and culture, including Maine African-American history and culture, to 
34the curricular offerings of school administrative units.
