 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 909
H.P. 673 House of  Representatives, February 19, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Commissioner  of Economic and Community 
Development To Establish a Blockchain  Technology Working 
Group
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WADSWORTH  of Hiram.

Page 1 - 129LR1479(01)-11Sec. 1.  Commissioner of Economic and Community Development to 
2establish a blockchain technology working group.  Resolved:  That the 
3Commissioner of Economic and Community Development, referred to in this resolve as 
4"the commissioner," shall establish a working group, referred to in this resolve as "the 
5group," to develop a master plan for fostering the expansion of the blockchain technology 
6industry in the State and recommend policies and investments to make the State a leader 
7in blockchain technology. For purposes of this resolve, "blockchain technology" means a 
8list of digital records linked together using cryptography that is resistant to modification 
9of the data in the records, creating an open, distributed ledger that records a transaction 
10between 2 or more parties efficiently and in a verifiable and permanent manner.
11Sec. 2.  Membership.  Resolved:  That the commissioner shall appoint to the 
12group at least 5 members who have knowledge and experience in blockchain technology 
13or represent an industry that could benefit from blockchain technology and at least 2 
14members representing a postsecondary educational institution in the State.  The 
15commissioner or the commissioner's designee shall serve as an ex officio member of the 
16group.  All appointments must be made within 30 days of the effective date of this 
17resolve. The members of the group shall select a chair from the group's membership. 
18Members of the group serve without compensation. The Department of Economic and 
19Community Development shall provide administrative support to the group. The group 
20shall disband after completing its duties under section 3.
21Sec. 3.  Meetings; duties. Resolved:  That the chair shall schedule the first 
22meeting of the group within 30 days of the date of the final appointment to the group. The 
23group shall meet at other times the chair determines necessary to perform and complete 
24the duties of the group. The group shall develop a master plan that:
251.  Identifies the economic growth and development opportunities presented by 
26blockchain technology;
272.  Assesses existing blockchain technology in the State;
283.  Reviews workforce needs and academic programs required to build blockchain 
29technology expertise across all relevant industries; and
304.  Makes recommendations of policies and investments that will help promote 
31innovation and economic growth by reducing barriers to and expediting the expansion of 
32the State's blockchain technology industry.
33Upon completion of the master plan, the group shall submit the master plan to the 
34commissioner for review and any changes to the plan that the commissioner determines 
35appropriate.
36Sec. 4.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 2, 2020, the 
37commissioner shall submit a report including the master plan described under section 3 
38and any recommended legislation to the joint standing committee of the Legislature 
39having jurisdiction over innovation, development, economic advancement and business 
Page 2 - 129LR1479(01)-11matters.  The committee may report out legislation concerning the master plan to the First 
2Regular Session of the 130th Legislature.
3SUMMARY
4This resolve directs the Commissioner of Economic and Community Development to 
5establish a working group to develop a master plan for fostering the expansion of the 
6blockchain technology industry in the State and recommend policies and investments to 
7make the State a leader in blockchain technology.  Blockchain technology, used in the 
8creation of Bitcoin and other digital currencies, consists of a list of digital records linked 
9together using cryptography that is resistant to modification of the data in the records, 
10creating an open, distributed ledger that records a transaction between 2 or more parties 
11efficiently and in a verifiable and permanent manner.  This resolve directs the 
12commissioner to submit the master plan to the joint standing committee of the Legislature 
13having jurisdiction over innovation, development, economic advancement and business 
14matters by December 2, 2020 and authorizes the committee to report out legislation to the 
15First Regular Session of the 130th Legislature.
