 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 52
S.P. 15 In Senate,  January  9, 2019
An Act  To Provide  an Affordable and Accessible Health Care 
System for  all Residents of Maine
Reference to the Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Representative HYMANSON  of York  and
Senators: CLAXTON of Androscoggin, FOLEY of York, President JACKSON of Aroostook,  
SANBORN, H. of Cumberland, SANBORN,  L. of Cumberland, VITELLI of Sagadahoc,  
Representatives: McCREIGHT of Harpswell, RYKERSON of Kittery.

Page 1 - 129LR0209(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to establish a health care system in the State that will be simple and 
6efficient for all consumers and providers.  The bill proposes to provide all Maine 
7residents with access to an affordable health benefit plan covering essential health 
8benefits.  The bill proposes to create the Health Care Trust, which will have authority to 
9determine essential health care benefits, to negotiate with providers, to reimburse 
10providers for the costs of providing care at negotiated rates and to manage the financing 
11mechanisms for the trust.  All Maine residents will be eligible to enroll in the trust on a 
12voluntary basis.  Those residents currently eligible for MaineCare or other public 
13coverage will be automatically enrolled; MaineCare and other public coverage programs 
14will be replaced by the trust's health care coverage.
15The bill proposes to use several funding sources to pay for the costs of the trust and 
16for coverage of all Maine residents enrolled in the trust for coverage, including payroll 
17taxes, transaction taxes and available federal funding.
18The Health Care Trust will be administered by a health care administrator and 
19overseen by a board of trustees.  In addition, a stakeholder advisory board will provide 
20input and guidance for the trust.
