 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1196
S.P. 371 In Senate,  March  12, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Implement  Ranked-choice  Voting
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CHENETTE of  York.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox, Representatives:  ACKLEY of Monmouth,  
KESSLER of South  Portland, McLEAN of Gorham, WARREN of Hallowell, Representative  
FECTEAU of Biddeford and
Senators: CHIPMAN of Cumberland, President JACKSON of Aroostook,  LUCHINI of  
Hancock, Representatives:  MAXMIN of Nobleboro, PEBWORTH of Blue Hill, RYKERSON 
of Kittery.

Page 1 - 129LR0539(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. First, §5 is amended to read:
5Section 5.  Election of Representatives; lists of votes delivered forthwith; 
6lists of votes examined by Governor; summons of persons who appear to be 
7elected; lists shall be laid before the House.  The meetings within this State for the 
8choice of Representatives shall be warned in due course of law by qualified officials of 
9the several towns and cities 7 days at least before the election, and the election officials of 
10the various towns and cities shall preside impartially at such meetings, receive the votes 
11of all the qualified electors, sort, count and declare them in open meeting; and a list of the 
12persons voted for shall be formed, with the number of votes for each person against that 
13person's name.  Cities and towns belonging to any Representative District shall hold their 
14meetings at the same time in the respective cities and towns; and such meetings shall be 
15notified, held and regulated, the votes received, sorted, counted and declared in the same 
16manner.  Fair copies of the lists of votes shall be attested by the municipal officers and 
17the clerks of the cities and towns and the city and town clerks respectively shall cause the 
18same to be delivered into the office of the Secretary of State forthwith.  The Governor 
19shall examine the returned copies of such lists and 7 days before the first Wednesday of 
20December biennially, shall issue a summons to such persons as shall appear to have been 
21elected by a plurality majority of all votes returned, to attend and take their seats.  All 
22such lists shall be laid before the House of Representatives on the first Wednesday of 
23December biennially, and they shall finally determine who are elected.
24Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Second, §§4 and 5 are amended to read:
25Section 4.  Lists of votes examined by Governor; summons to persons who 
26appear to be elected.  The Governor shall, as soon as may be, examine the copies of 
27such lists, and at least 7 days before the said first Wednesday of December, issue a 
28summons to such persons, as shall appear to be elected by a plurality majority of the 
29votes in each senatorial district, to attend that day and take their seats.
30Section 5.  Determination of Senators elected; procedure for filling 
31vacancies.  The Senate shall, on said first Wednesday of December, biennially 
32determine who is elected by a plurality majority of votes to be Senator in each district.  
33All vacancies in the Senate arising from death, resignation, removal from the State or like 
34causes, and also vacancies, if any, which may occur because of the failure of any district 
35to elect by a plurality majority of votes the Senator to which said district shall be entitled 
36shall be filled by an immediate election in the unrepresented district.  The Governor shall 
37issue a proclamation therefor and therein fix the time of such election.
38Constitution, Art. V, Pt. First, §3 is amended to read:
39Section 3.  Election; votes to be returned to Secretary of State; Secretary 
40of State to lay lists before the Senate and House of Representatives; provision 
Page 2 - 129LR0539(01)-11in case of tie.  The meetings for election of Governor shall be notified, held and 
2regulated and votes shall be received, sorted, counted and declared and recorded, in the 
3same manner as those for Senators and Representatives.  Copies of lists of votes shall be 
4sealed and returned to the secretary's office in the same manner and at the same time as 
5those for Senators.  The Secretary of State for the time being shall, on the first 
6Wednesday after the first Tuesday of January then next, lay the lists returned to the 
7secretary's office before the Senate and House of Representatives to be by them 
8examined, together with the ballots cast if they so elect, and they shall determine the 
9number of votes duly cast for the office of Governor, and in case of a choice by plurality 
10majority of all of the votes returned they shall declare and publish the same.  If there shall 
11be a tie between the 2 persons having the largest number of votes for Governor, the 
12House of Representatives and the Senate meeting in joint session, and each member of 
13said bodies having a single vote, shall elect one of said 2 persons having so received an 
14equal number of votes and the person so elected by the Senate and House of 
15Representatives shall be declared the Governor.
16Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
17Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
18respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
19holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
20following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
21proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
22"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require candidates 
23for the political offices of Governor, State Senator and State 
24Representative to be elected by a majority of the votes cast for that 
25office?"
26The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
27and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
28square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
29declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
30State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
31review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
32amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
33becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
34Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
35shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
36of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
37SUMMARY
38This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require candidates for 
39the political offices of Governor, State Senator and State Representative to be elected by 
40a majority of the votes cast for that office.
