 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 684
H.P. 505 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2019
Resolve, Relating to the  Prevention and Management of Neonatal 
Abstinence Syndrome
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative NADEAU of  Winslow.
Cosponsored by Senator FARRIN of Somerset and
Representatives: COREY of  Windham, FARNSWORTH of Portland, FAY of Raymond, 
HYMANSON of York, INGWERSEN of  Arundel, MAREAN of  Hollis, PERRY of Calais, 
PIERCE of Falmouth.

Page 1 - 129LR0915(01)-11Sec. 1.  Prevention and management of neonatal abstinence syndrome.  
2Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services shall develop 
3recommendations for measures related to the prevention and management of neonatal 
4abstinence syndrome.  The measures must be designed to:
51.  Promote the health and well-being of mothers and infants and prevent or minimize 
6neonatal abstinence syndrome;
72.  Improve access to family planning services and contraceptive management in 
8order to prevent unplanned pregnancies in women with substance use disorder; and
93.  Create targeted treatment programs for antepartum and postpartum women with 
10substance use disorder.  The targeted treatment must focus on multidisciplinary treatment, 
11education and access to community resources and support.
12For the purposes of this resolve, "neonatal abstinence syndrome" means a collection 
13of withdrawal symptoms experienced by newborns and infants after exposure in utero to 
14substances such as opioids and cocaine, benzodiazepines and other narcotics.  
15Sec. 2.  Report; authority to submit a bill.  Resolved:  That the Department of 
16Health and Human Services shall submit its recommendations developed under section 1 
17to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services by December 4, 2019, 
18and the committee may submit a bill related to the recommendations to the Second 
19Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
20SUMMARY
21This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to develop 
22recommendations for measures related to the prevention and management of neonatal 
23abstinence syndrome.
