 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 129
H.P. 111 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
An Act  To Protect  a Child from Misuse of Identity
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BRYANT of Windham.
Cosponsored by Senator LIBBY  of Androscoggin and
Representatives: DOORE of Augusta, EVANGELOS of Friendship,  MARTIN of Sinclair, 
NADEAU of Winslow, Senators: DESCHAMBAULT of York,  DIAMOND  of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR0821(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง42, sub-ยง10 is enacted to read:
310.  Protection of a child from misuse of identity.  The department shall adopt rules 
4to protect a child from the misuse of the identity of the child for household, business or 
5commercial purposes.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical 
6rules as defined by Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.  The rules must provide for the 
7following procedures when a person in a household that includes a minor child applies for 
8or renews an application for cash or medical assistance from the department:
9A.  Enabling the department to review information about and inquire and ascertain 
10whether a person who applies for or renews an application for cash or medical 
11assistance has misused the identity of the child, including, but not limited to, the 
12social security number and credit history of the child;
13B.  Requiring that, in applying for or renewing an application for cash or medical 
14assistance, the applicant and the child, if the child is able to sign a release, each sign a 
15release authorizing the department to make the inquiry and to receive and review any 
16information under paragraph A.  The rules must require releases with respect to all 
17children in a household; and
18C.  Referring the matter to the Attorney General for consideration and possible legal 
19action if the department determines that the identity of a child has been misused.
20The department shall report by April 1st each year to the joint standing committee of the 
21Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters on the results of 
22inquiries, reviews of information and referrals made pursuant to this subsection.
23SUMMARY
24This bill directs the Department of Health and Human Services to adopt rules to 
25protect a child from the misuse of the identity of the child for household, business or 
26commercial purposes. The rules must provide for releases to make an inquiry, to review 
27information and to refer a matter to the Attorney General if the department finds that a 
28child's identity has been misused.  The bill requires the department to report by April 1st 
29each year to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 
30health and human services matters on the results of child identity inquiries, reviews of 
31information and referrals.
