 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 665
H.P. 486 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2019
An Act  To Enact the Campus Free Expression Act
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ANDREWS of Paris.
Cosponsored by Senator FARRIN of Somerset and
Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, DeVEAU  of Caribou,  FAULKINGHAM  of Winter Harbor, 
FECTEAU of Augusta,  MORRIS of Turner, O'CONNOR of Berwick, ORDWAY of Standish, 
RUDNICKI of Fairfield.

Page 1 - 129LR1641(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง10014 is enacted to read:
3ยง10014.  Campus Free Expression Act
41.  Short title.  This section may be known and cited as "the Campus Free Expression 
5Act."
62.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
7following terms have the following meanings.
8A.  "Expressive activity" means an expressive activity protected under the United 
9States Constitution, Amendment I and the Constitution of Maine, Article I, including, 
10but not limited to, all forms of peaceful assembly, protests and speeches; distributing 
11literature; carrying signs; circulating petitions; and the recording and publication, 
12including Internet publication, of video or audio lawfully recorded in outdoor areas of 
13campus.  "Expressive activity" does not include commercial speech.
14B.  "Free speech zone" means an area on a campus of a public institution of higher 
15education that is designated for the purpose of engaging in an expressive activity.
16C.  "Material and substantial disruption" means conduct that intentionally and 
17significantly hinders another person's or group's expressive activity or, in the case of 
18disruption of the functioning of a public institution of higher education in subsection 
193, paragraph A, conduct that intentionally and significantly hinders the functioning of 
20a public institution of higher education.  "Material and substantial disruption" does 
21not include conduct that is protected under the United States Constitution, 
22Amendment I and the Constitution of Maine, Article I, including, but not limited to, 
23lawful protests and counterprotests in the outdoor areas of campus or minor or 
24fleeting nonviolent disruptions that are isolated or brief in duration.
25D.  "Outdoor area of campus" means a publicly accessible area of a campus of a 
26public institution of higher education in which members of the public are commonly 
27allowed.
28E.  "Public institution of higher education" means a university in the University of 
29Maine System, a college in the Maine Community College System and the Maine 
30Maritime Academy.
313.  Right to free speech activities on campus.  Free speech activities on campus are 
32governed by this subsection.
33A.  A person who wishes to engage in an expressive activity in an outdoor area of 
34campus may do so freely as long as the person's conduct is lawful and does not 
35materially and substantially disrupt the functioning of the public institution of higher 
36education.
37B.  Outdoor areas of campus are considered traditional public forums for individuals, 
38organizations and guest speakers.  A public institution of higher education may create 
39and enforce restrictions on time, place and manner of expression that are reasonable 
40and content-neutral and that are narrowly tailored to achieve a significant institutional 
Page 2 - 129LR1641(01)-11interest.  Such restrictions must be clear and provide for ample alternative means of 
2expression.  A public institution of higher education shall post such restrictions on the 
3institution's publicly accessible website.
4C.  A public institution of higher education may not designate an area of campus as a 
5free speech zone or otherwise create policies restricting expressive activities to a 
6particular outdoor area of campus, except as provided in paragraph B.
7D.  Students, faculty or staff of a public institution of higher education may not 
8materially and substantially disrupt expressive activities on campus that are 
9scheduled or reserved.
104.  Enforcement by Attorney General.  The Attorney General has the authority to 
11enforce compliance with this section and may bring an action to enjoin violations of this 
12section.
135.  Cause of action.  A person whose rights to conduct an expressive activity are 
14violated by an action prohibited under this section may bring an action against a public 
15institution of higher education in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin violations of 
16this section and to recover compensatory damages, reasonable court costs and attorney's 
17fees.  If the court finds a public institution of higher education violated this section, the 
18court shall award damages of at least $500 for the initial violation and $50 for each day 
19thereafter that the person's rights are violated.  Damages stemming from a single violation 
20of this section may not exceed $100,000.  If more than one person brings an action arising 
21from a single violation of this section and the court finds more than one person's rights 
22were violated, the court shall award damages equally among those persons.
236.  Statute of limitations.  An action brought pursuant to this section must be 
24commenced within one year of the date of the violation.
25SUMMARY
26This bill authorizes a person who wishes to engage in an expressive activity, as 
27defined in the bill, in an outdoor area of campus of a public institution of higher 
28education to do so freely as long as the person's conduct is lawful and does not materially 
29and substantially disrupt the functioning of the public institution of higher education.  It 
30prohibits a public institution of higher education from designating an area of campus as a 
31free speech zone or otherwise creating policies restricting expressive activities to a 
32particular outdoor area of campus, except that it allows public institutions of higher 
33education to create and enforce restrictions on time, place and manner of expression that 
34are reasonable and content-neutral.  The Attorney General has the authority to enforce 
35compliance, and a person whose rights are violated may bring an action to enjoin 
36violations and to recover compensatory damages, reasonable court costs and attorney's 
37fees.
