 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 886
H.P. 660 House of  Representatives, February 19, 2019
An Act  To Protect  Volunteer Search and Rescuers Certified by  the 
Maine Association for Search and  Rescue from  Adverse 
Employment Actions
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BAILEY of  Saco.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: BRADSTREET  of Vassalboro, FAY of Raymond, MARTIN of  Eagle Lake, 
NADEAU of Winslow, SYLVESTER  of Portland, Senators: DAVIS of Piscataquis, 
LAWRENCE of York.

Page 1 - 129LR0305(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  26 MRSA c. 7, sub-c. 4-D is enacted to read:
3SUBCHAPTER 4-D
4VOLUNTEER SEARCH AND RESCUER; ABSENCE FROM WORK
5ยง810.  Absence for emergency response
61.  Definitions.  As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, 
7the following terms have the following meanings.
8A.  "Employer" has the same meaning as in section 809, subsection 1, paragraph A.
9B.  "Volunteer search and rescuer" means a person who is certified in search and 
10rescue practices and procedures by a nonprofit search and rescue training 
11organization recognized by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Bureau 
12of Warden Service.
132.  Prohibition against discharge or disciplinary action.  An employer may not 
14discharge or take any other disciplinary action against an employee who is a volunteer 
15search and rescuer because of the employee's failure to report for work at the beginning 
16of the employee's regular working hours if the employee failed to do so because the 
17employee was responding to a search and rescue operation requested by a law 
18enforcement agency in the employee's capacity as a volunteer search and rescuer and the 
19employee reported for work as soon as reasonably possible after being released from the 
20search and rescue operation. An employer may charge the lost time against the 
21employee's regular pay or against the employee's available leave time. This subsection 
22does not apply to the absence of an employee if the employee has been designated as 
23essential by the employer pursuant to subsection 6.
243.  Notification; verification.  If time permits, when an employee is responding as a 
25volunteer search and rescuer to a search and rescue operation, the employee, the 
26employee's designee or the search and rescue operation supervisor shall notify the 
27employer that the employee will not report to work at the appointed time. At the request 
28of an employer, an employee losing work time as provided in subsection 2 shall provide 
29the employer with a statement from the official in charge of the recognized nonprofit 
30search and rescue training organization, the official's designee or a law enforcement 
31official responsible for the search and rescue operation stating that the employee was 
32responding to a search and rescue operation and the time of release from the operation.
334.  Enforcement; penalty for violation.  If an employer has violated subsection 2, 
34the employee may bring an action in Superior Court in the county in which the employee 
35resides or in the county in which the employer's place of business is located. The action 
36must be brought within one year of the date of the alleged violation. If the court finds that 
37the employer violated subsection 2, and if the employee so requests, the court shall order 
38the employer to reinstate the employee in the employee's former position without 
39reduction of pay, seniority or other benefits. The court also shall order any other 
Page 2 - 129LR0305(01)-11appropriate remedy necessary to return the employee to the position the employee would 
2have been in had the employer not violated subsection 2, including payment of back pay 
3and reinstatement of any other benefits lost during the period in which the discharge or 
4disciplinary action was in effect.
55.  Impact on individual agreements.  This section does not apply if the employer 
6and the employee have entered into a written agreement, signed by the employer and the 
7employee, that governs procedures to be followed when the employee is called to respond 
8to a search and rescue operation as a volunteer search and rescuer. This subsection 
9applies only if:
10A.  The recognized nonprofit search and rescue training organization in charge of 
11calling out volunteer search and rescuers has a written policy that:
12(1)  Specifies the circumstances under which volunteer search and rescuers will 
13be ordered to remain at a search and rescue operation; and
14(2)  Affirms that volunteer search and rescuers will be released as soon as 
15practicable; and
16B.  The employee presents a copy of the policy described in paragraph A to the 
17employer upon notifying the employer of the employee's status as a volunteer search 
18and rescuer.
196.  Designation as essential.  Upon receiving notice of an employee's volunteer 
20search and rescuer status, an employer may designate the employee essential to the 
21employer's operations when the absence of the employee would cause disruption of the 
22employer's business.
23SUMMARY
24This bill provides the same protections to volunteer search and rescuers for absences 
25from work in responding to search and rescue operations requested by a law enforcement 
26agency as volunteer firefighters receive for absences from work in responding to 
27emergencies. Under this bill, a volunteer search and rescuer is a person who has been 
28certified in search and rescue practices and procedures by a nonprofit search and rescue 
29training organization recognized by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, 
30Bureau of Warden Service.
