 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 232
H.P. 195 House of  Representatives, January 22, 2019
An Act  To Change the Process by  Which Designated Nonstate 
Mental Health Institutions Petition the District Court To  Admit 
Certain Patients  to a Progressive Treatment Program
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PERRY of Calais.
Cosponsored by Senator MOORE  of Washington  and
Representatives: CARDONE  of Bangor, CRAVEN of  Lewiston,  MADIGAN of Waterville,  
MEYER of  Eliot, RECKITT of  South  Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR1115(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  34-B MRSA ยง3873-A, sub-ยง1, as amended by PL 2011, c. 492, ยง1, is 
3further amended to read:
41.  Application.  The superintendent or chief administrative officer of a psychiatric 
5hospital, the commissioner, the director of an ACT team, a medical practitioner, a law 
6enforcement officer or the legal guardian of the patient who is the subject of the 
7application may obtain an order from the District Court to admit a patient to a progressive 
8treatment program upon the following conditions:
9A.  The patient suffers from a severe and persistent mental illness;
10B.  The patient poses a likelihood of serious harm;
11C.  The patient has the benefit of a suitable individualized treatment plan;
12D.  Licensed and qualified community providers are available to support the 
13treatment plan;
14E.  The patient is unlikely to follow the treatment plan voluntarily;
15F.  Court-ordered compliance will help to protect the patient from interruptions in 
16treatment, relapses or deterioration of mental health; and
17G.  Compliance will enable the patient to survive more safely in a community setting 
18without posing a likelihood of serious harm.
19If the patient who is the subject of the application is under observation, treatment or care 
20at a designated nonstate mental health institution, the superintendent or chief 
21administrative officer of the institution may request the commissioner to obtain an order 
22from the District Court to admit the patient to a progressive treatment program under this 
23subsection.
24SUMMARY
25This bill changes the process by which a petition to the District Court is made to 
26admit a patient at a designated nonstate mental health institution to a progressive 
27treatment program.  Current law provides that the superintendent or chief administrative 
28officer of a psychiatric hospital, including a designated nonstate mental health institution, 
29directly petition the District Court.  This bill provides that the superintendent or chief 
30administrative officer of a designated nonstate mental health institution request the 
31Commissioner of Health and Human Services to petition the District Court on the 
32superintendent's or chief administrative officer's behalf.
