 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 141
H.P. 123 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2019
An Act  To Promote Highway Safety by Restricting the Use of 
Marijuana and Possession of an Open Marijuana Container in a Vehicle
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative COREY of Windham.
Cosponsored by Senator ROSEN of Hancock  and
Representatives: ARATA of New Gloucester, BRYANT of Windham, COSTAIN  of 
Plymouth, PIERCE of Falmouth, RECKITT of South Portland, Senators: CYRWAY of Kennebec, DESCHAMBAULT of York,  DIAMOND of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR0283(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  29-A MRSA ยง2112-B is enacted to read:
3ยง2112-B.  Open container; using marijuana in a vehicle prohibited 
41.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
5following terms have the following meanings. 
6A.  "Open container" means a receptacle that contains any amount of marijuana or 
7consumable products made from marijuana and has a broken seal or a receptacle from 
8which the contents have been partially removed.
9B.  "Passenger area" means the area designed to seat the operator and passengers 
10while a vehicle is in operation and any area readily accessible to the operator or a 
11passenger, including, but not limited to, the glove compartment, while in their seated 
12positions.
13C.  "Public way" means a way, including a right-of-way, owned and maintained by 
14the State, a county or a municipality over which the general public has a right to pass.
152.  Violation.  The operator of a vehicle on a public way commits a traffic infraction 
16if the operator or a passenger in the passenger area of the vehicle:
17A.  Consumes marijuana or a marijuana product;
18B.  Possesses an open container; or
19C.  Places marijuana or a marijuana product in a container labeled by the 
20manufacturer of the container as containing a nonmarijuana substance.
213.  Exceptions.  An operator of a vehicle is not in violation of this section if:
22A.  The operator or a passenger possesses an open container in a vehicle not equipped 
23with a trunk if the open container is located behind the last upright seat of the vehicle 
24or in an area not normally occupied by the operator or passenger; or
25B.  A passenger possesses an open container or a passenger consumes marijuana or a 
26marijuana product in the living quarters of a motor home, trailer, semitrailer or truck 
27camper.
28SUMMARY
29This bill makes it a traffic infraction to consume marijuana or a marijuana product, to 
30possess an open container of marijuana or a marijuana product in the passenger area of a 
31vehicle or to place marijuana or a marijuana product in a container labeled by the 
32manufacturer of the container as containing a nonmarijuana substance.  This bill is similar 
33to the provisions of law making consuming alcohol or having an open container of 
34alcohol in the passenger area of a vehicle a traffic infraction.
