 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 842
H.P. 616 House of  Representatives, February 14, 2019
An Act  Relating  to Insurance Companies and Totaled Motor 
Vehicles
Reference to the Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative COLLINGS of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, DOORE of Augusta, EVANGELOS  of Friendship,  
MARTIN of  Sinclair, RYKERSON of Kittery,  TALBOT  ROSS  of Portland, Senators: 
CHIPMAN of Cumberland,  LAWRENCE of York.

Page 1 - 129LR2217(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA §2910-B is enacted to read:
3§2910-B.  Motor vehicles determined a total loss
4A motor vehicle insurance policy must allow the insured to maintain possession of a 
5damaged motor vehicle insured under the policy that the insurer determines is a total loss 
6if the insured provides a credible estimate from a motor vehicle mechanic or repair 
7facility detailing repairs that, if performed, would conform the motor vehicle to the motor 
8vehicle inspection standards in Title 29-A, section 1751.  An insurer may deduct from a 
9settlement paid for damage to an insured motor vehicle determined a total loss by the 
10insurer an amount equal to the salvage value of the motor vehicle if the insured elects to 
11maintain possession of the motor vehicle under this section.
12SUMMARY
13This bill requires motor vehicle insurance policies to allow an insured to maintain 
14possession of an insured motor vehicle determined a total loss by the insurer if the 
15insured provides a credible estimate from a motor vehicle mechanic or repair facility 
16detailing repairs that, if performed, would conform the motor vehicle to state motor 
17vehicle inspection standards.  This bill allows an insurer to deduct from a settlement paid 
18for damage to a totaled vehicle an amount equal to the motor vehicle’s salvage value if 
19the insured elects to maintain possession of the motor vehicle.
