 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 43
H.P. 44 House of  Representatives, January 9, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Dedicate All  Sales  Taxes from  All Vehicle Sales and  
Vehicle-related Sales  to the Highway Fund for Roads and Bridge 
Capital Improvements
Reference to the Committee on Taxation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CEBRA of Naples.

Page 1 - 129LR0184(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IX, ยง26 is enacted to read:
5Section 26.  Revenues from motor vehicle sales and use taxes.  Beginning in 
6July 2021, the revenue from the tax imposed on sales of motor vehicles and sales related 
7to motor vehicles must be deposited in the Highway Fund for roads and bridge capital 
8improvements.  Beginning in August 2021, and every month thereafter, the State 
9Controller shall transfer to the Highway Fund for roads and bridge capital improvements 
10an amount that is equal to 100% of the revenue from the tax imposed on sales of motor 
11vehicles and sales related to motor vehicles for the previous month.  The tax amount must 
12be based on actual sales for that month and may not consider any accruals that may be 
13required by law.  The State Tax Assessor shall certify to the State Controller by the 15th 
14day of each month the amounts to be distributed and credited under this section as of the 
15close of the State Controller's records for the previous month.
16Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
17Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
18respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
19holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in November 2020, to vote upon 
20the ratification of the amendment proposed in this resolution by voting upon the 
21following question:
22"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to dedicate all sales 
23and use tax revenue from sales of motor vehicles and sales related to 
24motor vehicles to the Highway Fund for roads and bridge capital 
25improvements?"
26The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
27and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
28square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
29declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
30State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
31review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
32amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
33becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
34Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
35shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
36of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
37SUMMARY
38This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to dedicate all sales and 
39use tax revenue from sales of motor vehicles and sales related to motor vehicles to the 
40Highway Fund for roads and bridge capital improvements.
