 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 29
H.P. 30 House of  Representatives, January 9, 2019
Resolve, To  Implement the Recommendations  of the Task  Force To 
Address the Opioid Crisis  in the State by Establishing a Work 
Group To Develop Educational Programming for Prevention  of 
Substance Use and Substance Use Disorders among Youth and Adolescents
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative McCREIGHT  of Harpswell.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Representatives: BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland, BRENNAN of Portland, FARNSWORTH of Portland, HYMANSON of York, KORNFIELD of Bangor, STEARNS of Guilford,  STOVER 
of Boothbay,  Senator:  CYRWAY of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 129LR0076(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, deaths from substance use disorder are preventable and programs to 
4promote prevention are critical; and
5Whereas, the work to determine the specific programs to be employed in this State 
6must be completed as soon as possible in order for reporting to the Legislature by January 
72020 and implementing in schools and communities; and
8Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
9the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
10immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
11therefore, be it
12Sec. 1.  Department of Education to establish work group regarding 
13substance use prevention programs.  Resolved:  That the Department of Education 
14shall establish a work group to evaluate existing substance use prevention programs 
15targeting school-age children, investigate prevention programs that have proven effective 
16in other areas of the United States or in other countries, identify funding resources and 
17determine how prevention programs are best incorporated into education curricula.
18Sec. 2.  Membership.  Resolved:  That the work group established in section 1 
19must include representatives from educational organizations, including the Maine 
20Education Association, Maine School Management Association, Maine Principals' 
21Association and Maine Interscholastic Athletic Administrators Association; 
22representatives of law enforcement; and representatives of organizations that promote and 
23facilitate programs focusing on public health, substance use prevention, behavioral health 
24treatment and the welfare of children.
25Sec. 3.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than January 1, 2020, the Department of 
26Education shall submit a report of the findings of its work group and any recommended 
27legislation to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 
28education matters.  The joint standing committee may report out legislation based upon 
29the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
30Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
31legislation takes effect when approved.
32SUMMARY
33This resolve is based on recommendations of the Task Force To Address the Opioid 
34Crisis in the State, which submitted its report to the Legislature in December 2017.  The 
35resolve requires the Department of Education to establish a work group to evaluate 
36existing substance use prevention programs targeting school-age children, investigate 
37prevention programs that have proven effective in other areas of the United States or in 
38other countries, identify funding resources and determine how prevention programs 
39should be incorporated into education curricula.  The work group must include 
Page 2 - 129LR0076(01)-11representatives of educational, law enforcement and public health organizations.  The 
2department is required to submit a report of the findings of the work group no later than 
3January 1, 2020 to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction 
4over education matters.
