 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 846
H.P. 620 House of  Representatives, February 14, 2019
Resolve, To  Provide for the Sealing of Records  of Convictions for 
Marijuana-related Violations That Are  No Longer Crimes
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TALBOT ROSS  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Representative FARNSWORTH  of Portland, President JACKSON of 
Aroostook and  Representatives: EVANGELOS of Friendship, HICKMAN  of Winthrop, 
NEWELL of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, O'NEIL of Saco,  PLUECKER of Warren,  WARREN 
of Hallowell, Senator: BELLOWS of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 129LR0316(01)-11Sec. 1.  Department of Public Safety; sealing of marijuana conviction 
2records.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary and no 
3later than January 15, 2021, the Department of Public Safety, Bureau of State Police, 
4State Bureau of Identification shall ensure that all criminal conviction records in the 
5possession of the department that relate to an eligible marijuana conviction are made 
6confidential.  The dissemination of such records by the department is prohibited.
71.  For the purposes of this section, "eligible marijuana conviction" means a 
8conviction for a current or former crime that consisted of conduct that is authorized under 
9the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 28-B, chapter 3.
102.  No later than January 15, 2020, the Department of Public Safety shall submit to 
11the joint standing committees of the Legislature having jurisdiction over adult use 
12marijuana matters, criminal justice and public safety matters and judicial matters a report 
13regarding the progress made by the department in meeting the requirements of this 
14section.  The report must include any proposed legislation necessary for the department to 
15meet the requirements of this section by January 15, 2021.  After reviewing the report, the 
16joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over adult use marijuana 
17matters may report out legislation relating to the report to the First Regular Session of the 
18130th Legislature.  The joint standing committees of the Legislature having jurisdiction 
19over criminal justice and public safety matters and judicial matters may make 
20recommendations to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction 
21over adult use marijuana matters regarding that legislation.
22SUMMARY
23This resolve requires the Department of Public Safety, Bureau of State Police, State 
24Bureau of Identification to ensure that all criminal conviction records in the possession of 
25the department that relate to the conviction for an offense involving marijuana that is no 
26longer illegal are made confidential and prohibits the dissemination of such records.  The 
27department is required to submit a report to the 130th Legislature regarding the progress 
28of the department in meeting the requirements of this legislation.
