 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1653
H.P. 1189 House of  Representatives,  April 30, 2019
Resolve, Establishing the Conference  To Address and Improve 
Relations between Maine Indian Tribes and  the Legislature
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DILLINGHAM of Oxford.
Cosponsored by President  JACKSON  of Aroostook and
Representatives: COLLINGS of  Portland, MARTIN of  Greene, MOONEN of Portland, 
O'CONNOR of Berwick, STEWART of Presque Isle, Senator: DOW of Lincoln.

Page 1 - 129LR2272(01)-11Sec. 1.  Conference established.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 
2353, the Conference To Address and Improve Relations between Maine Indian Tribes and 
3the Legislature, referred to in this resolve as "the conference," is established.  The 
4conference consists of the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the House, the Senate 
5Minority Leader and the House Minority Leader, who shall invite the participation of, as 
6members of the conference, the Chief of the Aroostook Band of Micmacs, the Chief of 
7the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, the Chief of the Penobscot Indian Nation, the 
8Chief of the Passamaquoddy Tribe at Indian Township and the Chief of the 
9Passamaquoddy Tribe at Pleasant Point.  The President of the Senate is the Senate chair 
10and the Speaker of the House is the House chair of the conference.  The conference is 
11established to develop meaningful conversations among the ex officio and invited 
12members of the conference on communication and policy differences that led to the 
13breakdown between the Legislature and the tribal representatives to the Legislature and 
14how better to communicate and improve the relationship between the Legislature and 
15Maine Indian tribes.
16SUMMARY
17This resolve establishes the Conference To Address and Improve Relations between 
18Maine Indian Tribes and the Legislature to develop meaningful conversations among the 
19members of the conference on communication and policy differences that led to the 
20breakdown between the Legislature and the tribal representatives to the Legislature and 
21how better to communicate and improve the relationship between the Legislature and 
22Maine Indian tribes.  Ex officio members of the conference are the President of the 
23Senate, the Speaker of the House, the Senate Minority Leader and the House Minority 
24Leader, who are directed to invite as members of the conference the Chief of the 
25Aroostook Band of Micmacs, the Chief of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, the 
26Chief of the Penobscot Indian Nation, the Chief of the Passamaquoddy Tribe at Indian 
27Township and the Chief of the Passamaquoddy Tribe at Pleasant Point.
