 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 932
H.P. 687 House of  Representatives, February 21, 2019
An Act  Regarding Moose Permit  Subpermittees
Reference to the Committee on Inland  Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PICKETT of Dixfield.   (BY REQUEST)
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS  of Piscataquis and
Representatives: ANDREWS of  Paris, MARTIN of Eagle Lake, MASON of Lisbon,  
NADEAU of Winslow, ORDWAY of Standish, STEARNS of Guilford,  STEWART of  
Presque Isle, THERIAULT of China.

Page 1 - 129LR1593(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  12 MRSA ยง11154, sub-ยง7-A is enacted to read:
37-A.  Death of permittee.  If a person who is issued a moose permit under this 
4section dies at any time prior to the start of the moose hunting season, the 
5subpermittee-designate or subpermittee, if an immediate family member, must be issued 
6that person's moose permit.  A person issued a permit under this subsection may name a 
7subpermittee-designate and alternate subpermittee-designate in accordance with 
8subsection 7.  For the purpose of this subsection, "immediate family member" means a 
9person's spouse, child, stepchild, grandchild, parent, grandparent, stepparent, brother, 
10sister, half-sister, half-brother or adopted child.
11SUMMARY
12This bill specifies that if a person who is issued a moose permit dies prior to the start 
13of the moose hunting season, that person's subpermittee-designate or subpermittee, if an 
14immediate family member, must be issued that person's moose permit.  The new moose 
15permit holder under this provision has the ability to name a subpermittee-designate and 
16alternate subpermittee-designate.
