 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 Date:,,?-/~ --/CJ L.D. 773 
(Filing No. H~~C:,) 
EDUCATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
129TH LEGISLATURE 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT .. fl-,, to H.P. 578, L.D. 773, Bill, "An Act 
Regarding Secondary School Education Concerning Sexual Activity and Sexual Assault" 
Amend the bill by inserting after the title and before the enacting clause the 
following: 
'Mandate preamble. This measure requires one or more local units of government 
to expand or modify activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures from local 
revenues but does not provide funding for at least 90% of those expenditures. Pursuant to 
the Constitution of Maine, Article IX, Section 21, 2/3 of all of the members elected to 
each House have determined it necessary to enact this measure.' 
SUMMARY 
This amendment adds a mandate preamble. 
FISCAL NOTE REQUIRED 
(See attached) 
Page 1 -129LR1850(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Revised: 05/14/19 feac 
129th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD773 LR 1850(02) 
An Act Regarding Secondary School Education Concerning Sexual Activity and Sexual Ass.ault 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment {Jrr(!l~fo(,) 
Committee: Education and Cultural Affairs 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
State Mandate -Exempted 
State Mandates 
Required Activity Unit Affected Local Cost 
Requires that instruction involving affirmative consent, communication and decision School Moderate 
making regarding sexual activity and the effects of alcoholic drinks, stimulants and statewide 
narcotics on the ability to give affinnative consent, communicate and make 
appropriate decisions be included in a secondary school's course of study in health, 
safety and physical education. 
Pursuant to the Mandate Preamble, the two-thirds vote of all members elected to each House exempts the State from 
the constitutional requirement to fund 90% of the additional costs. 
Fiscal Detail and Notes 
Additional costs to the Department of Education to include affirmative consent, communication and decision making 
regarding sexual activity and the effects of alcoholic drinks, stimulants and narcotics on the ability to give affinnative -
consent in the commissioner's review of the content standards and perfonnance indicators for the health, physical 
education and wellness content area beginning in the 2019-2020 school year can be absorbed within existing budgeted 
resources. 
LR1850(02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
