 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 769
H.P. 574 House of  Representatives, February 12, 2019
Resolve, To  Direct the  Commissioner of Professional and Financial 
Regulation To Create a Working Group To  Study  Credentialing 
Skilled Individuals  with Foreign Credentials
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TEPLER of Topsham.
Cosponsored by Senator SANBORN, H. of Cumberland and
Representatives: CLOUTIER of Lewiston, COLLINGS of Portland, DAUGHTRY  of 
Brunswick, GATTINE  of Westbrook,  JORGENSEN of Portland, MASTRACCIO  of Sanford, 
MORALES of South  Portland, Senator: BELLOWS of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 129LR1106(01)-11Sec. 1.  Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation to create 
2working group to study credentialing skilled individuals who have foreign 
3credentials. Resolved:  That the Commissioner of Professional and Financial 
4Regulation shall create a working group to study credentialing skilled individuals who 
5have foreign credentials.  The commissioner shall appoint to the working group no fewer 
6than 8 and no more than 10 members who represent licensing boards and professional 
7organizations served by the licensing boards in professions for which there is a need for 
8and an opportunity to credential skilled individuals with foreign credentials.  The working 
9group shall consider and develop recommendations for alternative pathways for skilled 
10individuals with foreign credentials to be credentialed in the State.
11Sec. 2.  Report. Resolved:  That by November 4, 2020 the working group created 
12pursuant to section 1 shall submit a report of its findings under section 1 along with any 
13recommendations and suggested legislation to the Governor and the Commissioner of 
14Professional and Financial Regulation.  The commissioner shall submit the report with 
15any recommendations and suggested legislation to the Joint Standing Committee on 
16Labor and Housing.  The committee may report out a bill relating to the subject matter of 
17the report to the First Regular Session of the 130th Legislature.
18SUMMARY
19This resolve directs the Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation to 
20create a working group to study credentialing skilled individuals with foreign credentials 
21in the State.  The working group consists of 8 to 10 members representing licensing 
22boards and professional organizations served by the licensing boards in professions for 
23which there is a need for and an opportunity to credential skilled individuals with foreign 
24credentials.  The working group is required to submit its report along with any 
25recommendations and suggested legislation to the Governor and the Commissioner of 
26Professional and Financial Regulation.   The commissioner is required to submit the 
27report with any recommendations and suggested legislation to the Joint Standing 
28Committee on Labor and Housing.  The committee is permitted to report out a bill 
29relating to the subject matter of the report to the First Regular Session of the 130th 
30Legislature.
