 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 592
H.P. 436 House of  Representatives, February 5, 2019
Resolve, To  Establish a Background Check Consolidation  
Commission
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative McCREA of Fort Fairfield.
Cosponsored by Senator VITELLI of Sagadahoc and
Representatives: ACKLEY of Monmouth, CARDONE of Bangor,  DUNPHY of Old Town,  
FARNSWORTH of  Portland, MARTIN of Sinclair, SCHNECK  of Bangor,  STANLEY of 
Medway, WHITE of Waterville.

Page 1 - 129LR0019(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, this legislation establishes the Background Check Consolidation 
4Commission to study consolidating state-required, employment-related background 
5checks; and
6Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90-day period expires in order that 
7the study may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 
8legislative session; and
9Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
10the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
11immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
12therefore, be it
13Sec. 1.  Commission established.  Resolved:  That the Background Check 
14Consolidation Commission, referred to in this resolve as "the commission," is established.
15Sec. 2.  Commission membership.  Resolved:  That the commission consists of 
1611 members appointed as follows:
171.  Four members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, including 
18members from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the Legislature;
192.  Three members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the 
20House, including members from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats 
21in the Legislature;
223.  The Commissioner of Education or the commissioner's designee;
234.  The Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the commissioner's 
24designee;
255.  The Commissioner of Public Safety or the commissioner's designee; and
266.  The Commissioner of Health and Human Services or the commissioner's designee.
27Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the first-named Senate member is the Senate 
28chair and the first-named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the 
29commission.
30Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of commission.  Resolved:  That all 
31appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 
32resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 
33Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 
34the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more 
35after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 
Page 2 - 129LR0019(01)-11made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 
2for the commission to meet and conduct its business.
3Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the commission shall study consolidating and 
4centralizing as many state-required background checks required for employment as 
5possible, including background checks for teachers, state workers and persons seeking 
6Maine Guide licenses.  Background checks to obtain firearms may not be addressed by 
7the commission.
8Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Legislative Council shall provide 
9necessary staffing services to the commission, except that Legislative Council staff 
10support is not authorized when the Legislature is in regular or special session.
11Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 4, 2019, the commission 
12shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 
13legislation, for presentation to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
14Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
15legislation takes effect when approved.
16SUMMARY
17This resolve establishes the Background Check Consolidation Commission to study 
18consolidating and centralizing as many state-required background checks required for 
19employment as possible, including background checks for teachers, state workers and 
20persons seeking Maine Guide licenses.  It prohibits the commission from studying 
21background checks to obtain firearms.
