 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1822
H.P. 1299 House of  Representatives, June 3, 2019
An Act  To Protect  Access to Services for Adults with Serious and 
Persistent Mental Illness
Submitted by the Department of  Health and Human  Services pursuant  to Joint Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GATTINE of Westbrook.

Page 1 - 129LR2321(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  34-B MRSA ยง3613 is enacted to read:
3ยง3613.  Access to services
41.  Mental health services. For purposes of this section, "mental health service" 
5includes only the following services, as described in the department's MaineCare rules or 
6in the provider's contract with the department:
7A.  Assertive community treatment;
8B.  Behavioral health homes;
9C.  Community integration;
10D.  Community rehabilitation;
11E.  Crisis services, including any crisis stabilization unit;
12F.  Daily living support;
13G.  Skills development;
14H.  Day support;
15I.  Medication management; and
16J.  Residential treatment.
172.  Department review and dispute resolution. An adult with serious and persistent 
18mental illness, as defined in rules adopted by the department pursuant to this section, who 
19is receiving or is eligible to receive any mental health service from a provider pursuant to 
20a contract with the department to provide such a service may obtain upon request, with 
21prior notice to the provider, an informal review by the department of the provider's 
22actions under the following circumstances:
23A.  When a hospital's treatment or discharge planning team has determined that a 
24mental health service is necessary for the adult with serious and persistent mental 
25illness to transition from a hospital into the community and has made a referral to a 
26provider under contract with the department to provide the service and the provider 
27has refused to accept the referral in violation of the terms of the provider's contract;
28B.  When the adult with serious and persistent mental illness is not hospitalized and 
29has applied for or been referred to a provider under contract with the department to 
30provide community integration services or assertive community treatment and the 
31provider has refused to accept the referral or application in violation of the terms of 
32the provider's contract; or
33C.  When the adult with serious and persistent mental illness is receiving a mental 
34health service and has that service terminated or suspended by a provider in violation 
35of the terms of the provider's contract with the department to provide that service.
Page 2 - 129LR2321(01)-11An adult with serious and persistent mental illness may not obtain department review of a 
2provider's refusal to provide residential treatment if there was no vacancy or if the 
3department did not authorize the service.
4The informal review process must include an opportunity for the provider and the person 
5requesting the review to provide relevant information to the department and for informal 
6dispute resolution by the department to facilitate access to the service.
73.  Department findings.  At the conclusion of the informal review and dispute 
8resolution process provided for in subsection 2, if access to the service has not been 
9provided, the department shall issue written findings regarding whether the provider's 
10action is in violation of the provider's contract with the department.  These findings do 
11not constitute final agency action as defined in Title 5, section 8002, subsection 4 and are 
12not appealable.
134.  Private right of action.  An adult with serious and persistent mental illness who 
14is aggrieved by the action of a provider as described in subsection 2 and who has not been 
15provided access to the mental health service by the provider within a reasonable period of 
16time in response to department review may bring a private civil action in Superior Court 
17for declaratory and injunctive relief to enforce by restraining order or injunction, 
18temporarily or permanently, the terms of the provider's contract with the department.  The 
19department must be notified of the action in writing prior to filing.
20A.  To be accepted for filing, an action filed under this subsection must be 
21accompanied by true and accurate copies of the department's findings issued pursuant 
22to subsection 3 and the provider's contract, both of which are admissible as evidence 
23in the proceeding.
24B.  Nothing in this section may be construed to create a cause of action by the 
25provider or the individual plaintiff against the department.  The department may not 
26be named by the provider or the individual plaintiff as a defendant, 3rd-party 
27defendant or party in interest in an action filed under this section, but the department 
28is not precluded from bringing an action to enforce the provider's contract with the 
29department or moving to intervene in a private right of action under this section.
30C.  An individual bringing an action under this subsection is not required to allege or 
31prove that the refusal, termination or suspension of services would cause irreparable 
32injury or harm to that individual, but to obtain injunctive relief the individual must 
33prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the provider's action violates the terms 
34of the provider's contract with the department.
35D.  An individual bringing an action under this subsection is not required to post a 
36bond.
37E.  The remedies available in an action under this subsection include both mandatory 
38and prohibitory injunctive relief.
39F.  An individual who obtains injunctive relief in an action under this subsection may 
40recover reasonable attorney's fees and costs, not to exceed $1,000, from the provider 
41against whom judgment was entered.
Page 3 - 129LR2321(01)-11G.  An individual who brings an action under this subsection is not liable to the 
2provider for damages resulting from bringing or pursuing the action unless the action 
3was brought in bad faith or without a reasonable belief that the provider was not 
4acting in compliance with its obligations under its contract with the department.
5H.  The members of an individual's hospital treatment or discharge planning team 
6may not be compelled by subpoena to appear in person to testify in an action brought 
7under this subsection but may submit sworn testimony by affidavit unless otherwise 
8ordered by the court upon a showing of good cause.
9I.  There may be no discovery in any action filed pursuant to this subsection unless 
10agreed to by the parties or ordered by the court upon a showing of good cause.
11J.  Court proceedings in any action filed pursuant to this subsection must be closed to 
12the public unless the individual plaintiff has requested a public hearing, and the 
13court's case file must be kept confidential and may not be released except to the 
14department, subject to confidentiality protections, without the written permission of 
15the individual plaintiff.
165.  Rulemaking.  The department shall adopt routine technical rules pursuant to Title 
175, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A governing the process for informal department review 
18described in this section, which must include a definition of "adult with serious and 
19persistent mental illness."
20SUMMARY
21This bill establishes the right of an adult with serious and persistent mental illness 
22who is denied access to certain services by a provider contrary to the terms of the 
23provider's contract with the Department of Health and Human Services to seek informal 
24department review of the provider's action and informal dispute resolution by the 
25department to facilitate access to the service.  If the adult continues to be denied access to 
26the mental health service following department review, the adult may bring a private civil 
27action in Superior Court for injunctive relief to enforce the terms of the provider's 
28contract with the department.  The bill requires the department to adopt routine technical 
29rules governing the process for informal department review, which must include a 
30definition of "adult with serious and persistent mental illness."
