 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1347
H.P. 975 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2019
An Act  To Promote High-quality After-school Programs in Public 
Schools
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BEEBE-CENTER of  Rockland.
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland  and
Representatives: DOUDERA  of Camden, PIERCE of Falmouth,  WARREN of Hallowell, 
Senator: CARPENTER of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR1628(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to amend the provisions in law regarding high-quality after-school 
6programs under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20-A, chapter 318.  Currently, funds to 
7provide high-quality after-school programs are provided by the After-school Program 
8Fund, which receives a substantial amount of funding from the Federal Government that 
9may be terminated or no longer available in the coming years.  This bill proposes to seek 
10new funding for the After-school Program Fund and to increase the quality of the after-
11school programs, including requiring matching funds from the schools that receive the 
12funds and to make grants from the fund competitive.  An after-school program that is a 
13recipient of funding from the fund must have as measurable outcomes for the students 
14academic improvement, social emotional learning and family engagement.  Criteria for 
15competitive grants would seek to improve or raise the quality of after-school programs by 
16giving preference to schools that would collaborate with and leverage existing 
17community resources that have demonstrated effectiveness, engage in outreach to 
18children and youth and involve local governments, including parks and recreation 
19departments and other schools.
