 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 544
H.P. 401 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2019
An Act  To Create Extended Producer Responsibility for Post-
consumer Waste Generated from the Use of Tobacco Products
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BLUME of York.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BAILEY  of Saco, FAY of Raymond, LANDRY of 
Farmington, McCREIGHT  of Harpswell.

Page 1 - 129LR0263(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5This bill proposes to establish a system under which producers of tobacco products 
6develop, finance and implement stewardship programs to collect, transport, process and 
7safely dispose of post-consumer tobacco waste to reduce, prevent and mitigate the 
8environmental effects of the disposal of that waste in the State.
9The bill proposes to:
101.  Prohibit tobacco producers or retailers from selling or offering for sale tobacco 
11products in the State unless they are participating in an approved tobacco waste 
12stewardship program;
132.  Require a tobacco producer to provide retailers that sell tobacco products 
14information about the producer's tobacco waste stewardship program and information 
15regarding available collection opportunities for post-consumer tobacco product waste.  
16Under the bill, a retailer that sells tobacco products would be required to provide that 
17information to its consumers at the time of sale;
183.  Require each tobacco producer to submit a plan for its tobacco waste stewardship 
19program to the State for approval.  The plan must:
20A.  Specify educational and outreach activities and materials that promote and 
21increase awareness of the tobacco waste stewardship program, including but not 
22limited to a website and written materials.  The outreach materials must identify 
23options for establishing an effective collection system, promote a reduction in the 
24generation of post-consumer tobacco product waste, identify each tobacco producer 
25participating in the program, identify participating brands of tobacco products sold 
26and identify the processors that manage the post-consumer tobacco product waste that 
27is collected;
28B.  Establish and provide for the implementation of goals to reduce the generation of 
29post-consumer tobacco product waste;
30C.  Outline the responsibility for negotiating and executing contracts to collect, 
31transport and process post-consumer tobacco product waste for end-of-product 
32management;
33D.  Describe how the end-of-product management of post-consumer tobacco product 
34waste that is collected under the tobacco waste stewardship program will use 
35environmentally sound management practices that are consistent with state laws and 
36other relevant environmental rules and practices for ultimate disposal;
Page 2 - 129LR0263(01)-11E.  Establish a timeline for carrying out an annual assessment of the effectiveness of 
2actions taken under the tobacco waste stewardship program;
3F.  Include an anticipated annual operating budget for the tobacco waste stewardship 
4program; and
5G.  Identify an effective, convenient system for the collection of post-consumer 
6tobacco product waste that ensures sufficient permanent collection sites and provides 
7for collection events in geographically underserved areas;
84.  Establish a process for tobacco producers to amend their tobacco waste 
9stewardship programs;
105.  Require tobacco producers to submit annual reports, which must include the 
11volume of post-consumer tobacco product waste collected, an independent financial 
12audit, an evaluation of the tobacco waste stewardship program's funding mechanism, an 
13updated budget, samples of educational and outreach materials, documentation of 
14compliance with collection requirements, a description of activities undertaken to achieve 
15the program's goals as provided for in the program plan and identification of proposed 
16changes to the program;
176.  Allow the state agency charged with overseeing tobacco waste stewardship 
18programs to develop a pilot project for a tobacco waste stewardship program;
197.  Require the state agency charged with overseeing tobacco waste stewardship 
20programs to establish a schedule of fees;
218.  Make financial cost, production or sales data and records confidential and 
22establish a process for disclosure of aggregate information;
239.  Require the state agency charged with overseeing tobacco waste stewardship 
24programs to publish by municipality, city or county the total weight of post-consumer 
25tobacco product waste collected; and
2610.  Establish civil penalties for violations.
