 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 2055
S.P. 728 In Senate,  January  16, 2020
An Act  To Require  State  Agencies  To Use Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy and Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LIBBY of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Representative MARTIN of Sinclair and
Senators: CLAXTON of Androscoggin, DESCHAMBAULT of York, VITELLI of Sagadahoc, Representative: BERRY  of Bowdoinham.

Page 1 - 129LR2804(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง1770-A is enacted to read:
3ยง1770-A.  Renewable and sustainable energy use and greenhouse gas emissions 
4reduction
51.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
6following terms have the following meanings.
7A.  "Environmentally preferable products and services" means products and services 
8that, when compared with other similar products or services, as applicable, contain 
9recycled materials, conserve energy or water, minimize waste and packaging, are less 
10toxic or hazardous, reduce the generation, release or disposal of toxic substances, 
11protect open spaces or otherwise lessen the impact of such products or services on 
12public health and the environment.
13B.  "Sustainability coordinator" means a person designated by a state agency to 
14oversee that agency's work to implement the renewable and sustainable energy use 
15and greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets and timelines established pursuant to 
16subsection 2.
172.  Renewable and sustainable energy use and greenhouse gas emissions 
18reduction timelines and targets.  The Governor's Energy Office, the Governor's Office 
19of Policy Innovation and the Future and representatives from the Department of 
20Environmental Protection, Efficiency Maine Trust, Department of Administrative and 
21Financial Services and Department of Transportation shall establish, by February 1, 2021, 
22renewable and sustainable energy use and greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets and 
23timelines for all state operations.  Solar panels or similar solar technologies must be 
24considered and included as a method to achieve the targets and timelines whenever 
25possible. The Governor's Energy Office shall post the targets and timelines on its publicly 
26accessible website.
273.  State agency sustainability coordinators.  Each state agency shall designate a 
28sustainability coordinator and may establish internal sustainability teams.
294.  Leadership team.  The sustainability coordinators designated under subsection 3 
30by the Governor's Energy Office, Governor's Office of Policy Innovation and the Future, 
31Department of Environmental Protection, Efficiency Maine Trust, Department of 
32Administrative and Financial Services and Department of Transportation compose the 
33leadership team and shall meet regularly to track the progress in meeting the renewable 
34and sustainable energy use and greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets and timelines 
35and to identify, develop and implement additional requirements to improve consistency 
36and cost efficiencies in the targets and timelines.  The Governor's Office of Policy 
37Innovation and the Future and the Governor's Energy Office sustainability coordinators 
38shall facilitate and support the work of the leadership team.
395.  Agency sustainability coordinators to work with leadership team.  An 
40agency's sustainability coordinator shall act as the agency's liaison with the leadership 
41team under subsection 4.  An agency's sustainability coordinator shall develop and 
Page 2 - 129LR2804(01)-11implement a plan for the agency to meet or exceed the renewable and sustainable energy 
2use and greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets and timelines established pursuant to 
3subsection 2.  In developing the plan, the sustainability coordinator shall consider policies 
4including, but not limited to:
5A.  Installing solar panels or similar solar technologies on existing public buildings;
6B.  Prioritizing energy and fuel efficiency when upgrading building systems, 
7appliances and vehicle fleets;
8C.  Installing renewable and sustainable energy generation and energy storage on 
9state property or procuring energy from low-carbon sources;
10D.  Promoting use of electric vehicles and installation of electric vehicle charging 
11stations on state property; and
12E.  Reducing employees' vehicle mileage by encouraging video conferencing; 
13telework options; and commuting by carpool, public transit, bike and foot and by 
14offering preferred parking, bike storage and other incentives to encourage these 
15options.
166.  Program.  The Governor's Energy Office shall coordinate with the Efficiency 
17Maine Trust to create a program to promote and fund projects that reduce greenhouse gas 
18emissions and costs or increase low-carbon energy adoption and efficiency, including 
19solar panels or similar solar technologies.
207.  Capitol Planning Commission master plan.  The Department of Administrative 
21and Financial Services shall update the master plan developed by the Capitol Planning 
22Commission pursuant to section 299 to implement the renewable and sustainable energy 
23use and greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets and timelines established in 
24subsection 2.
258.  Biennial report.  Every 2 years, the leadership team under subsection 4 shall 
26submit a written report to the Governor and the Legislature that includes, for all state 
27agencies and operations, the annual energy use, energy sources, greenhouse gas emissions 
28and progress on the renewable and sustainable energy use and greenhouse gas emissions 
29reduction targets and timelines established in subsection 2.  Each state agency shall post 
30the report on the agency's publicly accessible website.
319.  Procurement.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, all state 
32agencies shall procure environmentally preferable products and services whenever such 
33environmentally preferable products and services are readily available, perform to 
34satisfactory standards and represent best value to the State.  Agencies shall consider the 
35total cost of ownership of products and services, including all costs associated with the 
36production, purchase, transportation, use, operation and disposal of such products or 
37services.  Agencies shall consider environmentally preferable products and services 
38sourced in the State when total costs are competitive.
3910.  Waste management.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, all 
40state agencies shall encourage practices that lead to healthier and less wasteful 
41workplaces.  Such practices may include, but not be limited to, improving recycling and 
Page 3 - 129LR2804(01)-11composting, reducing use of plastic, foam and single-use products and providing 
2information to state employees about reducing their workplace carbon footprints and 
3reducing solid waste in the workplace.  Annual recognition may be awarded to agencies, 
4projects or employees that are leading by example.
511.  New facility siting and designing.  State agencies shall account for climate 
6change projections, including, but not limited to, sea level rise and increased precipitation 
7and temperature, when siting and designing new state facilities and other construction 
8projects. When procuring leased space, state agencies shall make every available effort to 
9increase the resiliency of these facilities and infrastructure. Agencies shall consider 
10continuity of operations and resilience in building system design for critical facilities.
11SUMMARY
12This bill requires renewable and sustainable energy use and greenhouse gas emissions 
13reduction targets and timelines to be established for state agencies by February 1, 2021.  
14Solar panels or similar solar technologies must be considered and included as a method to 
15achieve the targets and timelines as appropriate.  The bill requires the Governor's Energy 
16Office, the Governor's Office of Policy Innovation and the Future, the Department of 
17Environmental Protection, the Efficiency Maine Trust, the Department of Administrative 
18and Financial Services and the Department of Transportation to work together to establish 
19these targets and timelines and to submit a biennial progress report to the Governor and 
20the Legislature.  Each of these offices and departments, and each other state agency, must 
21designate a sustainability coordinator.  The sustainability coordinator is responsible to 
22develop and implement a plan for the agency to meet or exceed the targets and timelines.  
23State agencies are required to procure environmentally preferable products and services 
24as long as certain conditions are met.  State agencies are encouraged to adopt and 
25implement practices to decrease waste in the workplace.  State agencies are required to 
26account for climate change when siting or designing new state facilities or other 
27construction projects.
