 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 583
H.P. 427 House of  Representatives, February 5, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services To Study the State's  Long-term Services and  Supports System for  
Older Adults
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FAY of Raymond.
Cosponsored by Senator MOORE  of Washington  and
Representatives: CEBRA of Naples, CRAVEN of Lewiston, JORGENSEN of Portland, MASTRACCIO of Sanford, MEYER of Eliot, PERRY of Calais, TUELL of East Machias, Senator: CLAXTON of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 129LR0779(01)-11Sec. 1.  Study long-term care support programs for older adults.  
2Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services shall perform a study to 
3determine how to most efficiently manage and fund the various long-term care support 
4programs for older adults operated by the department.  The study must include, but is not 
5limited to, a study of the anticipated future needs of older adults, including those who 
6might not have adequate resources to afford services but who may not be eligible for 
7benefits, a study of diagnosis and functionality-based services and a forecast of the need 
8for long-term care beds.  The study must study the State's leveraging all available funds, 
9maximizing the use of federal money, making transitions between the various services as 
10seamless as possible and maximizing positive health outcomes for care recipients.  The 
11department may accept outside funding to fund the costs of the study.  The department 
12shall report the results of the study to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
13Human Services by January 15, 2020.  The joint standing committee may report out a bill 
14regarding the results of the study to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
15SUMMARY
16This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services to perform a study 
17to determine how to most efficiently manage and fund the various long-term care support 
18programs for older adults operated by the department.  It allows the department to accept 
19outside funding to fund the costs of the study and directs the department to report by 
20January 15, 2020 the results of the study to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
21Human Services, which is authorized to report out a bill regarding the results of the study 
22to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
