 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1529
H.P. 1112 House of  Representatives,  April 9, 2019
An Act  Concerning Nondisclosure  Agreements  in Employment
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HARNETT of  Gardiner.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: CARDONE  of Bangor, MADIGAN of  Waterville,  PEBWORTH of Blue Hill, 
RECKITT of South Portland, WARREN of Hallowell, Senator: CARPENTER of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 129LR0676(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  26 MRSA c. 7, sub-c. 3-B is enacted to read:
3SUBCHAPTER 3-B
4NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS IN EMPLOYMENT
5ยง691.  Nondisclosure agreements
61.  Certain preemployment and employment agreements prohibited.  It is an 
7unlawful employment practice for an employer to enter into a contract or agreement with 
8an employee or prospective employee:
9A.  As a condition of employment, continued employment, promotion, compensation 
10or benefits; and
11B.  That contains a nondisclosure agreement, nondisparagement agreement, waiver or 
12other provision that has the purpose or effect of preventing the employee from 
13disclosing or discussing discrimination, including harassment, occurring between 
14employees or between an employer and an employee:
15(1)  In the workplace;
16(2)  At work-related events coordinated by or through the employer; or 
17(3)  Off the employment premises.
182.  Certain settlement, separation and severance agreements prohibited.  Unless 
19entered into at the employee's, prospective employee's or former employee's request, an 
20employer may not enter into a settlement, separation or severance agreement that includes 
21a provision that prevents the disclosure of factual information relating to a claim of 
22discrimination, including harassment.
23A.  A nondisclosure provision in a settlement agreement may not explicitly or 
24implicitly:
25(1)  Limit an individual's ability to provide testimony or evidence, file claims or 
26make reports to any federal or state agency that enforces employment or 
27discrimination laws, including, but not limited to, the Maine Human Rights 
28Commission and the Department of Labor; or
29(2)  Prevent an employee from providing testimony or evidence in state or federal 
30litigation or proceedings, including class or collective actions, against the 
31employer.
32B.  An employer shall include in a settlement agreement that includes any 
33nondisclosure provision additional language that clearly states that an employee 
34retains the right to provide testimony or evidence, file claims or make reports to any 
35federal or state agency that enforces employment or discrimination laws, including, 
36but not limited to, the Maine Human Rights Commission and the Department of 
37Labor.
Page 2 - 129LR0676(01)-11C.  The employee, prospective employee or former employee that is a potential party 
2to a settlement agreement must be given 21 days to consider the nondisclosure terms 
3and conditions and given at least 7 days following the execution of the settlement 
4agreement to revoke the agreement.  The agreement is not effective or enforceable 
5until the revocation period has expired.
63.  No damages.  An employee, prospective employee or former employee is not 
7subject to monetary damages for breaching a contract or agreement prohibited in 
8subsection 1 or described in subsection 2.
9SUMMARY
10This bill prohibits employers from requiring agreements that prevent an employee or 
11prospective employee from disclosing or discussing discrimination, including harassment, 
12occurring between employees or between an employer and an employee.
13The bill prohibits settlement agreements, unless requested by the employee, 
14prospective employee or former employee, from including a provision that prevents the 
15disclosure of factual information relating to a claim of discrimination, including 
16harassment.  Agreements may not explicitly or implicitly limit an individual's ability to 
17provide testimony or evidence, file claims or make reports to any federal or state agency 
18that enforces employment or discrimination laws, including, but not limited to, the Maine 
19Human Rights Commission and the Department of Labor.
20An employee, prospective employee or former employee is not liable for damages for 
21breaching a prohibited nondisclosure agreement or a settlement agreement.
