 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 784
S.P. 228 In Senate, February 12, 2019
An Act  To Amend the Laws Governing Eligibility for 
Unemployment Benefits
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis.
Cosponsored by Representative STETKIS of Canaan  and
Senators: BLACK of  Franklin,  DOW  of Lincoln, HAMPER of Oxford, POULIOT of 
Kennebec, TIMBERLAKE of Androscoggin, Representatives: CURTIS  of Madison, 
MILLETT of  Waterford,  SKOLFIELD of  Weld.

Page 1 - 129LR1315(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  26 MRSA ยง1193, sub-ยง3, as amended by PL 2011, c. 645, ยง7, is further 
3amended to read:
43.  Refused to accept work. For the duration of the individual's unemployment 
5subsequent to the individual's having refused to accept an offer of, or having not accepted 
6or attended an offered interview for, suitable work for which the individual is reasonably 
7fitted, or having refused to accept a referral to a suitable job opportunity when directed to 
8do so by a local employment office of this State or another state or if an employer is 
9unable to contact a former employee at last known or given address, for the purpose of 
10recall to suitable employment; or the individual fails to respond to a request to report to 
11the local office for the purpose of a referral to a suitable job, and the disqualification 
12continues until claimant has earned 10 times the claimant's weekly benefit amount in 
13employment by an employer. If the deputy determines that refusal has occurred for cause 
14of necessitous and compelling nature, the individual is ineligible while such inability or 
15unavailability continues, but is eligible to receive prorated benefits for that portion of the 
16week during which the individual was able and available. 
17A.  In determining whether or not any work is suitable for an individual during the 
18first 10 consecutive weeks of unemployment, the deputy shall consider the degree of 
19risk involved to the individual's health, safety and morals, the individual's physical 
20fitness and prior training, the individual's experience and prior earnings, the 
21individual's length of unemployment and prospects for securing local work in the 
22individual's customary occupation and the distance of the available work from the 
23individual's residence.
24In determining whether or not work is suitable for an individual after the first 10 
25consecutive weeks of unemployment, the deputy shall consider the degree of risk 
26involved to the individual's health, safety and morals, the individual's physical fitness, 
27the individual's prior earnings, the individual's length of unemployment and prospects 
28for securing local work in the individual's customary occupation and the distance of 
29the available work from the individual's residence. The individual's prior earnings 
30may not be considered with respect to an offer of or referral to an otherwise suitable 
31job that pays wages equal to or exceeding the average weekly wage in the State.
32B.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, work may not be considered 
33suitable and benefits may not be denied under this chapter to any otherwise eligible 
34individual for refusing to accept new work under any of the following conditions: 
35(1)  If the position offered is vacant due directly to a strike, lockout or other labor 
36dispute; 
37(2)  If the wages, hours or other conditions of work are substantially less 
38favorable to the individual than those prevailing for similar work in the locality; 
39(3)  If, as a condition of being employed, the individual would be required to join 
40a company union or to resign from or refrain from joining any bona fide labor 
41organization; 
Page 2 - 129LR1315(01)-11(4)  If the position offered is the same one previously vacated by the claimant for 
2good cause attributable to that employment or is the position that the employee 
3left for reasons attributable to that employment, but which were found 
4insufficient to relieve disqualification for benefits under subsection 1, paragraph 
5A, as long as, in either instance, the specific good cause or specific reasons for 
6leaving have not been removed or otherwise changed; and 
7(5)  If the position offered is on a shift, the greater part of which falls between the 
8hours of midnight and 5 a.m., and is refused because of parental obligation, the 
9need to care for an immediate family member or the unavailability of a personal 
10care attendant required to assist the unemployed individual who is a handicapped 
11person;
12SUMMARY
13This bill disqualifies an individual from eligibility for unemployment benefits when 
14the individual has refused to accept or attend a job interview for suitable work for which 
15the individual is reasonably fitted.
