 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 1941
H.P. 1385 House of  Representatives, January 8, 2020
An Act  To Reform  Corrections Officer Compensation in Maine
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PLUECKER of Warren.
Cosponsored by Senator DOW of Lincoln and
Representatives: BRYANT of Windham,  COREY of Windham, EVANGELOS  of Friendship,  
MAXMIN of Nobleboro, TALBOT ROSS of Portland, Senators: CARPENTER of Aroostook,  
DESCHAMBAULT of York, MIRAMANT of Knox.

Page 1 - 129LR2960(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, there is currently a severe and chronic shortage of corrections officers in 
4this State; and
5Whereas, this shortage has resulted in mandatory overtime for current corrections 
6officers, which has resulted in lower morale and serious safety issues, not only at the 
7correctional facilities but for the corrections officers personally; and
8Whereas, it is imperative that action be taken as soon as possible to alleviate this 
9shortage; and
10Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
11the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
12immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
13therefore,
14Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
15Sec. 1.  Adjustment of salary schedules for corrections officers.  
16Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, effective for the first pay 
17period commencing on or after the effective date of this Act, the salary schedules for 
18corrections officers must be adjusted upward to equal the salary schedule for a law 
19enforcement officer in the Department of Public Safety, Bureau of State Police.  For 
20purposes of this section, "corrections officer" means an employee of the State whose 
21place of employment is a state correctional facility and who is responsible for the care, 
22custody or direct supervision of a person confined in a state correctional facility or 
23committed to the Long Creek Youth Development Center pursuant to an order of a court 
24or as a result of an arrest or detention.  For purposes of this section, "state correctional 
25facility" has the same meaning as "correctional facility" in the Maine Revised Statutes, 
26Title 34-A, section 1001, subsection 6 and includes the Long Creek Youth Development 
27Center.
28Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
29legislation takes effect when approved.
30SUMMARY
31This bill requires the rate of pay for corrections officers working in state correctional 
32facilities, including the Long Creek Youth Development Center, to equal the rate of pay 
33for law enforcement officers in the Department of Public Safety, Bureau of State Police.
