 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1314
H.P. 949 House of  Representatives, March 19, 2019
An Act  To Extend Protections for Genetic  Information
Reference to the Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WHITE of Waterville.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BROOKS  of Lewiston, BRYANT of Windham, MARTIN of 
Greene, STANLEY  of Medway, THERIAULT  of China,  VEROW  of Brewer, Senators: 
DIAMOND of Cumberland, FARRIN  of Somerset.

Page 1 - 129LR2140(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง2159-C, sub-ยง3, as enacted by PL 1997, c. 677, ยง2, is 
3amended to read:
43.  Discrimination in life, disability and long-term care insurance.  An insurer 
5may not make or permit any unfair discrimination discriminate against an individual in 
6the application of on the basis of genetic information or the results of a genetic test in the 
7issuance, withholding, extension or renewal of an insurance policy for life, credit life, 
8disability, long-term care, accidental injury, specified disease, hospital indemnity or 
9credit accident insurance or an annuity. For the purposes of this subsection, "unfair 
10discrimination" includes, but is not limited to, the application of the results of a genetic 
11test in a manner that is not reasonably related to anticipated claims experience.
12A.  If the superintendent has reason to believe that unfair discrimination has occurred 
13and that a proceeding by the superintendent is in the interest of the public, the 
14superintendent, in accordance with chapter 3, shall serve upon the insurer a statement 
15of the charges.  Upon a determination that the practice or act of the insurer is in 
16conflict with this subsection, the superintendent shall issue an order requiring the 
17insurer to cease and desist from engaging in the practice or act and may order 
18payment of a penalty consistent with the provisions of section 12-A.
19B.  If, in the issuance, withholding, extension or renewal of an insurance policy 
20covered by this subsection, an insurer uses the results of a genetic test in compliance 
21with this subsection, the insurer shall notify the individual who is the subject of the 
22genetic test that such a test is required and shall obtain the individual's authorization 
23in accordance with the requirements of chapter 24.  If a genetic test is required, the 
24insurer shall ensure that the individual states in writing whether the individual wishes 
25to be informed of the test results and, if authorized by the individual, shall provide a 
26copy of the test results, along with a written interpretation of the results by a qualified 
27professional, to the individual or to a physician or other health care practitioner 
28designated by the individual.
29SUMMARY
30Under current law, when considering the issuance, withholding, extension or renewal 
31of an insurance policy for life, credit life, disability, long-term care, accidental injury, 
32specified disease, hospital indemnity or credit accident insurance or an annuity, an insurer 
33may consider an applicant's genetic information or the results of an applicant's genetic 
34test as long as the consideration of genetic information or test results does not constitute 
35"unfair discrimination."  This bill strikes language that authorizes the consideration of 
36genetic information or test results and instead prohibits an insurer from discriminating 
37against an individual on the basis of genetic information or the results of a genetic test in 
38the issuance, withholding, extension or renewal of an insurance policy for life, credit life, 
39disability, long-term care, accidental injury, specified disease, hospital indemnity or 
40credit accident insurance or an annuity.
