 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 710
H.P. 515 House of  Representatives, February 11, 2019
Resolve, To  Require the Department of  Environmental  Protection 
To Study the Establishment of a Product Stewardship Program for Mattresses
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BERRY of Bowdoinham.
Cosponsored by Senator BREEN of  Cumberland  and
Representatives: ACKLEY of Monmouth, MARTIN of Eagle  Lake, MOONEN of Portland, 
PEOPLES of  Westbrook,  RISEMAN of Harrison,  Senator: VITELLI of Sagadahoc.

Page 1 - 129LR0013(01)-11Sec. 1.  Department of Environmental Protection to study the 
2establishment of a product stewardship program for mattresses. Resolved: 
3That the Department of Environmental Protection, referred to in this resolve as "the 
4department," shall study the establishment of a new stewardship program in the State for 
5mattresses, in accordance with the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, chapter 18.
6Sec. 2.  Reporting date established. Resolved:  That the department shall report 
7the findings of its study in section 1, including recommendations and recommended 
8legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources by 
9December 4, 2019. The joint standing committee may report out a bill relating to the 
10subject matter of this report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
11SUMMARY
12This resolve requires the Department of Environmental Protection to study the 
13establishment of a new stewardship program in the State for mattresses and report the 
14results of its study to the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural 
15Resources by December 4, 2019.  The department is required to include recommended 
16legislation to implement its recommendations related to the report, and the joint standing 
17committee is authorized to report out a bill relating to the subject matter of the report to 
18the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
