 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 2009
H.P. 1430 House of  Representatives, January 14, 2020
An Act  To Permit the Expansion of Municipal Membership of the 
Greater Portland  Transit District
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Speaker GIDEON  of Freeport.
Cosponsored by Senator CARSON of Cumberland and
Representatives: DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, McCREIGHT of Harpswell, McLEAN of Gorham, TUCKER of Brunswick, Senator: BREEN of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR3108(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, the Greater Portland Transit District initiated a pilot project to provide 
4express bus service between the City of Portland and the Town of Brunswick, called 
5"Metro Breez," in coordination with participating municipalities located along the Metro 
6Breez route; and 
7Whereas, as a result of Metro Breez's strong ridership performance, support among 
8riders and businesses, the long-term potential to help relieve Interstate 295 congestion 
9and the opportunity to help drive sustainable community and economic development, the 
10district desires to transition Metro Breez from its pilot phase to a permanent regional 
11transit service; and
12Whereas, the participating municipalities support the continuation of Metro Breez 
13as a permanent service and desire to join the board of directors of the district in order to 
14participate in the development of the district's annual budget and establish the local 
15contributions of the district's member municipalities to fund Metro Breez as a permanent 
16service; and
17Whereas, in accordance with the district's budget process as set forth in the Maine 
18Revised Statutes, Title 30-A, section 3516, the board of directors of the district must 
19initiate the budget process by preparing and submitting to the municipal officers of its 
20member municipalities an estimated budget by November 1st of each year and must 
21finalize its budget by March 1st of the subsequent year; and
22Whereas, Title 30-A, section 3504 provides that the district may expand its 
23membership to include other municipalities located wholly or partially within the 
24Portland Area Comprehensive Transportation System, but not all of the participating 
25municipalities are located wholly or partially within the system; and
26Whereas, this legislation allows municipalities that are contiguous to the system to 
27join the board of directors of the district; and
28Whereas, this legislation must take effect as soon as possible to help ensure these 
29municipalities may timely participate in the district's budget process; and
30Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
31the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
32immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
33therefore,
34Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
35Sec. 1.  30-A MRSA ยง3504, sub-ยง3, as amended by PL 2009, c. 18, ยง2, is further 
36amended to read:
373.  Greater Portland Transit District.  The board of directors of the Greater 
38Portland Transit District, composed of the City of Portland, the City of Westbrook and 
Page 2 - 129LR3108(01)-11the Town of Falmouth, consists of 5 directors appointed from the City of Portland, 3 
2directors appointed from the City of Westbrook and 2 directors appointed from the Town 
3of Falmouth.  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, the board of directors 
4of the Greater Portland Transit District may receive and accept applications for 
5membership from other municipalities located wholly or partially within, or contiguous 
6to, the Portland Area Comprehensive Transportation System whether or not they are 
7contiguous to other members of the Greater Portland Transit District and may determine 
8the number of directors to be appointed from those municipalities to the board of 
9directors of the Greater Portland Transit District on any basis that is mutually agreed 
10upon by the municipality applying for membership and the board of directors of the 
11Greater Portland Transit District.  The member municipalities may, by ordinance, provide 
12that their appointees serve at the will of the appointing power or for terms that are shorter 
13than those established in subsection 2.
14Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
15legislation takes effect when approved.
16SUMMARY
17This bill authorizes the board of directors of the Greater Portland Transit District to 
18accept applications for membership from municipalities that are contiguous to, as well as 
19those located wholly or partially within, the Portland Area Comprehensive Transportation 
20System.
