 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1255
H.P. 916 House of  Representatives, March 14, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Require  Referenda To Receive 60 Percent of the Vote To 
Become Law
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MORRIS of Turner.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  ANDREWS  of Paris, BRADSTREET  of Vassalboro,  
LOCKMAN of Bradley, O'CONNOR of Berwick, STETKIS of Canaan, STEWART of Presque Isle, SWALLOW of Houlton, Senator:  TIMBERLAKE  of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 129LR1910(01)-11Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub-ยง2 is amended to read:
52.  Referral to electors unless enacted by the Legislature without change; 
6number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating 
7signatures on petitions; competing measures.  For any measure thus proposed by 
8electors, the number of signatures shall not be less than 10% of the total vote for 
9Governor cast in the last gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition.  The 
10date each signature was made shall be written next to the signature on the petition.  A 
11signature is not valid if it is dated more than one year prior to the date that the petition 
12was filed in the office of the Secretary of State.  The measure thus proposed, unless 
13enacted without change by the Legislature at the session at which it is presented, shall be 
14submitted to the electors together with any amended form, substitute, or recommendation 
15of the Legislature, and in such manner that the people can choose between the competing 
16measures or reject both. When there are competing bills and neither receives a majority at 
17least 60% of the votes given for or against both, the one receiving the most votes shall at 
18the next statewide election to be held not less than 60 days after the first vote thereon be 
19submitted by itself if it receives more than 1/3 of the votes given for and against both.  If 
20the measure initiated is enacted by the Legislature without change, it shall not go to a 
21referendum vote unless in pursuance of a demand made in accordance with the preceding 
22section.  The Legislature may order a special election on any measure that is subject to a 
23vote of the people.
24Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง19 is amended to read:
25Section 19.  Effective date of measures approved by people; veto power 
26limited.  Any measure referred to the people and approved by a majority at least 60% of 
27the votes given thereon shall, unless a later date is specified in said measure, take effect 
28and become a law in 30 days after the Governor has made public proclamation of the 
29result of the vote on said measure, which the Governor shall do within 10 days after the 
30vote thereon has been canvassed and determined; provided, however, that any such 
31measure which entails expenditure in an amount in excess of available and 
32unappropriated state funds shall remain inoperative until 45 days after the next convening 
33of the Legislature in regular session, unless the measure provides for raising new 
34revenues adequate for its operation.  The veto power of the Governor shall not extend to 
35any measure approved by vote of the people, and any measure initiated by the people and 
36passed by the Legislature without change, if vetoed by the Governor and if the veto is 
37sustained by the Legislature shall be referred to the people to be voted on at the next 
38general election.  The Legislature may enact measures expressly conditioned upon the 
39people's ratification by a referendum vote.
40Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
41Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
42respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
Page 2 - 129LR1910(01)-11holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
2following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
3proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
4"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require that a 
5direct initiative of legislation or a competing measure receive at least 
660% of the votes cast to become law?"
7The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
8and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
9square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
10declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
11State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
12review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
13amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
14becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
15Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
16shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 
17of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
18SUMMARY
19This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require that a direct 
20initiative of legislation or a competing measure receive at least 60% of the votes cast to 
21become law.
