 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1367
H.P. 989 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2019
An Act  To Preserve and Protect the State's Rail Corridors
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative COLLINGS of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland and
Representatives: BRYANT of Windham,  CEBRA of Naples, MARTIN of Greene, PERKINS 
of Oakland,  SHEATS of Auburn, TERRY of Gorham, WHITE of  Waterville,  Senator: 
CHIPMAN of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 129LR2133(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  23 MRSA ยง7109 is enacted to read:
3ยง7109.  Preservation and protection of rail corridors
4Notwithstanding any other law, the Department of Transportation shall preserve and 
5protect the State's rail corridors for future railroad use and shall maintain all rail corridors 
6in a condition that allows for their resuming railroad service.
7A rail corridor may not be converted into or operated as a trail, used as a pathway or 
8space for walking or biking, used for any other form of nonmotorized travel or recreation 
9or used as a bus line without first being evaluated for passenger railroad service.
10SUMMARY
11This bill directs the Department of Transportation to preserve and protect the rail 
12corridors of the State for future railroad use and maintain all rail corridors in a condition 
13that allows for their resuming railroad service.
14The bill prohibits a rail corridor from being converted into or operated as a trail, used 
15as a pathway or space for walking or biking, used for any other form of nonmotorized 
16travel or recreation or used as a bus line without first being evaluated for passenger 
17railroad service.
