 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1133
H.P. 822 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2019
An Act  To Require  That Hospital Liens  Be Satisfied on a Just and 
Equitable Basis
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WARREN of Hallowell.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  CARDONE of  Bangor, EVANGELOS  of Friendship,  
HARNETT of Gardiner.

Page 1 - 129LR1923(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  10 MRSA ยง3412-A is enacted to read:
3ยง3412-A.  Limits on priority of hospital liens
41.  Lien reduction; just and equitable basis.  A hospital lien must be reduced by the 
5patient's proportionate share of the patient's litigation or other recovery costs, including, 
6but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees.  A hospital lien must be satisfied not on the 
7basis of a priority lien but on a just and equitable basis, which means that any factors that 
8diminish the potential value of the patient's claim against which the lien is asserted must 
9likewise reduce the share in the claim by the hospital for reimbursement for services 
10provided.  Such factors include, but are not limited to:
11A.  Questions of liability and comparative negligence or other legal defenses;
12B.  Exigencies of trial that reduce a settlement or award in order to resolve the claim; 
13and
14C.  Limits on the amount of applicable insurance coverage that reduce the claim to an 
15amount recoverable by the insured.
162.  Dispute resolution.  In the event of a dispute as to the application of this section 
17or the amount available for payment to those claiming payment for services or 
18reimbursement, that dispute must be determined, if the action is pending, before the court 
19in which it is pending; or if no action is pending, by filing an action in any court for 
20determination of the dispute.
21SUMMARY
22This bill requires that a hospital's statutory lien be reduced by the patient's 
23proportionate share of a patient's litigation or other recovery costs, including, but not 
24limited to, reasonable attorney's fees.  It also provides that a hospital lien must be 
25satisfied on a just and equitable basis considering factors that diminish the patient's claim 
26such as questions of liability or comparative negligence or other legal defenses, 
27exigencies of trial and limits of insurance coverage.
