 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 1506
H.P. 1098 House of  Representatives,  April 4, 2019
Resolve, Directing the Department of Economic and Community Development To Facilitate the Creation of a Strategic Economic Plan
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HUBBELL of Bar  Harbor.
Cosponsored by Senator DOW of Lincoln and
Representatives: Speaker GIDEON of  Freeport,  MASTRACCIO of Sanford,  STEWART of 
Presque Isle, Senators: GUERIN of Penobscot, HERBIG of Waldo, President JACKSON of Aroostook, LUCHINI  of Hancock, POULIOT of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 129LR1561(01)-11Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, this legislation must take effect before the end of the 90-day period so that 
4the Department of Economic and Community Development may timely make its report to 
5the Legislature; and
6Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
7the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
8immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
9therefore, be it
10Sec. 1.  Strategic economic plan.  Resolved:  That the Department of Economic 
11and Community Development, in collaboration with public and private constituents, shall 
12facilitate the creation of a 10-year strategic economic plan, referred to in this section as 
13"the strategic plan," that recommends breakthrough strategies for increased economic 
14prosperity for all citizens of the State in all regions, ultimately measured by increased 
15household income, a growing workforce and sustainable business development.
16The strategic plan must extend broadly from the Maine Innovation Economy 
17Advisory Board's 2017 Maine innovation economy action plan created pursuant to the 
18Maine Revised Statutes, Title 10, section 949 and seek to leverage private and federal 
19investment, particularly in areas of scientific research and commercialization, with the 
20intent of increasing the total value of private and federal investment to 3% of the State's 
21gross domestic product and returning quantifiable public benefits from the investment.
22The strategic plan must include sufficient assignments of accountably to ensure 
23execution of the plan with sufficient metrics for effective management.
24The strategic plan must include an analysis of gaps in funding and policy and 
25recommendations that ensure dependable continuity of access to capital across business 
26start-up stages from equity investments; seed capital tax credits; start-up grants; and 
27direct, revolving and commercial loans with clear benchmarks, rigorous accountability, 
28public transparency and risk mitigation that protect public benefits.
29Following a comprehensive assessment and trend analysis of the State's research and 
30development and business and commercial assets, the Department of Economic and 
31Community Development shall ensure that the strategic plan includes consideration of 
32but is not limited to directing policy supports that suit economic development in the 
33emerging sectors of:  life sciences and biomedical technology; environmental and 
34renewable energy technology; information technology; advanced technologies for 
35forestry and agriculture; aquaculture and marine technology; composites and advanced 
36materials; and precision manufacturing.
37The Department of Economic and Community Development shall establish a steering 
38committee composed of representatives from the Department of Economic and 
39Community Development, the Finance Authority of Maine, the Maine Development 
Page 2 - 129LR1561(01)-11Foundation, the Department of Labor and the State Economist, which shall guide the 
2development of the strategic plan.
3The Department of Economic and Community Development shall establish a work 
4team, which shall develop the content of the strategic plan.  The work team must include, 
5but is not limited to, the members of the steering committee and representatives from a 
6state business organization, the Maine Technology Institute, a venture capital fund 
7operating in the State, the office of the President of the University of Maine and a state 
8building and trades organization.
9The content of the strategic plan must be informed by the work team and developed 
10in consultation with individuals and agencies, including, but not limited to, those with 
11qualifications and experience related to:  scientific research leading to creation of 
12intellectual property, entrepreneurship and successful development of start-up and spin-
13off businesses; evaluating and underwriting successful business start-ups; technology 
14transfer and capitalization of intellectual property; evaluating or completing successful 
15projects funded in partnership with institutions such as the National Science Foundation, 
16the United States Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of 
17Health and National Institute of General Medical Sciences and the Maine Experimental 
18Program to Stimulate Competitive Research, established in the Maine Revised Statutes, 
19Title 5, section 13110, federal small business innovation research and small business 
20technology transfer programs, national research laboratories and the Maine Technology 
21Institute's technology asset fund.
22The strategic plan must also be informed by input from, without limitation, the 
23Finance Authority of Maine, the Maine Technology Institute, the Governor's office of 
24innovation and the future, the Department of Economic and Community Development, 
25the Maine Innovation Economy Advisory Board, the office of the President of the 
26University of Maine, the office of the Chancellor of the University of Maine System, a 
27venture capital fund operating in the State, organizations in the State dedicated to 
28entrepreneurship, an organization in the State dedicated to biomedical research excellence 
29and the State's congressional delegation.
30By December 31, 2019, the Department of Economic and Community Development 
31shall provide a report on the strategic plan to the Joint Standing Committee on 
32Appropriations and Financial Affairs and the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, 
33Development, Economic Advancement and Business.  The joint standing committees 
34may report out legislation based on the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th 
35Legislature.
36Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
37legislation takes effect when approved.
38SUMMARY
39This resolve directs the Department of Economic and Community Development to 
40facilitate the creation of a 10-year strategic economic plan that recommends breakthrough 
41strategies for increased economic prosperity for all citizens of the State in all regions, 
Page 3 - 129LR1561(01)-11ultimately measured by increased household income, a growing workforce and 
2sustainable business development.
3The resolve directs the department to provide a report on the strategic plan to the 
4Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and the Joint Standing 
5Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business by 
6December 31, 2019.  The joint standing committees are authorized to report out 
7legislation based on the report to the Second Regular Session of the 129th Legislature.
