 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 908
H.P. 672 House of  Representatives, February 19, 2019
An Act  To Require  Schools To Submit  Pest  Management Activity 
Logs and Inspection Results to the Board of Pesticides Control for the Purpose  of Providing Information to the Public
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DAUGHTRY of Brunswick.
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland  and
Representatives: BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland, BERRY of  Bowdoinham, DUNPHY of Old 
Town, HICKMAN of  Winthrop, McCREIGHT  of Harpswell, O'NEIL of Saco, TEPLER  of 
Topsham, TIPPING of  Orono.

Page 1 - 129LR1854(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง1471-CC is enacted to read:
3ยง1471-CC.  School pesticide data collection; public posting
4A school shall maintain and provide to the board by January 15th of each year a pest 
5management activity log for the previous calendar year that includes a list of pesticide 
6applications on school property. The log must include the date and location of each 
7application, the species of pest being managed, the trade name of the pesticide applied, 
8the United States Environmental Protection Agency registration number if the pesticide is 
9subject to registration, the name and license or certification number of the applicator and 
10other pertinent information required by the board by rule to be included in the log.
11The board shall post on its publicly accessible website all information provided by 
12each school under this section.  The board shall also post and maintain on its publicly 
13accessible website a current list of all board inspections of pesticide use by each school 
14and the results of those inspections.
15For purposes of this section, "school" means a public, private or tribally funded 
16kindergarten, elementary school, secondary school or nursery school that is part of an 
17elementary or secondary school.
18SUMMARY
19This bill establishes in law certain requirements of the Department of Agriculture, 
20Conservation and Forestry, Board of Pesticides Control related to pest management on 
21school property.  It requires a school to maintain a pest management activity log related 
22to the application of pesticides.  It requires this information to be provided annually to the 
23board and requires the board to post the information on its publicly accessible website.  It 
24also requires that the board post on its publicly accessible website a list of all board 
25inspections of a school's use of pesticides and the results of those inspections.
