 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2020
Legislative Document No. 2100
S.P. 749 In Senate, February 11, 2020
An Act  To Require  Third-party Certification  for Persons 
Undertaking Corrosion Prevention  and Mitigation Projects for 
Public Water Supply and  Wastewater Infrastructure and Bridges
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by President JACKSON of Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Speaker  GIDEON of Freeport and
Senators: LIBBY of  Androscoggin, VITELLI of Sagadahoc, Representatives: FECTEAU of 
Biddeford, McLEAN of Gorham, MOONEN of  Portland.

Page 1 - 129LR3099(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง42, sub-ยง3-C is enacted to read:
33-C.  Corrosion prevention and mitigation; public water supply infrastructure 
4and public wastewater infrastructure.  The department shall adopt rules governing 
5corrosion prevention and mitigation methods for public water supply infrastructure and 
6public wastewater infrastructure.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection must include, 
7but are not limited to, establishing a process for ensuring that corrosion prevention and 
8mitigation activities are carried out in accordance with established corrosion prevention 
9and mitigation standards, requiring the use of personnel who are industry-trained and 
10industry-certified in corrosion prevention and mitigation methods on any type of substrate 
11or surface and requiring plans to prevent environmental degradation that might result 
12from corrosion prevention and mitigation activities.  Rules adopted pursuant to this 
13subsection are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
14Sec. 2.  23 MRSA ยง356 is enacted to read:
15ยง356.  Corrosion prevention and mitigation; bridges
16The Department of Transportation shall adopt rules governing corrosion prevention 
17and mitigation methods for bridges wholly or partly under the control of the State.  Rules 
18adopted pursuant to this subsection must include, but are not limited to, establishing a 
19process for ensuring that corrosion prevention and mitigation activities are carried out in 
20accordance with established corrosion prevention and mitigation standards, requiring the 
21use of personnel who are industry-trained and industry-certified in corrosion prevention 
22and mitigation methods on any type of substrate or surface and requiring plans to prevent 
23environmental degradation that might result from corrosion prevention and mitigation 
24activities.  Rules adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in 
25Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
26Sec. 3.  Rulemaking.  Rulemaking conducted pursuant to this Act is governed by 
27this section.
281.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
29following terms have the following meanings.
30A.  "Corrosion" means the deterioration of a material, usually a metal or concrete, 
31that results from a chemical or electrochemical reaction with its environment.
32B.  "Corrosion prevention and mitigation" means:
33(1)  The preparation, application, installation, removal and general maintenance 
34as necessary of a protective coating system, including but not limited to:
35(a) Surface preparation and coating application on the interior or exterior of 
36the surface;
37(b) Removal of a lead-based or other hazardous coating;
38(c) Painting of structural steel fabricated for installation; and
Page 2 - 129LR3099(01)-11(d) Installation of coatings and surfacing on concrete or other cementitious 
2substrates; and
3(2) With respect to bridges, any activities related to corrosion prevention, 
4including cathodic protection, that in accordance with rules adopted pursuant to 
5this Act must be performed by industry-trained and industry-certified personnel.
6C.  "Corrosion prevention project" means corrosion prevention and mitigation 
7activities performed during construction, alteration, maintenance or repair work or at 
8any other time necessary on a bridge, public water supply infrastructure or public 
9wastewater infrastructure.
10D.  "Industry-trained and industry-certified" means:
11(1)  Completion of, or current enrollment in for at least the entire duration of a 
12corrosion prevention project, a state-certified apprenticeship training program 
13that requires concurrent on-the-job training and classroom instruction for an 
14individual to be considered adequately knowledgeable to perform corrosion 
15prevention and mitigation activities; or
16(2)  Confirmation from a corrosion prevention industry credentialing organization 
17whose standards for corrosion prevention and mitigation meet state requirements 
18that an individual is adequately trained to perform corrosion prevention and 
19mitigation activities or conduct inspections.
20E.  "Public wastewater infrastructure" means all mains, pipes and structures, intakes 
21and cribs, pumping stations and treatment plants, collectively or severally, through 
22which treated or untreated effluent, wastewater and storm water is collected, stored, 
23treated, disposed of or distributed.
24F.  "Public water supply infrastructure" means all mains, pipes and structures through 
25which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well 
26structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage 
27tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, used or intended for use for the 
28purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use in incorporated 
29municipalities, unincorporated communities where 10 or more separate lots or 
30properties are being served or intended to be served, state-owned parks and 
31memorials and state-owned educational, charitable or penal institutions.
322.  Rulemaking. In adopting rules to implement the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 22, 
33section 42, subsection 3-C and Title 23, section 356, the Department of Health and 
34Human Services and the Department of Transportation, respectively, shall adopt rules 
35that:
36A.  Provide the same standards and requirements for corrosion prevention and 
37mitigation methods as are established by the Society for Protective Coatings for its 
38coating application specialist program; the National Association of Corrosion 
39Engineers for its certified coating applicator program; and the National Association 
40of Corrosion Engineers International Institute;
41B.  Require the use of industry-trained and industry-certified personnel:
Page 3 - 129LR3099(01)-11(1)  To perform corrosion prevention and mitigation activities on any type of 
2substrate or surface; and
3(2)  As inspectors to ensure best practices and standards are followed in corrosion 
4prevention and mitigation projects; and
5C.  For all corrosion prevention and mitigation projects require the development of a 
6plan to prevent environmental degradation that might result from corrosion 
7prevention and mitigation activities.
8SUMMARY
9This bill requires the adoption of rules by the Department of Health and Human 
10Services and the Department of Transportation governing corrosion prevention and 
11mitigation for bridges, public water supply infrastructure and public wastewater 
12infrastructure.  Rules adopted pursuant to this legislation must include establishing a 
13process for ensuring that corrosion prevention and mitigation activities are performed in 
14accordance with established corrosion prevention and mitigation standards, requiring the 
15use of personnel who are industry-trained and industry-certified in corrosion prevention 
16and mitigation methods and requiring plans to prevent environmental degradation that 
17might result from corrosion prevention and mitigation activities.
