 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 809
S.P. 245 In Senate, February 14, 2019
An Act  To Expand and Clarify the Disqualification from Workers' 
Compensation Benefits of an Employee Who Is Injured While Under the  Influence of  Drugs or Alcohol
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CYRWAY of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative NADEAU of Winslow  and
Senators: BLACK of  Franklin,  CLAXTON  of Androscoggin, DAVIS of Piscataquis, 
HAMPER of  Oxford, Representatives:  BRADSTREET of Vassalboro, FECTEAU of 
Biddeford, PICKETT of Dixfield, SKOLFIELD of Weld.

Page 1 - 129LR1554(01)-11Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  39-A MRSA §202, as enacted by PL 1991, c. 885, Pt. A, §8 and affected 
3by §§9 to 11, is amended to read:
4§202.  Injury or death due to willful intention or intoxication
5Compensation or other benefits are not allowed for the injury or death of an 
6employee when it is proved that the injury or death was occasioned by the employee's 
7willful intention to bring about the injury or death of the employee or of another, or that 
8the injury or death resulted from the employee's intoxication employee was intoxicated 
9from use of an illegal drug, marijuana or alcohol while on duty when the injury or death 
10occurred. This provision as to intoxication does not apply if the employer knew at the 
11time of the injury that the employee was intoxicated or that the employee was in the habit 
12at that time of becoming intoxicated while on duty.
13SUMMARY
14Under current law, workers' compensation benefits are not allowed for the injury or 
15death of an employee when the injury or death was caused by the employee's 
16intoxication.  This bill eliminates that provision and instead disallows benefits for an 
17employee who was intoxicated at the time of the injury or death.  This bill also clarifies 
18that intoxication includes intoxication from an illegal drug, marijuana or alcohol.
