 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper129th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2019
Legislative Document No. 58
H.P. 55 House of  Representatives, January 15, 2019
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Extend the Terms of  Legislators to 4 Years
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative NADEAU of  Winslow.
Cosponsored by Senator CHENETTE of York and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, FECTEAU of Biddeford, HANINGTON  of Lincoln, 
KINNEY of Knox, MASTRACCIO of Sanford, Senator: FARRIN of Somerset.

Page 1 - 129LR0272(01)-11Constitutional amendment.  Resolved:  Two thirds of each branch of the 
2Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3proposed:
4Constitution, Art. II, ยง4 is amended to read:
5Section 4.  Time of state election; absentee voting.  The election of Senators 
6and members of the House of Representatives shall be on the Tuesday following the first 
7Monday of November biennially forever and the election of, except as provided in this 
8section.  Beginning with the general election held in 2022 for Senators and members of 
9the House of Representatives, the election of Senators and members of the House of 
10Representatives and Governor shall be on the Tuesday following the first Monday of 
11November every 4 years.  The Legislature under proper enactment shall authorize and 
12provide for voting by citizens of the State absent therefrom in the Armed Forces of the 
13United States or of this State and for voting by other citizens absent or physically 
14incapacitated for reasons deemed sufficient.
15Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. First, ยง2 is amended to read:
16Section 2.  Number of Representatives; 4-year terms; division of the State 
17into districts for House of Representatives.  The House of Representatives shall 
18consist of 151 members, to be elected by the qualified electors, and hold their office 2 
19years from the day next preceding the first Wednesday in December following the 
20general election, except that beginning with the general election held in 2022, they hold 
21their office 4 years from the day next preceding the first Wednesday in December 
22following the general election.  The Legislature which convenes in 2013, and also the 
23Legislature which convenes in 2021 and every 10th year thereafter, shall cause the State 
24to be divided into districts for the choice of one Representative for each district.  The 
25number of Representatives shall be divided into the number of inhabitants of the State 
26exclusive of foreigners not naturalized according to the latest Federal Decennial Census 
27or a State Census previously ordered by the Legislature to coincide with the Federal 
28Decennial Census, to determine a mean population figure for each Representative 
29District.  Each Representative District shall be formed of contiguous and compact 
30territory and shall cross political subdivision lines the least number of times necessary to 
31establish as nearly as practicable equally populated districts.  Whenever the population of 
32a municipality entitles it to more than one district, all whole districts shall be drawn 
33within municipal boundaries.  Any population remainder within the municipality shall be 
34included in a district with contiguous territory and shall be kept intact.
35Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. First, ยง5 is amended to read:
36Section 5.  Election of Representatives; lists of votes delivered forthwith; 
37lists of votes examined by Governor; summons of persons who appear to be 
38elected; lists shall be laid before the House.  The meetings within this State for the 
39choice of Representatives shall be warned in due course of law by qualified officials of 
40the several towns and cities 7 days at least before the election, and the election officials of 
41the various towns and cities shall preside impartially at such meetings, receive the votes 
Page 2 - 129LR0272(01)-11of all the qualified electors, sort, count and declare them in open meeting; and a list of the 
2persons voted for shall be formed, with the number of votes for each person against that 
3person's name.  Cities and towns belonging to any Representative District shall hold their 
4meetings at the same time in the respective cities and towns; and such meetings shall be 
5notified, held and regulated, the votes received, sorted, counted and declared in the same 
6manner.  Fair copies of the lists of votes shall be attested by the municipal officers and 
7the clerks of the cities and towns and the city and town clerks respectively shall cause the 
8same to be delivered into the office of the Secretary of State forthwith.  The Governor 
9shall examine the returned copies of such lists and 7 days before the first Wednesday of 
10December biennially until the general election held in 2022 and quadrennially thereafter 
11following the general election, shall issue a summons to such persons as shall appear to 
12have been elected by a plurality of all votes returned, to attend and take their seats.  All 
13such lists shall be laid before the House of Representatives on the first Wednesday of 
14December biennially until the general election held in 2022 and quadrennially thereafter 
15following the general election, and they shall finally determine who are elected.
16Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Second, ยง5 is amended to read:
17Section 5.  Determination of Senators elected; procedure for filling 
18vacancies.  The Senate shall, on said first Wednesday of December, biennially until the 
19general election held in 2022 and quadrennially thereafter determine who is elected by a 
20plurality of votes to be Senator in each district.  All vacancies in the Senate arising from 
21death, resignation, removal from the State or like causes, and also vacancies, if any, 
22which may occur because of the failure of any district to elect by a plurality of votes the 
23Senator to which said district shall be entitled shall be filled by an immediate election in 
24the unrepresented district.  The Governor shall issue a proclamation therefor and therein 
25fix the time of such election.
26Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
27Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
28respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
29holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 
30following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
31proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:
32"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to change the term of 
33office for State Senators and members of the House of Representatives 
34from 2 years to 4 years beginning in 2022?"
35The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
36and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 
37square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 
38declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 
39State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 
40review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 
41amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 
42becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
Page 3 - 129LR0272(01)-11Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of 
2State shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and 
3copies of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
4SUMMARY
5This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to increase the length of 
6the terms of State Senators and members of the House of Representatives from 2 years to 
74 years beginning in 2022.
