 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
in support of  
LD 384, An Act Addressing Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
 
3/20/ 2023 
Amy Winston  
Coastal Enterprises, Inc. (CEI)  
Amy.Winston@ceimaine.org  
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pleucker  and Members of the Committee : 
 
My name is Amy Winston. I live in Edgecomb. I am submit ting this testimony in support of the sponsor ’s 
amen dme nt to LD 384, An Act Addressing Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , as Senior Policy 
Director,  on behalf of C oastal Enterpris es, Inc .  
 
Coastal Enterprises, I nc., or C EI, is a non -profit , mission driven community development financial 
institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick.  CEI works to build a just, vibrant,  and climate -resilient future for 
people and  communities in Maine and rural regions by integrating finance, business expertise  and policy 
solutions in ways that make the  economy work more equitably . CEI support s Maine ’s agricultural 
community  as central to Maine ’s culture and  economy . Since its  founding in 1977 , CEI has  invested 
$32,682,424 in Maine ’s agriculture and food economy . Our focus on natural resource -based  businesses 
and commitment to value chain development in Maine’s heritage industries has only grown over the last 
4 decades.  Since FY 2018, CEI has provided $17,513,606 in financing to food and  agriculture related 
enterprises . 
 CEI recognizes the  dairy indus try as the backbone of Maine ’s agricultural economy . Dairy farms  rely on 
many ancillary farm services to function ; and, in addition, maintain  large acres of farmland in  working 
production. These  farms have defined Maine's rural landscapes for generations, and  dairy families are 
deeply invested in their rural communi ties. For these reasons , CEI has identified  dairy farms as a priority 
for its agriculture and food system strateg y. As an institution that provides financing to farm businesses, 
we know  that access to flexible operating capital is  key for an industry at the mercy of federally 
mandated milk prices that do not often reflect the tru e cost  of production here in Maine.   
 
We have lea rned  how cr ucial  the Maine Milk Commis sion policy has bee n to these businesses and 
surrounding communities. While no panacea for the myriad challenges facing  Maine’s dairy industry, 
this one -time allocation to the Dairy Stabilization  Program is critical in bridging the gap  between the 
commercial wholesale prices dairy farmers receive for their product and the actual costs of production . 
While the industr y is experiencing acute crisis, t his p olicy  is critical to mitigat ing the current crisis by 
prevent ing the further disappearance of these important  businesses.   
 To bu ttress this industry, CEI supports the proposed allocation to the Maine Milk Commission Maine to 
provide one -time  payments  to milk producers who produced milk (and reported production information 
to the Maine Milk Co mmission ) in 2022 and are currently participating in the Tier program . We 
encourage  the committee to support Maine dairy farmers and rural communities  and vote in support of 
this bill. Thank you for considerin g this testimony.  
