Sen. lngwerson and distinguished members of this august committee, 
thank you for the opportunity to present to you LD 384, a bill I would 
recommend amending the title to: “ An Act to Provide Emergency Aid to 
Dairy Farmers Affected by the Crisis in Production Costs.” 
This committee has already taken steps twice now to attempt to address 
what we know is a crisis within our Maine dairy industry. In the last two 
years we have lost approximately 25% of our dairy farms in the State of 
Maine. This is dozens of families that have lost their way of life. Dairy 
business is core to our whole agricultural industry in Maine. These 
businesses pump millions of dollars annually back into the infrastructure 
that keeps all farms up and running. From feed stores, to trucking, to 
equipment dealers, there are hundreds of ancillary businesses in the state 
that depend on dairy farms to make payroll. 
This state has a long running commitment to the dairy industry that we 
demonstrate through the Milk Tier program. However, our current runaway 
inflationary economic environment, combined with the pressures resulting 
from the pandemic, the Tier Program has been insufficient to keep farmers 
in business. ln the supplemental budget that we just passed, a new Cost of 
Production Study has been paid for, and should be completed by this 
coming January. At that time, this committee can begin our deliberations on 
how to address the issues of increasing costs of production despite a lack 
of a similar increase in prices. In the meantime, we are in danger of even 
more farms closing. 
One thing we cannot know for sure is how many farms or acres are 
necessary for maintaining the entire industry. There is a tipping point, 
where there just won’t be enough cows being milked to keep the milk 
haulers, equipment dealers, and processing facilities open. Once we have 
crossed that line, there won’t be much anyone can do but to say goodbye 
to an industry that has made Maine what it is today. Our dairy farms are 
responsible for keeping agricultural land productive and open. If we want to 
stave off development on our open land, we need to have ways to makea 
living on that land. Dairy is a major way that we do that in Maine.i 
it 
;i 
is
K
it
This bill is an attempt to get the Dairy farms through till the new prices go 
into effect. We cannot afford to lose another 10% of our industry this year. 
while we are waiting for the new Tier payment schedules to be 
implemented.' We need to act now, or this industry will face irreparable 
harm that we may never be able to recover from. 
During the pandemic, and even now in the after effects, we have learned 
that the supply chain of essential items is easily disrupted by events 
happening hundreds or thousands of miles away from us. The price of milk 
in the US is kept down by mammoth, 10,000 cow dairies, operating out‘ 
West. Milk is 87% water. Operating a dairy in a place where the water is 
disappearing makes no sense, but that is what our national dairy supply is 
built upon. The days are numbered for enormous dairies built in deserts, 
as the droughts and vagaries of weather grow more extreme. Our state has 
always been blessed with a more reliable water supply, though even here 
we are facing more drought issues than ever before. If we can keep the 
fundamental industry viable, we will see the demand for New England to 
produce its own milk supply return. Maine will be vital to that effort because 
of our land base. I see this bill as a vital link towards that future. 
Maine’s agricultural industry is of enormous significance to our resiliency as 
a state, our economic growth, and our ability to stave off food insecurity in 
these capricious, unpredictable times. Without support, our dairy industry's 
days are numbered. As the legislature ’s Agriculture, Conservation, and 
Forestry Committee we are tasked with providing the policy _ 
recommendations that will get our state through these times of hardship, 
and build the agricultural foundations for our state’s future. This bill is a vital 
building block for that foundation and our state's future. 
Thank you.% 
ii
. 
», 
,i 
‘t
3
l 
ii 
.1 
ll if 
/l 
tl
i
ii
