 
 
 
State of Maine 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Cross Building, Room 214 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
March 20, 2023 
 
Dear Members of the Maine Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, 
  
Thank you for this opportunity to submit testimony on behalf of Stonyfield. We appreciate the attention 
the Maine legislature is bringing to the challenges facing dairy producers in Maine, and we hope that the 
state will take action to protect the future viability of dairy. We support the Amendment to LD 384 - An 
Act Addressing Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, that would allocate additional funds to the 
Maine Milk Commission for the purpose of providing a pandemic relief payment to dairy farmers in the 
state. 
We wanted to take this opportunity to share our perspective on the unique challenges that organic dairy 
sector has experienced over the last few years and why aid is essential for all organic dairy farms at this 
time. To do this, we will also provide some context about our business and how we have been engaging 
with stakeholders in the region to strengthen the sector as a whole.  
 
Stonyfield’s commitment to Maine and Northeast organic dairy farmers  
Stonyfield was founded in 1983 in NH with the goal of helping small family dairy farmers survive and 
using business as force for good. Although the business has changed over the years we remain as 
committed as ever to the viability of organic dairy farming in this region. Today our headquarters are in 
Londonderry, NH and we do the majority of our manufacturing in at this facility. Because of this, we 
source as much of our milk from this region as we are able. 
Stonyfield’s milk comes from 2 sources, our direct supply program and the CROPP cooperative, sold 
under the brand name Organic Valley. Stonyfield’s direct supply was launched in 2014 because we 
wanted to do more to work with farmers in this region to strengthen the future of organic dairy in the 
Northeast. We have 35 farms in our direct supply in VT, NH, ME, and eastern NY.  

Shortly after we launched the direct supply we also teamed up with Wolfe’s Neck Center for Agriculture 
and the Environment in Freeport, Maine to provide $1.6 million in funding to launch a training program 
for new organic dairy farmers. We did not know then that we were heading into a period of oversupply 
for the organic dairy market that would make it challenging for new organic dairy farmers to start their 
own farms. Despite these challenges we have seen many successful graduates from this program go on 
to work in the organic dairy industry in this region. In 2021 we were proud to welcome the first graduate 
of this program, Haden Gooch and his partner Katie Gualtieri, to start their own new farm in Leeds, 
Maine into our direct supply. 
The balance of our milk comes from the CROPP cooperative, with whom we have a long-standing 
business relationship.  Nearly all of the raw whole milk we purchase from them comes from the 
Northeast, including NY and PA.  
Our parent company, Lactalis, continues to invest in our processing plant in NH. We currently have 
construction underway that will maximize our ability to produce yogurt onsite in Londonderry, and thus 
allow us to increase the amount of organic dairy we source from this region. This continued investment 
in the NH plant underscores our long-term commitment to this region – by investing in new 
infrastructure in this region we are essentially renewing our commitment to sourcing organic milk from 
this region. Sourcing organic milk from family farms nearby in New England is core to our mission, but 
it’s also the best business decision as it reduces hauling costs and helps us maintain the highest milk 
quality standards.  
When we saw the viability of organic dairy threatened in this region by the departure of a major organic 
dairy processor last year, we stepped in to co-chair a regional task force to bring recommendations to 
USDA on how the agency could better support the viability of organic dairy in this region. This resulted 
in USDA dedicating $80 million in new funds to the Dairy Business Innovation Centers, $20 million of 
which went to the Northeast DBIC. 
We are also strong supporters of the Northeast Organic Family Farm Partnership, an organization 
launched by Stonyfield’s co-founder and former CEO Gary Hirshberg to encourage consumers and 
retailers to commit to purchasing more regionally produced organic dairy products in an effort to 
further strengthen our regional organic dairy economy. In its first year the partnership signed on nearly 
40 co-ops in support of this effort and secured the commitment of Sodexo to increase the sale of 
regional organic dairy products at all 32 college campuses they serve in this region. 
The crisis facing organic dairy farmers in Maine and the Northeast 
The past several years have been a challenging time for organic dairy farmers in Maine, the Northeast, 
and around the United States as a whole. During the past two years organic feed prices have spiked, 
while the pay price for organic milk has been on a downward trajectory due to an oversupply of organic 
milk.  The result has been that organic dairy producers have been struggling to make ends meet, 
especially as other assistance payments provided during the pandemic have ceased and the Dairy 
Margin Coverage Program went for nearly a year without making payments to producers because 
conventional dairy prices were strong. As processors we are doing what we are able to do to address 
this challenge, but for reasons we will discuss more below, we are not able to cover the full increase in 
the cost of organic grain.  We believe emergency assistance is essential to helping organic dairy 
producers weather these unique and extenuating circumstances, until the market can return to more 
normal conditions.  We have also shared this perspective with the US Department of Agriculture and the 
legislature for the state of Vermont. 
Organic dairy prices are typically not set based on the federal order system. We do not publicly share 
details about our milk pricing system, but we can share some general trends and context. Between 
2017-2021 there was an oversupply of organic milk which put downward pressure on the pay price for 
organic dairy. Over the past year we have raised our pay price twice in response to inflation. 
While we were able to respond to the general inflation that organic dairy producers have experienced, 
we do not feel we have been able to respond adequately to the dramatic increase that has happened in 
the price of organic feed, which is substantially greater than the general rate of inflation and a result of 
extenuating circumstances. 
Our ability to increase the price of milk has been impacted by the universal pressures of inflation across 
our business, increasing expenses in every category and simultaneously restricting the purchasing power 
of consumers in the store. As consumers also respond to the impacts of inflation on their own budgets, 
they are increasingly seeking out private label organic products and/or switching to conventional 
options. Overall yogurt consumption is down across the entire conventional and organic yogurt 
category, and we are working hard to counter these trends.  This inhibits our ability to respond on price 
for organic dairy producers, because we do not have the ability to pass further price increases along to 
the consumer without impacting sales, which would ultimately be counterproductive for organic dairy 
demand. 
The United States lags in domestic production of organic grain, leaving all US organic livestock producers 
dependent on purchasing imported organic feed unless they able to produce feed on their own 
operation. Most organic dairy producers in this region have sufficient pasture and hayland but do not 
produce their own grains, so they are vulnerable to shifts in the market for organic feed. 
Two major factors started to have significant impacts on the global price for organic feed in 2021. The 
National Organic Program discontinued the recognition agreement with India for organic certification, 
which reduced organic grain supplies, and furthermore, countervailing duties related to an international 
anti-dumping case on Indian soybeans cut off access to this major source of organic feed. The Russian 
war in the Ukraine significantly cut exports of organic grains from the Black Sea region, which was 
previously a major source for organic grains. Together these two regions represented a substantial 
portion of all organic grains available in the global market, and the loss of supply from both of these 
regions at the same time had a major impact on organic grain prices. 
For example, according to Mercaris market data, prices for organic soybeans in the U.S. rose to $40.52 
per bushel in May 2022, up nearly 110% from January 2021’s $19.37 per bushel. Today organic soybean 
prices are still over $31 per bushel. During that same timeframe, conventional soybean prices ranged 
between $13 and $17 per bushel and as of this fall are around $14.50/bushel. Purchased feed is 
generally the highest input cost for organic dairy operations, so these price increases represent a 
substantial new financial burden on organic dairy farmers. 
Stonyfield’s expectations around the future of the market in this region 
As we noted earlier, Stonyfield and our parent company Lactalis continue to invest in our New 
Hampshire manufacturing facility and intend to continue sourcing as much of our milk as we can from 
this region. We do see positive signs that the organic grain market is stabilizing. Organic grain prices 
have started to decline from their peak in late 2021-  early 2022.  It will take some time for the price of 
organic feed at the grain mill to fully reflect this decline, but producers have started to see some relief 
and we expect this trend will continue.  We do not see an indication that organic grain prices will return 
to the levels they were pre 2021, but some relief is on the horizon.  
We are glad to see that USDA is investing in the future of organic here in the US with $300 million in 
funds that will support producers in transitioning to organic (https://www.usda.gov/media/press-
releases/2022/08/22/usda-invest-300-million-new-organic-transition-initiative). We are urging USDA 
and the organizations it partners with to focus those funds on supporting transition to organic grain so 
that the sector can be less dependent on imported organic grain. 
USDA has also stated that they will be providing $100 million in emergency relief to organic dairy 
producers nationwide. We have not yet seen details on how these funds will be distributed, but we are 
hopeful that this will provide some measure of relief for the financial strain these producers have been 
experiencing.  
While we are grateful for the USDA support, we do not expect that it will be sufficient to fully 
compensate organic dairy producers for the losses they have incurred over the past 2 years. Additional 
support from the state would be highly valuable for helping Maine’s organic dairy sector continue to 
weather the storm they have been enduring, and set them up for success into the future. We appreciate 
your attention to this critical issue and are eager to continue to support these efforts in any way that we 
can. Please feel free to reach out with any further questions, and we would welcome you to visit our 
plant in Londonderry. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Britt Lundgren 
Senior Director of Sustainability and Government Affairs 
Britt.lundgren@stonyfield.com 

Britt Lundgren
New Boston
LD 384
Please find Stonyfield's testimony on LD 384 attached.
