Good morning,
My name is Eric Saucier and I am writing today representing Central Maine Dairy 
Equipment’s support for LD 384.  CMDE is a small central Maine company that 
supports dairy farms across the state of Maine.  Our work ranges from 
refrigeration, electrical installation and repair, milking parlor installation and 
maintenance, barn equipment and anything else we can do to help keep the farm 
operating from a mechanical point of view. 
We currently employ 7 team members that come from various walks of life.  Our 
dairy technicians come from construction, electrical, HVAC, and dairy farming 
backgrounds.  Dairy farming is constantly evolving and to keep technicians up to 
speed, constant education is a must.  Every time we set out for more training, we 
are adding value to the employees, the business, the dairy farmers and the 
economy in general.  
A perfect example of this is the introduction to robotic milking in the state.  In 
October of 2020, we installed the first two milking robots in Maine.  None of us 
had ever worked on a voluntary milking system and although we still have a lot to 
learn, we are developing the infrastructure needed for widespread robotic milking 
in the state.  We often meet with farms to talk about their future with this new 
technology.  Although most are excited about technology, the conversations often 
turn to market uncertainty and rising costs. In our current situation inputs are 
going up faster than we have ever seen.  Dairy milking equipment and cleaning 
products are not exempt from this.  In 2022 alone, we saw cleaning and cow 
health products rise by over 23%.  These products are needed to not only 
maintain a healthy herd of animals, but also to deliver a quality product to the 
end user.  Ideally, when a dairy spends more, they have also improved their 
operation and product.  Unfortunately, this is not the case.  The added expense 
gives them the ability to continue as usual, using the money set aside for facility 
investment to run the day-to-day business.  A fair number of dairy operations talk 
about waiting to see what is going to happen before committing to upgrades.  
This has created a trickle-down effect to supporting companies like ours.
Let me use our small company to quickly illustrate the trickledown effect.  As I 
said earlier, Central Maine Dairy employs 7 skilled employees.  These are well-
paid positions with most employees requiring company service vehicles due to 
the nature of our work.  Between wages, vehicle and equipment acquisition, 
operating costs, continued education, fuel, parts, insurances, and maintaining 
assets, the vast majority of our income gets injected directly back into the local 
Maine economy one way or another.   We work hard at keeping our money local 
as we don’t see the long-term benefits of sending our money to a cheaper, online 
vendor.  Most dairy farmers we deal with feel the same way.  Keeping business 
local provides value to them and the community around them.
Although dairy farms aren’t our only customers there is no denying they are our 
core customers and without them, there would not be a Central Maine Dairy 
Equipment as we know it today.  The vast majority of farmers don’t want to just 
survive, they want to thrive.  They need a business that will attract the next 
generation to keep aspiring to feed our state.  A thriving environment attracts 
talented people into our lane and makes agriculture more attractive in a world 
full of work opportunities.   
I appreciate the opportunity to show our support for LD-384 appropriately.  I 
know we can all agree on the positive impact dairy farmers have on the local 
economy and local community.
Thank you.
 
