 
       Page 1 of 1 
 Amendment to LD 384 -  
An Act Addressing Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
Proposed by Representative Pluecker  
March 10, 2023  
 
 
Amend the bill by striking everything after the enacting clause and inserting the following:  
 
Sec. 1. Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and allocations are 
made.  
 
Maine Milk Commission 0188  
 
Initiative: Provides a one -time allocation to allow distribution of pandemic volatility payments to Maine 
dairy farmers who meet specific milk production criteria.  
 
          2023-24 
Other Special Revenue Funds         $5,500,000  
 
Total            $5,500,000  
 
Sec. 2.  Transfer from General Fund unappropriated surplus; pandemic relief for 
dairy farmers.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary on or before July 30, 2023 , 
the State Controller shall transfer $ 5,500,000  from the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund 
to the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Fores try, Maine Milk Commission, Maine 
Milk Pool, Other Special Revenue Funds account to provide one -time pandemic volatility 
payments to Maine milk producers who produced milk and reported production information to the 
Maine Milk Commission in the calendar yea r starting January 1, 2022, and ending December 31, 
2022  and if the milk producer is currently participating in the Maine Dairy Stabilization “Tier” 
Program.  In calculating the payment, the administrator of the Maine Milk Pool shall distribute 
payments to qualifying farmers at a rate of $1 per hundredweight of milk production. The 
administrator of the Maine Milk Pool may use existing distribution methods within the Maine Milk 
Pool program to expedite the distribution of payments.  
 
SUM MARY  
 
This amendment strikes and replaces the bill, which is a concept draft.  The amendment 
provides a one -time appropriation of $5.5 million in SFY 2024 from the unappropriated surplus of 
General Fund to the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Fo restry, Maine Milk 
Commission to provide one -time pandemic volatility payments to Maine milk producers.  
