LD 1619 
An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Abigail Beal of Cherryﬁeld, Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. 
I am here to urge you to oppose LD 1619. As you know, this law would allow abortion on demand for 
any reason up to the very moment of birth and would remove penalties for those who perform 
abortions without a license. So in essence, this bill is about whether or not to legalize the free murder 
of babies. This is the most weighty and crucial of topics. For if we cannot have life, we do not have 
anything. 
Unborn babies are human beings. At 6 weeks of development, eyes are visible and teeth are forming. 
Gender can be learned as early as 10 weeks. At 20 weeks, they can feel pain. And at 24 weeks, they 
can hiccup and smile. Truly, “A person is a person no matter how small. ” (Dr. Suess) 
For centuries America has cried out to the unwanted: 
“Give me your tired, your poor; 
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, 
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. 
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, 
I lift my lamp beside the golden door!" — Emma Lazarus 
How can we now suffer ourselves to cast away from us the blessings of Heaven, to blot out the names 
of the helpless, to snuff out the lives of the poor, and to slaughter our very own helpless, huddled scores 
of children before they take even one breath of freedom?! We must not. I say again — we must not! 
Choose you this day who you will serve. Will you serve the gods of evil, death, and destruction, or will 
you cross the line and serve the God of life, of love, and of hope? I urge you — CHOOSE LIFE and 
cast in your lot with right no matter the cost. 
As for me, I am absolutely unwilling for my hands to be deﬁled with blood. I have been charged by 
God with defending the poor, the innocent, and the helpless, and I am here to say, “Not here. Not on 
our watch!” These victims are not just “fetuses” . These are babies. These are lives. And as lawmakers, 
you have sworn to uphold the U.S. and State Constitutions to the best of your ability, so help me God. 
Therefore, you have a duty to protect these babies’ most fundamental, inalienable right to life, granted 
by Almighty God and protected by our founding documents, including the Fourteenth Amendment, 
Section 1 of the U.S. Constitution and the opening of our State Constitution, Section 1, which says that, 
“All people are born equally free and independent, and have certain natural, inherent and 
unalienable rights, among which are those of enjoying and defending life and liberty...” 
Where is the future of our civilization, if not in the lives we are destroying ‘? Where is the future of' 
America if not in the Ten Commandments we are shunning? And where is the future of our country if 
not in the freedoms and Constitutions we are trampling? It is time to draw a line in the sand and defend 
the existence of future citizens of our state. 
It is for these reasons that I urge you in the name of the Sovereign Lord, the Creator of life, and the 
Judge of the Universe to vote “Ought not to pass” on LD 1619. Thank you for your time.
