Hello Members of the Judiciary Committee my name is Adam Morgan. I would like to thank 
you for hearing the people of Maine’s voices today. 
I am here today to speak for those that can not speak yet. All of us here have at least one thing in 
common, we were all given the chance at life, and we were allowed to be born into this world. 
Some were bom into loving families, with a mother and a father, some were born to single 
mothers, and some were born and then given up for forester care or adoption._ 
All of us here were allowed the chance to thrive in this world. I can imagine the stories just in 
these halls of those who were not even supposed to make it, and by grace, they are here with us 
today and are viable and thriving. 
Everyone here today was allowed the chance to take their ﬁrst breath. LD 1619 will take away 
that right for some. The right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. This Bill is denying 
people that right. 
I’1n blessed to be a husband to my wife of 16 years and father to 5 beautiful children. I have been 
there for the birth of my ﬁve children and lord willing I will be there for the birth of my sixth. 
My wife has had two miscarriages as well, and we have mourned the loss of those children, herI 
would say more deeply than myself. 
I am a Christian, I believe that Jesus Christ died on the cross to pay for our sins, that he rose 
from the dead and sits by his Father in heaven. I believe that he will be coming back one day 
and all of humanity will be judged for its transgressions. 
The Bible and our conscious tells us that murder is a sin. 
Webster defines murder as the crime of unlawfully and unjustiﬁably killing a person. This bill in 
front of you is trying to make murder justiﬁable. 
Whether you are a Christian or not I think we can agree that 1I1LlId61 ‘ is a sin. That is whatI 
believe abortion to be, it is the murder of innocent life, we can debate when life starts till we are 
blue in the face. I believe what is not up for debate is a baby with a heartbeat, eyes, ﬁngers, toes, 
and the ability to live on its own outside the womb is a life. That life deserves all the rights and 
chances that we were all given. 
I choose to speak up for life, for those who are dependent on us to be ushered into this world. 
Don’t take their rights away, and don’t allow the murder of the innocent unborn. 
I urge this committee to vote “ought not to pass” on LD 1619. Thank you for your time and for 
considering the people of Maine’s voices on the matter. 
Adam Morgan 
2180 Carmel Rd North 
Newburgh Maine 04444
