U5 llolq 
Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness 
These are the unalienable rights afforded us by 
our constitution. 
Today you are debating the issue of Life but 
many in this legislature believe some don't 
deserve life. ls there any common sense left in 
the legislature, in the beginning there wasa 
clump of sells, they are growing so that means 
they are alive. As these cells continue to grow 
their shape begins to take shape, by the way 
you and I were once the same, so we know that 
it is a human being. Then suddenly one person 
decided to try to extinguish a whole race of 
people by killing their unborn children. They 
tried to convince people that their unborn 
children was just a clump of cells well we know 
it's more than that don't we. They formeda 
group that is now a business that charges 
money to kill your baby before it is born, we 
know they sell some of the body parts. They
never talk about the psychological effects of an 
abortion to the former mother; they don't want 
the prospective mother to see a sonogram 
because they will be able to see the baby in the 
womb and probably change their mind about 
terminating the pregnancy thus giving Life to 
their baby. ln fact they don't even call it a baby 
because doing so would acknowledge that it is 
a human. That baby does have the right to Life, 
liberty and to pursue it's happiness. Neither 
you or I have the moral right to take that life 
just as we didn't have the right to take the lives 
of slaves in our history. 
Abortion is not as some call it the right to 
choose. That choice was made when those two 
people decided to have sex to begin with. The 
pregnancy was a result of a choice. It is wrong 
to eliminate that life as we have no idea what 
or who that unborn life would grow up to be or 
do. Is that unborn baby the one that will grow
to be a doctor that will save your child from 
some catastrophic disease. We do not know 
that do we. 
In the last election cycle Gov I\/Iills said she was 
not going to change the current abortion laws 
in |\/Iaine evidently that was not true since she 
is now proposing the most open abortion laws 
that go against any form of morality. To be able 
to abort (kill) an unborn baby minutes before it 
is born is unconscionable. That baby has a right 
to live. I must ask have any of you seen an 
abortion if you did you would not like it. To see 
a baby torn apart a limb at a time is enough to 
turn your stomach. 
It's time to stop the Hypocrisy when it comes 
to abortion. When a mother and unborn baby 
are killed the perpetrator is charged with two 
murders not one. It is the killing of a human 
being you know it and I know it .l implore you 
in the name of decency to vote against any new
abortion laws being presented to the 
legislature this bill LD1619 was conceived by 
satin himself, I urge you to vote ought not to 
pass on LD 1619 
Thankyou 
Andre a beausoleil 
Sanford. Maine
