Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of The Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Angel Murchison and I live in Presque Isle, Maine. I am testifying today in 
opposition of LD 1619. I am a mother to three beautiful adult daughters and one aborted son, 
Jeremiah. As a teenager, I found myself in a relationship and pregnant. A family member took me 
for a quick procedure in Bangor, Maine that ended the life of my son and changed my life 
forever. It was a day I wish never happened and a day that will be etched in my mind forever. I 
can tell you from personal experience the aftermath of an abortion of shame, guilt, remorse is 
nothing to take lightly. I wish I could adequately put into words to describe the emotional pain 
this quick procedure left behind. A deeper journey of drinking alcohol at a young age to numb 
the pain I was experiencing. 
I grew up in a large family and if you were going to choose someone today that you were going 
to make a decision on whether they should live or to die, I probably would be one that would be 
on your radar to die. I was the fourteenth birth to my parents, grew up in poverty, my mom died 
when I was eight and my dad an alcoholic. I am sure you would think of me as someone that 
probably would not have much of a successful life. However, I am thankful for my life. Today,I 
am a radio talk show host, author, speaker and conference team leader. 
At a writers’ conference I attended I heard a woman minister say, we might as Well kill the 
children when they are young instead of them growing up in poverty. That was hard to hear andI 
wondered who would ever give her the right to determine who gets to live and who should die. 
At another writer’s conference I attended, a woman asked me to write a book and call it, No 
Mommy Don’t Do It. I did not write the book, but made a bookmark to present as I was part ofa 
team to the United Nations where I shared the following. 
NO! Mommy Don’t Do It! 
Knock knock hi mom I ’m here. Do you sense me? Do you feel me? Do you know I am here? I ’m 
connected in your womb. I ’m your Jeremiah child Mom what will I be someday." A doctor, 
nurse, teacher or clerk? Oh, Mom was does my future hold? Mom you seem sad, depressed, 
anxious, confused are you Ok? Mom you ’re not happy about me, are you? Mom who are you 
talking to? What are they saying? Mom No! No! I am not just a blob of tissue? No No that ’sa 
lie! Mom are you thinking straight? Can you hear my cry? I want to live, I want to live, I want to 
live, Oh God I want to live. A quick procedure it ’ll all be over soon I heard them say. Please God 
send someone to tell mom the truth I cry. I sense the room is dark and cold, I sense I’m losing my 
life today. I hear them talking again, I believe it ’s almost time. On no! It’s really true my mom 
she bought the lie. Now I must die. I hear the noises," I feel the pain. My liﬁz is over, it ’s my end. 
Mom, I say good-bye. 
I am here today to ask you to oppose this extreme bill allowing abortion up to birth. Maine isa 
beautiful state, with beautiful people and we want to keep it that way. 
Please oppose this unnecessary, drastic bill that the majority of Mainers do not Want to pass. 
Please vote ought not to pass. Thank you.
