5/1/23, 10:16 AM Gmail - Angel Hinkley testimony against Bill to expand Abortion _ 
Angel / Brunswick <prunerannmarie1@gmail.com> 
Angel Hinkley testimony against Bill to el 
xpanld“Abortion 
1 message 
Angel I Brunswick <prunerannmarie1@gmail.com> Mon, May 1, 2023 at 10:16 AM 
To: testimony@speakupforlife.com 
My name is Ann-Marie Hinkley* 
I want to start by saying how much I appreciate the chance to be heard by our Legislators ‘ today regarding a topic that is 
dear to my heart. 
Not only do I oppose the moving forth of LD 1619 but I am appalled by it. 
My heart breaks for our State that it has come to standing here in Augusta today with a heavy heart as I think of what is at 
stake if this Bill passes. 
I've lived in Maine all my life grew up in Topsham and was pregnant at 17 .. I was scared not married and considered 
having an Abortion. 
My OBGYN was Dr. Alice Cunningham who delivered most of the town of Brunswick until her retirement 
Doctor Cunningham sent me to meet with a mid-wife . That woman showed me the video of a DNC Abortion and saved 
my sons life by telling me the truth and showing me the truth!!! Abortion kills your child , dismembers their precious 
bodies and is horrific . 
Now 27 years later, it's so different that women considering Abortion are left to seek alternatives after the fact and told by 
medical professionals it's their choice to be a parent and for a fee they can sadly dispose of their "unwanted" pregnancy. 
No follow up no care team 
No mental Healthcare 
Just thrown back into the world 
Broken from the trauma of the “ choice" 
Their minds now call itjust a clump of cells or anything but the truth to somehow move on from the pain and guilt. 
Woman misled about the gift of motherhood and the truth of abortion. Even misled about God and our consequences for 
actions . 
Not only could I not end the life of my child, but my child was saved by one person saying to me if you are unsure D0n‘t!!!! 
let me help you.... 
My son was chosen I! Chosen to be born into this imperfect world ....aIl children are a gift from the Lord to be celebrated, 
they are not easy , not cheap, not always planned but still should be cherished and loved, not to be murdered while still 
in the protection of the womb. 
My son at 6 was diagnosed with epileptic seizures and by 8 was in Boston Childrens Hospital having his first brain 
surgery then 2 years later I almost lost him again on the operating table. This time they took his whole occipital lobe of his 
brain. Of course, his childhood was rough on all of us there were over 800 grand Mal seizures months in hospitals but 
he also played sports rode his bike and lived a Ii childhood I am proud of how we made it. 
I am so grateful for that midwife. .l remember being in the Chapel at Boston Childrens and begging God to just let my 
baby live even if he took my own life. 
As any parent should be willing to for their child. 
I never once regret my son he is an amazing citizen of this State and now is 27.. May he always know he was a choice, 
a choice made that honors God , a choice that was made because he was loved , a choice that was made because he 
was not disposable he is my child and I will cherish him till the day the Lord takes us from one another. 
Maine please cherish every child this way. 
Please find the need as a State to focus on loving woman enough to take on the tough issues that are faced after 
conception. . 
Providing funding to fix the gaps in the system of Department of Human sen/ices. 
Provide assistance to both the baby and the parents. 
Make the only choice being to give up that child to adoption If you just are not able to be the parent that child neeeds. , let 
churches help I know they are willing.. 
Please strengthen our state as one who stands for the unborn and the families struggling not just offer to terminate the 
pregnany .. while pregnant you can go through alot of different scenarios to try and justify aborting your unborn baby.. 
https://mail.googIe.com/mail/u/0l'?ik=36f8af3aee&view=pt&search=all&permthid=thread-a:r7907755570363911585&simpI=msg-a:r3908907039390959...
5/1/23, 10:16 AM Gmail - Angel Hinkley testimony against Bill to expand Abortion 
Let's make a clear path to protecting them and helping them both. 
Impact lives by saying the truth. 
Abortion is the taking of another life that is also the definition of murder. 
I pray for each and every one of you to be moved by the outpouring of people here today saying we don't want to bea 
state of hardened hearts that turn our back on God and turn our back on the horrific tragedy that Abortion is . The 
situation is grave but it begins here with saying no to this bill. 
To expand the access and terms for Abortion is saying here in Maine instead of taking responsibility for our lives and the 
lives of our offspring we just kill it and make it no longer a problem . 
MAINE we are moving in the wrong direction. 
as our State leaders sit here today i can only speak out on this bill l'm again grateful for the chance. 
Even in our laws we send mixed messages requarding unborn life. If someone kills an expecting mother they will go to 
trial for the murder of 2 lives not just one . How is that same life not valued the same if it's murder is condoned by 
Abortion? 
l'm 45 and have no way of wrapping my head around this imagine how confusing it is to our young people today that not 
only have we let them down by not teaching about adoption abstinence and birth control. If this Bill passes we as a State 
we are accomplices to the murder of these unborn babies. 
May God have mercy on us if this Blll moves forward! 
Today l'm pleading for your help please Defeat this bill 
Oppose LD 1619 
Thank you for your time. 
https://mail.go0gle.com/mail/u/Ol?ik=36f8af3aee&view=pt&search=alI&permthid=thread-a:r7907755570363911585&simpl=msg-a:r3908907039390959...
