Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee of Judiciary: 
My name is Bernice Fraser, and l’m a resident of Minot. l’m opposed to LD1619 that would allow 
a woman to abort her child anytime during the pregnancy, even up to the time the baby would 
be able to survive outside the mother’s womb. 
No other animal species voluntarily kills its young. In fact, a mother will fight to her death to 
protect her babies. But you are proposing a law that will allow a woman to do this terrible act to 
her child. 
During pregnancy, the woman’s body goes through many changes to prepare her for 
motherhood. How can a woman who feels life growing in her destroy it, as though it was trash. 
Wouldn't it be a better solution to give the women counseling and assistance? l’m sure they are 
scared and confused. Now is not the time to make such a decision. After birth she can then 
decide if she will raise the child or give it up to adoption. This is Women’s Health. 
Once you are pregnant and lose a baby you never forget, now imagine having to live with the 
guilt of knowing you were the cause of the child’s death. l speak from experience and grief. I lost 
2 babies during my pregnancy. I never forgot wondering if it was something l did that ended 
these children's lives. The pain and guilt was horrible. l cannot imagine the pain the mother will 
have knowing she voluntarily killed her baby. It may sound ok at ﬁrst when they are scared, or 
angry at getting pregnant and not knowing what else to do, but as the months go by and the 
hormones settle down the grief and pain will be there. How will they cope? With drugs or 
alcohol, is this part of Women's Health? lt’s been 50 years for me and l still sometimes wonder 
was it my fault? 
l pray that my testimony can save a child's life and one mother’s soul. 
We need education and counseling, not abortion. These women have to know what these 
abortion does to a baby -the pain and torture they will endure. 
There are many birth control devices to prevent pregnancy. Should pregnancy occur, educate 
and support, not abort. if you care about women's health, treat the whole body and mind.A 
child is separate from the mother’s body; it’s not her body she is destroying. 
Support life not death, adopt not abort. 
Please vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS.
