May 1, 2023 Testimony Against Bill LD 1619 - Presented by Carol McFadden 
LD 1619 is not just a moral issue for Maine but for the entire Nation, involving two 
distinct human beings, the pregnant mother and the viable baby. What’s next, 
infanticide? 
Here’s an inconvenient truth, an anatomy lesson for those who support Governor Mills‘ 
divisive Bill. The baby boy or girl is NOT a mother’s organ to pick -and choose, rather an 
entirely separate person; a precious human being, NOT an elective organ! 
- .’l"he"viab'le "human "baby is "NOT afemale body "part, but a citizen of the world who 
deserves human rights protecting this tiny person, as written in the US Constitution. 
- The 14th Amendment ’s Due Process Clause already provides substantive, as well 
as "proce'dural'law'for-the person’s protection for life. It states, and l quote, Nor shall 
any state deprive any person of life, nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the 
equal protection of the laws, making, l believe, the passing of LD 1619 illegal! 
LD1619 is pure semantics! 
Scientiﬁc fact: A viable human baby, in utero, can survive outside his or her mother’s 
womb, if you don’t kill the baby. Via this Bill, you are seeking to do just that...kill the 
baby. 
Senario:
- . An in utero, 9 month old baby is aborted in an auto accident by a drunk driver. The 
drunk driver is found guilty of the crime, receiving jail time for punishment. ln contrast, 
an in utero, 9 month old baby is aborted by his or her own mother, the medical 
establishment and with the support of Bill LD1619. The mother, et all are NOT found 
guilty and do not receive any punishment. 
And lastly, here's the lie, women have been told, Once the baby is aborted, it's gone... 
not true, the baby can never really be abortedfrom the mother; the baby, the tiny 
person, stays forever within the mother’s conscience, her heart, until the day she dies. 
LD 1619, Maine’s extreme abortion Bill is part of a nefarious path which ends, not 
in progress, but tragic societal defeat. ln your legislative power, l beg you to stop LD 
1619 now!
