Testimony to the Committee on Judiciary 05/01/23 
RE: L.D. 1343, H.P.0857; and L.D. 1619, H.P. 1044 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee: 
My name is Charles Bougie, Life Director of the Maine State Council Knights of Columbus. I 
live in Windham. On behalf of the approximately 7,000 members of the State ofMaine Knights 
of Columbus, I am here to strongly oppose the passage ofL.D. 1343, and the companion bill, 
L.D. 1619. 
I survived 9. Everyone here has survived 9. 9 months in the womb. I am here to represent the 
voice of the voiceless in a plea for you to allow them to survive 9 unscathed. The voices are 
babies that if allowed to grow, as science deems it so, use pronouns he, she, someone. They area 
person, a human, with a soul, who rely on others for care and our constitutional rights of life, 
liberty and the pursuit of happiness like we all did. 
When a moral issue and civic law intersect there is a fuzzy distinction of what’s what, church or 
state but in both cases taking of a life is wrong. It cannot be legislated as a right. 
Consider this. People who are staunch abortion supporters will have to examine deeply what 
their inner voice is saying. They will be the most difficult to change their perspective. Those who 
are on the fence might say I personally don’t believe in abortion but if someone wants to have 
one it’s their choice. Now, replace the word abortion with slavery. I don’t personally believe in 
slavery but if someone wants to own slave it’s their choice. . . .1 don’t think so. Over the years we 
have made some corrective moral inroads. Thank God. 
Please as you consider this proposal to kill innocent people, listen to your inner voice in your 
quiet place, the voice of your own conception and existence, the voice of your soul and 
conscience. ls this a humane outcome? Examine whether your decision is driven by political gain 
and you are afraid to go against the grain, or if you truly believe this is in the best interest of all 
your constituents and humanity. Your decision will determine your legacy. I leave you with these 
words, what does a society proﬁt if they gain the world but lose their soul. 
This Bill ought not to pass. 
Respectfully, 
Charles Bougie 
Knights of Columbus 
Maine State Council - Life Director
