Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Christina Ouellette and I live in Bradley. I am here today to testify in opposition of 
LD 1619. 
Last year I ran for House District 26. Obviously I was not elected to this position; however, I 
would like to share with you what I heard from many of the constituents I spoke with while on 
the campaign trail. As you know, the Roe v. Wade controversy was a hot topic at the time anda 
lot of people were either confused or very passionate about the topic of abortion. I am here 
today to tell you that whether someone was for or against abortion being legal, almost every 
person I spoke to was against late-tenn abortion, especially for reasons other than the health of 
the mother. 
As you are aware, in October of 2022 Governor Mills publicly announced to the people of 
Maine that she supported Maine’s current abortion law and had no plans to change it. Imagine 
our surprise when we were completely blindsided by this proposed bill, which changes so much 
about abortion in our state. You should know that I have spoken to many people who feel they 
have been lied to and are unhappy with these changes. If you have not spoken with your 
constituents, on both sides of the abortion debate, since this new bill has become public, mightI 
humbly suggest that you do so. You may just find that not as many people as you expect 
actually support the language it contains. 
I understand some people believe that abortion is a Woman’s rights issue. But when do the 
rights of the baby count? At what point does the baby’s life matter? I ask you, when did we 
become a society where some people find it acceptable to terminate the life of a full-term, 
healthy baby, just because? 
I would also like to ask all of you who expect to have grandchildren, nieces or nephews, or 
other babies in your future, how would you feel if that precious baby’s life was tenninated as it 
was ready to enter this world? I sincerely ask each of you to consider that scenario as you make 
your determination about this bill, and I urge you to vote ought not to pass. I can tell you that 
my biggest regret for not winning a seat in the State House is that I do not have the chance to 
vote against it. 
I know you’ve all had a very long day, and I thank you for allowing me to speak. 
Sincerely, 
Christina Ouellette 
19 Highland Avenue 
Bradley ME 04411 
207-951-3168
