I\./Iadam,/l\./Iister Chair 81. Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee: 
My name is Cindy Tabor and I live in Stockton Springs. I am against I_D 1619. 
I am a Mom. I have had two stillborn children. My first child was a boy. I went in fora 
routine appointment, and there was no heartbeat. I delivered him at 22 1/2 weeks. He 
was small and thin, and fit easily into the crook of my arm. He had cute little feet, and 
tiny hands. Though born early, have no doubt, he was a baby, and he was MY baby and 
I loved him. 
My third child, a girl, was born 14 years later, and was also stillborn at 22 1/2 weeks. Her 
story is much different. At 2 I/2 months of pregnancy, I went in for an ultrasound, and 
they found something wrong. After testing, the doctors found out that she hada 
chromosomal abnormality. She had about a 1% chance at being born alive, and if she 
made it, she would have had major problems. Doctors tried to convince me to have an 
abortion. I told them no. God had given this baby life and only God would take this 
baby's life away, not me. I was not going to cut her life short. I soaked in every minuteI 
had with her while I was pregnant, realizing the time I had with her was most likely 
going to be short. She was stillborn, with cute little feet and tiny hands, and I wrapped 
her in a blanket I had picked out and told her good—bye. I loved her and I was her Mom. 
My babies‘ lives, although short, had meaning. They mattered. ALL babies’ lives matter. 
I am Pro—Life, and this new bill that is being introduced does not reflect that. 
Also, there are some things thatjust don't make sense to me concerning this new bill. 
This new proposed bill is so extreme. For any reason that the doctor deems necessary, 
an abortion can be performed. A child's life is going to be taken. Shouldn't there have 
to be a good reason, at least? The mother's life was already protected under the current 
law. Why this new extreme? 
An unlicensed person can perform an abortion, and suffers no penalty for doing so. 
Where is the safety in that? Maybe this new law doesn't actually protect the mother as 
well as the former. Maybe ask yourself, who is this new law actually protecting? 
I would hope that you think about some of these things and take them to heart. I pray 
that you would oppose this bill. Thank you.
