Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Judiciary 
Committee, my name is Colin Mack, I live in Portland, I’m here with my wife Marjorie 
and we are both native Portlander ’s. Both of us raised in separate parts of Portland; me 
spending time growing up on Munj oy Hill and East Deering near B & M Bake Beans and 
Marjorie on the west end near Mercy Hospital. As you can imagine, we have seen a lot of 
changes in Portland and in Maine after joining the USAF and being stationed in Alaska 
and returning back to be near our families, going to work for Fairchild Semiconductor 
and both of us were at some time a member of the Communications Squadron of the 
Maine Air National Guard on Western Avenue in South Portland. We settled down on 
Brackett Street and were cominunicants of St Dominic’s and Sacred Heart, both of which 
have since closed as many other chuches have. L0t’s of chuches in Portland are closed, 
not just Catholic churches. The Barna Group who is leading research on the State of the 
Church, in 2019 did a study that stated Portland, Maine as the 2nd most unchurched city in 
America. In 2020, Governor Mills limited houses of worship to allow to only 10 people 
during covid-19, further slipping the parishes into decay. 
There is clearly a moral decline in this state. While Marjorie and I lived out of this state 
from 2000 until 2020 you have legalized marijuana, grew the beer making business, 
allowed more casinos to operate, reduced the houses of worship, look away from sex 
trafficking, allowed mentally and psychologically diminished people set up tents all 
around our cities, increasing the allocation of tax money for clinics to dispense legally 
approved opioids to marginalized individuals, legalized abortion. In essence, it’s crazy 
out there. We took and long walk around Portland last Friday night and witnessed to it. 
Is this the way life should be. . .really? 
Maine operates on a relaxed set of rules a11d laws. 
“Earlier this month, Governor Janet Mills introduced the LDl6l9 bill. If passed it will 
expand reproductive rights and increase access to abortion for Maine women.” As stated 
by Hope Carroll in an Op-Ed in the Maine Campus weekly highlights, which I read trying 
to get my head around this startling news. 
She goes on to say, “Mill’s new proposed abortion expansion bill is monumental in the 
ﬁght for reproductive freedom. ” 
Let’s not kid ourselves, this isn’t about freedom or rights, it’s about money. There is 
nothing monumental about it except for the monumental increase in killing unborn 
children. Fetuses are unborn children. Senate Minority Leader Trey Stewart said,
“ . . .they’re upstairs talking about how to expand abortion and kill more fetuses. ” He’s 
right too. They want to kill more fetuses, draw more people to Maine to do it, make more 
money. I’ve worked in a production enviromnent for over 40 years, I know about 
increasing production to increase income. 
Governor Mills Wants to change the Pine Tree State, the grand state of Maine, the home 
of the Chickadee, the place you get lobsters, the most northeast corner of the nation, into 
the place to get high, get drunk, gamble your money away, take your restaurant drinks

