Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, honorable members of the joint standing committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Colin La Grange and I am a resident of Veazie. I am here in opposition to LD1619. 
I have spent 25 years in practice as a fertility doctor and the idea of late-term abortion is unconscionable 
to me. With a $25 billion spend on infertility problems last year in the US, it seems preposterous to 
allow the abortion of viable babies that could be the life a joy of so many of these couples struggling to 
conceive. 
We are so strict in screening these potential couples for their worthiness as parents to ensure the safety 
of the child, yet we are now considering killing that very same child within weeks or days of its birth. 
Even couples who were desperate for a child suffer fear and trepidation about being a parent as their 
due date approaches. It is normal for new parents to feel this. Imagine that is a young woman given the 
opportunity to abort that child just before she delivers because the fear overwhelms her. In my 25 years, 
in practice, I have not dealt with a single woman who has not suffered with terrible guilt, and even years 
of depression and anxiety over taking the life of their fetus when they were younger and in different 
circumstances. 
When we have drug, alcohol and road rules in place to protect people from harming themselves from 
ignorant choices, why would we allow people the choice to take a life, out of desperation or even 
convenience at a time when hormones make them extremely emotionally fragile? And they have no idea 
how they are going to cope after they make this choice. 
How can we decide that a few days and a delivery determines the difference between being a child killer 
or legal choice with no consequences? "Today I am pregnant, and I can terminate a life," but in a couple 
of weeks when I take the same poison and kill my baby after I give birth, I face a life sentence in prison as 
a vilified murdered." 
As a person who has seen the emotional devastation first-hand, I am warning you that too many woman 
are not emotionally prepared for what they are going to face after they make such an enormous choice. 
I am fully aware of high-risk pregnancy, and the laws to protect the medical necessity for abortion in 
those cases; we do not need an open to interpretation law like LD1619, under the guise it is a protection 
of those special cases. 
I lived for 45 years in a country with one of the highest murder rates in the world; I was appalled that the 
government allowed life to be so cheap, and I cannot believe a wonderful country like the USA would 
even consider doing the same. When people asked me why I love living in Maine, I say it is the people 
here they are kind, considerate and look out for their fellow man, please show me I can trust the leaders 
of this state to show they are true to Maine values. 
I appeal to you to please consider powerfully the long-term repercussions a law like this will have on the 
emotional and moral health of our society. 
Thank you for your time and attention.
