Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee: I am 
Constance Craven, I live in Corinna and I am 84 years old. I come from Skowhegan, married at 
21, had 4 children by 30, was divorced when I was about 38. My ex husband moved to another 
state and I was left in Nebraska to raise 4 children, ages 8-16, so I moved back to Maine, bought 
a house in Bradley and worked in Bangor. I was an ofﬁce manager in Omaha, so found a job 
with an insurance company and moved up to ofﬁce manager, then became a licensed insurance 
adjuster and then licensed insurance agent. My children all have successful professions and so do 
my 9 adult grandchildren. 
I tell you this so that you will understand the idea that women can’t have children and still 
achieve their goals is a lie. It may be more difficult and more responsibility, but women are more 
than capable of having a child and still having a life, unlike what some of these liberal 
Democrats want you to believe. Abortion may seem like an option to a surprise pregnancy, but 
there is no excuse for killing a living human being. Science has proven that a fetus contains the 
DNA of both mother and father upon conception. 
Now I oppose any bills which would allow the killing of children beyond which the law now 
allows, which is about 20 weeks, for these reasons: 
l. Since Science has proven that the human mother and father’s DNA is present in the fetus 
upon conception, and that the female containing the fetus is human, we have to conclude 
that the fetus is also a human. Because the fetus is actually the beginning of a human 
baby, that fetus/baby, in this Country, has the “Right to Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of 
Happiness, since there is no distinction between the bom and unbom human being in our 
Constitution and Bill of Rights. That means that killing an unbom baby is murder, the 
same as killing a 1 month old born baby would be. 
2. When we come into Maine there is a sign that says: Welcome to Maine, the way life 
should be” . Now, Gov. Mills and some Democrats want unborn babies to be killed up to 
9 months old. Is that really the way we want Maine to be known? Oh, and 7.5 million 
people have left Calif. Since l970, because of their liberal policies. Is that what we want 
in Maine? Now Gov. Mills has joined some kind of Association for REPRODUCTIVE 
RIGHTS. We all know this means that women have the right to abortion. This association 
was started by the Gov. of Calif. In this Country, women have the right to reproduce 
(have children) whenever they want and as many as they Want. But having Reproductive 
Rights also means having Reproductive Responsibilities. If a woman decides to have sex, 
then she should be willing to accept the consequences of her actions. Just as We teach 
children to accept consequences of their actions.A 
3. In what Universe do we live where killing an unbom 4 month to 9 month old is OK?A 
live child with a heartbeat, who can feel pain, suck his/her thumb and smile? A child that 
could weigh 8 lbs. and be 16” long at 9 months. When is it good or healthy for a woman 
to have an instrument inserted inside her and her baby cut apart and taken out piece by 
piece and can you even imagine the pain that unborn child goes through‘? Unless, of
course, the child is killed before that all takes place. I understand they even count the 
pieces to be sure the get every piece out. 
The Bangor Daily News said that some doctors said it could be helpful in case the life of 
the mother is at stake. Many good doctors have said abortion is never necessary to save 
the mother. There are other methods. What ever happened to the Doctor’s oath, “Do no 
harm?” 
I have never seen so little respect for women, especially from the Democrats and our 
Governor. Apparently, today’s Women are not capable of carrying a child for 9 months 
and either taking care of him/her or putting the child up for adoption, and apparently 
murder of a living human being is OK if it is inconvenient to carry that child to term. The 
Democrats think so little of women, that they don't think they can ﬁnish school, pursuea 
career and have a life and a child. 
I am so sick of irresponsible Women choosing to have sex then not Willing to accept the 
consequences. If they don’t Want the possibility of getting pregnant, don’t have sex, then 
they won’t have to take care of the human being that is a result of their actions. Having 
an abortion instead of taking the responsibility of carrying the child 9 months and 
keeping and loving it or putting it up for adoption is demeaning, sickening, and extremely 
selﬁsh. Also, the Democrats act like it does not affect Women. But if a Woman hasa 
conscience, it will affect them for the rest of their lives. This is not healthcare, it is 
murder. 
Finally, I am sick and tired of Woman saying that murder is healthcare, and women being 
used as political tools for Democrat candidates to run for office and for the abortion 
industry to make money. It is time to point out to Women that they are being used, and 
told they are not capable of doing more than one thing at a time. We need to tell Women 
to stop being so irresponsible and selﬁsh. They need to take responsibility for their 
actions. It is not easy to go through with a pregnancy, but women are certainly strong 
enough to do what is right. 
Legislators, I hope you will consider all this before making a decision on any bill to 
increase the legal time for women to have an abortion. Keep in mind that if you vote for 
an abortion bill that allows fully formed babies to be killed, you are just as responsible as 
the mother if she kills her child. I remind you that Women are under immense pressure to 
have an abortion should they ﬁnd themselves pregnant. By passing a bill to kill more 
babies, you are adding to that pressure by indicating that it is alright with you if they kill 
their baby. Please vote against any abortion bills that the Democrats and Gov. Mills come 
up With. . . . 
REMEMBER: “WELCOME TO MAINE, THE WAY LIFE SHOULD BE” . WHAT DO 
YOU WANT US TO BE KNOWN FOR, LOW TAXES, FRIENDLY PEOPLE, GOOD 
OPPORTUNITIES TO START BUSINESSES AND JOBS, OR MAINE, ANOTHER 
STATE THAT KILLS BABIES UP TO 9 MONTHS?
