Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee May 1, 2023 
My name is Crystal Robinson, I am a resident of Hope, Maine, and I am testifying in opposition to LD 
1619. Article 1 Section 1 of the Maine Constitution protects our natural, unalienable rights. These 
rights do not come from government and cannot be taken from us by government. As legislators, 
you swore a solemn oath to this Constitution. 
I ask you to look deep into your hearts and ask yourselves if LD 1619 meets the standards set forth 
in Maine's Constitution. Does it feel right to you as a human being? 
Our current abortion law is written to give women the right to abort their babies through full term if 
their health or life are in danger. There is no time limit, rather the term viability is used. If the child is 
no longer viable because it either died in utero or is so seriously deformed that it would die at birth, 
current law would allow for an abortion. Although I believe that a baby's life starts at conception, I 
understand that not everyone agrees but who can dispute that viability is the point at which the baby 
and mother are two separate beings, equally deserving of life. 
Maine does not allow capital punishment, even for mass murderers, yet here we are debating 
whether or not innocent children deserve to live. 
I was told in my ninth month that our baby could suffer brain damage because of an infection I had. 
It mayn't be apparent for weeks or months. When I conﬁded this to a close relative, she shockingly 
but calmly offered to babysit and quietly smother our child with a pillow so we wouldn't be blamed. 
This woman could be easily compared with Margaret Sanger, the founder of Planned Parenthood, a 
woman who met with the Klu Klux Klan to promote eugenics. According to PIannedParenthood.org 
"Sanger endorsed the 1927 Buck v. Bell decision, in which the Supreme Court ruled that states could 
forcibly sterilize people deemed unﬁt without their consent and sometimes against their knowledge. 
The acceptance of this decision by Sanger and other thought leaders laid the foundation for tens of 
thousands of people to be sterilized often against their wiII." 
Legislators and even the Supreme Court, make many decisions that are unconstitutional, that ignore 
natural law -to love each other and do no harm. Do you want that on your conscience? 
Please do not put the burden of murdering viable babies on Maine's collective conscience. 
Thank you. 
My name is Valerie Robinson, a resident of Hope, Maine. I support leaving the current abortion law 
as is. Thank you. 
My name is Christopher Robinson, a resident of Hope, Maine. I am in opposition to LD 161 9. 
Maine's Constitution is pro life and it is the government's responsibility to protect life by not allowing 
a viable baby to be aborted. The law, as it stands, should not be expanded. Thank you.
s
