Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Cynthia Benner, and I reside in Skowhegan. Today, I am here to testify in opposition to 
LD1619. I have lived in this state of Maine my entire life. Our coast, mountains, and forests are full of 
beauty. The waves that crash onto the shoreline, the eagles that glide over mountaintops, and the deer 
that stroll in the woods are only a few examples of what make our state great. However, human life is 
the most beautiful and precious gift of all. Maine is not a place where full term babies should be allowed 
to be slaughtered. It should not happen anywhere. 
LD1619 simply cannot pass. 
Abortion alone is horrific. It is the end of life and we silence these babies before they're allowed to have 
a voice or any human rights. But, full term aboition- to kill a baby that can and would live outside the 
womb, is wrong. There is no gray here, but black and white- right and wrong. And, this is WRONG! 
There is no place for this in our state or anywhere. 
My son, Daniel Joseph, should be celebrating his 27th birthday this month, but 28 years ago, on a damp, 
gray day in October 1995, I took his life. I snuffed it out. I stopped his ever so tiny heart from beating. He 
would grow no more inside of me. I would never hold him or rock him to sleep. I would never tell himI 
loved him or hold his little hand. 
I don’t have time to tell my whole story, but I can tell you this- I found myself dealing with the 
unthinkable, an unplanned pregnancy. I believed the lies and felt I had no where to turn- I had no other 
option that made sense. Soon after l learned I was pregnant, I found myself inside the cold, bleak walls 
of the abortion clinic. Like the other girls, I was quiet, ashamed, embarrassed, and full of dread and fear. 
There is no talking, smiling, or laughter inside these walls. It is a place of death, blood, pain, and 
suffering. But, it does not end there. It lives within a woman forever. It never goes away. It's sucha 
nightmare, that many of us try to bury it as deep down as we can, but at times, it will rise up. I still cringe 
when I hear a baby cry or hear the word abortion. I dream of babies I don’t have here on earth. But,I 
thank God everyday for HIS love and forgiveness and He has made me whole again. 
The doctor told me, after I asked what stage of development my baby was, that it was only 6 weeks 
and it was simply a “bIob ofjelly” . There was no sympathy in his voice. He was as cold as the room 
itself. 
I have thought about what words, sentences, or stories each of you needs to hear to persuade you to 
vote this cruel bill down. I have prayed about it. I have asked God to give me the words. Our stories, all 
of our stories will ultimately help determine whether these unborn are given the chance to live and 
breathe, laugh and play, make friends and become part of our society, or their lives will be ripped away 
from them, painfully, horrifically, and in unimaginable ways. 
Please, l ask you to put aside politics- put aside outside pressure- think of your children and 
grandchildren- stop and look at the children around you and vote this bill down. It is the right thing to 
do. Everyone has a right to life. PLEASE VOTE OUGHT NOT TO PASS. 
Thank you.
