Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Dan Pearson, and I am a resident of Rumford. I’m here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
I have a 1'7-year-old son. When he was in his mother's Womb, an ultrasound showed that 
he had birth defects that were life threatening. He was, however, born with only a slight 
hole in his heart, which healed by age two. 
Light is that which is good and right and true. Those who stand and battle for the right to 
life are battling for what is good and right, not according to popular opinion or rule of 
law, but according to the will of their Creator. Our Creator has endowed all people with 
the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, from the moment of their 
conception to the moment of their natural death. It is the responsibility of the 
govermnent to secure these rights, according to the consent of those governed. 
On the campaign trail, the governor promised that she would not support any legislation 
loosening restrictions on abortion. The vast majority of Mainers do not support abortion 
up to birth. If this bill is passed, more abortions will occur after the age of viability. I 
read Where one pro-choice Maine physician called late tenn abortions “ghastly. ” He is 
not in favor of this bill. 
Even before viability, the growing child, the fetus, is a human being. She feels pain. She 
has all the features of a baby when seen on an ultrasound. To consider aborting a human 
fetus, a growing human being, at any time, should be unthinkable, and much more so 
after the child could survive when born early. 
Maine law already allows abortion after the age of viability for the life and health of the 
mother. A bill could easily be written that would allow for later abortions in the case of 
fetal anomalies expected to be fatal. We do not need to expand legal abortions beyond 
the age of viability for any other reasons. 
It is also ill-advised for any one, regardless of training, to be allowed to perform an 
abortion and to have no accountability for anything that occurs. Light cares for birthing 
people. It does not want to harm them. Women deserve the protection of the law when 
an abortion is botched, and like any other medical procedure, this should not be 
performed by unlicensed individuals. 
Please do not support LD 1619 and please do not support any bill that further extends 
the legality of abortion beyond the age of viability in Maine, except for the case of fatal 
fetal anomalies.
