Madam Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary 
Committee, - 
w My Name is David Clinard and I live in Oakland. I am “ 
’ 
testifying today in opposition of LD 1619. 
’ 
It's a worn paper I've carried for 35 years. Buta
I 
I 
cherished possession. It is the footprint of a 24 wéek -._~_-»,-I--. --.§_:,..l~.- as-...._.JL;' 
I 
preemie girl. Here's her story. 
Early in my 28 years as a Respiratory Therapist for Maine General. 
Night shift. Called stat to L&D where a tiny girl was born viaa 
precipitous birth. I joined the team of nurses and doctor keeping her 
alive. 24 weeks in those days was dicey, even though today, 19-21 
week preemies survive. 
This little gal, her head the size of an orange, was quickly intubated 
as Delta Rescue prepped for transport to the NICU at Maine Med. This 
in the days before the Barbara Bush NICU transport teams. This also 
before neonate transport vents. I was this tiny girl's vent with my 
resuscitation bag, inflated with oxygen. As a nurse made footprints for 
the parents, some impulse in me asked her to please make a copy for 
me (this in the days before HIPPA). She did and this is it. We gingerly 
wheeled her to the rig and were off thru a foggy night at 90 mph, lights 
flashing and me delivering rapid tiny breaths. And I prayed! We 
delicately off-loaded at Maine Med and wheeled into the elevator. Just 
as the doors of the elevator opened on 6"‘ floor, NICZU, the 02 cylinder 
ran empty and my bag went flaccid. But we had made it as the NICU 
team quickly took over. 
Why am I telling you this story? Because there was no doubt in the 
minds of any team member that night that this tiny patient wasa 
human worthy of every effort to keep her alive.
Now you are telling me that this 24 week preemie whose unique 
footprints and fingerprints were forming at 9 weeks would be fair game 
for the abortion "industry" to extract piecemeal from the womb up to 
the moment of birth? I tell you that if you vote for this horrendous bill 
that considers dilation and extraction of a human baby as "healthcare", 
Dr. Mengale of Auschwitz would be proud of you and I promise you 
that this will appear on your eternal resume before their Creator! I call 
on Governor Mills to rescind this declaration of death that would make 
Maine as sure a death camp as was Auschwitz. Or you. Have the guts to 
vote a resounding, NO!
