My name is Deanne Corcoran and I am a resident of South Portland. I am a Catholic, a wife,a 
daughter, a, sister, an aunt, a friend and a mother proudly and unapologetically FOR LIFE. 
Maine sees daylight first in the US and yet living here has gotten so dark. From the gender 
ideology confusion being taught, implemented and fostered in the public schools, male and 
female suddenly being completely subjective and arbitrary after only 2 short millennia of not, to 
my 8*“ graders needing to learn how to "safely" stick their tongues in someone's anus in health 
class last year, to the Covid stupidity that occurred here in Maine including, but certainly not 
limited to, my husband losing his social work job in the opioid recovery arena over a “vaccine”, 
to my attempt to get a kid here from Goma in the DRC for the last 3+ yrs in a school district that 
can't afford to restart its international student exchange program at the high school but CAN 
afford a $100K+ ‘DEI’ coordinator (whatever that is, feels like a first world problem) this year in 
the budget (and now I am evidently a “racist”), to just last week conversing with our local state 
rep over this proposed LD1619 bill who told me he knew of ‘no more savage an act’ than forcing 
a woman to carry a baby. Uhhhh, off the top of my head? I can think of one. Killing a viable, 
vulnerable one. These three beautiful kids standing behind me are triplets. They’re 15 now. 
They were born at 36 weeks each weighing over 6 pounds, they were in our room with us in the 
hospital and came home with us 2 days later. They were conceived spontaneously without 
fertility assistance (I'm a twin, my twin sister had twins... we’re a fertile Myrtle family to be sure). 
We found out they were triplets when I went to my 1s‘ ultrasound at 14-15 weeks gestation. 
Imagine our shock. And JOY! I was then transferred to a “triplet specialist ” and made it in to 
see him at about week 17. The first thing out of his mouth? “Selective reduction" (aka abortion, 
aka murder). We then got fed a pile of statistics (including insurance costs! His and the 
hospital's malpractice included!) on having 3 babies at once. My husband and I were stunned. 
What is happening here? We went from joy to shock. The panic in the room was palpable as 
this doctor and his staff then discovered we were not doing any type of prenatal testing and 
were quickly passing the “safe” time to abort one or more babies. In hindsight I know what he 
meant more so was the LEGAL time to abort one or more of these babies. I certainly don't 
know who the abortion would have been safe for. Certainly not for one or more of them. SoI 
ask you, which one? Which “one or more” should we have picked? This one, Casey, an uber 
talented soccer player, who was born with a birthmark? This one, Christian, born deaf in one 
ear (and also an accomplished organist and pianist, thank GOD Beethoven wasn’t conceived in 
Maine... or Helen Keller for that matter)? Or this one, Caleigh, a basketball player 
extraordinaire who was born with a hole in her heart that closed by her 15‘ birthday? Which one 
or ones should we have chosen? 
I implore you to bring some light back to Maine. We cannot be this “savage” (to quote 
Representative Kessler) as to allow for late term abortion. Like l asked our school board with 
regards to the lesson on oral anal sex in 8"‘ grade health class, “where are we going with this?". 
Abortion on demand, with no limitations, is dangerous and unethical. Please vote down LD1619, 
LD776 and LD1343. Thank you.
