Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Debbie Liberty. and l'm a resident of Corinna, Maine. l'm here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619, the abortion bill. I am pro-LlFE! 
l want you to think about your kids, your grandchildren, and those special ones you hold dear 
to your heart. Now I want you to think, what if they were aborted? How would your life be 
different if these precious people were not in your life right now? 
My son's girlfriend is 32 weeks and 5 days along and i had the privilege to go to the 
ultrasound last week! l got to hear her, the baby's, heartbeat! The baby's heartbeat had been 
heard since 6 weeks! Oh, what a joyous sound to hear my sixth grandbaby! This pregnancy 
began as twins and one of the twins didn't make it...God has a way of taking care of all the little 
details. The momma carrying her has been so sick during this pregnancy that this is probably 
going to be the last one she can have... But l'm so thankful for one healthy baby girl! l even got 
a photo of baby giriies footl lt looks like she did a Hi-Ya to me! Can't wait to kiss these precious 
feeties! i am one blessed gramme to have this girlie on the way and that her momma choose 
Lifei 
Too many women want to use abortion as birth control and it's not right! Not only are they 
killing a baby, but they are also psychologically affected for the rest of their lives... The Lord will 
forgive but it's so hard for them to forgive themselves once they realize this is a baby that they 
have harmed... And the doctors and nurses involved ——l can't even imagine the nightmares for 
them. 
in closing, I'd challenge you to watch a sonogram and each step of life. They can tell you the 
size from a baby bean right up to the birth and how big the baby is along the way. It's a miracle 
that we shouldn't take for granted! Children are an inheritance from the Lord! PS 127:3 
Thank you for your time and l pray that you Will choose life for these precious babies and 
reject the Governors bill, LD 1619. Please vote that this ought not to pass and that the Governor 
should stick by what she said BEFORE she was elected-that she would NOT change the 
abortion stance. 
Sincerely. 
Debbie Liberty, 406 Bond Road, Corinna, ME U4-928
