LEGAL ADVOCATES 
$ Mame W0men’s Lobby ”‘°“‘“°““ 
May 1, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 
We join you today on behalf of the Maine Women's Lobby and GLAD, GLBTQ+ Legal 
Advocates & Defenders, in support of all proposals you will take up today which 
strengthen and protect the right to access safe abortion care. l will keep my comments 
primarily focused on LD 1343, An Act to Protect the Reproductive Freedom of Maine 
People by Preempting the Field of Abortion Regulation, and thank Representative Supica 
for sponsoring this important bill. 
Preemption is the legal doctrine that allows the higher body of government to limit or overrule‘ 
the power of the lower government on certain topics. Especially in the abortion access context, 
where Roe and Casey were decided on federal constitutional principles, the U.S. Constitution's 
Supremacy Clause ensured that federal law would preempt state efforts to undermine federal 
guarantees. For most of us in this room, the majority of our lives have been spent with the 
Supreme Court’s preemption of the states’ ability to limit abortion access. Last spring, in 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, that federal guarantee was ripped away. 
Since then, near-total bans have been passed in 14 states, with 5 more states seeking 
limits or bans that have been blocked by courts, and the expectation that at least half of 
all states are at risk for bans.‘ Just a week ago a woman was told she had to wait until she 
was nearing a heart attack before a cancerous molar pregnancy could be removed because of 
new bans in Oklahoma? The harmful outcomes of these limits are most profound on historically 
excluded or marginalized people - BIPOC, rural communities, and low-wage workers or those in 
poverty, and queer and trans communities ﬁéli 
Until June 24, 2022, federal preemption assured at least a minimum access to care in the 
states. Without a federal constitutional rule, states have more authority to regulate abortion, and 
have been free to enact restrictions as long as there is some imaginable “rational basis” for 
‘ New York Times. (Updated April 28, 2023). Tracking the States Where Abortion ls Now Banned. 
Retrieved from https:/iwww.[ytimes.com/interactive/2022/us/abortlon-laws-roe-v-wade.html . See also 
Center for Reproductive Rights, interactive map, at: https://reproductiveriqhts.orq/maps/abortion-laws-by; 
state! 
2 National Public Radio. (April 25, 2023). ln Oklahoma, a woman was told to wait until she's 'crashing ‘ for 
abortion care. Retrieved from https://www.n0r.orq/sectionslhealth- 
shots!2023/04/25/1171851775/oklahoma-woman -abortion-ban-study-shows -co nfusion-at-hospitals.
them, even if they do nothing to protect pregnant women, trans and nonbinary people or their families and existing children. 
LD 1343 is squarely within the power of the Legislature to establish state-wide law with respect to abortion. Under our State Constitution, the legislature is empowered to "establish all reasonable laws and regulations ” for Maine people as long as those laws are for a public purpose and violate neither the State or U.S. Constitutions. Maine Const., Art. IV, Pt. 3, Sec. 1. 
Municipal home rule provides localities powers to pass laws and administer their affairs. But that power is limited when State law expressly states or implies that local action is prohibited, as LD 1343 does, and as both Democratic and Republican administrations have overseen in the recent past. For example, because of preemption provisions, municipalities are prohibited from regulating: firerarms, components, ammunition and supplies (2011); transportation networks including the personal vehicles of drivers (2015); and paid sick leave requirements different from the state standards (2019). 
In addition, LD 1343 serves multiple public purposes in the health and welfare of women and pregnant persons, their existing children, and their families ‘ , as others are discussing today. We wish to touch on the rigorous scientific findings from multiple authorities showing that denying a desired abortion worsens women’s physical and mental health. For example, without access to abortion, some pregnant people will self-manage their abortions instead because they lack the opportunity or resources to travel. In addition, childbirth has g I 
demonstrably higher risks of life-threatening complications or death compared to abortion. As the "Turnabout Study" found, women who wanted but could not obtain a desired abortion had worse physical health in the five years post-partum and were more likely to continue experiencing intimate partner violence than those who had been able to obtain an abortion? 
A statewide law also provides reassurance and protection to the many willingly pregnant women who could be mistreated in localities with an anti-abortion ordinance. In some places, women have faced prosecution when local law enforcement have misconstrued a woman's unfortunate circumstances as an attempt to end a pregnancy. For example, in Iowa,a pregnant woman who fell down a flight of stairs was reported to the police after seeking helpa a hospital. She was arrested for "attempted fetal homicide. “ While the underlying particulars of criminal law may differ between Maine and other states, the local prohibition of abortion may have unintended consequences. Prosecutors elsewhere have charged women who 
3 Lauren J. Ralph et al., Self-reported Physical Health of Women Who Did and Did Not Terminate Pregnancy After Seeking Abortion Services: A Cohort Study, 171 Annals of Internal Med. 238, 245 (2019),Lhttps://www.redaas.org.ar/archivosrecursos/470-Raiph%202O19_Self- 
reported%20physical%20 health%20of%20women%20who%20did%20and%20did%20%20 not%20terminate%20pregnancy.pdf. 4 Michelle Goodwin, POLICING THE WOMB: INVISIBLE WOMEN AND THE CRIMINALIZATION OF MOTHERHOOD sea? (2020).
experienced stillbirths with depraved-heart homicide and culpable-negligence manslaughter? 
Id. at 34-45.' 
Stated another way, preemption provides a more coherent legal system, and ensures a more 
equitable level of access and expectations statewide. LD 1343 is right as a matter of fairness 
and equity, as it seeks to prevent the piecemeal efforts in some other states this past 
year to limit access in local zip codes. That inconsistency would harm Maine residents by 
creating stark regional differences in access to care in some places, or increased harm to 
health and safety for some Mainers based on where they live. 
The reality is that we know that people's access is still based on many factors: their health 
insurance status, their income, their access to transportation, the services available in their 
areas. From a gender equity perspective, this matters because we know that women are more 
likely to live in poverty° and rural women have more challenges in access reliable transportation. 
For these reasons, we have developed policy and service structures to ﬁll these gaps, using 
telehealth and other forms of technology to create access where there wasn't access before. 
LD 1343, and the doctrine of preemption, will protect that access. We have worked too hard to 
increase access and decrease gaps to allow a patchwork of protections to roll back safety for 
just some members of our community. We hope you will vote ‘Ought to Pass on LD 1343. 
Finally, we also would like to note that we are in strong support of the other bills you will hear_ 
today, LD 1619 — AA to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws, and LD 776, 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish the Right to 
Bodily Autonomy. 
Abortion access and reproductive health care serves public health and the well being of 
many individuals, children and families. lt is the cornerstone of gender equity, a 
fundamentally important aspect of bodily autonomy, and core to human dignity. Without 
the ability to safely and security control our reproductive lives, all other freedoms are 
vulnerable. We hope that you will listen to the public at large- the vast majority of whom want to 
protect this healthcare — as well as the voters who resoundingly showed up to vote in favor of 
abortion access last November, and continue to support and grow Maine’s landscape of bodily 
freedom. 
Sincerely, 
Destie Hohman Sprague, Executive Director, Maine Women‘s Lobby 
Mary Bonauto, Attorney, GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders (GLAD) 
5 Io‘ . at 34-45. 
6 US Census Bureau. (2022). Quick Facts: Maine. Retrieved ~from 
https:!/vwvw.census.qovlq uickfacts/fact/table/ME/HSD410221?
