Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, l’m Dominic Mancine and l am a resident of Wilton. lam here to testify 
in opposition to LD1619. 
Psalm 2:10-12 
Now therefore, O kings, be wise; 
be warned, O rulers of the earth. 
Serve the Lord with fear, 
and rejoice with trembling. 
Kiss the Son, 
lest he be angry, and you perish in the way, 
for his wrath is quickly kindled. 
Blessed are all who take refuge in him. 
Do you remember the day you were born, 
When you ﬁrst saw the face of the earth? 
Your heart was kept beating, your limbs were not torn, 
Your mother completed her birth. 
You started to grow, and learn lots of things, 
Exploring the wonders around. 
You used all your talents to create and to sing, 
Endeavors to get off the ground. 
You started a family, you met with your friends, 
You helped all your neighbors meet needs. 
You laughed‘ 
and you cried at beginnings and ends, 
You struggled with good and bad deeds. 
You valued your life, you gave of your time 
To causes that you thought were right 
You served as lawmakers to help reduce crime, 
Entrusted with powers to ﬁght. 
But darkness crept in and clouded some thoughts, 
And truth became hard to discern. 
Each voice that was yelling was louder than God's 
So love became something to spurn. 
Invisible people that couldn't yet vote 
Became just a little bit less. 
And then over time, the murder began, 
But no one would ever confess.
Then genocide grew, and words became toys 
And slogans like "health care” were used. 
To justify butchering small girls and boys, 
Before they could just be abused. 
This thing we call life, that we all enjoy, 
Is precious and given to share, 
But we have rebelled, being quick to destroy 
To worship ourselves, how we dare. 
So, a pleading to you, who today hear the call 
Of the voices that cannot be heard 
Repent and trust Christ, before your last fall, 
Receive and treasure His Word. 
Deny all the forces that whisper these bills 
Which hurt the most precious we know 
For God's and your honor, say no to what kills 
Let babies continue to grow. 
Make Maine a bright state, with good things to give, 
Do not invite evil to thrive. 
Destroy not the infants, please let them live, 
Remember why YOU are alive. 
Isaiah 55:6-7 
"Seek the Lord while he may be found; 
call upon him while he is near; 
let the wicked forsake his way, 
and the unrighteous man his thoughts; 
let him return to the Lord, that he may have COMPGSSIOH on him, 
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon 
May we truly love all of the good things that are unseen 
Amen. 
1 Peter 1:8a 
"Though you have not seen him, you love him
