Donna L Miller, RN 
18 Flint Lane, Yarmouth, ME 
781-258-9545 
ME LD 1619 
Hello, I am Donna Miller, and have been an RN for 50+ years. Graduated as a psych nurse and later 
went into OB/GYN and Med/Surg nursing so l know what an abortion looks like as the later term abortions 
are generally done in the hospital. Formerly l was pro-choice as l assisted in abortions in the operating 
room, on the unit with post abortion patients, and in the nurseries taking care of the "dreaded 
complication" = a live birth, aka, an unwanted baby that lives. Most people l speak with who support 
abortion have never seen an abortion to realize its true description. From my experience its traumatic for 
the mother, brutal and ﬁnal for her child. It's not how it appears to be, white-washed and ending well. 
Up until the time of birth, 40 weeks gestation, the heartbeat begins at around 21 days after conception, 
by 12 weeks all the organs and systems are in place and the baby simply needs to grow until delivery, as 
well as at approx. 20-23 weeks the baby can feel pain per the science studies. in my nursing opinion l feel 
a baby is a baby no matter the point of development. The baby has all the DNA accounted for at 
conception. Legislatively, “when up until the time of birth” it ceases to be an abortion, it's really 
infanticide. Enough about me! 
Being pro-life now l want to point out that these are actual quotes from the women I have counseled 
with personally, not from me: 
As I am doing their PG tests they are asking me, "was it a baby?" which tells me they made an 
uninformed abortion decision in the past. Several women have shared that when they were "in the 
abortion clinic having an ultrasound that the technician turned the screen away saying, ‘you don't want 
to see that"' denying truth. Where I worked at a Center in Dorchester, Massachusetts I was told by 
some women that "adoption was not encouraged as a viable option at the abortion clinic." 
Several of these women clients ”have aborted the only child they will ever have as they have been 
injured by the surgical procedure causing damage to their cervix" where spontaneous miscarriage can 
occur. 
Here in Maine we are on a slippery slope when it comes to increasing the point of the baby's 
development for abortion access because we are dealing with the human condition here in Maine. 
Being a psych nurse, having graduated from the Psychiatric Division of Massachusetts General Hospital, l
Donna L Miller, RN 
18 Flint Lane, Yarmouth, ME 
781-258~9545 
ME LD 1619 
am well-aware of the human condition re: this matter. The reality of this discussion is that the tendency 
of the human experience will be to misuse this law, ME LD 1619, re: increasing the time a woman has 
the right to have an abortion. The tendency l have seen in this arena of abortion is for a woman to 
vacillate and prolong their regrettable decision given more time, thus more dangerous for her and more 
painful for the child. 
I have seen too many negative manifestations of this damaging abortion decision in not only my clients 
lives but in my immediate family including: promiscuity, unhealthy relationships, drugs and alcohol 
abuse, panic attacks, depression, suicide ideation, etc. 
In conclusion, it's not so much about being pro-choice, but being pro uniformed choice, unfortunately. 
l'm thankful for my son who l almost aborted 52 years ago when it was illegal but available.
