Testimony Against LD 1619 
Draa Mackey 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Draa Mackey, and I am a resident of Lincolnville. I am here to testify in opposition to LD 
1619. As a pastor, I've been tasked with the privilege and responsibility of directly caring for people of all ages 
and walks of life. Part of this care involves endeavoring to understand the human condition, life, and the basis for 
morality. Questions such as, ”What is life?" “When does life begin?" And "What is the ultimate basis for 
morality?" Go beyond the scope of this testimony, but how one answers these questions will affect their view on 
this bill. 
We all care about liberty and life. The disagreement sparking debate is the point where these two 
human rights clash. 
What is not debatable is the objective, incontrovertible fact that LD 1619 would create even more 
allowances for the harm, hindrance, and destruction of human life—a preborn baby. Murder is the crime of 
unlawfully and unjustiﬁably killing a person.‘ None of us in this room would approve a law excusing the 
indiscriminate killing of adolescents. Then, suddenly, accept the law as inherently lawful and RIGHT if it were 
passed by legislation. Yet, this is what the legislature is attempting to do here: permit the murder of preborn 
babies and remove any accompanying criminal penalties. 
My wife and I lost our ﬁrst daughter at almost 22 weeks’ gestation. She was perfectly healthy but died 
from uncorrectable medical complications. We listened to Christal's heartbeat slow, and then felt the blast of 
silence when it stopped. The next day we held her in our arms. To say she wasn't a uniquely human life isa 
denial of reality and an affront to every mother or couple who's experienced the REAL heartache of miscarriage, 
fatal complications from preterm labor, and stillbirth. 
I understand that you have your constituents, but I ask you to consider the door LD 1619 opens in our 
state. It may appear to open into a brave new world of absolute moral autonomy —a utopia where all people can 
do with their own bodies as they please. But this law's wording would also create a chilling precedent for moral 
autonomy: “All people could do with their own bodies as they please without regard for other viable humans." 
Please deeply consider this bill's implications before swinging wide a door that—once opened—will not 
be easily shut. I pray you do what is morally right in the sight of the One True God, whom we all will stand before 
one day; either clothed, covered by Christ's righteousness; or naked, fully exposed in our own sin and shame. 
You all remain in my prayers by name. 
1 
Merriam Webster's deﬁnition of murder. (Accessed on 4-24-2023. Web address: https://www.merriam — 
webster.com/dictionary/murder)
