Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, Honorable members of the State of Maine Judiciary 
Committee. 
My name is E. J. Dowling of Newburgh Maine. l testify today, in ﬁrm opposition to LD 1619! 
I am the proud father of a now deceased mentally disabled son, Ernest. He died of Cancer several years 
ago. l am also the proud father to a daughter, and two granddaughters. 
I am a retired Public Servant, who was willing to lay down my life for others. in the Army Reserve, I 
continued to serve my Country in the same way. in addition, I served many years as an Ordained 
Minister. 
I am standing before you today, hoping to save more lives! The lives of innocent children, not yet out 
of the womb! Healthy children, that could have their life snuffed out right up until the time of their 
birth, under the provisions of LD 1619. No truly Civilized society on planet earth would do sucha 
thing! 
Make no mistake about it, as voting members of the Maine Senate and House, you will determine if 
unborn children live or die! 
As l look at each of you, and those in this room, l am so thankful that you and l were not aborted! That 
our mothers and physicians choose life for us, instead of death! Why, because under God's plan, each of 
us has made and are making a difference in this world! 
There are no Democrats, Republicans, or independents in the womb! The Lord of the Universe loves 
and cares for each of us, and has a plan and purpose for each of our lives, and for those not yet out of 
their mother's womb! 
Think of your own family. Your precious children or grandchildren would not be here today if you had 
been aborted! One child aborted, leads to the loss of all future generations! 
And don't miss this! By-supporting LD 1619, you personally may suffer the consequences of not being 
able to hold a grandchild or great grandchild in your arms, because of a bad decision by your own 
daughter, or granddaughter, under LD 1619. 
Do you remember holding your newborn child or grandchild in your arms? Can you even begin to 
imagine, that they could have been aborted under LD 1619? That smile, that laugh, that unique 
personality, never to be enjoyed, never to love and be loved by you and others! 
If today, one would go into a female dog's womb, and kill a healthy unborn puppy, it would be 
considered animal cruelty! If today, a person shot and killed a pregnant woman and her unborn child, 
that person would be charged with a crime against both! 
I plead with you, before you vote LD 1619 out of Committee, please go before your Creator, and pray 
for a wise decision! A decision for life, not death! A vote against LD 1619! 
Thank you. May God Bless you and the people of the Great State of Maine!
