Hello. My name is Elaine Commeau of Brewer. I am testifying today in opposition of the bill LD 1619 
Under your proposed bill, a mother can decide to end her pregnancy right up until birth. If the same 
mother gives birth to the child but drowns the child in the bathtub, she would go to prison. Both 
scenarios are tragic, but one is set to become legal and one is not. Why, because in the scenario of 
abortion the baby hasn't taken its first breath? Is the fetus not considered alive? If it dies naturally in the 
womb, it would be considered dead. If its little heart is beating, its tiny legs are kicking its mother, it is 
sucking its thumb and it can be viable outside the womb, isn't it alive? If it is considered to be alive, how 
in good conscience can you make laws allowing us to kill it? 
I am always amazed at the ”It’ s my body" logic that is the mantra for abortion rights. A woman hasa 
uterus that surely belongs to her, but the life growing inside her uterus is another human being, a little 
helpless baby that should be protected. What has our society become when we have more reverence 
for endangered species and plants than we do for a viable fully developed human in the womb. You can 
get in a lot of trouble, huge fines and possible imprisonment for harming or killing an endangered 
species or a plant, but yet this bill would make it legal to kill our viable babies. 
When I was young, I bought into the "It's my body, my choice" . Thankfully I never had an abortion andI 
have total empathy for those who have, because, I know they suffer. When I was 29, I became 
pregnant. I wasn't married and lwas very much into my career and it just wasn't a convenient time. I 
was hoping and praying I was not pregnant. The Doctor did an ultrasound and I heard the baby's 
heartbeat. I went back to work that afternoon and I could not wipe the smile off my face. While I had 
no intention of ever getting an abortion, that little heartbeat amazed me. I couldn't believe I had a life 
growing inside of me. That beautiful little baby is now a beautiful 38-year-old woman whom I love with 
all my heart. 
All while I am writing this, I kept thinking, none of you will care what I have to say. I implore you, please 
don't pass this bill, even if you sponsored it. Will you feel proud tonight that you have passed a bill that 
allows killing a full term little human being, or will you feel proud that you took a stand against the 
popular tide and did the right thing. Thank you for your time.
