Senator Carney,“ Representative Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
my name is Eli Grober, and l live in Portland, Maine. _r 
l am here today testifying in support of LD 1343 and LD 1619. 
My mom had an abortion when she was sixteen, just weeks after the passage of Roe 
legalized abortion in the United States. 
She wasn’t ready to be a mom. More importantly, she didn’t want to be a mom. She 
was terrified by it. And, thankfully, my mom was able to have a safe and legal abortion. 
When she eventually had me over a decade and a half later, she was ready—-ready to 
be the absolute best mom. 
Access to safe and legal abortion gave my mom her life back. And because she was 
able to make her own decisions on her own terms, years later safe and legal abortion 
gave my mom me. 
If my mom didn’t have the right and the access to safe and legal abortion, her entire 
life’s path would have been thrown out of her control. 
Had she been forced to give birth, there's no telling what would have happened. A 
medical emergency ’? A loss of the child’? A mom who didn’t want to be a mom?A 
teenager forced to find an unsafe alternative to a legal abortion ’? The only thing that’s 
for sure is that I, Eli, would not be here today. 
lf my mom didn’t have the right and the access to safe and legal abortion, l would not 
be here today.~ 
l can”: stop thinking about that. 
Abortion is an issue that affects all of us. When politicians take rights away from people 
like my mom, they take away my rights, too. 
Safe and legal abortion has given life to so many, many people. Safe and legal abortion 
gave my mom agency over her own body and her own life. And because of that, safe 
and legal abortion gave me life.
We must act to protect those rights, not just for my mom, or for the millions like her, 
but for all of us. 
Today, you can act to protect those rights. You have the power to protect the 
fundamental right for a person to choose what happens to their body, and, here in 
Maine, to make sure no matter where someone lives in the state, they have the same freedom to decide. 
I urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1343 and LD 1619. 
Thank you for your time.
