Madam/Mister Chair and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Elizabeth Alordan and I live in Kennebunkport. I am a mother of four, three surviving (one 
lost at twelve weeks gestation) and three grandchildren. I am testifying in opposition to LD 1619: AN 
ACT TO IMPROVE MAlNE'S REPRODUCTIVE PRIVACY LAWS. 
l am writing in opposition to this bill as a mother who has lost a child to miscarriage and was there to 
witness that fully formed though tiny infant who had passed away and then passed through into my 
own hands with a fully formed perfect human body at twelve weeks. I have also had the joy of feeling 
the tiny flutter that later became kicks and somersaults over the weeks and months of the almost forty 
weeks of pregnancy with the next three children that were born to my husband and me. From the 
earliest moments these babies were unique human beings with the right to life given to them by their 
Creator. l am opposed to the taking of these lives at any stage of development but l am in agreement 
with the over 65% of Mainers who are especially outraged by the thought of the outright cruel and 
barbaric procedure which is required to take their lives as they are beyond viability with the ability to 
feel the pain of the tearing, crushing and ripping of their bodies that will occur in these procedures. We 
would be outraged if this were done to puppies or kittens. Where is the outrage here? Where is the 
compassion for our own flesh and blood? 
Finally, as a Christian, I must speak out on behalf of those who have no voice and will leave this group 
with a thought from Scripture. Whether you believe it or not, you will be judged by how you used your 
authority in this life, and in your role as an elected leader. Proverbs 24: 11-12 reads: "Deliver those who 
are drawn toward death and hold back those stumbling to the slaughter. If you say, "surely we did not 
know this," does not He who weighs the hearts consider it? He who keeps your soul, does He not know 
it? And will He not render to each man according to his deeds?" 
Please oppose this bill that is a violation of the consciences of so many of the Maine people. We love our 
beautiful Maine and we love our tourists, but do not want the notorious title of being the abortion 
tourism state. Thank you for voting DO NOT PASS on LD 1619. 
Elizabeth A Jordan 
Kennebunkport
