Emmeline Beal 
Cherryfield 
Testimony of Emmeline Beal 
Against LD 1619- 
An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on the Judiciary, 
My name is Emmeline Beal, and I live in Cherryfield. lam thankful for this opportunity 
to share my views with you today and am testifying in opposition to LD 1619, An Act to 
Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws. l would submit to you, however, that it does 
not matter so much what l think or what any other human being thinks as what God states 
as eternal truth in His Word. l believe that we have just cause to be concerned with His 
view of abortion and every other matter, for according to the Bible, He is our Creator and 
the omniscient Judge before whom we will stand. 
The Biblical case for the sanctity of life starts in Genesis 1: "So God created man in his 
own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." 
[Genesis 1:27] Human life is valuable because God made us in His image so that we can 
have a relationship with Him and show others a glimpse of what He is like. Each of us has 
intrinsic, immeasurable worth, regardless of social status, background, skin tone, gender, or 
stage of development. 
Thousands of years before the invention of ultrasound technology, King David realized 
that God saw and orchestrated the entire process of human development. He wrote in 
Psalm 139, "Thou hast covered me in my mother's womb. l will praise thee; for l am 
fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right 
well. My substance was not hid from thee, when l was made in secret, and curiously 
wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being 
unperfect; and in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were 
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them." [Psalm 139:13b-16] 
A child in the womb is indeed a human child and, as such, should be protected and 
respected as much as any other member of society. As the Declaration of Independence 
says, each of us is "endowed by [our] Creator with certain unalienable Rights," the 
foremost of which is the right to life. 
For women who find themselves in crisis pregnancies, there are individuals, churches, 
and pregnancy resource centers that are ready and willing to help. The solution toa 
difficult situation is not to end the life of an innocent baby; rather, Jesus offers hope and 
redemption to all who will accept them. He said in Matthew 11, "Come unto me, all ye 
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." [Matthew 11:28] Therefore, I 
urge you to oppose LD 1619. Thank you for your time.
