Opposition to LD 1619; LD 776, & LD 1343 
Testimony of (Pastor Erick Ness- Fryeburg) in opposition to LD 1619, LD 776, & LD 1343 "An Act to’ 
Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws.“ 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and the members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is (Pastor Erick Ness- Fryeburg) and I'm grateful for the opportunity to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619, LD 776, & LD 1343. 
Deuteronomy 30:19 
“l call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that l have set before you life and death, blessing 
and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live:" 
ln Genesis 1:26 “And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness... ” 
Man was made in the image of God. lt doesn’t mean man physically looked like God, for God is a spirit, 
but man had many things in him that resemble God. For instance, God is the creator; the soul of man is 
creative in nature. Animals can do many amazing things through instinct; for instance, bees, make 
amazing hives to protect their honey and their lar\/a but that is instinct. Birds through instinct build nests 
so they can lay their eggs, protect and feed their young. Man, however, is in a different category; they 
are taught by their parents, and then they build on what they were taught and learn many new things and 
build more and passes that creation and creative and billeted that has increased onto the next 
generation, and the next generation of society can build upon the foundational teachings of the previous 
generation, and the whole society can grow and morph into bigger and better things. We don’t see this 
in the animal kingdom. Manlhas created many beautiful, works of art many beautiful buildings men even 
takes and makes many of the structures to help us get across a river beautiful in their own right. lt is all 
part of the reflection of the creative nature of God, and that nature is reflected in man. 
ln Genesis 3, we see the devil coming as a serpent to ruin God‘s highest creation: man, he does this by 
tempting Eve to disobey the one law that God has laid clown. 
Genesis 3:15 
“And l will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed" it shall bruise 
thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.” 
Galatians 3:16 (KJV) 
"Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as 
of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ." 
There has been, since this day, a war; the serpent, later grew into a dragon, has been attacking the seed. 
lt started with Cain killing his brother Abel, continued down through the sacrifice of male children in 
Moses’ time, down through burning their children to the false god Molech, Jeremiah 7:31-32 
31 “And they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn 
their sons and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart. 32 
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that it shall no more be called Tophet, nor the valley 
of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter: for they shall bury in Tophet, till there be no place." 
This is a violation of Lev. 18:21 
“And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the ﬁre to Molech, neither shalt thou profane the 
name of thy God: I am the LORD.” 
Jer 32: 35 “And they built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause 
their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire unto Mo/ech; which I commanded them not, 
neither came it into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah to sin.” 
lt continues today through the slaughter of the innocent in abortion. We have built “high places” , in our 
minds, to the god of sex, in that people want to do the act that is designed by God for pro-creation, 
making life, and want no consequences. There are consequences, children are formed this way, and so 
you push the consequences of your actions on to the little baby in the place that God designed for
growth and safety. You take yourself down to the temple of slaughter in the denomination of planned 
parenthood found in so many states and worship in the temple at the altar by offering your child to the 
god of sex. 
lt will still be going on in Revelation 12:2-5 
2 “And she being with child cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered. 3 And there appeared 
another wonder in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven 
crowns upon his heads. 4 And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the 
earth: and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child 
as soon as it was born. 5 And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of 
iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne.” 
Revelation 12:17 
“And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which 
keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.” 
There have been many battles in this war: Cain & Abel, Slaughter of male children into which Moses was 
born, thru the many attacks on the Jewish people by the enemies, to the slaughter of the innocents 
around Bethlehem by Harod, the attempted extermination of the Jew by Hitler, & it continues today thru 
abortion. ln fact we have built a multi-billion dollar industiy out of 
In case you are not convinced as to whether the “clump of cells” is a baby or not; let's just look at 
the Scripture: 
Genesis 16:11 
“And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Behold, thou art with child, and shalt bear a son, and shalt 
call his name Ishmael; because the LORD hath heard thy affliction. ” 
Genesis 19:35-37 
35 “And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and 
he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose. 36 Thus were both the daughters of Lot with 
child by their father. 37 And the firstborn bare a son, and called his name Moab: the same is the father of 
the Moabites unto this day.” 
lt needs to be emphatically noted here that RIGHT AFTER CONCEPTION these girls were “with child”l 
Genesis 38:24-25 
24 And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in 
law hath played the harlot; and also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her 
forth, and let her be burnt.” 25 When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law, saying, By the 
man, whose these are, am l with child: and she said, Dlscern, l pray thee, whose are these, the signet, 
and bracelets, and staff. 
She was in her first trimester and was said to be “with child”l 
Exodus 21 :22 
“lf men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow: 
he shall be surely punished, according as the woman's husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as 
the judges determine. ” 
lt uses the words “with child" and “her fruit” . The fruit of a peach tree is peaches, the fruit of an orange 
tree is oranges, the fruit of a human is human! There is no other way around this. 
2 Samuel 11:5 
“And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, l am with child.”
Ecclesiastes 11:5 
5 As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that 
is with child: even so thou knowest not the works of God who maketh all. 
With child whose bones are growing in the womb! 
Isaiah 54:1’ 
“Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; 
break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: 
for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the LORD.” 
It speaks of travailing with child.' 
Jeremiah 30:6V 
6 Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child? 
wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned 
into paIeness? ” 
Jeremiah 31 :8 
8 Behold, I will bring them from the north country, 
and gather them from the coasts of the earth, 
and with them the blind and the lame,i 
the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a great company shall return thither." 
Hosea 1 3:16 
16 Samaria shall become desolate; 
for she hath rebelled against her God: 
they shall fall by the sword: 
their infants shall be dashed in pieces, 
and their women with child shall be ripped up." 
***WARNlNG GRAPHlC***A practice of terrorism in war in ancient times was to kill live babies swing 
them by their feet and dashing them against a wall or the ground, and to chop the bellies of pregnant 
women! Barbaric! Now they do much the same in sterile doctors offices! Barbaric! 
Amos 1 :13 
13 Thus saith the LORD; 
For three transgressions of the children of Ammon, 
and for four, l will not turn away the punishment thereof; 
because they have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they might enlarge their border:” 
Job 3:3I 
3 Let the day perish wherein I was born, 
and the night in which it was said, There is a man child conceived. 
“A man child conceived ” let that phrase sink in... man, child at conception! 
Job 3:16 — “Or as a hidden untimely birth, I had not been; as INFANTS which never saw Iight.” 
Psalms 51 :5 
“Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; 
and in sin did my mother conceive me.” 
“Me” at conception. 
Hosea 9:11 
“As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly away like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from the 
conception."
lt was called a “bird” from conception! lf a person can be fined for killing a bald eagle or its egg under 
“Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act and the punishment for“ ...violating provisions of the Act toa 
maximum fine of $5,000 or one year imprisonment with $10,000 or not more than two years in prison for 
a second conviction. 
Felony convictions carry a maximum fine of $250,000 or two years of imprisonment." If you can be 
punished for molesting the egg, why will they allow payment for the slaughter of a baby human? 
Matthew 1:18 
18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, 
before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost." 
Matthew 1:23 
23 Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shalt call his name 
Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us." 
Matthew 24:19 
19 And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!” 
Mark 13:17 
17 But woe to them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!” 
Luke 2:5 
5 To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child.” 
Luke 21 :23 
23 But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in those days! for there shall be 
great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people.” 
1 Thessalonians 5:3 
3 For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail 
upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape." 
Revelation 12:2 
2 And she being with child cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered." 
Jeremiah 1:5 
“Before l formed thee in the belly l knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb l sanctified 
thee, and l ordained thee a prophet unto the nations. ” 
Before formation, ordination! Purpose!
