Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Glenn Chalkley, and l am a resident of Corinth. My wife 
and l are parents of six children — one of whom is adopted and one we lost to miscarriage. We 
are long-time supporters of Pregnancy Resource Centers in the states where we have lived. 
I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. I respectfully encourage you in the strongest of 
terms to reject this proposed legislation. 
As you each are under oath for a term to administrate matters wisely and well for the public 
good, l must ask why are you even considering LD 1619: "An Act to Improve Maine‘s 
Reproductive Privacy Laws?" lf a lie is a falsehood with an intention to deceive, then the 
euphemistic title words "improve," "reproductive" are really fitting and cold-hearted. This bill 
changes the standard for when an abortion may be performed, removes the criminal penalties 
for performing an abortion after viability when it was not necessary, and hides information 
about specific circumstances precipitating the abortion. 
My fellow Mainers: What public good is served by enabling the Governor's proposal to abort 
viable unborn Maine children? The 1O—year average ending in 2020 according to Maine CDC for 
abortions in Maine is 1,961 lives. This represents nearly a 300 percent increase of averaged 
annual deaths to date from COVID-19, which Governor Mills shut down the state over, and 
compares to two-thirds of the population of the town l live in. What would you do if so many 
residents of a Maine town were slaughtered year-over-year? Would you consider it ok? 
Normal? l know you wouldn't. Esteemed lawmakers of Maine, we need fewer abortions not 
more. 
I am confident that some of your consciences have already confirmed that this bill is 
destructive, morally corrosive and should be opposed. Thank you and please act on your 
conviction. 
For others who are determined to support this bill when there is nothing about the public good 
in this bill — nor any good whatsoever — please take warning in all sincerity and earnestness. l 
believe that the voices of these children are heard, and will be heard, by the heavenly Authority 
above you. If your souls are not moved on behalf of Maine's unborn — viable — children, what 
could you possibly say when you are called to account? ”Have mercy?" And what if the words 
you hear are, ”As you have measured, so it will be measured to you." 
Most respectfully, l encourage you in the strongest of terms to change your minds and reject 
this bill. 
Thank you.
