Madam Carney, Mister Moonen and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee 
My name is lane Louise Shipman and l live in the town of Gouldsboro, Hancock County, Maine. 
I retired after a ten year career in Cardiovascular Research and a thirty year career in information 
Technology including 17 years at a Healthcare company. I am a certified lifeguard and enjoy keeping 
children and adults safe as they swim. 
l speak today in opposition to LD1619. 
50 years ago, I was pro-choice. As a college student and after attending female liberation workshops in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, l was convinced. Women were dying from back alley abortions and we 
should allow abortions in the first trimester of pregnancy. After all, it was just a fetus, a blob of cells, not 
really a baby. 
My stance on abortion has evolved. We see where 50 years of legalized abortion has brought us to this 
day in front of you. l am ashamed to say that two women, Gov. Janet Mills and House Speaker Rachel 
Talbot Ross have introduced LD1619 to allow abortion on demand for any reason at anytime up to the 
moment of birth. The current law allows for abortion up to 24 weeks and beyond if the health of the 
mother is at risk or the baby is "non-viable" . Why does Maine need to go beyond that? Welcome to 
Vacationland, the state of late term abortions? We know the gruesome details of partial birth abortions. 
We all know it is a baby, ultrasounds show us that! When did it become legal to kill children, some 
children just because they were unplanned? There are plenty of parents-in-waiting ready to adopta 
child, including a child with special needs. 
l am speaking today notjust for myself but in memory of my mother, Louise Shipman, who passed away 
at age 97 in 2020. ln her own way and wisdom when l told her about being pro-choice back in the 
1970's, she calmly told me that she was adopted. She was born in 1923. Do you think it was a harsh 
economic time for our country and that conditions were less than ideal? She was adopted by a young 
couple who couldn't have children. She was loved and went to college in 1941 to become a hospital 
dietician. She and my father came to Maine on vacation in 1953 when l was one year old. She wasa 
beloved wife of 59 years, beloved wherever she lived, the mother of an autistic daughter, a chemical 
engineer daughter and grandmother to a US Navy Aviator grandson and an Environmental Geoscientist 
granddaughter. If abortion had been legal in 1923 our family might not exist. 
Think carefully, search your heart and conscience and vote NO on LD1619. 
Thank you.
