Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee, my name 
is Janel StPeter and I currently live in Bangor, although I'll always be a county girl, and l’m here 
today to testify in support of LD 1343 and LD 1619. 
My mom had two children when she was a teenager. My older sister had a teenage pregnancy. I 
felt lucky I did not have a teenage pregnancy. Many years later and I am with my soulmate. 
Once we decided to start trying to have children, we discovered it wasn't luck preventing my 
teenage pregnancies, it was PCOS. 
Within the last five years of our relationship we have spent over thirty thousand dollars trying to 
have a healthy pregnancy and my medical records show I have had three abortions. Abortions 
that saved my life. Three of my pregnancies grew either in my fallopian tube or elsewhere in my 
body that couldn't sustain life. With two of those pregnancies, I had a fallopian tube rupture 
before I could even see an ultrasound of their heartbeat. I didn't know when I went into surgery 
for those ruptures that the surgery would be documented as an abortion. The miscarriage I had 
with Lanni is also considered a spontaneous abortion in medical terminology. 
A few years after losing Kayden, I transferred to another OBGYN office due to the traumaI 
experienced from going to the ofﬁce where I lost Khalon, Asher, and Kayden. Luckily I live ina 
town where I have the option to choose my OBGYN office and I don't have to travel far for care. 
I still get surprised when telling others that my pregnancy losses are considered abortions. This 
concerns me because about 20% of the population have fertility issues. 
I'm currently infertile because I had to have my fallopian tubes removed due to my ectopic 
pregnancies and the only way I can conceive now is through IVF. I know people opposed to 
abortion won't stop with abortion bans, I fear they will go after IVF and related care, and I don't 
want that to happen in Maine or anywhere. 
Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1343 and LD 1619. Thank you.
