TESTIMONY OF Jeffrey Polland of Otisﬁeld, ME requesting ought NOT to pass on LD 1619 
An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Jeffrey Polland of Otisﬁeld 
and I wish to bring to your attention concerns that I have with LD 1619 as it is 
currently written. 
The title of LD 1619 implies that its intent is to address existing concerns regarding 
patient privacy. I do not have any knowledge regarding these privacy issues but if 
privacy is a legitimate concern, then l would agree that appropriate steps could be 
taken to rectify how abortions are reported. 
My concerns begin with the fact that LD 1619 and its title imply one thing when, 
in reality, the implications of this bill would allow for something totally different. 
As you are aware, Maine law and policy already provides for the legal right fora 
woman to choose abortion before a baby can live viably outside of the womb. 
Existing Maine law also protects the health of all Maine women beyond the 
viability of a baby if a woman's life or health is in danger. While l personally do not 
support a woman's right to chose abortion in a general sense, existing Maine 
policy and law already affords Maine women the right to choose abortion within 
certain limits or boundaries. 
Beyond the "privacy" concerns, LD 1619 enters unacceptable territory by 
removing the boundaries of existing Maine law. Allowing any licensed physician to 
determine if a woman's life or health is in danger due to pregnancy effectively 
changes laws and policies so that any woman can receive an abortion at any time 
right up until the time of a child's birth. All reasonable and healthy boundaries will 
disappear. Readily available data in standard medical publications and 
conversations with qualiﬁed ob/gyn doctors reveal that all pregnancies pose a life 
or health risk for women. An argument can easily be made at any point in any 
pregnancy that a woman's life or health is at risk.
All healthy civilized free societies have laws protecting and providing freedoms to 
its citizens. It is also recognized that their laws have and need boundaries. When 
all boundaries are stripped from the law of the land in the name of one group's 
rights or freedoms, then someone else's rights and freedoms are lost. In the case 
of LD 1619, healthy viable babies are the ones who lose. 
If we are all honest with each other, existing Maine law and policies are not 
preventing a woman's right to choose abortion prior to a baby's ability to live 
outside the womb. A woman's right to abortion due to health and/or threats to 
her life are also extended to all women in Sec. 2 of 22 MRSA 1598. 
Furthermore, existing Maine law regarding abortions also provides penalties for 
those who choose not to follow the rules. This is another common, necessary, and 
healthy boundary often seen in a government's laws and policies. LD 1619 seeks 
to remove all penalties for people who perform abortions outside of the scope of 
recognized Maine law. Such a move causes one to question the ulterior motives of 
this proposed bill and further endangers the lives of lV|aine women and babies. 
ln conclusion, l respectfully ask the Judiciary Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass 
with regards to LD 1619. 
Very sincerely, 
Jeffrey Polland 
340 Cobb Hill Road 
Otisfield, ME 04270
