Good Afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, Members of the Iudiciary 
Committee, and Mainers, 
My name is Iennifer Barbalias, resident of Glenburn. I am testifying in opposition of 
LD 1619. I have had the privilege to serve the youngest of Maine citizens and their 
families as a neonatal ICU nurse. God has given us the ability to care for infants born 
prematurely to preserve life through medical technology not to destroy it. I have 
supported prenatal infants as young as 25 weeks. Please let me encourage you to 
protect and not destroy children's lives. 
I believe that Satan knows his time is short and is scrambling to take out as many 
humans as he can through the lies, one of which claims that prenatal lives have no 
value. 
But, in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. God said, let us make 
man in Our image... Genesis 1:1, 1:26 
We have an enemy that hates God and every human. The enemy seeks to deceive, 
steal, kill and destroy as many people as he can. I think a lot of us have been 
deceived into thinking that just because the baby is on the other side of the womb 
the baby is not living. Yet, the womb is designed by God to support new human life. 
This is the important part, whether you have had an abortion, pressured someone 
into it, thought about having an abortion, performed the abortion, or are thinking 
about passing a law to expand abortion, abortion is murder. It is sin. Sin causes 
death, eternal separation from God our Creator. 
In the Bible, Iesus Christ described hell, as a place of weeping and gnashing of teeth, 
where the worm dies not, and the fire is not extinguished. As such, it is the place of 
eternal pain, regret and sorrow. 
Do not be deceived: God is not mocked, for whatever one sows, that will he also 
reap. Galatians 6:7 
God our Creator has already give us the right to choose righteously, He has given us 
the free will to choose Him, to choose Life over death. 
The Truth is that you can be forgiven and save lives by asking Iesus Christ to forgive 
you for your sin. The Lord Iesus is coming back soon. Every knee will bow and every 
tongue will confess that Iesus Christ is Lord forever. I plead with you to choose Jesus 
as your Lord today before its too late. Thank you for your time.
