Testimony in Opposition of LD 1619 
An Act to improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
May 1, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney, Representative Matt Moonen, and Members of the 
Judiciary Committee, my name is Jennifer White of Gray, and I am here to 
voice my opposition to LD 1619. First, I would like to say that this Governor ’s 
bill is a huge disappointment to me and many across our state who heard 
Governor Mills televised political debates last October. She was asked if she 
would try to change the current abortion law in Maine and her response was 
that she would not change the current law. Many other Democrats who ran 
for office last year were asked similar questions about their stance on abortion 
and told their constituents that they supported the current abortion bill as it 
stood. This Governor ’s bill with many Democrat Co-Sponsors is a perfect 
example of bait and switch. Promises spoken to the people of Maine which 
turned out to be lies. This is one reason why so many people in our state do 
not trust politicians. 
As someone who has worked in the early childhood field for almost thirty 
years, l am immensely troubled that our Governor and state legislators would 
think it's okay to perform an abortion with no limitations on the age of the 
fetus. Why would you remove “it is necessary to preserve the life or health of 
the mother"? Anyone who supports this bill is leaving the door wide open for 
this law to be misused. The majority of abortions that occur right now are 
sadly being used as a form of birth control from unwanted pregnancies. 
According to the Lozier institute, in 2021 over 36% of women in Maine who 
reported having an abortion, this was their second, third, or fourth time having 
one. This is clearly being used in place of contraceptives. This is a barbaric 
choice that is torturous for any baby in utero to go through. By the 
seventeenth and eighteenth week after gestation, the fetus shows a clear 
response to pain in multiple studies that have been done. 
We love our pets more than we love our unborn children. When we makea 
conscious decision to euthanize our beloved animals but instead torture our 
unborn children through abortion- —there is something totally off balance in our 
world. We don't want to see our animals suffer but we are willing to make it 
easier for viable, full of life fetuses to brutally suffer—-all in the name of what?
Progressive thinking?? How about we provide better accessibility and choices 
for contraceptives and not use abortion as birth control? 
Human life is sacred—no matter how small and fragile. Abortion is painful, 
barbaric, and does not provide the dignity that every human life deserves. If 
this bill passes, there will be no baby carried in utero that is protected, that 
cannot be aborted, regardless of age and for whatever reason. This bill lacks 
any kind of human decency or compassion whatsoever. l pray that for all of 
you who have children or grandchildren, think back to cradling that beautiful 
tiny newborn in your arms for the first time. Then think of the pain that child 
would feel if they were in the womb, fully formed, nearing their date to be 
born, but instead painfully and brutally aborted. That is inconceivable. If you 
pass this bill, you will be responsible for that very tragedy happening to others. 
Please vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 1619. Using the lives of unborn 
children as political pawns is a terrible thing to do. Real birth control should 
not involve painful abortions. We can do better as a society by providing other 
means of contraceptives for both men and women. 
Thank you, 
Jennifer White 
Gray, Maine
