Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
Hello, my name is Jennifer Ramos and I live in Orrington. i am here to testify in opposition to LD 
1619. 
Congratulations! Congratulations to everyone in this room that is here today. Your mother 
decided life was the important gift she could give you. Aren’t you glad that the day before you 
were born that she didn’t change her mind and tragically end your life? So you are here! You 
are here at this moment to listen to the testimony of hundreds of people who believe that life 
begins with a heart beat and that all life is sacred. 
When I was pregnant with our third child my OBGYN surprised us with the news that we were 
having twins at our 8 week appointment. Within a few days I had to go back to the doctor 
because I was bleeding. He took a closer look and realized that one of the twins had implanted 
on my c-section scar. The baby’s heartbeat was very slow and we were told that the baby 
would not survive the pregnancy. 
This started a few scary months of continuous bleeding, monitoring, and appointments with my 
doctor and with specialists. The specialist I saw at 12 weeks recommended an immediate 
abortion of both babies for my health and safety. No consideration was given to the perfectly 
healthy baby growing inside of me or to the fact that I wasn’t having any other pregnancy 
complications or issues. Other than monitoring the c-section scar this was just like any other of 
my pregnancies. The specialist said it would be an easy in-and-out procedure and then we 
could just start over. Just start over. She wanted to quickly and easily eliminate my baby. Like 
it was a mark on the chalkboard that you could just erase and then start writing the next lesson 
on. 
Six months later, right on her due date we had the most beautiful little girl. She was delivered 
with no complications and is now a thriving 10 year old 5th grader. She loves to read, loves 
dogs (most of the time more than people, although that is a very close race) and is such a light 
in this world that a doctor was willing to quickly extinguish before Isabella even had the chance 
to shine. In this world you never know how or when your light is going to shine. Don’t let people 
extinguish it before you have a chance to ﬁnd it. I strongly encourage you, with every strength 
of my being, to oppose this bill. It is murder. It is taking the life of a baby that has no defense. 
If this atrocious crime was committed, in some cases just hours or days later, after they were 
born it would be considered murder. If the end of your life is signified by the stopping of your 
heart beat, shouldn't the beginning be signified by the starting of your heart beat. 
Thank you for your time and your consideration. Please vote ought not to pass.
