May 1, 2023 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Joan Angelakis. I am a resident of Lewiston Maine. l am here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
I am a Licensed Clinical Social Worker. I have counseled women for over 30 years. I 
am also a trauma therapist and train other professionals how to work with those 
suffering with trauma. 
I come before you today to bring a specific perspective of the trauma that is caused by 
abortion. I am against this bill because of the continued trauma that abortion causes 
women... Women who ultimately make the decision to abort their child, or submit to 
others who want them to have an aboition. 
As a clinical therapist, my job is to help people to fully examine all of the content of their 
own hearts and their own minds regarding the issues that they bring to therapy. I have 
never spoken to a woman regarding the issue of abortion, prior to or after the abortion, 
who is not suffering extreme duress with their decision. They are oven/vhelmed, 
regardless of their age. They are confused and listen to the many voices telling them 
what they should do. Many young women have been forced to have abortions bya 
boyfriend or a parent. Married women, by their husbands or circumstances. 
It is very rare that a women would ever want to have an abortion, especially when 
carrying a child to full term. 
The guilt and shame that follows lasts a lifetime. Few ever speak of it again or get 
counseling for it. 
My introduction to abortion was when a classmate in High School shot herself because 
she had already had an abortion and was facing another abortion. 
My next experience was a few years later when a co-worker broke down at work 
because she had already had 2 abortions and was pregnant again, facing a third. She 
was being pressured by her boyfriend to have the abortion. 
Another experience was a woman I worked with that through counseling who went 
against the wishes of her husband and decided to have her child. Whenever I would 
see her in the community, she would thank me and update me about her daughter. 
Another experience was a woman who could not move fon/vard with her life because of 
the trauma of having had 2 abortions, one her mother made her have and another her 
husband force her to have.
Abortion causes trauma to the mother, the family and the community. lt seems like an 
easy fix for the momentary crisis at the time. But it is pervasive in the functioning of the 
family. Everyone keeps it as a secret because of the guilt and shame. This does not 
only come from others, it is an offense of the person’s soul that continues to fester, 
throughout the women’s life. 
I have NEVER spoken to a woman who felt that they wanted an abortion. They have 
felt they had to or made to by someone else. 
l am not only here to speak up for life, but to advocate for the kind of counsel wherea 
woman discovers for herself, what she really wants, regardless of other peopie’s ideas. 
THAT is pro-choice. 
When a woman is given all the information about her choices... including adoption, the 
supports available for her to keep her baby... When she sees the life of her child within 
her womb on an ultrasound or a picture of her child, their little hands, little feet, the 
features of the baby’s face... When she has been presented with all the options 
available in addition to abortion, then she can make an informed decision for herself and 
her child...THAT IS PRO-CHOlCEl 
Thank you for hearing my voice today. 
Respectfully, 
Joan Angelakis, LCSW 
12 Hartford Street 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
207-491-3391 
joanangelakis@gmail.com
