Monday May 1, 2023y 
Speak Up For Life Testimony, Augusta, ME 
Good Morning Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members 
of the Judiciary Committee: 
My name is John Linnehan of Ellsworth. I'm here to testify for myself, 
my wife Heather, and to urge you to vote Ought NOT to Pass on LD 
1619! 
|’m going to state my opposition from a Biblical point of view, from 
God’s Point of View! As a Bible believing Christian, l believe that the 
Bible is the inspired Word of God. A paraphrase of Second Timothy 
chapter 3 verse 16 is "All Scripture is INSPJRED by God and teaches us 
what's right, what's NOT right, how to get right and how to stay right.” 
LD 1619 is a perfect example of ”what's NOT right”! Remember, this is 
not John Linnehan telling you his opinion. This is God, Our Heavenly 
Father, telling me and you THAT LD 1619 Ought NOT to Pass! 
God's starting point of life is at CONCEPTION! 
He is the Creator, the Author of life. Psalms chapter 139 verses 12-15 
says: "You made all the delicate inner parts of my body and knit me 
together inmy mother's womb. Thank You for making me so 
wonderfully complex! Your workmanship is marvelous —--how welll 
know it. You watched me as l was being formed in utter seclusion, asI 
was woven together in the dark of the womb. You saw me BEFOREI 
WAS BORN. iJ 
Secondiy, God says in the Bible that any intentional taking of any life is 
murden whether in the womb or outside the womb! 
Proverbs chapter 6 verses 16-19 says, "There are seven things which the 
Lord hates. One of the seven things God hates is ”hands that shed
innocent blood.” Intentionally taking the life of an innocent baby while 
still in the womb is an example of shedding innocent blood, which God 
hates.I 
Finally, any person that doesn't vote Ought NOT to Pass WILL face the 
judgment of God for their part in taking even one baby's life, let alone 
many babies’ lives. Like myself, every person on this committee will give 
an account to God for the things he or she does. Second Corinthians 
chapter 5 verses 10 and 11 tells us, "For we MUST all stand before 
Christ to BE JUDGED. We will each receive whatever we deserve, for the 
good or evil we have done in this earthly body. Because l understand 
my fearful responsibility to the Lord, l work hard to persuade you on 
this committee. Verse 11 is l\/IY part as God’s Ambassador to you today. 
l’m "working hard to persuade you" to vote Ought NOT to Pass for two 
reasons: Number One, to save the lives of innocent babies. Number 
Two, to warn you about the judgment of God for your part in the 
murder of babies’ lives. 
l urge each one of you to PRAY for wisdom and to vote Ought NOT To 
Pass on LD 1619...KlLL THE BlLL...NOT KILL THE BABY! 
Thank You for your time, God Bless you all.
