Members of the Judiciary Committee, thank you for allowing me to speak regarding bill 
LD 1619. 
My name is Julie Grant and I stand before you today defending God's greatest and most 
loved creation, us, life, the unborn babies. 
Because we are God's greatest creation, how can we say abortion is, okay? We are killing 
babies in the womb, a place that should be the safest for them. There is protection and 
rights for almost every species except for the unborn child. 
”Black Lives Matter!" We've all heard this and of course it is true. You must know that 
African Americans have the highest abortion rates in the country. So, do black lives really 
matter? "Abortion is safe healthcare for women." It can't be ”safe healthcare" when it 
ends a baby's life. Have you researched and talked with women who have had 
abortions? Most are left with depression, anxiety, feelings of suicide and trauma. Some 
are unable to have children again. Another possible argument, ”There is no help for 
women after they give birth." That is not true. I have volunteered in resource centers 
that provide counseling, free ultrasounds and continued care for these families. 
What has changed to cause our society to look for opportunities to kill unborn babies? 
ls it science? No, science has conﬁrmed what God has said from the beginning. Life 
begins at conception. "Abortion is a woman's issue." If that is true, the men on this 
committee should not vote on this bill. Obviously, that is not true. Both men and women 
have a voice in this matter. The prolife movement is very pro woman and pro-family. 
Jesus Christ came to earth to pay the penalty for our sins. ”We have all sinned and fallen 
short of the glory of God, the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our Lord." Our relationship with God was severed and we have been 
separated from Him. But because of His love for us, Jesus took that punishment and now 
we can have a right relationship with Him. ”For God so loved the world that He gave His 
only son, that whosoever believes in Him will not perish but have everlasting life." What 
a message of love, restoration and hope! 
I was two hours away from being aborted. My mother changed her mind and I am very 
thankful for that. She knew that life, a baby was growing in her womb. You are here 
today because someone chose not to end your life. I ask that you consider giving each 
unborn baby that same opportunity. 
Thank youl
