7.,. 
Regarding LD 1619 
The Act to improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws, What this act really is 
to remove the" viability ” restriction, resulting in Maine being the 6"‘ state USA allow 
murder of unborn that could survive independent of the womb, also removing. 
penalties for botched “back alley” abortions. 
Good afternoon, Judiciary Committee, my name is Karenelise Otto, I live in Augusta 
Maine.‘ 
I come here today to state my personal testimony, which is the catalyst to speak 
out against abortions, LD 1619 
Women are not informed of the long-term effects, the physical, emotional, and 
mental reactions that are experienced when an abortion has been performed. 
I am a bachelor's degree nurse as well as a patient advocate. In my profession it is law 
that the surgeon and nurse obtain informed consent and acknowledgement froma 
patient scheduled for surgery. This documentation states that theyhave a full 
understanding of all possible and potential results that might occur before, during and 
after a surgery. Before this consent is signed by the surgical candidate, they will verbally 
affirm that they have an understanding and are willing to accept any consequences that 
might inadvertently happen. 
I know from personal experience the immediate and long-term effects this uninformed 
decision has had on me from my decision to abort my second baby. 
Here is my story. The year is 1974, I'm 18 years old, in an abusive relationship, working as 
a waitress a single mother of a 2 ‘/2 year old son. As much as I loved children, I could not 
imagine putting another child besides the doctor said it was not really a baby ”it is justa 
mass of cells not a baby. I'll set up an appointment in have a D&C. It's like a vacuum 
cleaner, that cleans out your uterus. 
At the hospital, I roomed with a 15-year-old girl whose parents forced her to travel from 
Florida to Pennsylvania for an abortion. She told me that a nurse used a needle and put 
salt water into her belly that would make her go into labor to have the baby. A few hours 
later she was writhing in pain with nothing administered for pain. I rang for help for her, 
no one came. She went into the bathroom, having no understanding what was happening 
Minutes later there was a blood curdling scream, ”My baby is in the toilet, it's a little baby 
boy" . Finally, a nurse came to help, as she coldly disposed of the baby. This scene is 
forever burned into my secret memories. I was petriﬁed about this D&C! Was my baby 
fully formed, what was this right decision? During the night I decided that I couldn't go 
through with it and said I planned to leave, next thing I know I was given an injection, 
through the haze I was taken to the operating room the abortion was performed. I was 
numb from the overabundance of emotions that had swept over my life in such a short
,~
\ 
amount oftime; I did not want to think at all. That's how I dealt with it, I put it from my 
mind, and to the point that for many years I denied that it had happened, never telling 
anyone. _ 
During nurses training abortion was talked about in detail, I learned the fate of my 
aborted baby, still reminding myself that this was only a mass of cells, not a baby, that's 
what they told me. Making an uninformed decision to end a pregnancy without full 
disclosure should be against the law. Knowledge of the entire long term emotional, 
mental, physical and ethical ramiﬁcation that will occur after an abortion needs to be 
acknowledged and afﬁrmed by the woman. Scientiﬁc and diagnostic information of the 
events that the fetus will endure before it dies, the pain of being torn apart being ripped 
from the womb should be verbalizing the woman as well as she needs to 
acknowledgement that these implication's that been disclosed and agreed upon before an 
abortion is performed. 
Meta-analysis of 22 worldwide Studies on Adverse Effects of Abortion of 
Mental Health used a data base of 877,181 participants, 163,831 of whom 
experienced an abortion, 81% increased risk for mental health problems, 34% 
increased risk for anxiety disorders, 37% risk for depression,11O% risk for alcohol 
use/abuse, 220% for marijuana use/abuse and 155% risk for suicide. Calculate 
over time what that will cost the taxpayers!
