131 Legislature, Judiciary Committee 
LD 1619 & LD 1343 Testimony 
Kathryn E. Sharpless, MD, PhD 
Yarmouth, Maine 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee; my name 
is Dr. Kathyrn Sharpless, and l live in Yarmouth, Maine. 
As an obstetrician-gynecologist practicing for over 17 years, I help people decide if, and when, 
to have children. l see my patients through pregnancies resulting in births, miscarriages, and 
abortions. Providing abortion care ensures reproductive health and bodily autonomy. 
As a practicing OBGYN in Maine, my heart breaks each time l am forced to give pregnant 
people who need abortion care later in pregnancy a list of out-of-state providers because 
Maine's current law bans it and includes criminal penalties. 
I know many l am forced to turn away won’t be able to get the care they need. These are 
people whose developing pregnancies have fetal anomalies identified later in pregnancy, 
people who discover they are pregnant later in pregnancy, and people who face obstacles, 
such as cost or difficulties finding a provider, that delay their abortion care until later in the 
pregnancy. 
Most people who need abortion care later in pregnancy lack the financial resources, 
transportation, and childcare to leave Maine for care. 
People denied an abortion are more likely to live in poverty, be unemployed, and stay in 
dangerous relationships. They are more likely to experience anxiety, stress, and lower 
self-esteem compared to people who are able to obtain an abortion. The ban on abortion later 
in pregnancy in Maine harms pregnant people and their families, especially the most 
vulnerable, including people living in geographically isolated areas, such as those in many 
parts of Maine. Every Mainer, no matter where in the state they live, deserves the same 
access to abortion care. 
The ethics of providing an abortion later in pregnancy are the same as early in pregnancy. 
Supporting pregnant people in obtaining the abortion care they need is trusting pregnant 
people and their families to decide what is the best course of action based on their individual 
needs and medical circumstances.- 
l urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1619 and LD 1343.
