\ April 27 2023 
S 2 ¢\oL’rO 1" Q/W“l\£"li P"€Pv€§@!\*6L£ 
T 0Or:‘*:tfe\eJ —‘ l'm Kathleen Hale. l was boil" 
Mﬂdmwehak and honorame mam-berg Dime j\ud\c:wY>u(fbn vote Ought Not to Pass on Bill LD 1619- 
and raised in Nlaine and live in China, Maine. urg Y. 
- - fe Mainers who 
- , -' 
. S ort ro-choice and pro \\ 
An Act to improve Maine s Reproductive Privacy Laws UPPP 
. - ' ' 
b loved state. 
stand unified that 3"‘ trimester abortion should not be legalized in ourE 
. . . _.. - tth ir votes in 
Senator Ann Carney spoke about this bill and said. Maine people speak when {hell Cas 
d I 
: t_ _d 
the ballot.” None of you, or Governor Janet Mills would be lﬂ office, had you promote In 3" |¢l9 
during your campaign. 
Maine Medical Association whose goal is to be the best voice for _a_lj Maine physicians supports this 
bill. How many physician members support MMA's stance on legalizing infanticide? Can we trust 
the Maine healthcare system if you can be at a healthcare facility where a woman is 8 months 
pregnant, delivers a baby — everyone in the room joyfully welcomes this human life. While in the 
next room a woman is 8 months pregnant, the baby is ripped apart, limb by limb, she delivers a dead 
baby - same gestation as the baby celebrated in the other room - but there is no right to life, no 
celebrating, no tears for this infant's suffering. To LD 1619 supporters, the murdered baby is not 
considered "human" , but the other baby is, based on a mother’ s choice? This is sickening, disturbing, 
satanic. This is a moral issue not political. 
The bill is supported by the Maine Council of Churches who say they're rooted in Hebrew and 
Christian Scriptures, with justice, compassion, peace. Where is justice, compassion, andpeace for 
infants? As a Christian, I tell you this bill does not reflect Judeo-Christian values, nor does a church 
that purports to be Christian yet supports this bill. The Christians in opposition today are following 
Christ's teachings. God said, "what you do to the least of my people that you do untofn-e." The U.S. 
was founded on Judeo-Christian values. When we die, Christ will judge us for the good or evil that 
we've done. If we support this bill, or do nothing to stop it, eternity is a long time to be wrong. 
Maine is a destination for enjoying life. We do not want to be known as a destination for death. 
Many Democrats signed this bill. Now that they're in office, they champion infanticide, but had they 
campaigned on this, they know it would have been the end of their political career. This is a lie to the 
people of Maine. Mainers are not going to be okay with this and for those legislators to remain' 
in 
office having lied. Kill this bill - not infants. Represent the majority of your constituents. Vote Ought 
Not To Pass for LD 1619. l also request that you oppose LD 776 and LD 1343. Thank you. 
Respectfully, 
Kathleen Hale
\
