Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary, my name is Kathleen March and I am a resident of Windham. I am here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619 and all bills allowing abortions at any stage of life. 
All of life is a matter of perspective and our perspective shapes our attitude which in turn shapes our 
actions. As such, I would like to share part of my life story that has shaped and transformed my life 
perspective towards abortion. 
32 yrs ago I became pregnant as the result of a rape. After 11 weeks of agonizing over my situation 
and seeking counsel I had an abortion because it was legal. My abortion took place because of 
my distraught emotional state: fear that seeing the child of my attacker would always remind me of 
him and the rape; fear I couldn't financially afford a child and fear of a lifelong commitment. All of 
these thoughts were from one perspective, the emotion of fear. They were my rationale for having an 
abortion, although we all know emotions are NOT rational. I also told myself that what was growing 
inside me was not yet a child. I was wrong then and recognized that a few years later after I got 
married and wanted a family. This time my pregnancy perspective from the moment my husband and 
I tried to conceive was that what was inside me was a growing baby. The healthcare I received in 
both situations from the moment my pregnancy was confirmed was about protecting the life of the 
baby. The abortion I got wasn’t Healthy, it was to simply to erase my pregnancy. Abortion 
didn’t erase the amount time I carried my child and that experience, it didn't bring healing, it didn't 
bring closure, and it didn't bring help. All it brought was death. Lifelong, permanent decisions should 
NEVER be made in an emotional state. 
I was living with two ogposing_perspectives referring to my pregnancy as a thing and a child. WhenI 
look at my 4 living children I am reminded that my first pregnancy was a precious and valuable life, 
now gone. Emotions often mask the Truth in situations and there is only one truth, I took the precious 
life of my first child. 
As a women who has lived through the horrible ordeal of rape and as a women who has had an 
abortion, I know firsthand that abortion is not a viable or appropriate solution to anything. I wish 
abortion had been illegal so that I could have prevented the death of my first child. 
Sometimes we need something outside of ourselves to guide our actions, especially in times of 
stress. Like a parent guide’s a child, it’s why we have laws. A law preventing abortion could have 
saved my child’s life and saved me from greater pain. 
Could you in good conscience drive your daughter, niece or granddaughter to destroy the baby inside 
of them especially during their 8th or 9th month of pregnancy? For me I don’t see how I could look at 
my daughter and value her life while at the same time say that the viable life inside of her doesn’t 
matter. 
Life should be a right and No one should get to make the decide for another person if they get to live 
or not. When we take the life of another, there are consequences. Some are issued upon us bya 
court but there are also those we issue upon ourselves by the act itself because it cannot be 
undone. Abortion is death and it isn't right, it's a consequence I live with and hope others don’t have 
to. 
LD1619 and any law to abort a life is a bad decision and not right for Maine.
