Testimony in opposition to LD 1619 
Kelley Lavigne 
Limington 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Kelley Lavigne and I am a resident of Limington. Thank you 
so much for serving the people of Maine. I am so thankful that we have a process which allows 
for Maine people to have their voices heard in person. Something not to be taken for granted. 
I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. My personal story includes an abortion in my past. 
It has always been and continues to be the hardest thing for me to talk about because for me, it 
comes with a tremendous amount of heartache. I was 20 and not married. I chose to end the life 
of my child for convenience. It's still hard to hear these words come out of my mouth. To admit 
that I chose death. I mean let's be honest. I killed my child. That sounds blunt and harsh, but it is 
the truth. 
I did end up marrying the man who that child would have called Dad. He and I did have three 
healthy children after we were married. They are 21, 19 and 13 years old and their older sibling 
would have been 25 this year. I altered our family irreparably. He would have potentially had 25 
years to this point being loved, being guided throughout his childhood how to love others and to 
become the person he was created to be. 
Maine's current law on abortion is adequate in that it allows for legal abortion before viability and 
when needed to preserve the life of the mother. This bill is so extreme to go as far as allowing 
someone to choose to abort a baby even up to the day that it would be born. I just can't wrap my 
head around this. If a baby is going to be birthed on a certain day, and the mother or father 
decides that same day that they want to abort the baby, this would be legal? When that baby 
could be born in just a few hours? What is the difference in killing it that day, a few hours before 
it's time of birth or a few hours after? This is extreme, and this would be allowed if this bill is 
made into law. I am asking you to please vote no on LD 1619. 
Thank you for your time. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
