Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary:' 
My name is Kent Smallwood, and I am a resident of Hampden. I am here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
Those of us standing in opposition to this bill are male and female of varyi.ng ages and 
backgrounds. As Men, we have always been part of this issue. Women’s decisions about 
pregnancy are undeniably affected by the actions and attitudes of their male partners. Men 
volunteer to help moms and dads learn parenting skills. Men provide ﬁnancial support to 
struggling families. Men counsel and influence other men to honor women and to take 
accountability. Men, in part, adopt and raise children that some mother’s s elﬂessly give up. 
And some men, like me, have had to care for a woman who Was injured and scared by an 
abortionist. 
As a young adult, the mother of my child decided to have an abortion against my will. She 
sustained an injury from the abortion that led to a severe hemorrhage. As she was writhing in 
pain and losing blood rapidly, I raced as fast as I could to the ER. When We arrived, they 
rushed her into emergency surgery. She narrowly escaped with her Life. This bill not only 
makes it legal to murder more defenseless babies, but decreasing penalties for individuals 
who perform “back-alley ” abortions can cause more women to suffer like my former partner 
did. 
Regardless of our gender or any other factors, we know that this is violence against the 
innocent I am against the murder of these precious babies at any time. But please consider 
the impact of this bill. Under this bill, your loved ones, on the same day they were born, 
could have been terrninated ——murdered. . 
We must not deny the humanity, personhood, and uniqueness of these precious defenseless 
unborn babies. Science continues to shine a light on this truth. There are many victims, 
including your conscience and that of our collective society. What are we telling our kids and 
citizens if we are willing to sacriﬁce our babies? We will not stand idle while this goes on in 
our state. We will pull backthe curtain and shine light onto this atrocity. Regardless of your 
vote, we will continue to be pro -women, pro-children, and pro-family-before and after birth. 
I stand for those things,because of the Love and Truth Ireceive from My Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ. 
Please search yourheart. Be a light. Do not push us deeper into darkness. Vote ought not to 
pass.
