In Support of LD1412 Senator Carney, Representative Moonan and Members of the Judiciary Committee: 
My name is Kimberly Simmons, from Portland Maine. I am submitting testimony today both as a mother of young adult daughters and a feminist sociologist.  I am testifying in support of LD 776.  
As a woman who has experienced pregnancy, miscarriage and two live births, I’m horriﬁed at the new spate of laws attempting to restrict reproductive health care at every stage of family planning.  
My miscarriage, at about 12 weeks pregnant, was one of the saddest and most challenging medical experiences I’ve suﬀered.  I wanted a new baby, and so I had aspirations for the pregnancy and felt deep grief when I learned that the fetus had not developed.   I had the choice to allow my body to eventually ﬁgure out that the pregnancy was over and spontaneously miscarry at a time and place I could not predict, or to have a dilation and curettage procedure - a D&C, aka surgical abortion.  My medical providers lacked training and compassion and I was counseled that if I “found Jesus” this might not have happened to me by a nurse - in a secular hospital. It was dumbfounding and cruel advice, and has stuck with me for over twenty years.  I share this to say that many of us have abortions for many reasons and they are our own private business. Harsh judgement, barriers to care, and threats of violence profoundly eﬀect us.  Maine owes us the easiest and safest medical care possible.  
My own daughters are now at the age where they may choose to try to become pregnant, to prevent pregnancy, or to end a pregnancy.  The notion that it is anyone’s business but their own violates my core values and my understanding of human rights.  I believe that Maine is a State that will embrace liberty as a shared value and one that extends to all of us who can become pregnant.  The right to privacy, to liberty, and to the pursuit of happiness is not suspended when fertility is suspected.  (And, this is an argument for LD 1412, the ERA, as well — if the Courts have not previously fully recognized women as people, it is time to ensure they will in the future!)  
Finally, I trust that the reproductive health beneﬁts of access to all forms of health care - including abortion - will be well documented in testimony by others today.  However, I feel compelled to remind you that the United States ranks a shocking 83rd in the world on health and  survival in the 2022 World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap.  Our inability to meet the health care needs of all girls and women leaves us with shocking levels of both maternal and infant death and many other health consequences for women denied pregnancy related health care.  Racism exacerbates this problem, with Black maternal health a national crisis.  We have lived with this problem for my entire adult life, but the worsening conditions are a source of anger and grief for many of us who believed we would be a generation making a commitment to maternal well-being — that is, we’re solving scientiﬁc and technical problems quickly allowing for new solutions to stubborn problems.  The idea that politics will prevent us from engaging these solutions to save lives is extremely disheartening.  

In Support of LD1412 Codifying our right to reproductive autonomy in the Maine Constitution will allow us to move forward on the signiﬁcant problem solving we need to do to ensure a healthy environment for parents and children in Maine.  Our State crisis should not be focused policing possible pregnancy’s but supporting families who struggle to ﬁnd enough health, mental health, and economic supports.  
Thank you, 
Kimberly C Simmons
Portland, ME 

