Senator Anne Carney, Representative l\/latt Moonen, and members of the State Judiciary 
Committee: 
l'm Kristen Day, mother of three, and a taxpayer from Windham. l am here today to oppose 
LD1619. 
My husband and l were born and raised in Maine, we moved away for a few years, and 
returned to Maine when our first born was an infant to raise our family. We've lived in the 
same home in Windham for 20 years. Maine, then, WAS the way life should be. l was a life-long 
voting Liberal Democrat until recent years; I don't even recognize the state of Maine today. lt 
has become a petri dish of progressive social experimentation, and voters don't even know half 
of what is happening because the media hides it. 
This bill is a political, cultural, and legal extreme — Morally, legalizing abortion up until the day 
of birth is legalizing murder no matter how definitions are interpreted. But what women should 
be concerned with is that removing the requirement that an abortion be done by a physician is 
degrading women's reproductive care. With no legal requirement, it opens the door for anyone 
to perform abortions; it could someone with an online certiﬁcation, or less. What if there is an. 
emergency? With this bill, women would lose their right to being assured that a medical 
physician is providing their procedure, and if it goes wrong, possibly much more. While 
Abortion providers would gain cost savings by not using physicians, and protection from liability 
if it goes wrong. Laws should protect women at their most vulnerable, and this bill misleads and 
exploits them, and puts them in danger. 
This life and death issue should not be political or partisan; but it is. When Roe v Wade was 
overturned, before the last election, Democrats claimed that Republicans would take women's 
rights, make abortion illegal in Maine. Republicans said they wouldn't do that. Now after 
elections, Republicans didn't bring a bill to outlaw abortion. But Democrats are bringing this bill 
to maximize the Maine abortion law -which they, too, said they wouldn't touch. Now, voters 
are fighting for their "rights" -not to abortion at all -but to abortion at any time for any reason. 
That escalated extremely. 
As for the lawfulness of abortion, we can argue the timeline of viability of a fetus’s life, and the 
moral point of ending a human life at all, but there is no gray moral area here. Legalizing ending 
the life of a full-grown, baby-about-to-be-born is barbaric. lt is NOT the way LIFE should be. As 
Maine goes, so goes the nation. l urge you to vote NO on LD16l9 to protect women's health 
care standards, to protect the lives of viable unborn babies, and to slow the moral hemorrhage 
that threatens Maine. 
Thank you.
