May 1, 2023 
Members of the Maine Judiciary Committee, 
I am Kyle Black, I am the husband of Katie and the father to five amazing children. I am 
here today and will always be in opposition of LD 1619 a bill that if passed will 
sentence an untold number of unborn children to an untimely death that they do not 
have a choice in. I am here to stand and speak for these children. I am here to be their 
voice. I am here to make sure as a father, a protector of my family, to also be the 
protector of the unborn children this bill has been written to destroy. I am commanded 
to stand here today for the fatherless and to offer another solution. The abolition of 
abortion. I am asking you to join me. To stand with me to fight for the unborn, to stand 
for the fatherless, to protect them from this death sentence. 
IN 1776 our Founding Fathers signed the Declaration of Independence, that we have all 
been afforded through their sacrifice, death, courage and belief in what they called to 
be “unalienabIe rights of LIFE, LIBERTY and the pursuit of happiness. ” LD1619 is 
contrary to this proclamation of Life, Liberty and the pursuit of happiness, by murdering 
innocent children in what should be the safest place for any child, the womb. We all 
know that there is no science that supports that the child in the womb is just a cluster 
of cells, or has no feeling, or doesn’t know what is happening outside the womb. I am 
not here to argue this point. These are the facts. 
A child feels and hears everything happening outside the womb. They know their 
mother and fathers voices. They hear the music planning outside. They are nourished 
by the food their mother eats. They feel and fight when the forceps enter the birth 
cannel that are coming to literally tear them apart. They fight for their little lives. You 
can see these disturbing videos on YouTube. 
My belief in the sanctity of life isn’t just because of what our Founding Fathers believed 
and stated in the Declaration of Independence. My belief in the sanctity of life, comes 
from the conviction that every human, is created in the image of the One True God, you 
may be asking why do you believe this to be true? in Genesis 1: 26, God said, “Let us 
make man in our image, and our |ikeness... ” this historical account continues in 
Genesis 2:7, “then the Lord God formed the man of dust from the ground, and 
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life and the man became a living creature and 
the Lord God planted a garden in Eden, in the east, and there he put the man whom he 
had formed.” We see later in the same chapter that God saw that it was not good for
the man to be alone and made him fall into a deep sleep and then created another 
human from the rib of the man, woman. One of God's most beautiful creations. 
My belief in the sanctity of life and standing here before you in opposition of this bill 
and in the conviction that the murder of innocent children needs to stop from the time 
of conception, from the very moment the man’s sperm enters the woman’s egg and 
begins the creation of a new life, continues to come from the ancient text of scripture 
where King David, the man God said was a “man of His own heart” wrote about in 
Psalms 139113-14 “For you formed my inward parts, you knitted me together in my 
mother’s womb. I praise you, for l am fearfully and wonderfully made. Wonderful are 
your works; my soul knows it very well. My frame was not hidden from you, when l was 
being made in secret, intricately woven in the depths of the earth. Your eyes saw my 
unformed substance; in your book were written, every one of them, the days that were 
formed for me, when as yet there was none of them.” 
This Psalm is not only speaking of how King David was created but every human 
being. Every baby in the womb and shows us the beauty of the how we are created. 
That every child in the womb is being formed by God after His image. As a Christian 
man and trying to be a the best follower of Christ my Savior and Lord, l am here to ask 
you to not allow this bill to go forward. To know that in doing so you are showing your 
hatred towards God in breaking one of the 10 Commandments, You shall not murder. 
You will be showing and endorsing your hatred towards God by allowing a bill that will 
endorse the murder of innocent children that are created in God’s imagine. 
In a state where the death penalty is no longer allowed for those who commit heinous 
crimes, why would you even be considering allowing a bill like this that will give an 
unborn child this sentence? A child that has committed no crime, that has spoken no 
words, that has not been able to benefit from the freedoms we hold to. 
Let me share one more thing with you, when Katie and l were 20 years old we found 
out that Katie was pregnant. We were excited and scared to be parents. We did 
everything we were supposed to, to ensure the child in my wife’s womb was safe and 
healthy. We did the ultrasounds and were thrilled the first time we heard our unborn 
child‘s heartbeat. After one of the ultrasounds, we received what we thought was 
devastating news. We were told because of a measurement they took that the child 
was at risk of having down syndrome. They continued to tell us and even encouraged 
us that there were “options. ” I asked them what the options were, and the only option
they gave us was to abort this child. Katie and l were shocked. l wasn't expecting them 
to be so blunt and to actually try to convince us to do this. 
l looked at Katie and said absolutely not. This is not an option and l thought there were 
options. We left that ultrasound confused and scared. We had so many questions that 
the “medical professionals ” could not answer, like “how do yo know that the child will 
have down syndrome. ” How can you be so sure?" Their response was, we aren’t, we 
just think its an indicator. l told them no and yet they continued to try to convince us 
this was the right thing to do. 
Well as I stand before you today and being the father of this young lady for the past 16 
years, she is healthy and does not have down syndrome. Those medical professionals 
were completely wrong. l have personally experienced the struggle that these medical 
professionals created in my mind and l took the stand even then, knowing that there 
was a riskier my child and also knew that my child was being knitted together in Katie's 
womb by God and trusted Him. 
Members of the Judiciary Committee l’m imploring you to stop this bill and stand for 
life. To join us in the fight for the sanctity of life. To stand with our Founding Fathers, 
and not allow an innocent life to be taken and more than that to stand for those who 
have no voice, who have no choice in the matter of whether their life will be ended. 
One final warning, if you do not stop this bill, one day you will stand before the Holy 
God and give an account on why you endorsed a bill that murdered those created in 
His image. Repent and believe. There is mercy available to those who repent because 
Christ gave himself for sinners to come to him. 
Respectfully, 
Kyle Black
