Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Laura Parker and lam asking you to vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 1619. 
l am a mother of three teenagers, and I have been a Registered Nurse in the State of Maine for over 20 
years. I have spent my career advocating for those who cannot advocate for themselves. No one fits that 
description more than the unborn. 
When I first read the language of this bill, I was immediately reminded of my years working on the 
medical floor of a local hospital where we had the following saying, "Be nice to your nurse. Nurses keep 
your doctors from killing you." Because the language pertaining to the discretion of the physician is 
troubling to me. Because physicians are not infallible. They do make mistakes. They are human just like 
the rest of us. 
Additionally, according to existing statute, if this new language is passed, a physician who stands to 
make money from abortion procedures can certify that one is necessary in their professional judgment. 
There's nothing prohibiting it. There's certainly no standard delineated as to what thatjudgment must 
be based on. 
This should give us all pause. 
Ending the life ofa child is unfathomable to me. The thought of having the ”lawful" ending the life ofa 
child capable of exiting outside the womb scares me. Because l have been in healthcare long enough to 
know that this is a line in the sand that will be normalized and then washed away and replaced witha 
new line. 
As you well know, there are thousands of bills submitted each session. You are asked to put your mark 
of approval, or disapproval on each one. You are asked to draw your line in the sand. 
This is not about a State bird, or butterfly or dog. This is not about changing the design of the State flag 
or the length of a hunting season. This is about ending human life. 
It cannot be about the next election cycle, the next endorsement, how your caucus wants you to vote, 
or how much money you get from a PAC because you voted with them. It has to be about what you can 
live with for the rest of your life. 
I have seen a lot of legislation presented in Augusta in the last 10 years. I have never seen a bill that 
carries with it the weight this one does. It is so extreme. It is so dangerous. 
Please vote OUGHT NOT T0 PASS on LD 1619 
Laura B. Parker, RN 
Sidney, ME
