Honorable members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Lori Smith and l live in Wellington with my husband and five children. l am 
testifying today in opposition of LD1619, regarding late term abortion. 
On behalf of my children and Maine residents who stand with the US constitution and 
the right to life I say that this right is not negotiable. When we respect life, we honor our 
posterity. While three of my own children were born prematurely, one was at special 
risk. During pregnancy l struggled through Cholestasis which develops in the third 
trimester and can result in the death of the child. Although he was at high risk, 
removing him from the womb in the natural process of childbirth enabled him to be 
born perfectly healthy. At 36 weeks gestation, under this new law, he could have been 
killed by me as an inconvenience. 
Regardless of your personal beliefs on abortion and its practices, there are a number of 
reasons why this bill should be opposed. lt is unnecessary. It is dangerous. lt is not 
what the Maine people want. 
First, it is unnecessary. Currently, the Maine law allows for abortions for medical 
necessity and viability. Early term abortions are legal in Maine. Abortions to save the 
mother’s life are legal, and abortions for stillbirth are legal. With all of these medical 
conditions addressed in the current law, this drastic late term abortion law is 
completely unnecessary. 
Second, it is dangerous. As with all medical procedures, abortion is dangerous. 
Medical professionals undergo years of training to offer safe medical care to Maine 
citizens. Weighing the risks of pregnancy to the mother and child, the later an abortion 
is performed the more dangerous the procedure is for the mother. The safest way to 
end a late term pregnancy is through childbirth. 
Finally, it isn’t what the Maine people want. When Gov. Mills ran for reelection she 
promised not to support the extension of abortion services in Maine, yet, here we are. 
Over 65% of Maine citizens do not support this dangerous, unnecessary bill. Mainers 
agree that on-demand abortion, especially when the child is fully formed, is too 
extreme. This bill is not supported by the Maine people. 
Please consider seriously your impact on Maine and oppose this extreme bill. Thank 
you.
