L D léM ABORTION; One Dead, One Wounded 
(My Testimony: for J essie’s sake, by Mrs. Maria Michaels) April 30, 2023 
Members of the the Legislative Committee: 
Thank you for hearing my story and that of so many others with the same wounds 
and heartbreak. You see 44 years ago, at the age of 21, in my blindness, ignorance and 
naivety, I paid $180 to a “doctor” to perform what was then called an abortion. WhenI 
asked him BEFORE the procedure if it was a baby, he lied to me and said “it” was justa 
“blob of cells” . Even though the procedure was horriﬁcally painful; NOTHING can 
compare to the devastating, heart-wrenching truth that I came to know approximately 
lOyears later; that is’ that I murdered my baby who had a beating heart, ﬁngers, toes, 
feelings, etc and that he (Jessie) felt the excruciating pain of being tom apart as he was 
sucked out of what should’ve been a place of safety; a place to grow; a place of love.I 
have seen a video of an actual abortion and what my poor baby went thru, I encourage 
you to watch one... you will never be the same. I am not. Abortion robbed my child of 
life and me of my child. 
The one thing that gives me solace and comfort is in knowing the truth that Jessie 
went to be with His loving God and Creator and that thanks to Jesus dying on that cross, 
and all that He suffered, that I am forgiven and will one day go to Heaven with Jesus 
and Jessie. I am sooo thankful that Jesus came to save and not to condemn; He loves the 
sinner but hates the sin. He hates the sin in part because sin hurts us and those we sin 
against and therefore hurts and grieves God. Thus Jesus has called us to follow Him, to 
live holy and to love; reproving the darkness and speaking up for the helpless, 
defenseless and innocent and that is why I and so many others are here today for He 
commands us all not to kill AND not to lie and as I and you know: ABORTION STOPS 
A BEATING HEART and the truth is that as God, in His Words to us, refers to the baby 
in its mother’s womb as an unborn CHILD just as even the Latin words EMBRYO& 
FETUS refer to the unborn baby as one’s UNBORN CHILD/OFF SPRING. The LIE IS: 
that that unborn baby is a part of the mother’s body (or a blob of cells!) BUT the 
TRUTH IS that that BABY has its OWN BODY with its own DNA, heart, emotions, 
brain, soul and blood. Innocent Blood that not only declares is not shed but our own 
laws that prohibit murder and a constitution that Declares we all, regardless, of our 
developmental maturity, sex, race, religion, or value to others has a GOD-Given right to 
LIFE, LIBERTY AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS. I do not think being found 
dismembered in a trash can or ﬂushed down a drain fulfills ANY of these rights, do 
you? 
Earn 2% :22 lf men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from 
her; and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished, according as the 
woman's husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.
My mother often told me to “do unto others as you would have others do unto 
you” as Jesus declares. I personally would NOT want someone to murder me (whether 
it be for convenience, cash, cruelty, fear, pride, etc) and tear me apart limb by limb, 
suction my brains out, poison me with a pill, or drown and bum me from the inside out 
by filling me and my mother’s womb with concentrated saline solution; would you‘? Of 
course not! So why choose to allow and thus enable someone to do this to an innocent 
child in the womb that just like you was created in the “Image of God” by a loving 
Heavenly Father who has a purpose and plan my life, your life and all children He 
creates. Should we not fear HIS loving chastisement?Should we not use our free will to 
choose to do no hann to another, especially a child whether in the womb or outside of 
the womb. 
Well regardless of what we mere humans think or feel or even that true science 
declares that the unborn child is a seperate human from the mother, God declares and 
commands us not to murder His creation, the creation He loves and has a purpose for 
and thus the ultimate war for those who want to kill or help kill the unborn and the 
innocent, is with God; is it not? Please make the right the choice and choose life and 
true goodness for mother and child. NO mother or father has ever been truly helped by 
murdering their own offspring. Plevqsﬂ Q/1,) .0 0 3,1 +6 ‘,.¢,,:HT- if U ,:E._ b 7-hqhk 0 LL tl\W\ 
Ree *'t3§:t3-48 For thou hast formed and gifted me my inward parts: thou hast 
covered me in my mother's womb. l will praise thee; for l am fearfully and wonderfully 
made: marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well. My substance 
was not hid from thee, when l was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the 
lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see my sub-stance, yet being unperfect; 
and in thy book all my mernhers were written, vvfrioh in continuance were fashioned, 
when as yet there was none of them. How precious also are thy thoughts unto me,O 
God! how great is the sum of them! If l should count them, they are more in number 
than the sand: when I awake, l am still with thee. 
Jer 1:46 Kill Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, Before l formed 
thee in the belly l knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb l sancti- 
fied thee, and l ordained thee a prophet unto the nations. 
Jar 29:11»1;3 For l know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the LORD, 
thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end. Then shall ye call 
upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and l will hearken unto you. And ye shall 
seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. 
Prev eziﬁaiﬁ These six things doth the LORD hate: yea, seven are an abomination 
unto him: A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, An heart 
that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, A false 
witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.
