Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary 
My name is Mary Salvatore and I live in Belfast. I am here because I believe in the sanctity of 
life and therefore I oppose LD1619. I believe that a child is a gift from God made in His image 
and likeness and given to be cherished and nurtured NOT murdered! 
Life begins at conception and is universally determined to be viable outside the womb at 24 
weeks. I find the thought of killing an innocent child heinous at any stage of development but 
particularly heinous at full term and for no particular reason. It is despicable to think that LD1619 
would allow for an abortion for the entire term of pregnancy up until moments before delivery for 
any or no reason at all. Those of you who are parents think of the first time you held your 
precious child and looked into their eyes. Can you truly imagine murdering them just to make 
your life simpler?I 
In Maine, we have a Safe Haven Law that says a baby can be dropped off at a hospital 
emergency room, law enforcement agency, medical service provider, or ﬁre station up until the 
31st day of life with no consequences to anyone. There are many people who would love to 
have a child but are unable to. Why murder an innocent child when there are people desperate 
to love and raise a child and give him or her a good home and a good life! 
If God forbid, this unspeakable bill becomes a law, our state, 65% of the population of which 
oppose late term abortion, would be on the most extreme end of the spectrum of abortion laws 
not only in the United States, but among all the Western countries of the world! Even the most 
liberal states, including California and New York, do not have such a radical abortion law. 
In the words of Mother Teresa, "If we accept that a mother can kill her own child how can we 
tell other people not to kill one another? If a mother can kill her own child what is left for us but 
to kill each other?" I beg you not to pass LD1916 into law! Thank you for your time.
