Megan Marquis
China Village
LD 776
Dear Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Megan Marquis, and I live in China Village, Maine. I am writing today to
ask you to support LD 776 because I believe I should have the right to control my 
own body.  After seeing several laws being made in other states by people who aren't 
Women, or Doctors, or the highest of all medical professionals- I am scared. I am 
scared to travel to those states because they don't believe that I am capable of making 
decisions for my own body. They think I am something less than my male counter 
parts - and if I was ever raped across state lines- I would not be able to legally speak 
up to advocate for myself- with those laws in place. So the moment you decide a 
woman is less than, or a woman can't control her own body, that's when you open the 
flood gates and take away everything else. The facts are more women die annually 
than men, when they're health isn't considered a valuable as males- because they aren't
guaranteed access to gender-affirming health care. According to the Guardian, 
Women died at a 32% higher rate than men in surgeries. And the AMA has also 
completed research mentioning disparities in medical school's curriculum that don't 
appropriately solve this problem either because they don't properly educate medical 
students about Women's health care. So, if we don't have equal representation, and 
our medical systems aren't there yet, the best thing our legislature can do - is to pave 
the way to make sure Maine women are safe to begin with -in its constitution. If this 
is passed, more women will come to Maine, because it will be a guaranteed safe 
haven. They will know that Maine will always value them as equals and that Maine 
will do its part state-wide to keep them safe. 
This is why I support LD776 and why all of the women in your life would benefit 
from this too. So, when you vote to support LD776- think about your sisters, your 
mother, grandmothers and think about what they would say - if you devalued them as 
people.   
