Hll!E%Al. Qllll @Alls AlllSaT 
Silllllll ASSAULT 
May 1, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Melissa Martin and I am submitting testimony today on behalf of the Maine Coalition 
Against Sexual Assault (MECASA), the organization which represents and serves Maine’s sexual 
violence prevention and response programs as well as Maine’s Children's Advocacy Centers. 
MECASA initiates and advocates for victim-centered public policy; provides expert training, 
technical assistance, and resources for providers and partners; and funds the service providers in 
your communities. 
MECASA is here today in support of LD 1619 an Act to Improve Reproductive Privacy Laws. Thank 
you to Governor Mills, Speaker Talbot Ross, President Jackson, and the numerous cosponsors for 
bringing this legislation. 
MECASA and the network of sexual assault support centers it represents oppose all eﬁorts that 
would force any person to carry a pregnancy to term against their will. Laws and policies restricting 
rights to end a pregnancy continue to disparately impact the most vulnerable members of our 
society while eroding bodily autonomy for all. Restrictions on abortion services and birth control 
disproportionately harm people who are LGBTQ+, who are members of the BIPOC community, 
and who are living in under-resourced, low-income communities. 
Ending sexual violence is rooted in the principle that the person, not another individual or the 
state, has the sole right to determine what happens to their body, including decisions about 
reproductive health care. Restrictions on these decisions affirm that others have the right to 
determine what happens to the body of another. Enabling decisions and bodily autonomy 
ultimately communicates an intolerance of sexual violence. All people must be entitled to agency, 
bodily autonomy, and self-determination. As part of the effort to prevent and end gender-based 
sexual violence, everyone must have access to the full range of comprehensive reproductive 
health care. We remain strongly behind reproductive healthcare options for all people, including 
birth control, gender-affirming care, prevention of sexually transmitted diseases, prenatal care, 
and abortion.
1
Ending sexual violence requires that all communities respect that the person, not another 
individual or the state, has the sole right to determine what happens to their body. This includes 
decisions about reproductive health care. in addition, survivors can and do become pregnant asa 
result of sexual violence and are more likely to experience forced pregnancy. Sexual violence isa 
violation of autonomy, and restrictions on reproductive health care, including restrictions on 
access to abortion services, only perpetuate the violation and are harmful and life-threatening. 
The list of negative outcomes and harms that may be caused by forced pregnancy includes, but is 
not limited to: 
0 Loss of sense of empowerment, bodily autonomy, and control — all which impact and can 
prevent trauma healing; 
¢ Greater chance of experiencing more violence, pain, and suffering; 
0 Interference with access to equitable educational opportunities and the completion of 
education, resulting in adverse outcomes, including reduced earnings; 
0 Exposure to potential criminal charges for trying to seek abortion services or simply based 
on their status as a pregnant person (for example: drug use during pregnancy); 
0 Becoming a parent forever when not ready or able to be or having to give up parental 
rights to a child; and, 
0 increased life~threatening complications from pregnancy and childbirth, especially for 
people who do not have access to appropriate healthcare. 
Thank you for your consideration. We hope you will support LD 1619 and would be pleased to 
answer any questions you might have. 
About Maine's Sexual Assault Service Providers 
One in five Mainers will experience sexual assault at some point in their lifetime? Each year, 
14,000 Mainers will experience sexual violence? 
Maine's sexual violence service providers provide free and confidential services across the state 
to victims/survivors of sexual harassment and sexual assault and those close to them, as well as to 
individuals who wish to increase their understanding of the issues. Just some of the services 
include a 24-hour statewide sexual assault helpline, crisis intervention and information, support 
groups, in-person accompaniment and advocacy through the medical and legal systems, and 
schooi- and community-based prevention education. Services are provided for a victim/survivor 
1 
Dumont, R. & Shaler, G. (2015). Maine Crime Victimization Report: Informing public poiicy for safer communities. 
Muskie School of Public Service, University of Southern Maine. 
2 
/bid.
2
