Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary. 
My name is Melissa McKenney RN, and I’m a resident of Fort Fairfield. I'm here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
I have been a registered nurse for over 35 years and practiced 22 of those years in the ICU.I 
have had experience working in Cardiac Rehab, recovery room, Day Surgery, Medsurg Floor, 
but one beautiful moment stands out in my memory. 
I remember going to college for nursing and eagerly anticipating my three months of obstetrics 
rotation. It was SO EXCITING to me that I would witness the very first moments of a child's life 
outside the womb ...and to learn in advance of all the wonderful ways that baby would grow. 
This included pre-and post-partum care, as well as experiences in the delivery room. 
I remember an unanticipated reaction to one of those births... 
I was listening to the sounds of the baby's fast heartbeats echoing throughout the room by the 
sound of the heart monitor and the gentle coaching by the nurses. Labor and delivery is one of 
the most difﬁcult and also one of the most beautiful things a woman can do. What a privilege to 
witness! After many contractions, little Harry appeared! Moments after delivery, he did 
something unusual. With his wispy long black hair sticking up all over, he held his dark beautiful 
eyes wide open! He looked as if he was in amazement as he took in his new world! 
What added to this sweet moment was that he initially didn't make a sound. It was completely 
silent in that delivery room as we watched. This was such a beautiful experience! He was so 
wide eyed, so alert, and so quiet perched there between the physician's hands. Everyone in that 
labor room was affected by that tender moment. 
We have an administration wanting to legalize abortion up through 9 months - FULL TERM 
BABIES - babies just like Harry! Babies who are just like the ones you've loved! 
Please, vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1619. This is murder of a child. Please kill this bill; not 
the child! 
Melissa ( Mitzi) McKenney RN 
Fort Fairfield, ME
