Honorable Senators and Representatives of the Judiciary Committee. My name is Michael Kamas I am 
an English Teacher who lives in Brewer Maine. As many have, I have come to day to express to you my 
opposition to LD1619 (Late Term Abortion) In truth I have been opposed to all laws allowing abortions 
for over 40 years. I believe children are precious in God's sight and are gifts affording us grace, joy and 
strength (bright hope for tomorrow). I also believe that the Sexual Revolution that has preoccupied this 
country for close to 50 years, has not resulted in freedom for women but in a degradation of the 
character of our people, twisted and expressed in Laws that allow for the disposal of human beings 
simply because of inconvenience as though they were refuse. The death toll is atrocious: Over 60 million 
killed in the US over 130,000 killed in the State of Maine. Do not try to tell me that most abortions are 
because of rape, or incest, or the saving of the mother's life, or the mercy killing of a child that will not 
survive except by extraordinary care. We know that most are unwanted pregnancies, so called mistakes, 
as though the couple that conceived the child had no control over their actions. Are we animals? I ﬁnd 
it hard to express the words that describe this particular Bill because it is so abhorrent to me. I am 
shocked that a group of people could have the arrogance to even introduce it, that so called intelligent, 
compassionate and caring people could make it a law. It is legalized lnfanticide! Before you pass this bill, 
remember what God says of this bill (in His 6th commandment) It is Raza! Razal Murder! Murder! How 
long will this arrogance rule? How long will this unchecked political power be unrestrained? How long 
will love and compassion cease. How long will this blind revenge (over Roe v Wade) corrupt common 
sense. Members of the Judiciary committee I implore you in the name of the gentle Savior Jesus Christ to 
cease from this course: do not let this bill come out of committee and shame You, shame the State, 
corrupt the people.
