Christian Civic: League of Maine 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, lam Mike 
McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic League of Maine 
envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom flourishes, families thrive, and life 
is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including in governance. 
I am here to testify in opposition to LD 776 RESOLUTlON, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Establish the Right to Bodily Autonomy -Sen. Craig Hickman ofKennebec 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine by declaring that every person hasa 
natural, inherent and inalienable right to bodily autonomy. The bill text describes the following process 
of sending this to the "people." However, sending what? My concern begins with having no idea what 
this bill seeks? While it is not technically a concept draft, it gives no defined information as to its intent. 
Does it seek to protect the women's right to abortion or does look to protect Maine people from the 
government forcing inoculations on them? Very different worlds. I would guess the courts and lawyers 
would love such a malleable law. As presented, this bill is a disservice to the public who do not know the 
intent, will have to guess today if they testify and will not be included in the further discussions as intent 
evolves. 
Clearly, a bill like this would see the courts possibly interpreting this constitutional amendment as the 
constitutional right to abortion with no limitations. If that is the intent, why not just say so for integrity? 
For those who shout, ”send it to the people," our Republic doesn't work that way. Our elected bodies 
are here to work these bills. if elected officials need help, such as from "the people," than vote for that 
help in this process. 
Thank you for your time and consideration today. 
Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your families. God bless, 
Mike 
Mike McClellan 
Policy Director 
Christian Civic League Maine 
70 Sewaii Street, /1\.1..1gusta, i\/iainrz (1)4330 Phone: (207) 3296148 
poiir;y(@cclinaineorg www.i:cim;1inc.nrg
