Testimony in Opposition to LD 1619 / Gould / Page 1 of2 
May 1, 2023 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1619 
An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
IVIy name is Nathan Gould, I am from Winterport, and I am here to give testimony 
in opposition to LD 1619, ”An Act to Improve l\/Iaine's Reproductive Privacy Laws." 
Today I am sure you have heard or will hear how few—around less than a third- 
of citizens support late-term abortion, and you will be presented with the accounts of 
individuals whose births were complicated with grim diagnoses yet survived and 
experienced life. I believe not only are there individual consequences to this bill—the 
right to life of the preborn baby being abrogated —but there are also consequences to 
our society and culture. 
I recognize that although I cling to the Name oflesus Christ as the only Name 
under heaven by which we must be saved, not all of my fellow citizens do. Undoubtedly 
there are those who differ with my faith, even within the sound of my voice. The 
government has no authority to establish or prohibit the free exercise of religion per 
both our Nation's Constitution and that of the State of Maine, nor should it have such 
power. The Founders of our Country and State rightly placed these protections. 
Nevertheless, the Founders also recognized our rights must come from Someone higher 
than ourselves: He Whom the Preamble of the Maine State Constitution refers to as the 
”Sovereign Ruler of the Universe."
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1619 / Gould / Page 2 of2 
Our unalienable rights are protected if we uphold that they are "endowed by our 
Creator," yet a concerning trend has developed in which our rights are increasingly 
dictated to us by government. lf our rights are granted by mere men, they can be taken 
by mere men. Thus it is disturbing to me that we would consider terminating the life of 
our most voiceless citizens —the preborn—continuing a prejudice against a 
demographic that cannot defend themselves: future generations. The power overa 
person's right to life belongs neither in your hands, distinguished members of the 
Judiciary Committee, nor mine. If we cannot protect the right to life of our most 
vulnerable, how can we hope to defend the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of 
happiness for anyone else? 
It brings open shame to me and to all of us that things have gone this far, far 
from “clumps of cells." That we are discussing the terminating of babies up to birth, 
with no limits based on viability, is a symptom of how far off course our society hasT 
gone. Though some may intend to help those in extreme and tragic cases with this 
legislation, it is a poor solution if it puts any baby at risk just because they are deemed 
an inconvenience. l ﬁrmly hold to the truth that all lives are valuable, created in God's 
image. 
l humbly and earnestly ask that you, members of the Committee, correct our 
course. l ask the Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass. Thank you for your time. 
Respectfully, 
Nathan C Gould 
Winterport
