Pam Holland, Owls Head, ME 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today re: LD1619. 
While in college, l interned with a US Senator, who took his duty 
seriously representing ALL the people of the state of Iowa. I am 
now asking you to do the same. On April 11 of this year, Forbes 
published an article titled, ”How Americans Really Feel About 
Abortion" . Just 20% support it during the third trimester. While 
stats were not broken down by state, it would be quite the 
statistical anomaly if l\/laine were above 50%. I urge you to 
represent ALL Mainers.A 
Maine's current abortion law represents the best possible 
compromise to the line in the sand drawn between the pro- 
choice and pro-life camps. Abortion is legal for any reason up to 
24 weeks, and after that for certain exceptions. The story of Erin 
Wolf is heartbreaking, but current law can be amended to 
include cases like hers. It has been said that "The best 
diplomatic agreement is one in which neither side is satisﬁed." 
That is where we are in Maine and we ought not to be trying to 
move the plumb line. Creating public policy when constituents 
vary widely in their values is not easy. It is true you cannot 
legislate morality, but legislation creates the boundaries of 
morality within which a society operates. The language of 
LD1619 is too permissive and could easily be interpreted to 
allow abortion for any reason far beyond far beyond viability. 
Mainers don't want this.
Furthermore, extending the legal limit for abortion would 
almost certainly increase the risk of mental health issues for 
pregnant women. A friend of mine had an abortion while she 
was still dating the man she would later marry. She was not 
prepared for the depression she would experience--depression 
around what would have been the due date of her baby, 
depression around the date she had the abortion. She and her 
husband went on to have 4 beautiful girls, but the child she 
chose not to have weighed on her for many years. She was told 
the whole thing would take a few minutes, she'd receive some 
pain medicine, and then it would all be over, but it wasn't over, 
not for her. She got her abortion at 10 weeks. l cannot imagine 
the risk for mental health issues if the abortion is performed 
after 24 weeks. 
Honestly, I don't know anyone who wants someone else making 
their healthcare decisions for them and l totally empathize with 
those who say this decision should be between the patient and 
the doctor. The thing is, in this scenario, there are two patients 
in the room with the doctor, and one of them has been deeply 
marginalized by our society. One of them has no voice. For 
those of us who believe that all life is precious no matter where 
it is on the continuum of life, who are part of the community 
that is the State of Maine, for the sake of women's health, for 
the sake of the child, please vote no.
