Senator Carney, Representative l\/loonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Randy Gauvin from Farmington, and I stand opposed to L. D. 1619. l have 
known Janet Mills for many years and have long respected her even before she 
became Governor. So I find myself disheartened and disappointed by this bill and the 
reasons for her wanting this. I find it hard to believe that her only goal is to push an 
abortion agenda regardless of how it will affect the sensible and thoughtful people 
throughout Maine. 
I am a retired physician assistant and prior to this, a paramedic, having a combined 
career of over 40 years in emergency medicine. 
|’m concerned about the terminology,“ ...an abortion may be performed only when it is 
necessary in the professional iudgment of a physician ” . This seems strategically vague. 
What makes an abortion necessary? 
ls the impetus for this bill the heart-wrenching story of a family who would have hada 
baby with severe spinal dysplasia ’? l have nothing but sympathy for this family and their 
situation. But as sad as this case is, this condition is rare, occurring only 2.4 times in 
10,000 pregnancies. To change the existing law to cover a case like this is to clearly try 
to justify a calculated overreach; to have l\/laine become “a shelter from the storm and 
a beacon of hope” for those seeking abortions across the country, made more frenzied 
by the repeal of Roe v. Wade, a decision that has had absolutely no affect on the status 
of abortions in Maine. 
What could be done instead? A more realistic approach would be to maintain the 
current viability status and to avoid an all-or-nothing approach by creating a roster of 
situations that would qualify for an exemption supporting the individual medical needs 
of a patient, and which would allow the physician the guidance they would need to 
make these difficult decisions. 
Nowadays, the idea that a medical decision being a private matter between a woman 
and her provider is overly simplistic. A medical provider needs to consider howa 
decision would not only impact the lives of their patients, but their own lives, their 
families, medical practice, office staff, partners, affiliated hospitals, malpractice 
coverage, and dealing with the increased complexity of insurance companiesthat pay 
the bills. 
Regardless of the intent, under the new law any woman who wishes to have an 
abortion for any reason at any time, could simply ask her doctor to sanction it. 
Realistically, what doctor could find a reason to say no, especially if there are no 
consequences? 
l beg you, please think long and hard before making this decision. Thank you for 
your time in listening to all of us in what l’m sure is a challenging and thankless task.
