Senator Carney and Representative Moonen. Honorable Members of the Joint Standing_ 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Reynold Dubois, but please call me Rey. I am from 
Bangor. I am testifying in opposition to the three abortion bills that are being reviewed' 
today. 
We all know that LD 1619, LD 776, and LD 1343 will increase the occurrence and 
decrease the penalties for providing abortions in Maine. Increasing access to anything, 
whether it be marijuana, gambling, or abortion will increase its frequency. Maine doesn't 
need any more laws that will increase the occurrence of inappropriate behaviors. 
I was born in Caribou, ME, and grew up in Fort Kent. ME. My parents taught me 
that you need to respect and love the people around you. Up in Fort Kent, there Wasn'ta 
whole lot of "entertainment" . We just hung out with people. We were in touch with 
reality, and we knew the difference between right and wrong. Almost everyone wasa 
Democrat back then, because Democrats seemed to emphasize protecting the 
environment and helping people who were down on their luck or physically 
handicapped. Iworked on Senator Ed Muskie's campaign. We even had a genuine 
Catholic President! 
But the political landscape evolved over the years to the point that a misguided and 
misinformed Supreme Court legislated that abortion would be legal in all states. 
Abortion blossomed as a business and it grew dramatically. I grew up, too, and realized 
that what my mother told me many times was true. "They are killing babies!" 
I can now speak clearly about the reality of abortion. Human life begins at 
conception. That's biology and it's the truth. Arguments to the contrary simply 
manipulate the truth. Killing a human life at age 5 years old, or at l year old, or right 
before birth, or between viability and 9 months, or in the first trimester of life, is still 
killing a human being. Period. Regardless of how people are trying to manipulate reality 
right here in this chamber, right here in front of you, abortion still kills a human being. 
Don't be manipulated into believing all the lies you have heard today from pro- 
abortion men and women... who are all present because their parents chose life. Do the 
right thing when it comes time to vote these bills out of committee! 
Vfhy would you ever vote for legislation that will increase the number of children 
who will be sacrificed to big business and a culture that says kids are an inconvenience 
worthy of death? You'd have to live the rest of your lives knowing that you contributed 
to the death of more people. Use those morals that your parents taught you. Look 
Governor Janet Mills, Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross, Senator Craig Hickman, and 
Representative Laura Supica right in the eyes and say "No, this is not right!" You all 
know the difference between right and wrong. Do what is right! I know you will have to 
live with the political consequence, but you will live the rest of your lives knowing you 
did the right thing. Maine doesn't need this dramatically expanded (or ANY expanded) 
access to more abortions. 
Thank you for your attention and your patience for my passion in regards to abortion. 
O5/O1/2023
