Public Hearing Testimony before the Maine Judiciary Committee 
on the Subject of Abortion Legislation - May 2023 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary, my name is Robert Manchester a resident of Turner, Maine. I am here to 
testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
In the United States of America, before the Civil War, many land owners in the South 
owned slaves. The legislators of those states helped ensure that those owners could exert 
maximum control over the enslaved men, women and children. They made sure the 
slaves were not fully human. They had few rights. Even basic human rights were 
withheld. The law makers of those states, for census reasons, calculated that a slave was 
only 3/5th of a human. Laws were passed to make sure the Master fully controlled the 
slave. 
Today, the mother is the Master over the child. Legislators in many states have made 
sure the child is not fully human. Only some fraction of a human. I’m guessing about 
60%. At present, in the State of Maine, before 24 weeks, the child is called a fetus,a 
clump of tissue or a thing. Legislatures in Maine want to extend that non human status to 
birth. Some states would extend it to after a child is born. 
I’m the father of two adopted girls from China; so I am familiar with abortion. Abortion 
on an industrial scale. When I was in China to bring my girls home; it was cormnon for 
women to approach me and say with tears in their eyes, in broken English “Lucky Girl”. 
They knew how children in the womb in China were treated. 
I do not want Maine to move deeper into this dark world of dehumanizing children. 
Including those in the womb. They have no say. They have few, if any, rights. They are 
innocent. They are made in the image of God. What does God think about the “Law 
Makers” of the Great State of Maine? Is it the Way Life Should Be? 
United States history; including those horriﬁc events surrounding the Civil War, tells us 
this is pure MADNESS. 
May I, 2023
