Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Ruth Rogers and I am a resident of Bangor. I am 
testifying in opposition to LD 1619: An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy 
Laws. 
Two people see the same pregnancy, but their realities can vastly differ. One believes in 
the creation of a new human being. While the other might say: 
“Your life is a mess, you can't have a baby. You don't even know the father’s last 
name. Nobody will love you if you have a kid. How can you afford a baby if you 
can't afford an abortion? The baby is severely handicapped. The baby will be 
born into poverty. You can't adopt out your own flesh and blood. You'll lose your 
scholarship. You’re not ready to be parents." And so on.... 
I believe that those who offer abortion are well intentioned and have a heart for people 
in difficult situations. But in the state of Maine, we must stop the practice of telling 
vulnerable women that, "The best we can do is to take your money and kill your baby." 
I believe that women are inherently strong and should not be told that they can't do 
something they're perfectly capable of doing. There are abundant resources available to 
assist parents in unplanned pregnancy without offering abortion. 
Honorable Committee Members, I believe that youave can come up with brilliant 
solutions that don't terminate the life of a tiny maturing human being in the womb. 
I urge you to use your position to increase support for pregnant women that does not 
include abortion by addressing all of their challenges, such as safe places for pregnant 
students to live and complete their education, chastity programs for youth, true 
resources centers where they don't charge for pregnancy tests, ultrasounds and 
baby/momma gift shops with diapers, maternity clothes, etc. 
Please think about that for a second. Abortion businesses charge considerable fees for 
all of their services, while true pregnancy resource centers offer ALL of their services for 
free. Which one is truly helping women? 
I urge you to judge justly. Please vote ”ought not to pass" LD 1619. 
I know you can do better for the citizens of Maine. Thank you.
