According to your duties of office, please read the entirety of this statement. I am writing in opposition 
to the passage of LD776 &  LD1343.   
The baby in the womb is just that, it is not the mother, it is not the father, it is a whole new creation, it is 
a whole new person. A baby becomes a person at conception. When sperm meets egg. A new body and 
being is created. In nine months unless something tragic and unplanned happens, that baby comes out 
of the womb a nd begins life outside of the womb, just as it was living life inside the womb, but to a 
greater experience. Much like the rest of our years on earth.  
The basis of personage can NOT be a heartbeat, as how many of our citizens have pacemakers that 
enable t hat for them. The basis of personage can NOT be the first breath, as how many of our citizens 
have been on respirators, and oxygen tanks, how about even sleep apnea machines. Their lives are not 
dispensable then, and neither is the child in the womb.  The child in the womb depends on the health of 
his mother to the extent that the adult on a feeding tube depends on the tube. The feeding tube is NOT 
the adult. The baby is NOT the mother. The value of a baby  or any life for that matter, must also not 
cling t o its desirability ( by parentage) , circumstances, convenience or timing. That would create a real 
problem when we think of the elderly in our society and the burden, inconvenience, timing of health 
issues, etc that we as children sometimes become respons ible for.  
Tell me the difference from the last day of week 40 to the first day of week 41. That baby did not change 
immensely over that 24 hours. In fact, many children that are born at week 25 can survive outside of the 
womb. They may require the same so rt of dependency on modern medical equipment that our elderly 
or our sick do. You would not kill someone in a coma if you knew for a fact, they would be out of that 
coma in 9 months. Let us stop killing our babies that are coming out in 9 months as well.  
When the holocaust was fresh, we did not like to see the pictures of the wounded, the dead, the 
mistreated. When slaves were being beaten, only a few dared to read books and see pictures that 
exposed it. As our citizens hung our citizens of color we did no t want to look. How many of you have 
seen an abortion? Have you watched the movie UNPLANNED ?  You ought not vote something into 
access and availability that your own eyes cannot bear to watch.  What will you tell your grandchildren if 
you are so lucky to h ave one someday? That you are partially responsible for the death of the unborn. 
That is not a legacy I would want to leave.  
At what point should we start having concern for a child being butchered by the parent? If I saw my 
neighbor killing her 1 minute old son, then I would intervene with whatever means, or call the cops. And 
the act would be called child abuse, or murder. But this “medical intervention,” this is going on in a place 
that ought not be associated with slaughter, murder, or abuse. And yet, it is.  
A fetus is just a word that mean “little one” in Latin.” Let’s stop calling it a word the illiterate do not 
understand and start calling them humans. ONE  of OUR OWN OFFSPRING!  What is being done is 
murder. In the worst conglomeration of circumstan ces, should the innocent be punished, ( MURDERED) 
for the crime of an offender? Have we not been told all of our lives that two wrongs never make a right? 
What of the comparisons we could make between courage and fear? Despair and hope? Selfishness and 
com passion?  I request the research committee to inquire the reasons for abortions across the united 
states and see if such a study shows that the majority of abortions sought after have not been medical, 
incest or rape  motivated, but that the access to abor tion is becoming the new birth control method of 
popularity.  
 If the learned , the  literate and  the powerful  among us do understand all of this , then the blood is on 
their hands, your hands if you will,  as a legislator, rule maker, standard setter an d example. I implore 
you to let your decisions and your legacy be one you are proud of, and that your consciences will lend 
peace to.   
