Senator Anne Carney, Representative Matt Moonan, and members of the Judiciary Committee, thank 
you for holding space today for this vital issue. 
l’m Shannon Carr, a board certiﬁed Ob-Gyn with subspecialty fellowship training in family planning. l’m 
based in Maine and have worked in another state helping people and families through later abortion 
procedures. 
l’m not going to resort to customary proabortion rhetorical maneuvers. This is a hard conversation we’re 
having today. I get it. In the very uncommon event that someone presents later in pregnancy for an 
abortion, l’m asking that you please try to understand that something has gone terribly wrong. 
Something tragic has happened to the baby, something life-changing has happened in the pregnant 
person’s life. Further, and more so today, a myriad of nearly insurmountable barriers to abortion 
access push pregnancies later and later in gestation. These people find themselves in one of the worst 
life circumstances that they never could have imagined and are facing one of the hardest decisions 
they’ve ever had to make. Good decisions are often not easy ones, and these folks must grapple with, 
hold, and honor conflicting deeply held truths and beliefs. 
Unless you’ve been in this situation yourself, as a patient or family member, or have cared for people 
who seek this uncommon but necessary lifesaving healthcare, it’s nearly impossible to understand the 
gravity of decision-making and grief that these people are experiencing. 
The folks facing these previously unimaginable circumstances later in pregnancy need this safe, time- 
sensitive compassionate and necessary care. When l’ve met with patients before, during, and after 
their later abortion process, we’ve cried together and shared in the profound sadness and confusion 
that can follow and have talked about ways to move fon/vard. And rather than regret, my patients have 
expressed heartfelt gratitude about having been able to get the care that they and their families 
needed. 
l‘m asking everyone here today to try and suspend your ideology, and that we don’t oversimplify this 
issue. These are very personal sensitive decisions and medical decisions that should be private and 
shared between patients and providers. These decisions are complicated and nuanced. We all live 
complicated and nuanced lives, don’t we? 
Abortion restrictions and outright bans always have and always will hurt the most vulnerable among us. 
We can do better in Maine. This is a hard conversation, l get it. Let’s allow Maine to be a place where 
people can have these hard conversations and get the care that they very much need and deserve.
