Sharon Moore 
Hampden 
An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
LD 1619 
Oppose 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judicial Committee: 
My name is Sharon Moore, from Hampden. i come before you today to speak in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
i want to share with you 3 points in considering this bill. 
First, we need to determine if a third-trimester fetus is a human being, having 
the Constitutional Right to Life. 
Does the barrier of the mother's ﬂesh determine its status as human? One minute 
and a few inches out of the woman's body, does it suddenly become a human 
being? Third-trimester abortions are inhumane and unnecessary. Fully-developed 
babies are not part of the mother's body. They are indeed unique humans, as any 
parent of a premie would tell you. 
...yet women are given the misinformation that the things growing inside them are 
just part of their own body, not a separate person. Later on, many are deeply 
grieved by what they have been persuaded to do to their child. 
To be clear, to end the lives of innocent Human Beings who can survive outside of 
the temporary sack of their mother's ﬂesh is a Crime against Humanity.
Next, third-trimester abortions are an attack on our Democracy. 
0 Maine citizens are not being heard and respected. The majority of 
Mainers oppose abortions in the third trimester 
0 There is a huge lack of transparency in this situation, and too many 
secrets behind closed doors. This is not Democracy. 
0 Voters were promised by our Governor that there would be no 
changes to l\/|aine's abortion laws. Many Mainers have no idea that 
this is even happening, and will be shocked when they learn about it. 
Finally, abortions are Planned Parenthood's gift that keeps on giving in the world 
of Systemic Racism. 
Dr. Alveda King remarked on the error of Planned Parenthood ’s 
abortion-on-demand corporate ideology: She stated: 
“The most obvious practitioner of racism in the United States today is 
Planned Parenthood, an organization founded by the eugenicist Margaret 
Sanger and recently documented as ready to accept money to eliminate 
black babies.” 
From the CDC: 
White women had the lowest abortion rate (6.2 abortions per 1,000 women, 
and Black women had the highest abortion rate (24.4 abortions per 1,000 
women). 
lt’s time to help pregnant women find solutions to their pregnancy fears, 
and support life-affirming choices for all Maine citizens. 
Thank you
