Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Su Leigh. l am a resident of Oakland, Maine and am here to testify in 
opposition to LD1619. 
Maine has existing legislation that allows abortion until viability; in other words untila 
baby can survive outside the womb. Current law makes no allowance for other options 
for the mother. If abortion is performed at the supposed threshold of viability 22-23 
weeks into a woman’s pregnancy, that baby suffers greatly. 
And our society is fine with this? 
Do we truly live in a society where life, like picnic plates and grocery bags, has become 
disposable? This is civilization? 
To now have proposed legislation, LD1619, that goes beyond civility — it is downright 
barbaric. A bill that allows for the destruction of a baby at any point, up to birth, is 
legislating murder. And our society is fine with this? 
Abortion does not happen without risks to the woman carrying the baby, but her health 
isn’t part of the narrative. Only her ‘choice’ is addressed. 
lf this were truly about protecting women, then surely we would be taking into 
consideration the millions of female babies who never get to grow up. 
The current law addresses the aspects of rape and incest, based on the sheer length of 
time that it allows the ‘procedure ’ to happen. lt is more than adequate for someone to 
exercise their ‘choice.’ We do not need to go beyond that. 
I have had conversations with many individuals, whether they consider themselves pro- 
choice or pro-life, they do not agree with full-term abortion. People in Maine, 
regardless of where they find themselves on this issue or the political spectrum, still 
have morals. We do not condone infanticide. 
We also do not want our state to be a destination for such an act. This would be one of 
the most extreme abortion laws in the nation. This is no light in the window, this isa 
dark and abhorrent proposition. 
This bill is far too extreme, without merit, and ought not to pass. 
l appreciate your time and urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass. 
Respectfully, 
Su Leigh , Oakland Maine
