Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Susan Forbes, and I am a resident of Presque isle. i am here to testify in opposition 
to LD 1619. 
Usually the death of a child is a sad event. So very sad. Yet when it comes to induced abortion, 
somehow whether the child was “wanted” or not has great weight. l imagine most of the people 
who are shot, stabbed, poisoned, or otherwise killed every day were “unwanted ” by someone-- 
their killer, at least. 
In contrast: the unborn. Current state law allows them to be killed before “viability ” . There is also 
language permitting the baby's life to be terminated after viability “to preserve the life or health 
of the mother’ . I say the state of Maine allowing abortion through the time of viability (plus the 
provision for the life of the mother thereafter) is ENOUGH permission to kill. 
Casting aside how sad it is that a mother has regarded her child so “unwanted ” as to seek some 
procedure or some agent to tem1inate that life—-current law allows this through the point of 
viability. l mean, if that child were somehow magically outside of his or her mother's womb, he 
or she would not be able to survive—likely even with the best neonatal care. That seems like 
ENOUGH provision for abortion. ENOUGH opportunity for a young woman to risk long term 
regret. 
Yet, this is apparently not ENQUGH for the many cosponsors of LD 1619. This bill would allow 
abortion at any point in the pregnancy. Babies that could be viable outside the womb can now 
be killed and caused to leave the womb. 
l don’t believe we are serving women better to lengthen the gestational window for legal 
abortion. What pain will that cause? What emotional distress? What unending grief and 
feelings of guilt? Even self-loathing. 
Who will bear these emotional burdens for a woman who felt legally permitted to starve, poison, 
dismember, and expel the would-be fruit of her own womb? 
Will the physician whose professional judgment permitted it? 
Will the governor who requested this bill?' 
Will the many cosponsors of LD 1619? _ 
Abortion through “viability ” . That's ENOUGH. Please vote ‘ought not to pass’.
