Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary. 
My name is Suzette Furrow, I am a resident of Bangor. I am here to testify in opposition to 
LD1619. This bill would allow an Abortion at ANY time for ANY Reason. This bill is too extreme 
and unnecessary. The current law already addresses viability and allows for medical necessity in 
case of still birth, ectopic pregnancy, etc. 
lt has been noted in local newspapers that the abortion rate in Maine has decreased. I have 
never read an article about anyone complaining that they were not able to have an abortion in 
this state or that they were denied an abortion. 65% of Mainers do not support late term 
abortion. There is no evidence to support that expanding abortions rights is necessary. Maine 
has an elderly population; instead of promoting the ending of a life that is just beginning, we 
should encourage new life. A baby is the greatest gift. All of us in this room, democrats, 
republicans and unenrolled have been given this wonderful gift by our mothers. Life has no 
political affiliation. 
lf this bill passes, Maine will have one of the most extreme abortion laws in the country. I 
support life in a state where the slogan is, ”Maine the way LIFE should be" . There is alsoa 
popular show with the title Maine LIFE. When you drive into the state of Maine, the sign 
greeting you reads, "Welcome Home" . When we think of home, we think of the place where we 
live, where there is love and where there is LlFE. Maine should not be a state where people 
come to end the life of a baby that is trying to have a home. 
My father, the late Representative Arthur Verow was a democrat. He was also pro-life. He 
came to the capitol building with our family for the Hands Around the Capitol and supported 
pro-life legislation. This is not a political party issue this is a humanity issue. You cannot have 
human rights or civil rights without the sanctity of life, you cannot have women's rights either 
since half of the babies aborted are female. For the sake of the future generations of our state 
and the reputation of our state I urge you all to oppose this bill as well as the other two Bills 
dealing with abortion, LD 776 and LD1343.
