Testimony of Tammy Howe - Against LD 1619 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Tammy Howe, I live in North Bervvick, I am testifying in opposition to LD 1619, An 
Act to improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws. Thank you for the opportunity to address 
the Committee today. 
I am testifying against this bill because I am pro-life, I believe that life starts at conception and is 
a divine miracle. LD 1619 is misleading, while the bill states it is “an act to improve Maine’s 
reproductive privacy laws” it is much more than that. It is an extreme bill that will allow elective, 
on demand abortions up to birth. Otherwise known as “late-term" abortion, this bill will align 
Maine with only a few states in the US and 1 of 7 (1) countries that have the most permissive, 
egregious abortion laws in the world, ending the life of an unborn baby after viability at around 
24 weeks. ls this what we want our great state of Maine to be known for? 
I am also testifying against this bill because I am a woman. Women have been uniquely created 
with the ability to nurture and create life within our own bodies. The LD 1619 bill is 
masquerading as a women's reproductive healthcare bill, while putting women’s reproductive 
health at risk by removing the penalties of a Class C crime for any person that is not licensed, 
who knowingly performs or assists with an abortion. That is not protecting privacy as the bill 
states, but instead, removing the penalties for unlicensed abortionists. A license to perform an 
abortion is required within our healthcare system in Maine for a very important reason; to protect 
a mother and her unborn child from very serious injury, up to and including death from an 
improperly trained abortionist. Maine lawmakers will potentially be creating an unsafe 
environment for women who may be considering the option of abortion. With the removal of 
these penalties, there will be no consequences for anyone performing abortions without a 
medical license. This could be a critically dangerous precedent to set. What other types of 
procedures will Maine not require a medical license for? 
The babies, whose lives are being terminated are the hope and the future of Maine. We are not 
to be bystanders when we know the defenseless aren’t able to speak up for themselves. We are 
to “Rescue those being led away to death; hold back those staggering toward slaughter. If you 
say, “But we knew nothing about this,” does not he who weighs the heart perceive it? Does not 
he who guards your life know it? VWII he not repay everyone according to what they have done?” 
(Proverbs 24:11-12) This bill is not ethical; you have the power to stop it.» 
Please think about the consequences of this unnecessary, drastic bill and oppose it. Most of 
Maine’s citizens do not agree with late-term abortion (2) and do not want to see this 
reprehensible, highly opposed LD 1619 bill pass. 
Thank you for your time, 
Tammy Howe, North Bervvick 
(1) The Washington Post and Right to Life 
(2) Speak Up for Life handout.
