Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Virginia Woodman and 
I am a resident of Windham, Maine. I am here to testify in opposition to 
L.D. 16 19. 
It is important for you to know that I have agonized over the wording of this 
testimony and prayed that my words might somehow enlighten and change 
the hearts of those legislators who currently support L.D. 1619. 
Abortion has become a common word in today’s vocabulary. The word is so 
common I do not think people actually take the time to embrace what the 
procedure truly entails. 
Abortionists must deliver a dead baby. Therefore, a substance such as 
potassium chloride must be injected into the baby’s brain or heart via the 
mother’s abdominal wall to ensure he is dead in the womb. The mother’s 
cervix has been dilating for two days via a substance inserted by the 
provider. This partially dilates the birth canal, but not enough for the baby’s 
body to be delivered intact. The body must be reduced in size to pass 
through the canal. This is accomplished by dismembering the limbs, 
vacuuming out the brain matter and crushing the skull. Maybe you knew 
this, but to my astonishment many of my friends did not. This makes me 
think that society as a whole does not know, either.
At this point, I must ask, “When did babies become the enemy?” In the 
sixties, “the pill” was an almost taboo subject. Then came the seventies and 
ﬁrst trimester abortions. Next came second trimester abortions and now 
this? How have we sunk so low that killing full term babies is to be 
considered acceptable and a right in Maine? What’s worse to me is that the 
writer and labeler of this bill apparently felt it needed a title like “An Act to 
Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy LaWs” to pass. What??? This bill is 
not about paperwork. It is about full term abortion (infanticide) Without 
penalty by anyone who will perform it. The safety net words such as 
“medically ” necessary and “penalties ” have been removed in the amended 
form. I am angry and ashamed that some members of our legislature feel 
deception is an acceptable method to accomplish their goals. 
I hope you will consider my words and that L.D. 1619 will not pass. Thank 
you for your time.
