“Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, good morning. 
My name is Virginia Farrin and I am a resident of Boothbay Harbor. I am 
here to testify in opposition to LD 1619 and two other similar bills, 776 and 
1343. 
Current Maine law already allows abortions for pregnant women who desire 
one, and allows access for emergency late term abortions. There is ll 
good reason to expand this law. 
Gov. Mill’s during her campaign Q31 say that she supported the present 
Maine law also. Was she telling the truth during her campaign when she 
said “l have no plans to change the current law”? Did she lie by omission. 
Does anyone change their mind this quickly on a topic such as this? She 
may not have had a plan at the time, but now she clearly does. 
We have been brainwashed to think that abortion is just a clump of cells, 
and that it does not matter. Viability is not a good argument for abortion. 
Do we kill all people who are dependent on others for their sun/ival? 
The photos included in my testimony are from late term abortions. Can you 
look at them without weeping? Look at those babies and tell us that you 
plan to do this to more children. Where is the humanity? ls this another tool 
for population control and expanded opportunities for Planned Parenthood 
to traffic body parts? 
There are many women’s health centers, and pregnancy resource centers 
in this State that will help women immensely (and support men as well) 
who have nowhere to turn when they are in this difficult situation. Namely: 
First Choice in Waterville 
Care Net in Brunswick 
Zoe in Rockport and 
First Step in Bangor are just a few of the resource centers. 
Murder is not the way to go. I am appalled that this bill is before the 
Legislature in our great State. This is evil and shame on the sponsors. 
I will leave you with Matthew 19:14 
“Jesus said, ‘Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for 
the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.”’ 
Thank you for your time and consideration. Please stand against this evil 
and vote not to pass on LD 1619.
I

\
\
n
1
7\
K 
\, 
\ ~
w

