Senator Carney, Representative Moonen & Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary my name is William Coll andI 
live in Union Me. l am here to testify in opposition to LD1619, LD1343, 
& LD935. 
Broadly speaking, we cannot determine when a fetus owns life, and when it 
owns a soul. It safe to say, that we do not know when that occurs. I believe that it 
occurs at inception. Others may believe differently. Regardless, because we 
cannot determine the time of this ownership we cannot ethically assume thata 
fetus is without life in any stage of its’ development. Our ethics must allow life to 
prevail as the moral principle that governs our activity. Otherwise we sanction the 
negative and allow economic and sensual gratification to rule. It is our obligation 
and our duty to permit ethics to prevail. LD1619 prevents this and is unethical. 
Specifically, we know that when a man and a woman join in a union while 
unprotected during the reproductive cycle of the female their sexual activity 
often results in the formation of a fetus. Not recognizing this is irresponsible 
behavior on both participating parties. However, many times in the aftermath of 
such a union abortion seems to be a convenient remedy of the consequences. 
Regardless, the created fetus whether desired or not the truth is that the fetus is 
an innocent party and, that status never changes. Under the provisions of LD1619 
should abortion be chosen the innocent fetus will bear the consequences of an 
act 6% performed by others and will suffer by being dismembered in a brutal 
way up to the time of birth. Under LD1619 the State of Maine will indifferently 
sanction the killing of an innocent who is a victim of the parties who created this 
life . Even an owner of a vehicle illegally parked cannot transfer his fine to others 
but, LD1619 will permit the execution of an innocent life by allowing the sexually 
active parties to transfer the consequences of their union to the innocent fetus. 
LD1619 promotes sexual promiscuity, promotes irresponsible behavior and, isa 
state sanction of murder. LD1619 must be struck down with malice. At some time 
we will have to answer to God for what we do and do not do. With a clear 
conscience we must protect the unborn and render LD1619 trash.
