May 15, 2023  
 
Senator Donna Bailey  
Representative Anne Perry  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services ; 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comm ent on LD 1856, Resolve, to Study the Establishment of a 
MaineCare Public Health Plan . I thank Representative Arford for her collaboration  on th e proposed 
ame ndment text, and for  and her consideration of the capacity of th e Office  of Affordable Health Care  
(OAHC) . I am taking a position neither for nor against the bill because I defer to the Committee to 
determine wh ether clarifications to the Office ’s existing study mandate are nece ssary to meet the 
Committee ’s objectives.  
 
As I have mentioned in some recent testimony, OAHC  has a mandate under P.L. 2021 Ch. 518 to provide 
a report t o this committee by January 1, 202 4 studying a variety of policy options to improve 
affordability for consumers, which include a public option, a Medicaid buy -in, expanding MaineCare 
eligibility, and offering additional state -funded subsidies to consumers through the Maine Health 
Insurance Marketplace . I view this existing study requi rement as a directive to provide a landscape of 
the wide range of options that could potentially improve the affordability of health insurance, and 
therefore health care, for consumers . I would expect the  report to serve as a foundation for work next 
year to identify one or more of th ose options for further in -depth study  and policy development.  
 
The Office of Affordable Health Care is not yet in a po sition  to recommend specific policies or policy 
directions  to this Committee. I recognize, however, that ther e is interest among members of the 
Committee in various models of public option plans, and I view this amendment  as an op portunity for 
the Committee to request additional focus on those policies , if it wishe s to,  in a structure that is feasible 
and does not duplicate the e xisting stu dy requirement . If the Committee would like to prio ritize in-depth 
stud y of public option models a nd their impact on consumers and Maine ’s overall health insurance 
market, I am happy to follow that direction.  
 
In summary, I want to ensure that the report the Office pr oduces is useful to the Committee in its work, 
and view this bill as an opportu nity to ensure that the stu dy requirement is ali gned with  the 
Committee ’s interest s and expectations.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Meg Garratt -Reed  
Executive Director, Office of Affordable Health Care  

