LD 1856  
Proposed Sponsor ’s Amendment  
Proposed by Rep. Arford  
FOR HCIFS REVIEW  AT PUBLIC HE ARING  
 
DRAFT COMMITTEE AMENDMENT:  
LD 1856 , Resolve, to Study the Establishment of a MaineCare Public Health Plan  
Amend the bill by striking everything after the enacting clause and before the summary  and 
inserting in its place the following:  
Sec. 1.   Office of Affordable Health Care study of health car e and cover age. 
Resolved:  That, when conducting the study required by Publi c Law 2021, chapter 518, the 
Office of Affordable Health Care, shall consider  the c reation of a public option health benefit 
plan that takes the form of a fully -publicly admin istered plan eligible for advanced  premium tax 
credits th rough the Mai ne Health I nsurance Marke tplace established  under T itle 22, section 
5403 . The office  shall also consider other mode ls to address the availab ility and affordability of 
health cover age in the State and ways that the State may leverage federal -state innovation  
waivers to imp rove the fully -insured h ealth insurance  market .  
SUMMARY  
This amend ment replaces the r esolve . Public Law 2021 , chapter  518 directs the Office of 
Afford able Health Care to study the effects of policies aimed at improving health care 
affordability and coverage, and the effects of the policies on enrollment in comprehensive health 
coverage , including consideration of a public option health benefit plan .  This amend ment 
requires  the office to consider  the c reation of a public option health benefit plan  that takes the 
form of a fully -publicly admin istered plan eligible for advanced  premium tax credits th rough the 
Maine Health I nsurance Marke tplace . The amendment also directs the office  to consider other 
models to address the availab ility and affordability of h ealth cover age in the State and ways that 
the State may leverage federal -state innovation  waivers to imp rove the fully -insured h ealth 
insurance  market .  
 
 
