The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA 
members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, 
amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers 
from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933).
Alison  Sucy,  Chief Operating Officer and Director  of Government  Affairs,  
on Behalf  of the Maine  Tourism  Association
In Favor of
LD 559, An Act to Increase the Number of Hours Certain Minor Students May Work Under Certain 
Circumstances
Senator  Tipping, Representative  Roeder, and Members  of the Joint  Standing  Committee  on 
Labor  and Housing:
My name  is Alison  Sucy  and I am the Chief  Operating  Officer  and Director  of Government  
Affairs  for the Maine  Tourism  Association.  The Maine  Tourism  Association,  a non-profit,  is 
the state’s  largest  tourism  organization  supporting  members  in every  type of tourism  business  
such  as lodging,  restaurants,  camps,  campgrounds,  retail,  guides,  tour operators,  amusements,  
and historical  and cultural  attractions.  We’ve  been  promoting  Maine  and our members  for over 
100 years.  I present  this testimony  in support  of LD 559.
Workforce  shortages  are one of the biggest  challenges  for the tourism  industry —a problem  that 
has existed  for many  years,  was exacerbated  by the pandemic,  and continues  to the present  day. 
Tourism  jobs vary greatly  by season  in terms  of number  of workers  needed  and hours  of work  
available.  Different  types  of tourism  businesses  are busiest  in different  seasons  but Maine’s  
summer  has the most  businesses  at peak.  However,  “summer”  seasonal  businesses  start hiring,  
training,  preparing  to open,  and open  between  March  and May  and remain  open  through  
October  or November.  These  “shoulder  seasons”  overlap  with school  schedules.  An increase  in 
work  hours  allowed  for students  if their  education  is safeguarded  would  be tremendously  
beneficial  to Maine’s  tourism  industry  and to the student  workers.
Students  working  in tourism  jobs is not just a benefit  to Maine’s  tourism  businesses  by filling  
staffing  vacancies.  Tourism  jobs,  even  if seasonal  or temporary  for students,  can lead to 
significant  career  opportunities.  According  to a 2019  U.S. Travel  Association  report,  
Americans  who began  their  career  in travel  went  on to earn an average  salary  of $82,400  by the 
time they were  50 years  old—higher  than workers  whose  first jobs were  in manufacturing  or 
health  care.  Also, 17%  of Americans  whose  first job was in travel  now own their  own business  
and 19%  consider  themselves  entrepreneurs —higher  than finance  and health  care.  Finally, 32%  
of workers  who began  their  careers  in the travel  industry  eventually  earned  at least  a bachelor’s  
degree,  compared  to 30%  in health  care,  18%  in manufacturing.  Encouraging  and creating  
opportunities  for Maine’s  young  people  to work  in the tourism  industry  can help them  greatly  
in the future.  
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA 
members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, 
amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers 
from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933).Lastly,  since  tourism  jobs are abundant  in Maine,  encouraging  our young  people  to work  in the 
industry  can help keep  them  in Maine  and allow  them  to work  in a variety  of careers —outdoor  
recreation,  finance,  marketing,  sales,  business  ownership,  entrepreneurial  enterprises,  
hospitality,  culinary,  and many  more.
If the specific  proposals  in this bill need  to amended,  we would  be supportive  of that. The 
Maine  Tourism  Association  supports  policy  changes  that increase  opportunities  for student  
workers.  I respectfully  ask for your  support  of this proposal.  Thank  you for your  time and 
consideration  of our testimony.
