 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce In Support 
of  
L.D. 559 An Act to Increase the Number of Hours Certain Minor Students May 
Work Under Certain Circumstances 
Chairs Tipping and Roeder, and esteemed members of the Labor and 
Housing Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner and I represent 
the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association made up 
of both large and small businesses, here to provide you with my testimony in 
support of giving students an opportunity to work more hours during the school 
year.
The Maine State Chamber of Commerce has crafted policy positions 
concerning education and workforce using feedback from the business 
community. The latest issue of Making Maine Work, a collaboration between 
Educate Maine, Maine Development Foundation, and The State Chamber, 
highlights business priorities for the current administration and legislative session. 
Of the top ten priorities, workforce is referenced three separate times. The 
availability of entry level workers was the top priority.
The State Chamber supports experiential learning and job training. Many 
students participate in the workforce while in high school. Whether to earn 
spending money, help their household, learn skills, or just fill up time, there are 
many great reasons for students to work. For some the experience gained in their 
first job will become lessons they carry for an entire career.
The Chamber supports this bill because it takes a practical, case-by-case 
approach to making decisions about a student's ability to work while school is in 
session. We recognize that children in their high school years should be students 
above all else, this being said, working students have an opportunity to round out 
their education with experiences not found in the classroom. Solving problems 
with coworkers has different stakes than solving problems with classmates, taking 
instruction from a supervisor is not the same as instruction from a teacher, and 
working with customers is not easily replicated.
The Chamber supports the case-by-case basis of this bill. Currently, a 
student engaged in school athletics, the drama club, and student senate is allowed 
the same 18 hours to work as a student involved in none of these activities. If 
student A can manage school, 18 hours of work, and 15 hours or more of 
additional commitments, student B should be given the opportunity to fill more of 
their free time with work. For comparison, our neighbors in New Hampshire allow 
30 hours of work while school is in session and California allows 24.
As our state struggles with workforce and is continually looking for new 
ways to keep our students engaged and here, I ask that you give this bill your 
support. This is a way to help ease staffing shortages and give many Maine 
students the opportunity to begin building their future careers.
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.  
  
 
 
