 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473   Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 559 
 
AN ACT TO INCREASE THE NUMBER OF HOURS CERTAIN MINOR STUDENTS  
MAY WORK UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Committee on Labor and Housing . I am Steven 
Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the legislative 
committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents Association in 
opposition to L.D. 559.  
 
Our associations are opposed to this bill because  we are concerned  it is not in the best interest of student s. To 
increase the allowed time to work from 24 hours to 32 hours when the minor’s school is in session through the 
three identified scenarios  is too large of an increase . 32 hour s is 4/5ths of a regular 40 -hour work week. 
Students through Chapter 125 are expected to be in a full week of school for 25 hours. The carve out for 
students enrolled in equivalent instruction programs or in home school instruction provides different 
opport unities and expectations for these students compared to those students enrolled in public schools, except 
those students that have an alternative schedule approved. We understand the desire for young people to 
engage in meaningful trade and technical oppo rtunities to enhance their learning, and also have the 
opportunity to earn money for a variety of reasons, including paying for post-secondary school opportunities . 
We also know that we are not always aware of how many hours students work if they are piec ing together 
various jobs. That said, condoning longer work hours in statute takes away any leverage we may have to keep 
the student’s focus on school.  
 
The Associations think the 24 -hour limit remains reasonable, for all students. We therefore oppose L .D. 559 
and urge the Labor and Housing Committee to vote against it.  
