1 HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Morgan Rieuy TTY: MAINE RELAY 7ll 
16 Blue Spruce Farm Road, Apt #6 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Phone: (207) 228-5767 
Morgan.Riellv@legislaturemaine.Eov 
April 24, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Morgan Rielly introducing 
LD 427, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Invest in Research, 
Development and Commercialization in Maine's Marine Technology and Aquaculture 
Sector 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Aﬂairs 
Good morning Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. I am Morgan Rielly, andI 
represent House District 127, which includes part of Westbrook. I am here today to introduce LD 
427, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Invest in Research, Development 
and Commercialization in Maine's Marine Technology and Aquaculture Sector. 
This bill proposes a bond of $25 million to be awarded through a competitive process to 
Maine-based public and private entities, for the purposes of research, development and 
commercialization in the State's marine technology and aquaculture sector to be used for 
infrastructure, equipment and technology upgrades to enable organizations to gain and hold 
market share and to expand employment or preserve jobs. 
We need a sustainable, environmentally friendly, and local sources of food. I see aquaculture as 
the way to address this while retaining our coastal heritage and preserving the working 
waterfront as Maine Weathers the changes due to the ongoing climate crisis. LD 427 provides an 
opportunity for us to further many of the goals highlighted in the Maine Aquaculture Road Map 
that was published in January 2022. After reading through the report and speaking with people 
who work in the aquaculture industry, I have found that one of the biggest issues for the industry 
is access to capital. 
In addition to the provisions laid out in the bill, I suggest that the committee adopt language that 
ensures these monies go to small aquaculture farms, are equitably distributed and support 
lobstennen —many of whom have started growing seaweed to supplement their income—and other 
commercial ﬁshermen looking at diversifying into aquaculture. Additionally, I suggest that the 
District 127: Westbrook
funding in this bill be directed to the Maine Technology Institute with the Department of Marine 
Resources (DMR) consulting on how to best allocate monies as DMR wouldn’t have the capacity 
to distribute these funds alone. 
According to the Maine Aquaculture Road Map, there is a demand for traceable, sustainable, 
high-quality seafood, and Maine has an opportunity to be a leader, both in the United States and 
across the world. According to the report, the U.S. imports nearly all of its seafood with close to 
a $20 billion trade deﬁcit. This tade imbalance is unacceptable and opens us up to vulernablility 
in todays world. 
In the Maine Economic Development Strategy 2020, the report highlighted that sustainable 
acqualculture is a sector of Maine’s economy with immense potential that will compliment 
commercial ﬁshing and could make Maine a leader in the development of a new Blue Economy 
for the 21st century. A report by FocusMaine in 2016 has predicted that Maine’s aquaculture 
industry “exports to net $230-$800 million by 2025.” 
Investing in our aquaculture sector will help us maintain our working waterfronts and lower our 
state’s carbon footprint. Aquaculture is one of the most efﬁcient and sustainable Ways of 
producing food because of reduced space requirements and smaller feed conversion ratios 
compared to agriculture on land. And with shellﬁsh and seaweed there is no feeding, watering, or 
fertilizing that has to be done. Oysters, mussels, scallops, and clams are bivalves which ﬁlter 
seawater. This puriﬁes our waters and keeps them healthy. Seaweed also has great beneﬁts for 
our environment because as it grows it captures carbon and nitrogen, which helps balance ocean 
acidity. 
We can address climate issues and protect Maine’s enviroment, preserve our state’s maritime 
character for the next generation, and provide good paying jobs all by investing in our state’s 
aquaculture industry. This is a crucial investment into Maine’s future. And it could pair with 
legislation proposed this session to establish a Blue Economy Taskforce that would support 
Maine's emergence as a center for Blue Economy innovation and opportunity, which has two 
bipartisan members of this committee as sponsor and cosponsor on it. 
All Mainers should have the opportunity to find work along Maine’s coast and in the Gulf of 
Maine. It’s part of our state’s heritage and will continue, well into the future, to be a crucial part 
our state’s economy. There is personally no better feeling, and no better way to know you've had 
a good day, than the smell of the ocean as you traverse across Casco Bay and some mud on your 
sleeves from lifting bags of oysters out of cages. We need to support Maine’s aquaculturists and 
working waterfront. This bill will provide the necessary investments to put our state’s vision into 
reality. 
Thank you very much for your time and consideration. I’m happy to answer any questions. 
District I27: Westbrook
