 
339 Water Street 
Gardiner, ME  04345 
(207) 622-0136 
www.maineaqua.org 
 
 
The Honorable Margaret Rotundo, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Melanie Sachs, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
State House, Room 228 
Augusta, ME. 04333 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, Honorable members of the Joint 
Committee on Marine Resources: 
 
My name is Sebastian Belle and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Aquaculture 
Association (MAA). I stand before you today to testify in strong support of the 
proposed biennial budget request for the Department of Marine Resources.  The MAA 
represents Maine’s aquatic farmers and the many infrastructure companies that 
provide goods and services to our producers.  Our farmers annually produce over 100 
million dollars in farm gate revenue and directly employ roughly 700 Maine citizens 
year-round. We purchase goods and services from over 400 Maine businesses and 
our total economic impact is roughly 150 million dollars annually.  
 
My apologies I am unable to appear before you in person today because we are co-
hosting a three day conference on Seaweed aquaculture in Portland.. I wish to present 
testimony in strong support of LD 427, “ An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond 
Issue to Invest in Research, Development and Commercialization in Maine's Marine 
Technology and Aquaculture Sector" sponsored by Representative Morgan Rielly. 
Our community farms roughly 24 different species using 16 different production 
methods. Many of those species and farming methods are relatively new and we are 
still developing and refining culture methods for them. Critical to the development of 
those methods is research designed to increase efficiency, improve survival and 
reduce our environmental impacts. LD 427 helps support an investment in research 
and development in our sector that is growing and providing much needed revenue 
and year round jobs in our coastal communities.  
 
Maine seafood is an iconic part of the Maine brand and Maine aquaculture products 
have earned their place as part of that brand. Please help us continue to build that 
brand and defend Maines working waterfronts. Vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 427. I 
thank you for your attention and patience and would be glad to answer any questions 
you may have. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
339 Water Street 
Gardiner, ME  04345 
(207) 622-0136 
www.maineaqua.org 
 
 
      
 
Sebastian M. Belle 
Executive Director 
 
 

