April 6, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Marine  Resources  
 
RE: LD 593 – An Act to Increase the Bag Limit for Smelts for Pers onal Use from 2 
Quarts to 4 Quarts  
 
Senator Reny , Representative Hepler , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Environment and Natural Resources , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the 
Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this 
opportunity to submit written comments neither for nor aga inst  LD 593 – An Act to 
Increase the  Bag Limit for Smelts for Personal Use from 2 Quarts to 4 Quarts . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th l argest landowner in  the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address ou r changing climate.  
 
TNC is primarily concerned about the precedent this would set in overriding the Maine 
Department of Marine Resource s (DMR)  fisheries manage ment regulatory authority.  
Additionally,  existing data on smelt populations along the Maine coast is limited.  We 
feel additional monitoring a nd inf ormation is needed in all management zones to 
inform harvest levels. TNC is curr ently working with DMR to expand monitoring efforts 
coastwide for smelt and other species of sea run fish.  
 
Thank  you for the opport unity to weigh in on LD 593. I ’m happy to answer questions at 
any time.    
