BJ McCollister
Maine Labor Climate Council
LD 1064
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is BJ McCollister and I’m here representing
the Maine Labor Climate Council (MLCC). MLCC is a coalition of 16 public and 
private sector unions representing thousands of working people across the state of 
Maine. We are committed to advancing an ambitious vision to combat  climate 
change and income inequality at the same time. 
One of our priorities as a coalition is to work together to create safe and healthy 
public schools for our students and teachers, slash energy costs and carbon emissions 
in our state, and support high-quality family-sustaining jobs by investing in deep 
energy efficient retrofits across all of our public school facilities. 
It has become clear that a key benchmark for combating economic inequality in 
Maine will require increasing educators’ salaries. This is the best way to address our 
growing teacher shortage – and for these reasons – MLCC is strongly supportive of 
LD 1064, An Act to Increase the Minimum Teacher Salary. 
Every child in Maine deserves a caring and quality teacher in the classroom. But the 
reality is that teachers are leaving because they can earn more in another state or 
profession. If addressing the teacher shortage is a priority, then Maine must pay our 
teachers a competitive wage. Maine’s students are faced with tremendous workforce 
shortages in nearly all teaching areas. Teachers are quitting, not retiring, and we 
understand that to be because their salaries can not sustain their own families’ needs. 
The public sector has not kept pace with wage inflation in the private sector. This is 
not fair to students, teachers, and working families. 
While the varied activities of local boosters are certainly a wonderful way to show our
appreciation for our teachers, from the MLCC’s perspective the primary way we show
our respect for workers is by making sure they get paid appropriately, don’t have to 
worry about getting sick, are cared for in their retirement, and have a say in how their 
work is done.
There can be no question about the importance of teachers and the work they do to 
inspire a love of learning in our children. Everything we do and want to do hinges on 
having a well educated citizenry. Any of us as parents and caregivers who had to 
navigate remote learning  during the pandemic understand how hard a teacher’s job is,
and we only had our kids at home, not 20 or more kids! Supporting LD 1064 and 
raising teacher pay shows that we respect our teachers and are serious about keeping 
them in the classroom.
The 129th legislature raised the minimum to $40,000 per year by 2020. That 
minimum salary had not been increased since 2007. We cannot wait that long again. 
Now is the time to do right by the women and men who  teach our children.
Thank you for your time and attention to this matter, and we sincerely hope that you 
will vote Ought to Pass on LD 1064.

