Carey Hotaling
Freeport
LD 1064
To the Educational and Cultural Affairs Committee,
As a parent of children who went to the Falmouth School District, Senator Pierce saw 
the quality of teachers in a district with a reasonable salary in Maine.  I applaud you 
for bringing this bill to the legislature.  I retired from teaching in Falmouth, and was 
continually inspired by the creative, talented, brilliant educators.  That’s what you 
attract with the good salaries.  If you look at measures of educational student success, 
you will see Falmouth is right up there with a short list of other higher paying districts
in Maine.  
Public schools are in desperate need of talented, caring educators.  We need to 
encourage young people who might think of going into education that it is a viable 
career.  At the $30,000 for a minimum beginning salary, they won’t be able to buy a 
house or many other necessities. (Even $40,000 seems minimal given the cost of 
living raises teachers haven’t been getting.)  We still have people who care about 
children, want to be part of a thriving educational community, but who don’t think 
they could support a family on that type of salary.  
The lack of respect for educators is reflected in our compensation for their work.  
Much our work occurs in the evening, weekends, throughout the summer and other 
vacations.  There is a misconception about the amount of time we have to prepare our 
fast evolving lessons, and the amount of money we are given for creative supplies.  
Through the “Great Resignation” that has occurred during the pandemic, many 
educators reevaluated their priorities and quit.  Rather than lowering the requirements 
to become a teacher, we should be training and paying teachers better.  I’m guessing 
every single district in Maine has a teacher vacancy (or many).  This number will 
continue to grow if we don’t get the compensation in line with the economic realities 
we live within.
Please support LD 1064.  We have no time to lose.
Sincerely,
Carey Hotaling, Retired Falmouth Science Teacher

