Karen MacDonald
Westbrook
LD 1064
375 Pride Street Unit 14 
Westbrook, Maine 04092 
March 30, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:
Please let this written testimony stand in support of LD 1064 - An Act to Increase the 
Minimum Teacher Salary. This bill is critical for Maine as we move into a crisis 
situation in our state related to the recruitment and retention of teachers.
As a retired teacher who served for 37 years in the City of Portland, the issue of 
teacher compensation has always been front and center. I remember days as a young 
teacher when my educator husband and I looked at our checkbook and wondered 
whether the $31.00 in our checking account would cover a doctor visit for one of our 
children. I can’t imagine beginning to teach today when the average rent and home 
prices in Maine have skyrocketed. No wonder schools in Maine are scrambling to 
maintain a full staff!
Low salaries play a role in the high rate of teacher turnover in Maine and cost the 
districts in other ways, as well. Research shows that a district invests roughly $20,000
in onboarding new educators, a cost that the district does not recoup if educators leave
in 1-5 years.
The cost of living in Maine is rising rapidly, particularly for housing. Homes in Maine
increased an average of 10% in the last year, with the city of Auburn increasing 
almost 38%. This profession, which requires a college degree and continuing 
education, has not kept pace with the expenses of living in our state. Significant 
differences exist between average salaries in current dollars versus constant 
dollars.While there has been current dollar growth for educators in the years since 
2012-13, when inflation is considered, the average classroom teacher salary decreased
by an estimated 3.8 percent from 2012-13 to 2021-22.
For these reasons, I strongly urge the Committee to vote unanimously “ought to pass” 
LD 1064. Thank you for considering my written testimony.
Sincerely,
Karen MacDonald
Retired Educator
2014 Maine Teacher of the Year
 
