 Sena tor Ra fferty, Represen tative Brennan and other es teemed member s of the E ducation and  
 Cultur al Af fairs Commit tee, 
 My name is Laur en St ark (she/her). I liv e in Belf ast and am a P olicy Eng agemen t Fellow for the  
 Scholar s Str ategy Ne twork. I am also an Assis tant Professor of E ducation and Field Placemen t 
 Director at the Univ ersity of Maine a t Augus ta, and I am her e to shar e my own per spectiv e and  
 expertise without r epresen ting m y univ ersity a ffiliations.  
 I am her e to testify in support of LD 1064: An Act t o Incr ease the Minimum T eacher Salar y. 
 Teacher s in Maine earn the   lowest  educ ator w ages in   New England and, when adjus ted for cost 
 of living , the   fifth-lo west  teacher salar y in the   nation. The y also mak e  24% less   than their  
 colleg e-educ ated peer s in other pr ofessions, a “t eacher pa y penalty ” tha t has w orsened o ver 
 time despit e incr eases in t eacher w orkload and in flation. Tha t is a pr oblem.  
 Educators pla y a fundamen tal role in our socie ty. The y create safe spaces f or childr en and t eens  
 to learn and gr ow, nurturing the unique s trengths tha t every studen t brings t o the classr oom.  
 They support y outh as the y navigate the mos t difficult s tructur al inequalities w e face as a  
 nation. And as the Co vid-19 pandemic has made clear , teacher s don’t jus t prepar e the ne xt 
 gener ation of doct ors, fir efighters, and scien tists. The y mak e it possible f or the curr ent 
 gener ation t o do their job s, too. 
 If we hope t o recruit and r etain skilled, c ompassiona te educ ators for this crucial fr ontline w ork, 
 we need t o pa y them acc ordingly . 
 Unfortuna tely, the curr ent level of in vestmen t in t eacher s is not enough t o keep them in the  
 classr oom. T eacher r esigna tions ha ve risen sharply in the pas t five years, fueled b y the  
 pandemic and longs tanding s tructur al challeng es. Da ta from the Maine Public Emplo yee 
 Retiremen t System sho ws a record 1,311 t eacher s resigning fr om their positions in 2022, nearly  
 two times as man y as in 2017. As r eport ed in the   Maine   Monit or  , teacher r etiremen ts ha ve also  
 risen in the pas t five years. 
 While the s tate of Maine does not k eep tr ack of t eacher short ages, dis trict and school leader s 
 have  spok en out   about the challeng es of filling open   teaching positions, particularly in rur al and  
 high-po verty dis tricts. In m y role as a t eacher educ ator and field placemen t director, I work 
 closely with these leader s and m y peer s thr oughout the Univ ersity of Maine S ystem t o de velop  
 creative solutions   to bring mor e teacher s into the   profession. A t the Univ ersity of Maine a t 
 Augus ta, wher e I teach, w e ha ve pioneer ed a t eacher r esidency model tha t allo ws educ ational  
 technicians and emer gency -certified t eacher s to comple te their certific ation c ourses while  
 working full-time in schools.  
 But univ ersity and dis trict leader s alik e kno w tha t recruitmen t isn’t enough; t eacher s need t o be  
 appr opria tely c ompensa ted if the y are to stay in the pr ofession. While superin tenden ts acr oss 
 the s tate would no doub t be thrilled t o be able t o offer a mor e compe titive  living w age  salar y to 
 new and curr ent teacher s, this will not be fully possible un til dis tricts r eceiv e mor e investmen t 
 from the s tate. 
 Without a signific ant incr ease in t eacher pa y, we can e xpect the t eacher short age to worsen in  
 years to come. A r ecen t  survey  by the Na tional E ducation  Associa tion sho wed tha t 55% of  
 educ ators are considering quit ting or r etiring earlier than e xpect ed. P articipan ts  iden tified  
 raising t eacher salaries and hiring mor e teacher s as the tw o mos t import ant policies f or 
 retention, f ollowed b y providing men tal health and beha vioral support f or studen ts and hiring  
 additional support s taff. 
 Similarly , a recen t  survey  by McKinse y & Compan y sho wed  that nearly a thir d of K -12 educ ators 
 are planning t o lea ve their positions in the ne xt year. Teacher s in this sur vey iden tified  
 “inadequa te compensa tion” and “unsus tainable w ork c onditions” as their t op tw o reasons f or 
 planning t o lea ve their curr ent roles.  
 These findings align with br oader   educ ational   and  economic   policy r esear ch, which sho w tha t 
 we can counter the e xodus fr om t eaching in tw o major w ays: impr oving educ ators’ working  
 conditions and incr easing educ ator pa y. In r ecognition of this r esear ch, incr easing t eacher pa y is 
 central to the fir st pillar of the   #TeachMaine   plan.  
 Proposals ha ve been floa ted her e and acr oss the c ountry to incr ease r ecruitmen t by  lowering  
 the bar   for teacher certific ation. These pr oposals   aren’t back ed b y resear ch and, as the P ortland  
 Press Her ald edit orial t eam r ecen tly  argued   , the y  could w orsen educ ators’ working c onditions  
 by exacerba ting the ong oing de valua tion of the t eaching pr ofession.  
 Instead of lo wering the bar , we should f ollow the r esear ch and impr ove pa y and w orking  
 conditions f or educ ators. 
 LD 1064   would be a signific ant step toward these g oals, and w e should c onsider similar  
 measur es to impr ove the pa y of other vit al educ ation w orkers, including educ ational  
 technicians.  
 This bill w ould c ontribut e to our c ollectiv e efforts t o overcome the “t eacher pa y penalty ” and  
 recruit, tr ain, and r etain e xcellen t educ ators in the s tate of Maine.  
 *** 
 Lauren W are St ark is a P olicy E ngagemen t Fellow with the Scholars Strat egy Ne twork and an  
 Assis tant Prof essor of E ducation and Field Plac emen t Direct or at the University of Maine at  
 Augus ta. The opinions and research outlined in this t estimon y do not nec essarily represen t the  
 views of the University of Maine at Augus ta, the University of Maine S ystem, or an y of the  
 author ’s other ins titutional af filiations.  
Lauren Stark
Scholars Strategy Network
LD 1064
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other esteemed members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee,
My name is Lauren Stark (she/her). I live in Belfast and am a Policy Engagement 
Fellow for the Scholars Strategy Network. I am also an Assistant Professor of 
Education and Field Placement Director at the University of Maine at Augusta, and I 
am sharing my own perspective and expertise without representing my university 
affiliations. 
I am here to testify in support of LD 1064: An Act to Increase the Minimum Teacher 
Salary.
Teachers in Maine earn the lowest educator wages in New England and, when 
adjusted for cost of living, the fifth-lowest teacher salary in the nation. They also 
make 24% less than their college-educated peers in other professions, a “teacher pay 
penalty” that has worsened over time despite increases in teacher workload and 
inflation. That is a problem. 
Educators play a fundamental role in our society. They create safe spaces for children 
and teens to learn and grow, nurturing the unique strengths that every student brings 
to the classroom. They support youth as they navigate the most difficult structural 
inequalities we face as a nation. And as the Covid-19 pandemic has made clear, 
teachers don’t just prepare the next generation of doctors, firefighters, and scientists. 
They make it possible for the current generation to do their jobs, too.
If we hope to recruit and retain skilled, compassionate educators for this crucial 
frontline work, we need to pay them accordingly.
Unfortunately, the current level of investment in teachers is not enough to keep them 
in the classroom. Teacher resignations have risen sharply in the past five years, fueled
by the pandemic and longstanding structural challenges. Data from the Maine Public 
Employee Retirement System shows a record 1,311 teachers resigning from their 
positions in 2022, nearly two times as many as in 2017. As reported in the Maine 
Monitor, teacher retirements have also risen in the past five years. 
While the state of Maine does not keep track of teacher shortages, district and school 
leaders have spoken out about the challenges of filling open teaching positions, 
particularly in rural and high-poverty districts. In my role as a teacher educator and 
field placement director, I work closely with these leaders and my peers throughout 
the University of Maine System to develop creative solutions to bring more teachers 
into the profession. At the University of Maine at Augusta, where I teach, we have 
pioneered a teacher residency model that allows educational technicians and 
emergency-certified teachers to complete their certification courses while working 
full-time in schools. 
But university and district leaders alike know that recruitment isn’t enough; teachers 
need to be appropriately compensated if they are to stay in the profession. While 
superintendents across the state would no doubt be thrilled to be able to offer a more 
competitive living wage salary to new and current teachers, this will not be fully 
possible until districts receive more investment from the state.
Without a significant increase in teacher pay, we can expect the teacher shortage to 
worsen in years to come. A recent survey by the National Education Association 
showed that 55% of educators are considering quitting or retiring earlier than 
expected. Participants identified raising teacher salaries and hiring more teachers as 
the two most important policies for retention, followed by providing mental health 
and behavioral support for students and hiring additional support staff.
Similarly, a recent survey by McKinsey & Company showed that nearly a third of 
K-12 educators are planning to leave their positions in the next year. Teachers in this 
survey identified “inadequate compensation” and “unsustainable work conditions” as 
their top two reasons for planning to leave their current roles. 
These findings align with broader educational and economic policy research, which 
show that we can counter the exodus from teaching in two major ways: improving 
educators’ working conditions and increasing educator pay. In recognition of this 
research, increasing teacher pay is central to the first pillar of the #TeachMaine plan.
Proposals have been floated here and across the country to increase recruitment by 
lowering the bar for teacher certification. These proposals aren’t backed by research 
and, as the Portland Press Herald editorial team recently argued, they could worsen 
educators’ working conditions by exacerbating the ongoing devaluation of the 
teaching profession. 
Instead of lowering the bar, we should follow the research and improve pay and 
working conditions for educators.
LD 1064 would be a significant step toward these goals, and we should consider 
similar measures to improve the pay of other vital education workers, including 
educational technicians. 
This bill would contribute to our collective efforts to overcome the “teacher pay 
penalty” and recruit, train, and retain excellent educators in the state of Maine.
***
Lauren Ware Stark is a Policy Engagement Fellow with the Scholars Strategy 
Network and an Assistant Professor of Education and Field Placement Director at the 
University of Maine at Augusta. The opinions and research outlined in this testimony 
do not necessarily represent the views of the University of Maine at Augusta, the 
University of Maine System, or any of the author’s other institutional affiliations.
