Liam Anderson 
Orono 
LD 1064 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, My name is Liam Anderson and I am a junior Early Childhood 
Education Student at the University of Maine in Orono, and I am here to testify in support of LD 
1064: An Act to Increase the Minimum Teacher Salary. 
I am here to make a difference. That is something I have believed in myself sinceI 
developed critical thinking skills at the age of 6. I want to put myself in a position where I have 
the opportunity to positively impact as many lives as I can. For me, that means becoming a 
teacher. I am making a commitment to public service; using my knowledge and skills to facilitate 
the leaming and development of our next generation of difference-makers. For the thousands of 
educators in the state of Maine, and for the aspiring educators seeking out the opportunity to 
positively impact their community with their passion for the profession, the current teacher 
salary scale is the most restrictive obstacle towards achieving such opportunity. 
Receiving a university degree is viewed as an investment. Investing valuable time and 
thousands of dollars into a quality education in the present, to propel yourself forward for 
success in a professional career. But with the current state of education, the reality is that calling 
it an investment would be ﬂawed. The reality is that it is a sacriﬁce. I made a conscious decision 
before I chose education to make the sacriﬁce to become a teacher. There are so many making 
such sacriﬁces with me, as they prepare to act on their calling and become educators. 
Overcoming the anxieties of the student debt that awaits me as I try to put food on the table or 
pay rent at a $40,000 a year salary. Wondering how I am going to scrounge up the money to ﬁll 
up my tank of gas, so they can drive to their unpaid student teaching experience, 5 days a week, 
40 hours a week, for 4 months. Some argue this as a choice I made. To that, I say I chose to be in 
a classroom day in and day out to support a child’s development and hardships. I choose to bea 
consistent smiling face for a child without a home. I choose to provide additional support fora 
child with a developmental disability. These hardships I face are an accepted reality of doing 
what I know I should. 
But in a teacher shortage crisis, these continued sacriﬁces educators make grow closer 
and closer to a point of being unjustiﬁable. Everyday, teachers begin to assess their own needs as 
individuals. New graduates are making the evaluation that the average teacher salary in Maine is 
the lowest in the Northeast, and as the nation tries to climb their way out of a teacher shortage, 
the solution to the problem won’t be looking here nearly as much. As a member of the solution, 
the next generation of educators, I urge you to see that the College of Education and Human 
Development ’s enrollment numbers have continues to decline further each year I urge you to 
look at the districts pleading for support from any source possible, the need for trained 
professionals in our schools continues to snowball in the wrong direction. 
At 20 years old, I have chosen to dedicate my life to teaching. Becoming the best 
educator I can be so our children can thrive in a better community they are leaming to be a part
of. But I am here today to tell you I cannot do that if I can’t support myself. We can’t do that if 
we can’t afford to take care of our most basic essentials. The thousands of educators I stand here 
representing today can not do that without this bill, raising the minimum teacher salary to 
$50,000 in the state of Maine.A 
I am here today to hopefully emphasize the reality that education needs help. I am here 
today to tell you that teachers need an economically viable and appreciated profession so they 
can do what they do best. I am here to make a difference. 
Thank you.
n
