Testimony on bill #LD1064,SPO433 
An act to increase the minimum teacher salary 
Hello, my name is Maya Koerber-Marx and I am a sophomore at Brunswick High School, andI 
would like to testify in support of this bill. Today I would like to offer you a perspective that is 
perhaps one of the most important to make a decision on this issue which is that of a student. I 
spend about 7 hours a day 5 days a week for over 8 months a year with teachers. I can assure 
you that the teachers in Maine are some of the most important, amazing, and impactful people 
in my life. Teachers are the ones responsible for the future generation. They are responsible for 
our future lawyers, doctors, and of course our future state senators and representatives. Why 
should the people who hold such an important role in shaping the lives of young people that are 
going to hold powerful positions not be paid as such? Everyone likes to talk about my 
generation, the ones everyone is relying on for change, their hope for us, how powerful we are, 
but none of this would be possible if I didn’t have the teachers I do in Maine. Some of my 
teachers are my role models, some are like my friends. I’m not gonna stand here and say I get 
along with all of them because that would be a lie but even the ones I don’t agree with have 
taught me so many valuable lessons beyond the curriculum for the class. I would not be the 
person l am today, I would not be standing here without all of my Maine teachers. Without' 
teachers our society would quite literally not be able to function yet they are paid so unfairly. A 
report from the Economic Policy Institute published on December 6th, 2022 stated that there is 
no lack of qualified teachers yet we are facing a pre-existing and long-standing teacher shortage 
that has been worsened by the pandemic due to “few qualified teachers willing to work at 
current compensation levels given the increasingly stressful environment facing teachers." One 
of the two solutions this report outlined is that we need to address the long-standing decline in 
the pay of teachers relative to other workers with a college degree and this bill is an excellent 
step in that direction. Thank you for your time.
