Pui:i>!i<:r 
'* 
tin i ve rs/' fies 
UNlVERSlTY OF MAME SYSTEM 
DATE: April 6, 2023 
TO: Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
FROM: Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations 
samanthawarren@maine.edu / (207) 632-0389 
RE: Support for LD 1064, An Act to Increase the Minimum Teacher Salary 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs: My name is Samantha Warren and I am the Director 
of Government Relations for the University of Maine System (UMS), which supports LD 1064, An 
Act to Increase the Minimum Teacher Salary. 
Our System is proud to be the state’s largest producer of classroom-ready teachers, 
having awarded nearly 4,000 education degrees or certificates just in the past five years. 
Among our six State-approved educator preparation programs (EPPs) are Maine’s only to have 
earned national accreditation (University of Maine, University of Maine at Farmington and 
University of Southern Maine) and 24 of the past 30 Maine Teachers of the Year have been 
UMS graduates, including the 2012 MTOY, Alana Margeson, who now directs teacher education 
at the University of Maine at Presque lsle. 
Overall enrollment in UMS education-related degree and certificate programs has 
increased by 27% over the last five years, with 4,016 students enrolled in 2021 -22. However, 
much of that growth has been in education-related master’s degree programs, for which UMS has 
experienced significant enrollment gains from 1,094 students in 2017-18 to 1,580 in 2021-22. This 
44.4% increase is driven in part because of our new degree programs to meet state workforce 
needs like UMaine’s four new Graduate Certificates in Special Education. While undergraduate 
education-related enrollment is up slightly over the past five years — aided by new degree 
programs like UMF’s World Languages Education major, launched in 2018, and the University of 
Maine at Augusta’s Elementary and Secondaly Education degrees, launched in 2021— 
enrollment in programs that lead to teacher certification is down 5.6%, from 1,902 students in fall 
2018 to 1,795 students in fall 2022. 
lt is with this tradition of excellence and experience in preparing thousands of talented Maine 
teachers and informed by the findings of our own independent Maine Education Policy Research 
Institute (MEPRI) that UMS supports State investment to increase teacher pay, including for 
Maine’s early childhood and public PK-12 educators. 
Leaders of our EPPs note that nationally, public school teachers are more likely than other 
workers to experience higher levels of anxiety, stress and burnout, and 44% quit the profession 
within their first five years. This mirrors the Maine findings of a 2021 l\/lEPRl report about 
educator recruitment and retention, which we urge this Committee to revisit and which found 
that more than half of experienced teachers had “seriously considered leaving the professional 
in the prior year." Past lVlEPRl regorts also provide evidence about the connection between 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent - 
University of 
Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque lsle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
teacher turnover and lower student achievement — especially in high poverty schools —— and 
the cost to districts and taxpayers to fill these vacancies. 
The need for higher compensation is continually cited by educators as a barrier to recruitment 
and retention to the profession, with evidence of higher retention among teachers with higher 
pay. According to MEPRI, Maine’s teacher salaries in 2018 — before legislation was passed to 
increase the minimum teacher salary — were the lowest in New England. After adjusting for 
inflation, Maine teacher salaries in 1999 were actually higher than in 2018. 
UMS universities are working together and with the field to expand access to affordable, 
appropriately ﬂexible, comprehensive pathways in and through our high-quality preparation 
programs and the educator workforce. This includes a high-impact “grow your own” teacher 
residency led by USM and funded through a federal earmark secured by the System thanks to 
Sens. Collins and King. You will hear later this session from Sen. Pierce how you can help make 
this successful pilot permanent. 
As we have shared with the Committee before, UMS has been a national leader in college 
affordability and the debt load of our graduates who have debt is well below the New 
England average. Yet even relatively small amounts of student debt can be difficult to 
discharge for those in professions that are essential to our economy and communities but 
that provide low wages, like early childhood education, teaching and social work. 
Our System’s EPPs are confident they could recruit more qualiﬁed candidates into their 
programs, and in-turn the teaching profession, if teacher salaries were commensurate with 
expected education and experience. Feedback from our own students support this. This fall, 
MEPRl conducted an online sun/ey of UMS undergraduates to explore how students chose their 
college majors and their perceptions about K-12 teaching as a career. MEPRl’s findings, informed 
by the responses of more than 600 students, will be reported to the Committee this month and 
include: 
0 81% of respondents said pay was a drawback to choosing teaching as a career (no other 
drawback was selected by more than 40% of respondents). 
~ 88% of respondents agreed that a starting salary for teachers of $40,000 was too low and 
54% said it “far too little.” 
As one UMS EPP leader noted to me when discussing our support for LD 1064, "In an age 
where emergency certiﬁcation reinforces the age-0/d adage that ‘anyone can teach,’ it is 
important that we continue to emphasize that teaching is a profession that requires specialize 
know/edge and expertise. Ensuring that teachers receive appropriate pay for the service 
they provide to students, families and communities is one reflection of this.” 
Thank you for your support of Maine’s public institutions and our students, and your 
commitmentto strengthen and grow the state's teacher workforce. Please let me know if I can 
provide additional information on behalf of UMS in advance of your work session. 
Page 2 of2
