§“5‘i,'i§,L 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
ms a ON Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
Website: Www'mSmaWeb'c0m MaineScl1oolSup €l'il\lcn(lenlsAsocinliun PUBLIC EDUCATION ADVOCATES 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 1064 
AN ACT TO INCREASE THE MINIMUM TEACHER SALARY 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to L.D. 1064. 
MS SA and MSBA are both in support of seeing salaries for teachers increase. Both Associations provided 
supportive testimony for the last bill that helped raise the minimum salary of all teachers in Maine to $40,000. 
It is true that increases in salary will help recruit and retain quality professionals to provide the quality 
learning for our students in our classrooms across the state. School districts who were in need of still getting 
to this $40,000 minimum are in the third year of the ramp up to this minimum ﬁgure. While some districts 
were already beyond this ﬁgure within their collective bargaining agreements, there were many that were not, 
even with the state funds to help support this increase within districts. Raising the minimum also had the 
impact of increasing other salaries higher up in salary schedules as these collective bargaining agreements 
have been renegotiated. This has had the impact of raising the entire budget in these school districts. 
The design of this bill is Well constructed; yet, given the fact that while most districts have recovered from the 
most recent increases, except for pockets of districts here and there, MSSA and MSBA are opposed to seeing 
L.D. 1064 move forward at this time. 
We know that increased teacher salaries can have a positive impact to attract and retain qualiﬁed teachers 
within our schools. Providing this ﬁnancial support to highlight teaching within Maine’s Public Schools as 
THE job to seek would be a beneﬁt of this type of increase. Our Associations recognize this and would like to 
see these increases be viable. We also know there have been bills proposed to increase the minimum wage of 
the educational support professionals within schools. The Associations see problems with all of these bills 
moving forward. 
MSSA and MSBA need to better understand the funding stream for all of the recommended increases in 
salaries. We understand the level of support that will be provided to reach the minimum salary but what level 
of state support will be provided as contracts are renegotiated to reﬂect and change in the rest of collective 
bargaining agreements? 
With proposed budgets still tight, and many districts still working to provide additional supports for students 
with socio and emotional needs related to learning during Covid-19, and for those students who still need 
additional assistance to accelerate learning due to difficulties experienced during the pandemic, many districts 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E_ King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
are expecting a funding cliff that potentially will impact them for the immediate future. Districts are 
struggling with budgets right now due to the increase in valuation, where many towns are required to pay 
more towards education, combined with the decrease in economically disadvantaged subsidy. 75-80% of 
school budgets are made up of salaries and beneﬁts. If the increases in salaries fall on the taxpayers, we worry 
that budgets will not pass and that will have a negative impact on the services we need to provide to our 
students. 
The timing is just not right, according to the two Associations, to support this bill right now. MSSA and 
MSBA recommend that L.D. 1064 ought not to pass.
