Maine Gommunit 
g College Systemy 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
323 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330-7131 
(207) 629-4000 I Fax (207) 629-4048 I mccs.me.edu 
TO: Senator Rafferty, Representative Brerman and the 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
FROM: Becky Smith, Director of Government and Community Relations 
RE: LD 830, Resolve, Directing the Maine Community College System to Study Providing 
V On-campus Housing on All Campuses 
DATE: March 15, 2023- 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs, my name is Becky Smith, and I am here to testify in support of LD 830 on behalf of the Maine 
Community College System. We have been actively studying how to best maximize our existing housing and to 
support our students who need a place to live or want a residential college experience. We welcome the 
opportunity to continue this analysis and to report our fmdings to your committee next session. 
Representative Hobbs’ bill touches on something you have heard us speak to already this session. Some of our 
students, especially those in the southern part of the state, struggle to ﬁnd and afford housing. As you know, 
many of our programs require hands on learning. While we work hard to schedule the in-person portions of 
classes in a way that minimizes travel to and from our campuses and training sites, it greatly beneﬁts our students 
to be able to live near or on campus. 
Currently, ﬁve of our seven colleges have residence halls and one, York County Community College, does not 
have a residence hall but is lodging some students in a local hotel. Kennebec Valley Cormnunity College, which 
does not offer housing, is also exploring housing options. 
The president of Southem Maine Comrmmity College, Joe Cassidy, stated at a recent meeting that just a few years 
ago, SMCC’s students did not really struggle to ﬁnd housing near our South Portland and Brunswick campuses. 
Now it is practically impossible. If he had twice the amount of on-campus housing, it would be ﬁlled. SMCC 
currently houses 450 students in South Portland, 90 in Brunswick and, this fall, housed 100 in local hotels. 
Central Maine Community College has received 300 applications for housing this spring, up from 150 a year ago. 
CMCC houses 253 students on campus, and this fall also housed 71 in hotels off campus. 
However, some of our other campuses, such as Northern Maine Community College, Washington County 
Cormnunity College and Eastem Maine Community College do not ﬁll their residence halls, so the need is not 
uniform across our campuses. 
It is important to note that simply providing a place to sleep and shower is not enough. Rep. Hobbs wisely 
included infrastructure and staff to support a robust residential life on campus in his study request. Students who 
live on campus need to eat, they need places to study, transportation to shop in their local communities or get to 
off-campus jobs, and social activities that are both fun, inexpensive, and healthy. They also need qualiﬁed staff 
who can help them navigate communal living, coursework, roommates etc. 
As the state grapples with an affordable housing crisis, we hope to work with you to assure our students have the 
housing resources they need. 
Thank you.
