District 145: Wells (part) 
Daniel J. Hobbs
P.O. Box 2000
Wells, ME 04090
 Phone: (207) 360-0000
Daniel.Hobbs@legislature.maine.govHOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002
(207) 287-1400
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
March 15, 2023
Testimony of Rep. Daniel J. Hobbs presenting
LD 830 Resolve, Directing the Maine Community College System to Study Providing On-campus 
Housing on All Campuses
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, my name is Dan Hobbs and I represent House District 145 and a portion of the Wells 
community. I am here before you today to present LD 830 Resolve, Directing the Maine Community College 
System to Study Providing On-campus Housing on All Campuses. 
This bill would direct the Maine community college system to study the costs associated with providing on-
campus housing for all students. The community college system would need to consider the cost of constructing 
housing, the availability of space on campuses, the cost to students, other infrastructure and staff necessary to 
support housing, alternate housing options and any other issues the system feels are appropriate. 
Maine’s community colleges are seeing an overall 12 percent increase in enrollment because of the state’s free 
tuition program. With an increase in students comes a greater demand for on-campus housing. Both Southern 
Maine Community College and Central Maine Community College have long waitlists for housing leaving 
students to enter the housing market, which has skyrocketed in Maine and around the country.
The number of obstacles and financial obligations that accompany attending college is increasing. I want on-
campus housing to be more accessible to all students. Finding housing reasonably close to campus should not be 
added to the list of obstacles that they already face. 
 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions or provide any information you 
need in an upcoming work session.
