  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKe e 
 
Secretar y 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph M ekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Pren dergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
 April 11 , 2023  
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair  
Committee on Criminal Justice and P ublic Safety  
100 State House Station, Room 43 6 
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1014  – An Act Regarding Payments to Recipients of Restitution  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and Members of the 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety , 
 
MACDL opposes  LD 1014 . 
 
MACDL’s specific opposition to LD 1014  is the proposed language i n 17-A MRSA 
§§ 1707 and 1708 (1) that requires  restitution to be paid in full prior to paying any 
court fines .  
 
Historically, persons who owe  restitution have made  payments  through the District 
Attorney’s office if not on probati on and through the Department of Corrections if on 
probation. Despite the language  in the current iteration of the statu te allowing 
payment of restitution to the clerk of court, I am not aware  of any recent cases in 
which restitution has be en paid to the clerk of court . Therefore, we have no opposition 
to amending the language to make clear that restitution should be paid to the District 
Attorney’s office, or the Department of Corrections , as indicated.   
 
However, if th e Legislature were to no w require that restitution  be paid in full , prior 
to payment  of any court fines, it could have uni ntended consequences that are worth 
considering , including  creating additional burde ns on the court and po ssible license 
suspensions for our clients .   
 
By way of example, an  individual who is convicted of Class D misdemeanor assault  
that is order ed to pay $300 in restitution, would also be obligated to pay $300 in 
mandatory court  fines  (unless suspended by the court) . Almost certainly,  an indigent 
defendant would not be able to pay the restitution  in full on the date of c onviction and 
would have to establish a payment plan. At a payment plan of $10 per month, the 
restitution  would not be paid off for 2 ½ years.   
 
At the  time of the assault conviction,  a sepa rate payment plan would have to be 
established for the court fine s, and the Judge would necessarily have to set some 
future date (to begin 2 ½ years from the date of conviction)  for the payment plan to 
begin after payment of th e restitution in full. If the restitution payment plan wa s later  
 
 
 
 
 
amended, the court payment  plan would also have to be amended . That would requi re 
notification by the defendant, an attorney, or the District Attorney ’s Office to the 
court that the payment plan  for court fines  would  need to be amended.  
 
There  are many cases where restitution amounts are much larg er than $300, and 
scenarios  where restitution has been ordered in smaller amounts in several cases  and 
the aggregate now to tals thous ands of dollars.  If an individual has an existing payment 
plan to pay down court fines for other matters  and later is convicted of a new crime 
with a restitution  payment , do the payments  being made under  the existing payment 
plan for court fines cease until the person pays off the new restitution  order ? If so,  it 
would likely take  many years for that indigent defendant to pay off the restitution  in 
full before being able to make any payment  on his or her court fines. It would  also 
necessarily  require a new order on payment of fines  for the older cases , to begin at 
some date in the future,  and would require attorneys and the court to inquire about the 
status of existing payment  plans on older cases and restitution  at the time of  any new 
convicti on.  
 
The District Attorney ’s Offices would  have to  routinely track  payment  of all  
restitution  and notify the  clerks of court  when the restitution amount had been paid in 
full. If a defendant came to m ake a payment at the clerk window for his or her fines, 
would the clerk then be obligated  to contact t he District Attorney ’s office to determine  
whether  restitution had been paid off before it could accept the fine payment?   
 
Moreover,  MACDL has concerns that some c ases may fall through the cracks and 
orders to a mend fine payments may not get done. This could happen if a self-
represented defendant agreed to resolve a case with a restitution order but then did not 
realize he would need to inquire about  amend ing his order on payment  of court fines. 
If an amend ment w as not made , at some point it would likely  trigger a nother  court 
event for failure to pay fines , which could ultimately  result in license suspensions  for 
nonpayme nt.   
 
At a time when the court is  woef ully understaf fed, this legislation would create 
additi onal tracking and court events and require  additional communication between 
the District Attorney ’s offices and the clerks of courts  about the status of restit ution .  
 
MACDL understands the importance of vi ctims being made whole in cases where 
restitution is ordered. However, this legislation may prove to be onerous should it  be 
enacted , and it could cause additional (unin tended) consequences to our clients sh ould 
any li censes be suspended due to nonpayment of court fines .  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to  address this important issue.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
/s/ Amber L. T ucker  
Amber  L. Tucker  
President  
 
