131“ Maine State Legislature 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
Hon. Senator Anne Beebe-Center, Chair 
Hon. Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair 
Room 436 
State House Station 100 
Augusta ME 04333 
April 10, 2023 
RE: LD 1014, An Act Regarding Payments to Recipients of Restitution 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Honorable members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Joseph Owen. l am an Augusta native living with my wife in the neighborhood where l grew 
up. On 29 October 2011 a man broke into our house at 81 Green Street while my wife was asleep 
upstairs and stole a variety of items, including a laptop computer, a cellphone, a digital camera, anda 
set of keys. l apparently interrupted the burglary when I was returning home from work, but I did not 
see the burglar, who fled through a kitchen door leading to our side porch. He called us around 4 a.m. 
on 31 October and demanded $2,000 in cash in exchange for returning our belongings to us. Augusta 
police arrested him later that day after setting up a sting operation. He pleaded guilty in 2012 to 
burglary and theft by unauthorized taking in connection with the break-in at our house, as well as to 
other charges stemming from similar crimes at other people's property, and was sentenced to 18 
months in the Maine State Prison. In a 13 March 2012 ruling, a superior court judge ordered him to pay 
us $1,339.39 as restitution for the items he had stolen from us that police could not retrieve. 
We never received any payments from the Department of Corrections or its Division of Probation and 
Parole, nor were we notified that the defendant had been released from prison or probation. In June 
2013, I called Diana York (now Murphy), the restitution clerk in the Kennebec County District Attorney's 
Office, who said she would contact Probation and Parole. Later she told me that according to that 
agency, the defendant had been released from parole without any restitution payments having been 
collected. She filed a motion in district court to enforce payments and was able to collect $95 from the 
defendant, which the Kennebec County Treasurer's Office sent to us in November that year. 
Since that payment more than ten and a half years ago, we have received no further restitution. We 
have checked on the defendant's status from time to time and discovered that he committed and was 
convicted of several other crimes, and that the number of his victims who are entitled to restitution has 
grown. We also noted that whenever we received an update about his status, it was because we took 
the initiative to contact the District Attorney's Office or the Maine Department of Corrections, not 
because they called us. l assume a lack of staffing and the relative abundance of such crimes is the 
reason for that.
As a Maine resident who otherwise has no occasion to interact with prosecutors and prison officials, l 
am frustrated by the state's inability to monitor and enforce restitution payments and would welcome 
changes in law or policy that would expedite such payments. Since the defendant committed his crimes 
against us, my wife and I have moved to a different house, retired from our careers, welcomed two 
additional grandchildren into our lives, mourned the deaths of two of our parents, and experienced 
many other momentous developments. None of that has diminished the loss of the sense of security we 
had once felt while living in this neighborhood, or the nagging fear that such a burglary might happen 
again, with worse results. The state can't do anything about that psychological trauma, but it should be 
empowered at least to repair whatever financial damage such crimes inflict on victims. l encourage the 
Legislature and state policymakers to take the steps necessary, within the bounds of constitutional 
mandates, to ensure that we and other victims receive speedy and just compensation for losses that 
offenders have caused us and for which they have been ordered to atone. 
,Joseph Owen7 
CC: Criminal Justice Committee
