1 
’ “ KENNEBEC COUNTY COURTHOUSE Mae han Malone ., - 9 V ‘vi ~ 
95 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 DlSi|'lCi Attorney \}r£§ 6234156 
~10‘ W‘-r I 
Fax'622-5839 
Fra la Tar inian 317"?l 
D ‘Y D t_ tp mtome . 
SOMERSET COUNTY COURTHOUSE epu Y '3 "C V 41 Court Street, Skowhegan. ME 04976 
~&i]@ ,» 474-242a —' 
Fax: 474-7407 
STATE OF MAINE 
OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY PROSECUTORIAL DISTRICT IV 
131 st Maine State Legislature 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
Hon. Senator Anne Beebe-Center, Chair 
Hon. Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair 
Room 436 
State House Station 100 
Augusta ME 04333 
April 5*“ , 2023 
RE: LD 1014, An Act Regarding Payments to Recipients of Restitution 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Honorable members of the Criminal 
Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Kelly Staton. I am the Victim/Witness Advocate at the Kennebec County District 
Attorney ’s Office, sewing over Eighteen years. 
I am in favor of bill LD #1014; by this amended bill I feel that victims can be made whole, ina 
timelier manner. 
I hear the stories firsthand from victims. I am asked almost daily, of how long it will take fora 
victim to receive their money. My answer is as follows: My office will seek restitution with proof 
from you, the victim, of the value and/or amount owed. The Attorney for the State will request 
the court to order the restitution. If a defendant is sentenced to jail, then the Department of 
Corrections will collect restitution. Prior to the offender's release from jail, the Department of 
Corrections will provide our ofﬁce a written notice as to the amount of restitution outstanding, so 
our ofﬁce can enforce any outstanding restitution. It is the same when a defendant is placed on 
probation, the convicted individual will pay restitution to Probation, once the defendant 
completes their probation period, but has an outstanding obligation, and has defaulted in 
payments, then Probation will forward a notice of release to our office so our oﬁice can enforce 
any outstanding restitution.
Our ofﬁce maintains contact with Probation obtaining any notices of release and ﬁnancial 
documentation of any outstanding restitution, so we can enforce these payments. This process is 
difﬁcult for victims to understand, I receive repeated calls from victims of crimes who are 
frustrated wondering who they are to call, who is advocating for them, wanting updates on where 
their money is. Not only does a victim have trauma from the crime that was committed against 
them, now they endure the trauma from the system. 
I am hopeful that my letter will help to bring changes to the law detailing accountability and 
structure of the restitution process and to cotut orders, along with advocacy for the victims in 
these ases so past restitutions that are due, will be paid in full and in a timely manner.
' 
_ / ) 
ell Stato 
Cc: Crimina Justice Committee
