 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1014 (NFNA)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1014, An Act Regarding Payments to Recipients of Restitution  
 
DA: April 1 2, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
observations regarding LD 1014.  
 
 Judges can currently create an order of payment of fines and restitution by setting a date 
certain for each payment at the time of sentence.   Courts can also order that cash posted as a 
condition of bail be appl ied to restitution or fines.    Further, if a judge is aware that there are both 
outstanding fines and restitution when a defendant makes a request for an extension of payment of 
time to pay either, the judge can establish an order of payment by setting da tes certain for each 
obligation.    
 
 Ideally, financial obligations (restitution, fines, contributions to attorney fees) would be 
consolidated and paid to a central location, where they could be tracked and from which they could 
be distributed, and CLAC w ould support such a program.   Unfortunately, the State lacks the current 
infrastructure to implement such a process.  Currently, fines are paid to the court, and restitution 
may be paid through the District Attorney, Attorney General, or Dept. of Correcti ons, depending on 
whether or not a convicted person is incarcerated , where the person is incarcerated, and whether or 
not the person is subject to probation or another type of supervised release.   Because of these 
variables, there are practical implementa tion issues associated with the proposal.   In section s 2 and 
3, for example, if a fine is paid to the court clerk, the clerk does not necessarily have access to any 
information to determine whether restitution has been paid in full , because it may have be en paid 
through another agency .    
 
 Section 7 would represent a change in practice that could be confusing for convicted 
persons.   Currently, a convicted person who has completed any period of incarceration or probatio n 
would continue to make restitution  payments to the Dept. of Corrections, unless the person return s 
to court and the court establishes a different payment schedule.    Section 7 would automatically 
change the path of restitution payment s from DOC to the office of the prosecutor, which could  be 
confusing for the person making payments, and create payment tracking issues.      
 
 CLAC notes the following technical drafting point with respect to Section 7, if it is retained:  
In line 35, “continue to” should be deleted.   
  
 
   CLAC does not oppose  the changes proposed in Sections 1, 4, 5, 6 and 8.  With respect to 
section 6, CLAC recommends changing the term “monetary compensation” to “restitution.”     
 
  
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
