KATHRYN SLATTERY STATE OF CHRISTOPHER ALMY DISTRICT I DISTRICT V 
JAQUELINE SARTORIS NATASHA IRVING 
DISTRICT II DISTRICT VI 
NEIL MCLEAN ROBERT GRANGER DISTRICT III DISTRICT VII 
MAEGHAN MALONEY I I 
TODD R QOLUNS 
DISTRICT VIII DISTRICT IV . 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION 
AARON FREY 
ATTORNEY GENERAL 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Beebe—Center, Representative Salisbury, and 
Honorable members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Committee, my name is Maeghan Maloney, I ain the District 
Attorney for Kennebec and Somerset Counties and the President of 
the Maine Prosecutors Association (“MPA”) and I am submitting this 
written testimony in support of LD 1014, An Act Regarding 
Payments to Recipients of Restitution. 
What is restitution? In its simplest terms, restitution is money 
that a court orders a defendant to pay to a victim. Why does a judge 
order a defendant to pay a victim? In short, it is because the 
defendant caused a harm that money will help to fix. 
An example illustrates this best. I prosecuted a domestic 
violence case where a defendant was ordered to pay money to 
replace the teeth he had punched out of his girlfriend ’s mouth. She 
had no money to replace her missing teeth. After he was convicted, 
she often came into the DA’s Office asking if he had paid his 
restitution. With every check we handed her, she was able to pay 
for another tooth. _ 
Another example: an elderly Woman’s trailer had been~ 
burglarized by breaking a Window. The Woman taped plastic over 
her Window but was terrified of not surviving the Winter until she 
received the restitution money to pay for that broken Window.
Restitution money goes exclusively to victims—not insurance 
companies. We require victims to document every loss and the 
amount it Will cost to repair. We are required to give the court 
dental bills, medical bills, and repair estimates to prove beyonda 
reasonable doubt that the victim needs the restitution and it is 
directly connected to the defendant ’s crime. 
After the judge orders that restitution be paid to a victim, We 
are only just beginning. It can take months, years, sadly sometimes 
decades, for the defendant to pay. That is Why we are here today. 
These are mostly technical fixes needed to the statute to make sure 
that money that defendants. pay goes to victims first. For example, 
section 1 of the bill would require that money from a criminal 
forfeiture should go first to victims. Another example, sections 2 
and 3 of the bill, would have money paid after a conviction going 
first to a victim, and only after the victim is made Whole, then to 
other debts such as court fines. Finally, the bill clarifies where 
restitution payments are to be made when probation is over. To 
clarify this further I have included a joint amendment with MDOC. 
The red unlined Words are the amendment. 
The MPA is grateful to our legislative sponsor, Rep. Kelly 
Murphy. The MPA believes this legislation is an example of how we 
can make significant positive changes to our criminal justice system 
with victim compensation before the payment of our institutions. 
Our dedicated, hard—Working subject matter expert, Diana 
Murphy, will be speaking after me but I’m happy to answer any 
questions that I can. 
Thank you,A 
District Attorney
