t
I
i
l
i
k
<
<
!
i
i
i
i
l
i
I
t
i
E
E
l
=
E
E
i 
E I31 st Maine State Legislature 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
Hon. Senator Anne Beebe-Center, Chair 
Hon. Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair 
Room 436 
State House Station I00 
Augusta ME 04333 
March 13, 2023 
RE: LD 1014, An Act Regarding Payments to Recipients of Restitution 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Honorable members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Rosemary Boudreau, I live in the town of Madison, my father was a victim of a theft crime 
who has since passed away and I am the executor of the estate. l am in favor of bill LD #1014, by this 
amended bill I feel that victims can be made whole, I a more timely manner than my father and myself. 
I-Iere is mine and my father’s story: 
The initial date of this offense was 4/ l9/2020 and the order from the court was initially placed in 
December of 2020 Regina was supposed to meet with probation and develop a monthly pay 
Some months being 35.00 some being as low as 10.00. 
Regia was ordered to pay restitution to my father, Richard Boudrean, in the amount of 
$11,800.00. The ﬁrst amount was received from Victim Services on 9/27/21. To date, the Estate 
has only received $405.00. 
My father passed away prior to any funds being received and I was awarded Executor of his 
estate after his passing at the age of eighty-nine. 
On 5/19/2022, I spent the afternoon at the court house, the District Attorney ’s office and the 
Probation oﬁice in Augusta trying to ﬁgure out how to modify these conditions. If the defend 
continues to pay the average of $45.00 per month it will take nearly twenty-two years to pay _ thi 
debt. 
While at the probation ofﬁce, it was conﬁrmed that the defendant states she has no gainful 
employment per her probation officer Joanne Cerrone. ‘ ant
s enti . I
m 
plan based on income. Not only were we receiving checks infrequently, the amounts were small.
If/ll“, The defendant stole my elderly father’s little savings in one day but will take her twenty-two 
years to repay this debt. There are no expectations of the defendant, that she holds gainful 
employment so how will she repay this debt. 
My father was a pillar in his community as an integral part of the Catholic Church, Secular 
Franciscans, Spectrum Generations and other groups offering his time, passion, patience, 
assistance and support to those in need for over sixty years following time served in the Korean 
War. 
What was done to my father by his care giver, was a financial and character assault against my 
respected and charitable father. If the defendant needed help in some way and asked, we would 
have done what we could to help her and her children. Instead, she stole and now won’t repay. 
I want to see probation hold offenders accountable for paying restitution monthly at an amount 
that is fair to the crime committed and in a timely manner. I am glad that the case is now 
transitioned now to the District Attorney ’s oiiice, so that restitution payments continue with 
oversight of the offender. This made me think about how many other victims in similar 
situations have never received restitution in a timely manner. 
I am hopeful that my letter will help to bring changes to the law detailing accountability and 
structure of the probation process and to court orders, along with advocacy for the victims in 
these cases so past restitutions that are due, will be paid in full and in a timely manner then my 
father and I have been. I am still be waiting to be made whole. 
‘i 
{~10 §>@-rvz e)¢ive:.<:zJ.J._ _~ 
List your name and sign your statement. 
Cc: Criminal Justice Committee
