W . Z'" 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
Ambureen Rana (207) 287-1400 
124 West Broadway TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Bangor, ME 04401 
Cell: (207) 350-5081 
Ambureen.Rana@legislature.maineirov 
April 5, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Ambureen Rana Presenting 
LD 540, An Act to Establish Peer Respite Centers for Adults with Mental 
Health Challenges in Maine 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Ambureen Rana, andI 
represent House District 21, which includes a portion of Bangor. I am here before you today to 
present LD 540, An Act to Establish Peer Respite Centers for Adults with Mental Health 
Challenges in Maine. 
This bill directs the Maine Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Office of 
Behavioral Health to develop a Request for Proposal for two adult peer respite centers in Maine. 
They should be based in geographically-diverse locations and should align with the higher usage 
areas based on DHHS crisis usage data. They should be completely run by peers with lived 
mental health challenges utilizing the Intentional Peer Support Model. 
Peer respite is a voluntary, short-term, overnight program that provides community-based, 
non-clinical crisis support to help people find new understanding and ways to move forward. It 
operates 24 hours per day in a homelike environment. These programs do not replace traditional 
clinical services, but rather, they provide altematives and choices for individuals. Further, these 
programs are managed and staffed by people with lived experience and are trained peer support 
specialists. 
Programs like these reduce usage of the emergency room and crisis stabilization unit visits while 
allowing peers to stay in their community. 
Complementary to our overwhelmed psychiatric crisis services, peer-run respites are less costly 
and often more effective than the alternatives. The average inpatient psychiatric stay in the 
United States costs $7,100 and lasts 6.4 days. In comparison, the same length stay at the Aﬁya 
Respite in Massachusetts is $2,594.
Peer-run respite programs offer support consensually, without coercion or force, creating a more 
1‘6Sp€Ctﬁll and Warmer environment. In contrast, forced treatment has poorer results and drives 
some people away from the mental health systems. 
We must take a multi-pronged approach to address our mental health care needs, and peer-run 
respite centers will help provide the care our community members are so desperately seeking. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. While I am happy to answer any questions you may 
have, the Consumer Council System of Maine is also here and can help answer any more 
technical questions.
