Good Afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed 
members of the Health and Human Sen/ices Committee, 
My name is April Kerr, I am a resident of Farmington and I am 
testifying in support of LD 540 “An Act to Establish Peer Respite 
Services for Adults with Mental Health Challenges in Maine.” 
I am a person who has had lived experience of mental health 
struggles for decades. For the past 6+ years, I have been in recovery, andI 
am working toward a healthier me every day. 
I 
The battles I faced were traumatizing and often caused one thing to 
lead to another. “lt’s a vicious cycle” , is not just a saying. There were times 
when I felt so trapped, not because I couldn’t go somewhere due to 
transportation or money or because someone was telling me that I couldn’t. 
It was more about not knowing where to go once I left home. I struggled 
with a major depressive disorder and deeply hidden fear and anxiety mostly 
because of a battle with agoraphobia. I didn’t know what I was struggling 
with but I knew what I was feeling and thinking. Why did I always seem to 
wait until it was dark out to go to the store or any other kinds of things 
outside of the home that I needed or wanted to do? Why did I go to the 
store and sit in the parking lot for 20, 30, or even 40 minutes before finally 
going inside to buy what I needed? I would sit there and go over what l had 
for money, my list, and so on. Then I would think, do I really need to go in 
today? Can I wait until tomorrow or later in the week to get these things? I 
would often turn around and go home without even getting out of my car. 
I knew there was something wrong but I didn’t know what. I was in 
counseling and saw a psychiatrist sometimes when I would go, and whenI 
had an appointment. The help was minimal at best. If I could just go 
somewhere and rest, get away from the, (stuff) that I was surrounded by for 
a day or so... but where would I go? To a friend’s? That would mean thatI 
would have to deal with their questions and “stuff” in their life/home. That's 
not going to work. You see when someone is in a mode of needing help 
and not knowing where to go or what they need for help, trusting people or 
wanting to deal with more stuff on top of their own is just too much. You are 
left with your own despair and uselessness, in a dark and weaiy place. You
feel like no one could understand or much less care. This is one of those 
places that can lead to self-medicating with alcohol and/or drugs, 
overeating, etc. lf l had only had the chance to go to a place where 
someone could have sat with me and helped me process what my needs 
were and how l could work on getting them met l may not have done many 
of the things I did to get through the moment. l might even have had the 
chance to spend the night in a safe and judgmental drama-free space, oh 
Hallelujahll 
I know that much of what l have explained here today may not seem 
like too much but believe me it was and if not for the grace of God I would 
not be here today! People are suffering in silence right now, today. They 
are in their homes or on the street or in an Emergency dept. Waiting to be 
seen, and will they be seen? Will they be heard? Will they be sent home 
with a pill bottle or sent to a psychiatric hospital to wander the halls 
wondering if they did the right thing by even going to the hospital? Are they 
going to pay with a label for the rest of their life? Should they have just 
stayed home and shut the door on the world? Does it matter? Does 
anybody care? This is how many people think and feel during these times 
of desperation and they/we need somewhere to turn, somewhere to help 
them turn around their life, get a healthy reset, if only for a brief moment in 
time. Please help us get this tool in place to help get the direction needed. 
Please, please vote ought to pass. 
Sincerely, April Kerr 
F armington
