April 5, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of 
the Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Ash Hebert, I am a resident 
of Waterville, and I am here today to testify in favor of LD 540. 
I approach this testimony with not only evidence but also as someone who has been 
subjected to crisis services multiple times in my life. LD 540 would establish two 
adult peer respite centers across the state in areas that report the highest 
concentrations of crisis service utilization. And while that may sound or feel far- 
fetched, research reveals that peer support respite programs in New York, California, 
and Georgia have witnessed an overall reduction in hospitalization rates, duration of 
stay, costs; and decreased reliance on more coercive forms of treatment. Peer respite 
models encourage a more humanizing safety net for people who are experiencing 
crisis by allowing free movement, choice in support options (wellness walks, peer 
suppoit groups, art/music, cooking, mindfulness), and access to a peer-comprised staff 
during initial intake and throughout one’s stay. Respite is based in a trauma-sensitive, 
home-like, and voluntary setting (Mad in America, 2021). Evidence therefore shows 
that peer respites provide an awesome alternative to hospitalization for individuals 
like me who experience mental health crises from time to time (LAPPA, 2021). 
Likewise, LD 540 is a bill to celebrate, and it aligns beautifully with the principles 
and goals of the AMHI Consent Decree of l990, such as: decreased reliance on 
institutionalization, a redistribution of funding to the community, providing least 
restrictive available treatment settings and means, and service delivery based on 
individualized needs. To be honest with you all, sometimes I experience scary bouts 
of crisis and while I wish more than anything that I could conﬁde in the current 
medical system the State offers to relieve some of that suffering, I have had far too 
many traumatic and forced experiences to ever return voluntarily. That is a major 
shame and I recognize it is a shared experience for many other peers. This, however, 
can begin to change with your inﬂuence. In closing, I urge you to pass LD 540. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Ash Hebert 
Watewille Constituent
Resources 
Peer Respites as an Alternative to Hospitilization (legislativeanalysis.0rg) 
TABLE OF CONTENTS (mainegov) 
Evidence for Peer Sugport May 2019.pdf (_mhanational.org)
