carlene  mahaffey
IPSAC
LD 540
Members of the Health and Human Services Committee; thank you for you time in 
reading 
Testimony from the Intentional Peer Support Advisory Committee (IPSAC) IN 
SUPPORT OF An Act to Establish Peer Respite Centers for Adults with Mental 
Health Challenges in Maine
The Intentional Peer Support Advisory Committee (IPSAC) is a group of Certified 
Intentional Peer Support Specialists who advise and support the Department of Health
and Human Services in the continued development and fidelity of Intentional Peer 
Support (IPS) practices in Maine.
This bill is a step in the right direction when it comes to offering a solution to the 
complex problems and situations we are seeing in the emergency departments, 
psychiatric hospitals, other inpatient psychiatric programs, and at some community 
based clinical programs.
  As IPSAC has said in other testimony, when a person is supported in the community
and is offered choices, not directives, of treatment (because one size does not fit all in 
the mental health world) the burden on emergency departments and hospitals will be 
eased.  
Having the option to go to a peer respite means a person will not have their life 
interrupted.  Those housing vouchers and applications, those hard to get medical 
appointments, that job, that new friendship will not be put on hold, with a chance of 
disappearing.   
 Peer Respite centers are an alternative resource for people when going through a 
mental health crisis.  It is a safe space where a person can have access to an 
Intentional Peer Support Specialist and have those difficult conversations that can 
help a person to heal from a traumatic environment/situation. This kind of treatment 
option utilizes community based resources to heal and builds on the strength of the 
community.  A person is able to move beyond immediate urgency without going to an
emergency department, where they risk trauma and languishing for days or months 
with no treatment or resolve.  
From IPSAC’s personal perspective, most of us wish that an alternative choice had 
existed when we needed it.  For most of us, having those difficult conversations that 
only an intentional peer support specialist would have, or taking the Intentional Peer 
Support training, is what made the difference in our lives.  We often say and hear, “If 
I had met a CIPSS…” or “If I had been able to go to a peer respite…”, things would 
have been different. Peer Respite Centers would allow us to connect with a person 
with lived experience to normalize what we were feeling or going through.  Please 
bring Peer Respites back to Maine! 
As the organization which oversees the Certified Intentional Peer Support Program 
in Maine, which the peer respites will employ, we look forward to collaboration and 
involvement in the development of these much needed programs. 
Thank you for your time. Please vote Out to Pass. 
Members of IPSAC
Contact: carma21@gmail.com

