Testimony of Doug Dunbar from Hermon, Maine 
 
In Support of LD 540 
An Act to Establish Peer Respite Centers for  
Adults with Mental Health Challenges in Maine 
 
Public Hearing: April 5, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Committee on Health and Human Services, 
my name is Doug Dunbar. As a person who has experienced mental health disorders on a daily basis since 
my earliest recollections as a child, I write to urge your support for LD 540.   
 
In my case, stigma and fear kept me from seeking treatment. My disorders—OCD and anxiety—were 
concealed from everyone in my life. They were often tormenting and debilitating, but I managed my way 
through life until 9/11. 
 
When those attacks occurred 21 years ago, I was working on Capitol Hill in Washington as John 
Baldacci’s communications director in the U.S. House of Representatives. My obsessive compulsive 
disorder and anxiety spiraled out of control. Soon after, I began self-medicating with alcohol. 
 
Returning to Maine, I worked as Governor Baldacci’s press secretary, then served as Maine’s Chief 
Deputy Secretary of State. During those years, my alcohol consumption increased in frequency and 
quantity. Eventually, I began to experience legal problems. 
 
Very poor decision-making caused by my alcohol use disorder ultimately resulted in several months in 
jail during 2017 and 2018 and over a year in the Penobscot County Adult Drug Treatment Court. While 
incarcerated, my eyes were opened to our profound failures as a society to properly care for people who 
are ill and to provide appropriate community-based services and resources. 
 
The number of individuals with mental illness who land and languish in our jails and prisons is 
unconscionable. Until you have witnessed and experienced what happens to individuals who are ill in 
places of incarceration, I am not sure you can fully appreciate our collective failures. 
 
LD 540 is one of numerous steps we should be taking to provide alternatives for individuals who require 
support, guidance, encouragement, and hope. There are currently few options, and they are often harmful.  
 
The positive impact of peer-support is increasingly well-known and valued. This legislation is a modest 
effort to provide settings where individuals can heal and acquire support from others whose lived 
experience can make a significant difference.  
 
Thanks for your time and consideration of this request to support LD 540. Special thanks to 
Representative Ambureen Rana for sponsoring this important, much-needed legislation and to Senator 
Mike Tipping, Representative Joe Perry and Representative Laurie Osher for cosponsoring the bill. 
 
There are ample expert sources of research and data demonstrating the beneficial impacts of peer-focused 
care, but I would be happy to provide additional information if you contact me ( dougdunbar@yahoo.com  
or 207-299-5626).   
 
