DISABILITY 
RIGHTS 
MAINED 
April 5, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Cross Office Building, Room 209 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 540 An Act to Establish Peer Respite Centers for Adults with Mental Health 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
My name is Jane Moore and I am a mental health advocate with Disability Rights Maine, 
Maine’s designated protection and advocacy agency for people with disabilities. As an advocate 
I have Worked at Riverview Psychiatric Center (RPC) and am currently working as a mental 
health advocate in the community mostly in York and Cumberland County. I am also a peer and 
worked as a Certiﬁed Intentional Peer Support Specialist at RPC. Disability Rights Maine 
testifies today in support of LD 540 "An Act to Establish Peer Respite Centers for Adults with 
Mental Health Challenges in Maine". 
According to the National Empowerment Center 14 states currently offer peer respite including 
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont. ‘ Peer respite provides a voluntary, low barrier 
alternative to traditional crisis services such as emergency departments and crisis stabilization 
residences. It can be a unique additional resource along the continuum of mental health care 
already offered in Maine. 
New peer respite programs are emerging every day throughout the country and the research that 
has been undertaken shows evidence of their effectiveness in reducing costs and frequency of 
1 https://p0wer2u.org/directory-of —peer-respites/ 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330 
207.626.2774 - 1.800.452.1948 - Fax: 207.621.1419 - drme.org 
MAINE'S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
hospitalizations among those utilizing the centers? A study conducted in California found that 
peer respite guests at the Second Story program were 70% less likely to use the emergency 
department or hospital inpatient services as Well as a decreased reliance on coercive treatment. 
Second Story was the ﬁrst peer respite program to open in the country and it was funded bya 
SAMHSA Mental Health Transformation Grant. 
SAMHSA cites the cost effectiveness of peer-run crisis respite but also points to the more 
important qualitative outcomes including the restoration of hope and empowerment in a less 
traumatizing, strength-based setting.4 In addition the focus at peer respite programs is not the 
traditional focus on what is wrong with you, but on building strength to move forward towards 
your goals. 
Because of the success of peer respite, its cost effectiveness and the impact it can have to 
enhance the lives of people with psychiatric labels, Disability Rights Maine urges you to vote 
ought to pass.W 
Thank you for your time. 
Respectfully, 
Jane A. Moore, JD 
Advocate 
Disability Rights Maine 
2 
Bouchery, Ellen f. et aI" The Effectiveness of Peer-staffed Crisis Respite Program as an Alternative to 
Hospitalization. ” Psychiatric Services 69:10 (oct.2018): 1069-1074. 
3 
Encompass Community Services, "Second Story" Accessed .lan.13, 2021. 
4 SAMHSA Peer-run respites: An effective Crisis Alternative"3
