April 5, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Honorable 
Members of the Health and Human Services Committee. 
My name is Kandie Cleaves, and I reside in Garland. I am here to testify in favor 
of, LD 540 “An Act to Establish Peer Respite Centers for 
Adults with Mental Health Challenges in Maine." 
While I haven't been to a Peer Respite personally it is easy for me 
to see how it can be effective, from my other experiences. 
I raised daughters who required special needs services. Because 
of this I had occasional opportunities to have respite services, 
that allowed their dad and I to have a short break while the kids 
were with safely cared for. This time was to relax, get extra sleep 
or do something fun. It made a huge difference when I returned 
home. That type of respite served its purpose well. Had I had an 
opportunity to go somewhere without my then husband or the 
kids, where I could talk with Peers who could relate to the many 
things, I was dealing with emotionally it could have cut years off 
the time I spent in counselling. 
For some of us finding or maintaining healthy friendships with 
people we can spend time with can already be challenging, add in 
mental health issues that are overwhelming your life and it often 
makes the challenge impossible. For years my in—person circle 
consisted of my medical team, individuals assigned from church 
to visit, my husband's friends and an older neighbor couple. I was 
only able to connect with others at that time via mail or a pay 
phone. I was unaware of peers I could share and relate with. 
People, including family don't often want to be around someone 
who wants to talk of the mental health struggles they are dealing 
with, it's depressing. I became disconnected from most of the 
family I was raised with for this reason.
There were many times in my life years ago where I should have 
received more intense treatment, but I avoided my providers 
during those times since I had no one who could step in and 
provide care for my children if I were away. Their dad was not an 
appropriate option. 
At those times going out of my home became impossible. I recall 
one incident where I watched the mailman leave a letter in my 
box across the road. I desperately wanted that letter that I knew 
my mom had sent, but could only stand at the window and cry, 
knowing it would be a few more hours before my girls got home 
from school and would bring in the mail. At that time I was 
dutifully taking my meds and seeing a counselor at my home 
once a week. But I needed more than 45 minutes a week to talk. 
A mental health hospital would have been more than I needed, 
but a Peer Respite where I could have talked to people who could 
relate, an where arrangements would have been made for my 
kids, so I didn't have to worry about their safety or about the 
state coming to get them, would have been a perfect option, and 
one that would have saved thousands of dollars and could have 
allowed me to remain capable of working at that point in life. 
In closing I hope that you can see the benefits as well and will 
vote in favor of passing LD 540.A 
Thank you, 
Kandie Cleaves 
Garland
