April 5,2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of 
the Health and Human Services Committee, 
My name is Karen Evans. l am from Portland, and I am testifying in favor of-LD 540- 
“An Act to Establish Peer Respite Services for Adults with Mental Health 
Challenges in Maine.” 
My testimony will reflect how useful peer respite has been to individuals who use this 
service 
Both conventional therapeutic and peer respite modality approaches support people 
through emotional crises Many times people in clinical roles get set up with the 
impossible expectation that you have control over people and if they don-’t do well it is 
their fault. The goal of the conventional approach is to reduce or eliminate symptoms, 
making the person easier to manage and conform to dominant cultural norms. A peer 
respite program does not replace traditional clinical sen/ices, rather it provides an 
alternative and a different choice for individuals. 
The conventional approach can be very fear-based. A review of over 100 studies 
worldwide concluded, “The immediate post-discharge period is a time of marked risk, 
but rates of suicide remain high for many years after discharge." Another 
study concluded “Suicide risk increased during the entire admission and post-discharge 
period, but peaked in the ﬁrst week of admission and the ﬁrst week post-discharge. ” 
When I was in a local psychiatric facility hospital staff wanted me regulated and stable 
which to me means numb and dumb. 
In contrast, a peer-run respite approach is power with, where decisions are guided by 
the person in crisis, whose knowledge of themselves and their situation is honored. The 
focus is on creating a safe space by listening, exploring the person's experience and 
perspective, and supporting them in thinking and feeling their way through the crisis, 
even if it means going into the unknown and tolerating uncertainty. 
Data for peer respite shows improvements in self-esteem, empowerment, social activity 
and self-rated mental health symptoms; cost savings; 70% reduction in use of inpatient 
or emergency sen/ices; and more. 
Peer respites reduce usage of the emergency room and crisis stabilization unit visits 
while allowing peers to stay in their community.
ln closing, peer respites offer a unique alternative to traditional crisis services while 
being very cost effective. So I urge this committee to vote0 “ought to pass" on LD 540 
https://www.madinamerica.com/2023/O3/peer-run-respite-soteria-house-aQproach/ 
Sincerely 
Karen Evans 
Portland
