April 5, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and 
Honorable Members of the Health and Human Services Committee. 
My name is Krystal Gustin, and I reside in Bangor. I am writing to testify in favor 
of, LD 540 “An Act to Establish Peer Respite Centers for 
Adults with Mental Health Challenges in Maine." 
I wasn't sure where to start Ijust kept drawing blanks, I thought back to 
more recent traumatic experiences, thought a bit too deeply abouta 
woman I saw abducted and how my pleas to the authorities were not taken 
seriously, just as my own had not been heard when I sought help for 
myself. This created a mini-PTSD experience so instead Ijust decided to 
type what comes to mind. 
I could list off manytimes in my life where I could have used a respite care 
center especially as a young single mother who had experienced much 
trauma from an early age and throughout life. I am now in a better place in 
life than I was for many years, but I write this in hopes that this gets 
approved and that those who can utilize these respite centers will not have 
to take as long as I did to get to a better place in life and forthose who may 
faulter on their path and just need a brief reset to resume their recoveiy. 
We live in a time where we are all connected yet never have so many 
people felt so alone. These centers will give people the opportunity to be 
with others who have a common purpose and are more likely to understand 
one another. It will help them to feel less alone, be less isolated and feel 
lessjudged. It offers a peer setting ratherthan a clinical setting. I can attest 
that going inpatient for mental health can often be more harmful, I felt 
unheard, judged and ashamed and the staff and doctors are unrelatable, 
and the setting is cold, it feels more like being a criminal than a patient. It 
would be good and vital to have a place where people can go who know 
that they need a respite before reaching a mental breakdown and not have 
to turn in their shoelaces. With their peers they can talk and feel 
understood and greatly relieve the stress putting them there. They can 
share resources, strategies and coping skills with one another. But mostly 
they can offer each other needed companionship and compassion.
We have ven/little options ifanyto help give people a needed respite that 
aren'tthe extreme.We need more options and this is one that is proven to 
help, so please help by passing LD 540. 
Thank you for taking time to hear my thoughts. 
Krystal Gustin 
Bangor
