Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The uniﬁed voice for Maine's communiry behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Alliance 
J Testimony in Support of LD 540 
”An Act to Establish Peer Respite Centers for Adults with 
Mental Health Challenges in Maine" 
~ Off,-Q,-5 ~ Sponsored by Representative Ambureen Rana 
April 5, 2023 
Dave Mccluskey, President 
c°"""‘“"ltV Care Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and hardworking members of 
5‘I 
- - 4 - Greg B°wel;s' low“ P'°‘id°"t 
the Health and Human Services Committees. My name lS Malory Shaughnessy and I am 
Bob Descozautzad vice the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The 
President Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine's community 
lVl'ain@Ge ﬂ@ra| Behavioral Health based mental health and substance use treatment providers, providing services to over 
K3" Hal!’ 5°°"°ta'Y 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates for the implementation 
Penquis CAP Inc‘ 
of sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
Ellen Bemis Treasurer . . 
Amostook Mentél Health Center effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink On behalf of the Alliance, lam here today to speak in support of LD 540, "An Act to 
Establish Peer Respite Centers for Adults with Mental Health Challenges in Maine." 
l N B°‘”d MembersN 
The proposal directs the department to establish through contracts two peer respite 
Ad Ed ti a| msftute centers in the State for persons 18 years of age or older. Further, the proposal funds 
Aliﬁt Mﬁa cocgtt Hosgtal the establishment of the two peer respite centers. The proposal states that the 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. centers must provide 24-hour intentional peer support to persons in need of mental 
Androscoggin Home & Healthﬂre health services on a voluntary, short-term basis. Additionally, the centers must be in 
Assmance Plus geographically diverse locations in the State that have populations with a high 
Cathuhc Charities ’ Maine ut'l' at' on rate of crisis services Co-occurring Collaborative I '2 | ' 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center A peer respite is a voluntary, short-term, overnight program that provides" 
C°'"""‘°" Ties community-based, non-clinical crisis support to help people find new understanding 
€°mm““ _ity 
58:1’: ;°gab‘:;::‘r:e and ways to move forward. They operate 24 hours per day in a homelike 
ommunity G OU g _ _ _ _ _ 
COR Heath environment. Successful peer respites are currently operating in many states. Studies 
Crisis & Counseling Centers have found a 70% reduction in inpatient or emergency services usel and that peer 
' 
CF0$$f<>ad$ Maine respites strengthen self-sufficiency and social connectedness? 
Genoa Healthcare & 
I h‘ . . 
KennegﬁcegpggvijtgfHealth According to the US Department of Health and Human Services Substance Abuse and 
Maine Beha(,;ora| Heam, Mental Health Services Administration, "Utilization of peer support is, by now,a 
Organization common practice in many fields. In the medical world of today, for example, there is 
Mame 5eha\’l°'a' Healthwe scarcely a specialty where peer support is not recognized as a valuable adjunct to 
M':ﬁ;m:3e rtF:1ei:1 ’:'e'Y professional medical and social interventions. Improved outcomes are particularly 
Northern Ligh}/Acadia notable when peer support services are provided to people with chronic conditions 
Pbrtland Recovery Community that require long-term self-management. Thus, the peer recovery support services 
Center offered by RCSP grant projects and others stand in a long, well-documented, and 
Pathway‘ °f Mame copied evidence-based tradition. “ 
Rumford Group Homes l 
Brighter Heights Maine _ _ _ _' 
Sunrise Opportunities Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of this important proposal. I urge 
Sweetser you to vote ought to pass. I'd be happy to answer any questions you have for me. 
TriCounty Mental Health Services 
_ We"sl"l"g' Inc’ 
, , 1. Croft, B., & lsvan, N. (2015, June). Impact of the 2nd story peer respite program on use of inpatient, 
Wings for Children & Families . . . . 
Woodfords Family Services and emergency services. Psychiatric Services, 66(6), 632-637. 
2. Croft, B., Weaver, A., & Ostrow, L. (2021). Self-reliance and belonging: Guest experiences of a peer 
respite. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 44(2), 124-131. 
3. SAMSHA. Acessed on 04.01.2023. https://store.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/sma09~4454.pdf 
. 295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.org
