219 Capitol Street, Suite7 
ﬁensurner ﬁeuneii System of hﬁﬁine Augusta’ ME 04330 
A Voice for Consumers of Mental Health Services 
Phone: 207.430.8300 
Fax: 207.430.8301 
TO“-Fl'€€I 877.207.5073 
www.maineccsm.org 
April 5, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee, 
My name is Simonne Maline. I am the Executive Director for the Consumer Council System of Maine 
(CCSM). I am here today on behalf of the CCSM to testify in support of LD 540 "An Act To 
Establish Peer Respite Centers for Adults with Mental Health Challenges in Maine". 
The Consumer Council System of Maine is a public instrumentality written into State Statute by the Maine 
Legislature to sen/e in an advisory capacity and to provide legislators with guidance and advice regarding 
the delivery of effective and appropriate adult mental health services from those sen/ed by them. 
We are very excited to see this day! We wish to reestablish this program(s) in Maine. The history of peer 
respite in Maine and in the US is that Maine was not the first one but close to the very beginning of when 
peer respite was started in our country. In 2002 the only peer respite in Maine was opened in Brunswick 
and was available for anyone regardless of where they lived and was of no cost to the individual. It was 
funded by what we now call the Office of Behavioral Health, DHHS. It closed in 2017. The CCSM has been 
advocating for respite to return to Maine ever since. 
I was fortunate enough to be one of the individuals that ran the program in Brunswick. I saw how many 
individuals experienced significant support and did not need inpatient or high intensity supports after a stay 
as a guest in the respite program. I saw individuals move fon/vard in their recovery. 
Currently in the US, there are 14 states with peer respites and 43 different programs. The link to the 
directory is below. The cost difference is also significant. Inpatient can cost 3 times more than the cost ofa 
day at a peer respite. 
There are some very distinct differences between clinical sen/ices and peer respite. Peer respite isa 
completely voluntary program whereas inpatient services contain locked units, individuals can be 
involuntarily committed and many experience trauma from the ways we force people into treatment. 
Support experienced at respites is a mutual relationship based on dignity and respect. Inpatient sen/ices, 
while some clinicians can be kind to individuals, there is a very different “power over” framework. The 
“professionals ” know what is best and will tell you what you need to be fixed. In that process we overlook 
the person in distress and assume they do not know what they need. Nor do we give them to space to 
explore their own inner knowing of what is best. This is the foundation of what peer respite is built upon. 
Guests of respite also report a high level of satisfaction in utilizing this type of program. Below are some
’ iieﬁeurﬁer €euracii ﬁysieerra er Meiee A Voice for Consumers of Mental Health Services1 
links to research done on peer respites that show very positive outcomes as well as where they are in the 
US. 
Directory of Peer Respites - National Empowerment Center (power2u.org) 
Peer Respites — Live & Learn, inc. ilivetearnincmetl 
What is a Peer Respite? - Hope and Healing Center and Institute 
I would be than wiling to be available for the work session and provide additional resources that may be 
needed. 
l urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 540. 
Sincerely, 
Executive Director
