April 5,2023 
 
Good day, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee, 
 
My name is Victoria McCarty.  I am from Augusta, and I wish as a person with mental 
health challenges to testify in favor of LD 540 - “An Act to Establish Peer Respite 
Services for Adults with Mental Health Challenges in Maine   
 
Peer respite can be described as “a voluntary, short-term, overnight program that 
provides community-based, trauma-informed, and person-centered crisis support and 
prevention 24 hours a day in a homelike environment to individuals with mental health 
conditions who are experiencing acute distress, anxiety, or emotional pain that if left 
unaddressed may lead to the need for inpatient hospital services.” 
 
The Advantages of Peer-run Crisis Respites Are: 
• Peer Respites contribute to restoration of hope for individuals. 
• Provides meaningful employment for persons with disabilities. 
• Peer Respite alternatives are working well in other states such as California, Florida, 
Georgia, Iowa, Massachusetts, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, 
Ohio, Pennsylvania, Vermont, and Wisconsin.  
•Peer Respite is empowering, less traumatic.  
• The Focus is on strength-based approaches that encourage growth and recovery.  
• Enables continuity of care and life in community. 
http://www.nasmhpd.org/sites/default/files/Peer%20Run%20Respite%20slides.revised.p
df  
LEGISLATIVE ANALYSIS AND PUBLIC POLICY ASSOCIATION 
Peer Respites as an ALTERNATIVE to Hospitalization. February 2021 
https://legislativeanalysis.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Peer-Respites-as-an-
Alternative-to-Hospitilzation-FINAL.pdf   
 
Peer Respite Resources 
https://livelearninc.net/respite-research    
 
In an article published in Psychiatry Online entitled: The Effectiveness of a Peer-
Staffed Crisis Respite Program as an Alternative to Hospitalization a study 
assessed whether peer-staffed crisis respite centers implemented in New York City in 
2013 as an alternative to hospitalization reduced emergency department (ED) visits, 
hospitalizations, and Medicaid expenditures for individuals enrolled in Medicaid.  
“In the first year following crisis respite services, clients experienced fewer 
hospitalizations and had lower total Medicaid expenditures compared with individuals 
with similar characteristics who received inpatient treatment for a psychiatric crisis 
during the same time period. Previous studies have demonstrated the value of peer 
services in other contexts, including longer-term residential treatment, outpatient mental 
health care, and the delivery of services intended to change health-related behaviors 
(4,7,12). Studies have found that peer services can reduce client depression and 
increase hope compared with typical care ( 4,13). They also have shown that peer 
supports increase rates of engagement in care ( 4,14). This study extends that literature 
by using a well-matched comparison group and rigorous methods to quantify the 
potential impact of peer-staffed crisis respite services on hospitalizations and total 
Medicaid expenditures.” 
Published Online:3 Aug 2018 https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.201700451  
Peer Respites have been shown to be a win-win alternative for everyone involved. Our 
peers in other states have expressed great satisfaction when utilizing peer respites 
because it comes down to being able to exercise choice with dignity and respect instead 
of coercion. This makes for many more positive outcomes. 
 
Therefore, I urge you to please vote “ought to pass” LD 540.  Thank you. 
 
Sincerely, 
Victoria McCarty  
Augusta 
