3, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
at 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287- 1400 
Lori K_ Granllich TTYI l\/l£tll1 € Relay 7ll 
l54 Temple Ave. 
Old Orchard Beach. ME 04064 
Phone: (207)232-1067 
lori gramlich@legislature.maine.gov 
April 20, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Lori K. Gramlich presenting 
LD 847, An Act to Support Law Enforcement in Interactions with Individuals 
with Histories of Trauma 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Good afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished colleagues ot 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, l am Lori Gramlich, 
Representative for House District 131, which is the lovely seaside community ofOld Orchard 
Beach. I am pleased to present LD 847, An Act to Support Law Enforcement in Interactions 
with Individuals with Histories of Trauma. 
As we are all aware, the issues that law enforcement personnel are confronted with on a daily 
basis are vastl different from the situation of ears cone b/ . Trauma-informed training and ID D 
education in law enforcement is becoming increasingly crucial in our communities and wider 
society. We have seen an increase in the creation and design of trauma-informed initiatives 
embedded into some. but not all, municipalities in Maine. including but not limited to Bangor. 
Biddeford, Saco, and my own community of Old Orchard Beach. 
The situations which law enforcement are confronted with today are very different from those 
that both my grandfather and uncle, both of whom were police officers, were confronted with. 
Coming from a family of law enforcement, I have a deep regard for the incredible, difticult work 
our ﬁrst responders engage in. Through my lens as a social worker. l have a keen understanding 
as to how and why ensuring that these brave women and men have all the tools they need to be 
successful, particularly as it relates to mental health, is so critically important. 
So why is trauma informed training important ‘? Police are often in situations where they, 
themselves. experience trauma. Their professional training has not, traditionally. given them 
adequate tools to manage their own reactions and feelings during and following traumatic 
incidents. The result is high rates of depression (Wang et al., 2010), post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD; Marmar et al., 2006), alcohol use disorders (Leino et al., 201 l ) and suicide
(Miller, 2006). Additionally. police are frequently responding to individuals who are 
experiencing trauma. Examples include victims of street violence. domestic violence, individuals 
who have chronic and persistent mental illness, survivors of sexual assault. and other vulnerable 
populations. Without some understanding of how trauma affects perception and memory, 
otlicers are likely to inadvertently re-traumatize those who look to them for help. 
l have presented to you an amendment to this bill, which I understand has been distributed to 
committee members and interested parties. I would like the committee to consider this bill as 
amended. which, simply put. 1) requires the Department of Public Safety to develop and 
implement a program to provide law enforcement officers with quality trauma-infonned training 
and 2) further requires the Department and municipal police departments to create binding 
Memorandums of Understanding with local behavioral health providers to work with municipal 
police departments. 
Giving municipalities the opportunity to craft an agreement with mental health providers and 
social workers. which will be specific to the needs of their community, is effective and preferred. 
And again, while a number ofcommunities in Maine currently utilize mental health providers in 
law enforcement dispatch and their response, not all do. This is a lost opportunity. 
LD 847 has the capacity to create department policies, culture and focus on the well-being and 
resiliency of staff, while avoiding secondary victimization and re-traumatization of survivors. 
Providing trauma training can increase the knowledge, skills and conﬁdence of staff to respond 
to survivors in a trauma-informed manner. thereby improving interactions with the public. 
Putting into statute that municipalities must enter into MOUs actually gives communities the 
latitude they need to be effective in their relationship with mental health providers and social 
workers and to realize success with the challenging and emerging social issues departments and
1 
olticers are confronted with regularly. 
l urge you to pass LD 847. and l would be happy to answer any questions you might have. Thank 
you for your consideration.
