 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition To 
LD 847- An Act to Support Law Enforcement in Interactions with Individuals with Histories of Trauma 
April 20, 2023 
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing testimony, in opposition to LD 847, An 
Act to Support Law Enforcement in Interactions with Individuals with Histories of Trauma, on behalf of 
the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the 
Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 
35 Senate districts. 
While this public hearing was being held, our LPC was meeting to take positions on pending 
legislation with municipal impact. I apologize for not being able to attend in person but do benefit from 
the ability to review the hearing and correct several pieces of information I believe were incorrectly 
relayed.  
This bill not only presents a mandate on municipal government requiring the mandate preamble 
for enactment or a commitment from the legislature to fund 90% of the costs under Maine’s Constitution 
to meet such requirements, but it also potentially disrupts incredibly necessary and vital services provided 
by many municipal police already.  
More often than not, municipal police agencies have crisis intervention programs to respond to 
mental health and other welfare calls. Access to appropriate providers, and appropriate funding is 
frequently the only reason that any agency lacks this connection currently. Last session, the Department 
of Public Safety asked for 8 such individuals and the Legislature only provided 4. Following 24 years of 
successful community intervention, the state also ceased funding the Midnight Team for Waterville Police 
Department leaving a gap that has been necessary to fill at the local level for a proven beneficial program. 
The three communities that Rep. Gramlich mentioned in her testimony struggle to retain their 
behavioral health specialists for the same reasons agencies struggle to retain their officers. Better pay, 
changes in workload and multi-department competition for practitioners who fit into an expected public 
safety role have impacted provider availability indicating not only is there a viable space for career 
opportunities but that municipalities have already established the services the bill seeks to mandate. 
As drafted, the bill threatens to undermine those roles established and funded by the residents in 
the communities that pay for them and further directs communities or use what may be the only resource 
in the area but not meet the needs of those agencies. By requiring legally binding on call contracts with 
service providers, who may or may not be available in all areas, rather than allowing the community to 
select their preferred method, including ride-along providers with locally available resources seems 

counter intuitive and fails to recognize the work of law enforcement in Maine or the disparities of 
providers in rural and northern communities. 
 Officials believe these loft goals are important especially since mental health calls are far more 
frequently impacting areas with no mental health practitioners, as evidenced by consistent reports from 
the Deadly Force Review Panel. Municipal police go above and beyond in these areas in direct 
consultation with their communities, and within available resources. Officials and police across the state 
would welcome working with Rep. Gramlich to champion a better path to filling the gaps in communities 
with no resources, in tandem towards a state-wide mobile response team to back fill these needs in all 
areas instead of mandating contracting with the finite and not even regionally available resources funded 
exclusively through the resident property taxpayers. 
For these reasons officials ask that you vote ought not to pass on LD 847. Issues of statewide 
need deserve state support, not municipal mandates. 
