l\/IAINE ASSOCIATION 
. OF. 
HEALT1-I Pmus 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt — 4/24/23 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services
' 
In Opposition to LD 1244 
An Act Regarding Timely Payment of Undisputed Insurance Claims 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: . 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private 
and non-profit insurance carriers provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 
600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people 
by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare.' 
LD l244 proposes to increase an l8% annualized interest rate on undisputed insurance claims to 
an annualized rate of 120%. It is excessive and umiecessary." 
Insurance carriers Work quickly to administer claims and make payments due to providers. 
Transitions to electronic payment systems have helped standardized payment process, reduced 
administrative burdens, and led to faster and safer payments to providers. Carriers also provide 
websites and provider support resources to help track down the status of claims.I 
The interest rate in current law is l ‘/2% per month. That equates to an annualized interest rate on 
overdue claims of 18%. By comparison, the average annualized interest rate assessed by the 
Maine Revenue Service over the last 30-years for overdue taxes is 8.3% and the highest 
assessment was 12%.5l1 
The licensed insurance carriers who comprise the Maine Association of Health Plans adhere to 
high standards of professionalism and work to meet the expectations set out for them in the 
marketplace, statute, their contracts With providers, and the regulations and oversight of the 
Maine Bureau of Insurance. 
Everyone can do better, but a punitive interest rate is not the right way to get the best out of 
anyone. We urge a vote of Ought Not To Pass. 
ill https://www.rnaine. gov/revenue/tax —returnyforms/interest-rates 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
