126 Sewall Street ' ' 
Augusta, ME 04330-6822 Equa1JuStlC € A"? |.Da;'df°rt th 
TW/Voice: (207) 626-7058 °'°‘/ "°°ae 
Fax: (207)621-8148 - . (207) 626—7058‘X216 
www.mejp.0rg 
Testimony on Behalf of Maine Equal Justice in support of LD 1282, An Act to Streamline Income 
Verification Requests for Income Supplementation and Assistance Programs 
April 19, 2023 
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee. My name is Ann Danforth and I use she/her pronouns. I'm a Policy Advocate at Maine Equal 
Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for 
people in Maine. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in support of LD 1282. 
Streamlining economic security programs reduces administrative burdens and helps people access 
them 
At Maine Equal Justice, one of the one things we frequently hear from people accessing economic 
security programs is the challenges they face navigating a siloed system. The administrative 
responsibility to deliver the help people need is scattered throughout different governmental agencies 
and is largely not integrated or coordinated. People need to share the same information - income and 
other documentation that needs to be verified — over and over again with different state agencies, 
telling their story again and again. LD 1282 proposes one opportunity to better coordinate these 
processes between the Department of Health and Human Services and MaineH0using in a manner that 
would allow for more streamlined verification of eligibility factors between them both, lessening 
administrative burden for both governmental entities and people in need of services. 
We can bring our safety net and work support programs into the 21st century and make these systems 
better equipped to respond to people's needs in a holistic manner. States throughout the nation have 
been modernizing their systems to reach this goal. For example, North Carolina's goal is to design their 
state-administered safety net systems so people “only have to tell their story once.” We have begun to 
have similar conversations with agencies throughout state government here in Maine. With this change, 
the payoff will be great — it will improve governmental efficiencies, improve people's well—being, and 
improve the state's economy. 
Federal law and data sharing challenges can be overcome People Policy Solutions adanforth@me]p.org
We are very sensitive to concerns around client confidentiality and data privacy. We also understand 
that there are federal laws in place to protect client data. Any electronic solution could and should, of 
course, respect these and must be contingent on consent by the client to share their information. This 
could be done in a number of ways — something as simple as a check-box indicating a client's consent for 
MaineHousing to share data with DHHS or vice versa. 
We would be glad to work with DHHS and MaineHousing to think through solutions, which we believe 
could be replicated in other programs as well, such as LIHEAP (the Home Energy Assistance Program, 
which is administered through MaineHousing by the Community Action Agencies). We recommend that 
any enhanced coordination between these two agencies that may result from this bill also apply to 
verification procedures for the LIHEAP as well, since the overwhelming majority of households receiving 
this heating assistance receive services from DHHS as well. These changes would ultimately reduce 
administrative burden, make programs more coordinated and human-centered, and more likely to reach 
the people who need them most. 
Conclusion 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 1282. I am happy to answer any questions you 
might have.
