STATE OF MAINE 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION 
Philip L. Bartlett. ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONERS 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
In Support of 
LD 1282, An Act to Streamline Income Veriﬁcation Requests for Income 
Supplementation and Assistance Programs 
April 19, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services (Committee), my name is Deirdre Sclmeider, testifying in support of the 
sponsor’s amendment to LD 1282, An Act to Streamline Income Veriﬁcation Requests for Income 
Supplementation and Assistance Programs, on behalf of the Public Utilities Commission (Connnission) 
Each transmission and distribution utility (utility) in the State is required to implement a low-income 
assistance program. The Low-Income Assistance Program (LIAP) is designed to assist qualiﬁed low- 
income electricity consumers in paying their electricity costs. Eligibility for LIAP is based on 
eligibility for LIHEAP or participation in a DHHS means tested programs with a household income at 
or less than 75% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines. If an individual qualiﬁes for LIAP, they will 
receive a credit on their electric bill that is based on their income and electricity usage. 
Eligibility to participate in LIAP was expanded in 2022 to include utility consumers that participate in 
a DHHS means tested programs with a household income at or less than 75% of the Federal Poverty 
Guidelines. When eligibility was expanded, the Commission increased the ftmding for the program 
from about $7.8 million to $15 million. 
Since the expansion of the program, the Commission has been exploring ways to make enrolling 
consumers who participate in a DHHS means tested program more efﬁcient. Initial notice of eligibility 
was provided by DHHS in a letter. If a consumer of a utility received a letter, they were required to 
contact their utility and provide the letter as proof of eligibility. After the distribution of letters, the 
Commission added to its website an online application for LIAP. The Commission has been working 
with DHHS on this issue and DHHS has been extremely helpful. However, this bill would help 
facilitate automatic enrollment of eligible customers which would greatly expand participation and 
make the enrollment process easier for consumers and DHHS. 
Since expanding eligibility, the Commission has been surprised by the lower than expected 
participation level of consumers that participate in a means tested program and are concemed that the 
letter process is a potential barrier for enrollment. The Commission is looking to this legislation to 
streamline eligibility veriﬁcation and perhaps allow those who are eligible to automatically be enrolled 
in LIAP instead of the current system. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session. 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) 'I'l"Y users call Maine Relay 71 I FAX: (207) 287-1039
