    
1 
  
Testimony of 
Erik C. Jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority    
 
Before 
The Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
IN SUPPORT OF 
LD 1282 An Act to Streamline Income Verification Requests for Income 
Supplementation and Assistance Programs 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services, I am Erik Jorgensen, Senior Director of Government 
Relations and Communications at the Maine State Housing Authority (MaineHousing) 
and I am submitting this testimony in strong support of LD 1282 An Act to Streamline 
Income Verification Requests for Income Supplementation and Assistance Programs. 
 
 MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes 
since 1969. We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to 
address the problems of unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing.  
We are authorized to issue bonds to finance single family mortgages for first time 
homebuyers and for affordable multi-family housing.   
 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, 
including rental subsidies, weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, 
2 
 the low-income housing tax credit program, and homeless grant programs.  We 
receive state general fund revenue for homeless programs and receive a dedicated 
portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing Opportunities for Maine 
(HOME) Fund. 
 
We are very grateful that Senator Daughtry submitted this important bill, and I wish 
to extend my apologies for not being there in person today.  MaineHousing operates 
several means-tested programs in Maine, including our administration of various 
housing assistance voucher programs. Maine has approximately 12,000 housing 
choice vouchers, which are HUD’s primary form of housing assistance. The purpose 
of this program, as this committee knows, is to aid very low income families, the 
disabled and the elderly in finding affordable basic housing. At least 75% of all 
vouchers issued by a housing authority must be targeted to households whose total 
income does not exceed 30% of the area median income.  There are around 12,000 
federal housing choice vouchers in Maine, and MaineHousing has jurisdiction over 
those vouchers that do not fall into communities covered by public housing 
authorities. We administer about 1/3 of them. 
 
This bill focuses on the challenge of income verification. For our Housing Choice 
Voucher program and those operated by our fellow public housing authorities 
around Maine, we know that accurately understanding an applicant’s income is 
obviously the most important part of determining whether an applicant can receive a 
voucher.  This is a process that requires batches of verification forms to be bundled 
together and sent to DHHS. Our understanding is that once at DHHS, the 
verification forms then need to travel between departments depending on how many 
benefit programs an applicant is enrolled in, before they are completed and returned 
to us.    
 
3 
 The income verification process can take 4-6 weeks to complete, which is a very 
long wait at the end of what is almost always a years-long period on a waiting list 
and an uncertain period of searching to find an appropriate unit. This wait can spell 
the difference between leasing up and losing a unit.  
 
We understand that there is a sponsor amendment being proposed that could 
expand this process beyond housing choice voucher programs, to other income-
restricted programming, such as the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP). We 
do not have a great deal of information on the specific mechanics of what is being 
proposed in this bill, but can say that any efforts to streamline the income 
verification process would be welcome from our perspective. 
 
 If there were to be limited, secure, narrowly focused read-only electronic access for 
MaineHousing, public housing authorities and similar entities, it could make a 
tremendous difference. 
 
I look forward to attending the work session, answering questions, and learning 
more. 
 
Thank you 
 
 
 
