LD 1282, An Act to Streamline Income Veriﬁcation Requests for 
Income Sugplementation and Assistance Programs 
Chair Baldacci, Chair Meyer and members of the Health & Human Services 
committee my name is John Hodge and I am the Executive Director of the 
Brunswick and Topsham Housing Authorities and I also represent the Maine 
Association of Public Housing Directors, MAPHD. I rise to support this 
legislation to ensure timely responses to housing authorities requests for 
income verification on behalf of participants of our housing subsidy programs. 
State and federal housing programs that provide critical housing subsidies for 
families throughout the State require we verify a household income to determine 
their eligibility for the assistance and the amount of assistance that household is 
eligible to receive. Many of our programs function on the basis that eligible 
households will pay 30% of their adjusted gross household income towards the 
rent while programs such as the Housing Choice Voucher will pay the 
difference. It is also required that we verify the household ’s income through a 
third party. 
For some of our program participants, the primary source of income is the 
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families, TANF or Child Support payments. As 
such, we obtain their Authorization for Release of Information and provide it to 
the third party income source which in this case is the Department of Health& 
Human Sen/ices. Our staff submits the release of information form and an 
income verification request to DHHS through a Housing Requests email. This 
request requires staff time to submit the request, review the request, answer the 
request, release the information to the requesting party and any follow ups 
necessary to ensure timeliness and accuracy. In other words, it is time 
consuming for all parties involved. 
The response time from DHHS will vary from one week to three months. 
Housing authorities rely on this information for two purposes. The first is to 
lease up a new resident in a program so they can receive their housing 
assistance. Any delay is detrimental to a family which may have been waiting 
years for housing assistance. The other is our requirement to annually verifya 
program participants income. While this does not directly impact their housing, it 
is their responsibility to submit their income information to us and assist us in 
obtaining the third party verification. 
Failure to provide annual income to a housing authority can be grounds for 
termination of their assistance. While no housing authority would terminate 
housing assistance to anyone who is actively working with us to determine
annual income, it is imperative to state how important this information is so we 
can accurately determine what the assistance will be for the coming year. This 
is important to the family as it is important to the taxpayer to assure that the 
program funds are being used in accordance with program rules and 
regulations. 
Today we are seeking a better way to secure this information on behalf of the 
people that rely on our programs and the people who work on behalf of those 
who need our assistance. ln today’s technologically advanced society, we 
believe there is a better way. Authorizing staff at housing authorities to directly 
access this information electronically will greatly enhance our abilities to sen/e 
those who need housing assistance and eliminate the endless requests for 
information our staff send to DHHS. This is not a unique request as housing 
authorities currently have electronic access to State of Maine DMV and criminal 
history records. 
We understand there may be some issues regarding electronic access but we 
stand ready to assist the department to make this happen. We believe it to be in 
the best interest of the residents we serve and the good people who work at 
DHHS. We also acknowledge there may be some concerns granting electronic 
access but please be assured, housing authorities have been dealing with 
issues of using and keeping safe personal information since the inception of 
housing assistance programs. Housing authorities currently have access to 
income information at the federal level through the Enterprise Income 
Verification system, EIV. We have strict rules on how we use and maintain 
personal information and we receive annual training to maintain our 
certifications to use EIV. 
On behalf of MAPHD, I thank you for your time and would be happy to answer 
any questions you may have. 
Thank You. 
John Hodge, Executive Director 
Brunswick & Topsham Housing Authorities 
john@brunswickhousinq.org 
207-725-8711
