 
1 
 
 
131st Legislature 
Senate of 
Maine  
Senate District 23 
 
   Senator Mattie Daughtry 
Assistant Majority Leader 
3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
Office (207) 287-1515 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Mattie Daughtry introducing 
LD 1282, An Act to Streamline Income Verification Requests for Income 
Supplementation and Assistance Programs 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 19, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Mattie Daughtry, and I proudly represent 
Senate District 23, which includes Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, 
and part of Yarmouth. Today I am pleased to introduce LD 1282, “An Act to Streamline Income 
Verification Requests for Income Supplementation and Assistance Programs.” 
 
At the end of last year, Brunswick Housing Director John Hodge contacted me and asked me to 
submit legislation that would help municipal housing authorities verify household income as a 
means of determining eligibility and housing subsidies. John is here today, so I know that he will 
be able to share his experience and perspective on this issue. But basically, many households 
whose primary source of income is TANF must be verified by DHHS. The time it takes for a 
verification request varies from office to office; sometimes, there is no response at all. These 
delays cause many problems for residents and staff. That’s why we’d like to grant direct 
electronic access to these records, similar to access already granted for criminal background 
checks and motor vehicle registrations. If we make this change, then we could save time for 
housing authority and DHHS staff – and ensure that delays don’t prevent people from accessing 
benefits or services. 
 
In the time since the bill was drafted, referred to committee, and scheduled for a public hearing, I 
have heard requests from stakeholders to expand the scope of this bill. I’d like to introduce a 
sponsor’s amendment that would accomplish the following: 
 
• Under Income verification requests by state and local authorities, I would like to add 
“or affordable housing organizations, which would include any federally or state-
subsidized property or property subject to rent restrictions per local, state or federal 
mandate.” 
• Under Income verification requests by state and local authorities, I would like to add 
the Public Utilities Commission. The PUC helps administer the Low-Income Assistance 
Program (LIAP), and elgibility for this program is based on a customer’s eligibility in the 
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) and/or participation in a 
 
2 
 DHHS means-tested program with a household income at or less than 75% of the Federal 
Poverty Guidelines.  
 
I thank you for your time. I would be happy to answer any questions you might have, but I hope 
that you’ll save some of the more specific ones for John Hodge.  
 
 
Mattie Daughtry 
Assistant Senate Majority Leader, Senate District 23 
Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth 
 

