On Behalf of the Maine Real Estate Managers 
Association  
 
In support of  LD 1 282107 Resolve, to Establish a Pilot 
project to Improve Access to Credit for Low -income 
Individuals An Act to Streamline Income Verification 
Reques ts for Income Supplemental and Assistance 
programs  
 
March 27April 18 , 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, Daughtry  and members Senator 
Baldacci, Representative Meyer, members  of the the Labor and Housing Health 
and Human Services  Committee , my name is  Sherrin Vail , and I am writing to 
you as a member of the  Maine Real Estate Managers Association  (MREMA) .   
 
Our organization is a nonprofit which represents over 80 professional property 
manage ment companies providing  affordable and subsidized housing 
throughout the state.  It is within our mission to promote the availability of 
safe, decent affordable housing in Maine.  Our manage ment members  are 
both for -profit and nonprofit  landlords  that believe in this mission.  
 
As property m anagers , we have applicant screening in place with credit history 
a part of the selection criteria.  Our only means to know if an applicant has a 
positive rental history  payment  is to contact prior landlords, who may or may 
not call us back.  Our members s upport a more systematic way to identify 
applicant’s positive rent payment history , an important step in housing those 
in need is to confirm they are income eligible for the funding progra m of the 
property they are applying to.  At application, a household ’s income must be 
verified using a 3rd party verifier.  Property Managers  are reliant on the 
response of 3rd party verifiers  to house those in need , in this case income  
verified through the Department of Health and Human Services.  If a response 
in providing this verification is delayed beyond a reasonable window of time, 
3-5 business days for example, it can  delay or  jeopar dize the housing for this 
household.  . 
 
Our members also focus on providing our residents with an improved quality 
of life thro ugh resident service programs.  These programs connect residents 
with services in the community to help their financial, health and overall 
wellbeing.   Part of our resident ’s wellbeing and access to opportunity  is the 
ability to establish positive credit history with rent reporting.  Some of our 
residents have credit they need to repair or credit they need to establish to 
buy a vehicle, get student loans for themselves or their children, or buy a 
house.  Rent re porting is a pathway towards those opportunities.  This is a 
Alpha Management Corp  
Auburn Housing Authority  
Avesta Housing  
Bangor Housing Authority  
Barkan Management Co.  
Bath Housing  
Brewer Housing Authority  
C & C Realty Management  
C. M. Cimino Realty Inc.  
C. S. Management, Inc  
C.B. Mattson, Inc.  
Caleb Foundation, The  
CMHI Property Management Inc  
Community Housing of Maine  
DBH Management  
DC Management  
Deanna Morse Property 
Management Inc  
Deering Pavilion  
Dover -Foxcroft Housing Dev Corp  
Downeast Community Partners  
Eagle Point Management, LLC  
Ellen M Leach Memorial Home  
Evernorth  
Federal Management Co., Inc  
Foothills Management  
Foreside Real Estate Mgt  
Gary Buck Property Management  
Guilford Development Corp  
Hallkeen Management, Inc  
Harbor Management  
Harborview Management LLC  
Hillside Apts  
Housing Authority City of Old 
Town  
Housing Foundation, The  
Kathryn Hughes Associates, Inc.  
L & L Management  
LaBrecque Property Management  
Laplante Apartments  
Lewiston Housing Authority  
Madison Avenue Associates  
Maine Development  
Mary Young  
Matthew Sherman Mem Apts  
MEMBERS  
Formatted:  Superscript
Formatted:  Superscript
In many cases an applicant is homeless, and a delay in response by DHHS 
In many cases an applicant is 
homeless, and a delay in response by DHHS m eans the household continues 
to be homeless.  For  those who have given a notice to  their current 
landlord, this delay could force them into homelessness.  For others, they 
could be rent burdened in their current housing and this delay continues 
that financ ial burden unnecessarily.  
 
We believe this bill will allow those in need of affordable housing receive  
the housing they need quicker and more efficiently.  
For that reason , MREMA supports the passage of LD 1282. 
For that reason , MREMA supports the passage of LD 1282. 
For that reason , MREMA supports the passage of LD 1282. 
 
 
 
Thank you for your consideration, and please do not hesitate to contact me 
with any questions.  
 
Alyssa Dean -Littlefield     Sherrin Vail  
 adeanlittlefield@wishcamper.com   svail@evernorthus.org  
 
    
 
MEMBERS  
MCH Housing, Inc.  
Mexico Senior Housing  
Mike Eon Associates, Inc  
Monroe Group  
New Beginnings Inc  
New England Developers, Inc.  
Newell Investments  
Northland Management Corp  
Occupied Properties  
Penobscot Nation Housing Dept.  
Phoenix Management  
Pines, The  
Portland Housing Authority  
Preservation Management Inc  
Princeton Properties  
R & K Oxford Management  
R.L.W. Management, LLC  
Realty Resources Management  
Realty Services, LLC  
Ricker Plaza  
Saco Falls Management  
Scovil Apartments  
Shalom House  
SHP Management Corp  
South Portland Housing Authority  
Spear Management Co  
St. Amand, Roger & Eileen  
St. John Valley Realty Co, LLC  
Stanford Management  
Sterling  Management, Inc.  
Stewart Property Management  
Targeted Management Co., Inc.  
Volunteers of America Northern 
New England  
Washburn Realty Company  
Washington Street Apartments  
Waterville Housing Authority  
Westbrook Housing Authority  
Yale Court, LP  
York County Shelter Program  
 
