By Maria W. Steenland and Laura R. WherryMedicaid Expansion Led ToReductions In PostpartumHospitalizationsABSTRACTThe Affordable Care Act (ACA) Medicaid expansions increasedpreconception and postpartum insurance coverage among low-incomebirthing people, leading to greater use of outpatient care. In this studywe evaluated whether the expansions affected rates of postpartumhospitalization. Our analyses took advantage of underused longitudinalhospital data from the period 2010–17 to examine hospitalizations afterchildbirth. We compared changes in hospitalizations among birthingpeople with a Medicaid-financed delivery in states that did and did notexpand Medicaid under the ACA. We found a 17 percent reduction inhospitalizations during the first sixty days postpartum associated withthe Medicaid expansions and some evidence of a smaller decrease inhospitalizations between sixty-one days and six months postpartum. Ourfindings indicate that expanding Medicaid coverage led to improvedpostpartum health for low-income birthing people.Experts recommend increasing ac-cess to health care before pregnancyand during the postpartum periodto promote the health of US child-bearing parents and their infants.1,2More than one-third of women with pregnancycoverage through Medicaid, which covers morethan 40 percent of all births in the US and pro-vides sixty days of postpartum coverage for qual-ifying parents, are uninsured before or duringthe two to six months after pregnancy.3,4In states that adopted the Affordable Care Act(ACA) Medicaid expansions, new eligibility rulesallowed a larger share of low-income adults toqualify for Medicaid coverage both before preg-nancy and after the sixty-day postpartum period.This led to significant increases in Medicaid en-rollment and overall insurance coverage bothbefore and after pregnancy, as well as greatercontinuity of insurance coverage, among low-income parents.5–8Prior studies have documented greater use ofoutpatient care before and after pregnancy un-der the ACA Medicaid expansions.6,7,9There isalso evidence of improved care during pregnancyfrom studies of ACA Medicaid expansions inOhio10and Oregon,11although there is less evi-dence in support of this from other studies.5,12–14Our study used a unique source of longitudinaladministrative hospital data to examine whetherthese changes in access to care affected rates ofinpatient hospitalization during the first sixmonths postpartum.Study Data And MethodsStudy DesignOur analysis used 2010–17 dataon four expansion states (Iowa, Maryland, NewMexico, Washington) and four nonexpansionstates (Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, Utah) fromthe Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual-ity’s Healthcare Cost and Utilization ProjectState Inpatient Databases. These databases con-tain the universe of state inpatient hospital rec-ords.15The study included all states with patientidentifiers available during the pre and post pe-riods, which allowed patients to be trackedacross hospital encounters. We excluded fourdoi:10.1377/hlthaff.2022.00819HEALTH AFFAIRS 42,NO. 1 (2023): 18–25©2023 Project HOPE—The People-to-People HealthFoundation, Inc.
Maria W. Steenland,B r o w nUniversity, Providence, RhodeIsland.Laura R. Wherry(Laura.Wherry@nyu.edu), New YorkUniversity, New York,New York.
18Health AffairsJanuary 2023 42:1Maternal Health
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by Dan Morin on May 08, 2023.Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.






ARTICLE(s) SUBMITTED BY: MAINE MEDICAL ASSOCIATION to HHS for LD902 
states with non-ACA Medicaid expansions forlow-income adults and two states with changesin Medicaid-funded deliveries unrelated to theexpansions, to arrive at our study sample of eightstates.We defined the postexpansion period usingthe start date of Medicaid expansion implemen-tation in each state, which was January 1, 2014,in all four of the study’s expansion states. Med-icaid expansion applied to adults without chil-dren as well as parents. However, the change ineligibility differed depending on parental status,as adults without children were not eligible forMedicaid (regardless of their income level) inmost states. Therefore, the change in preconcep-tion eligibility after Medicaid expansion de-pended on whether the birthing person had oth-er children before becoming pregnant. In all fourof the study’s expansion states, income eligibilityfor childless adults increased from 0 percent to138 percent of federal poverty level,16whereasparental eligibility increased from 80 percentto 138 percent of poverty in Iowa, 122 percentto138percentinMaryland,85percentto138per-cent in New Mexico, and 71 percent to 138 per-cent in Washington.17We were unable to deter-mine from our data source whether postpartumpeople had other children before delivery.The study sample was defined as state resi-dents age nineteen or older with a hospital deliv-ery for which the expected primary payer wasMedicaid. Delivery hospitalizations were identi-fied using the method provided by Elena Kuklinaand colleagues.18In addition to examining ef-fects for all patients meeting these criteria, wealso stratified the sample by the race and ethnic-ity (non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic Black,and Hispanic) of the birthing person.OutcomesOur primary outcomes were theoccurrence of a postpartum hospitalization with-in sixty days of delivery discharge and betweensixty-one days and up to six months after deliverydischarge. This categorization was meant to dis-tinguish between the first sixty days of the post-partum period, which was already covered bypregnancy-related Medicaid in all states beforeexpansion, and the period after sixty days, whichwas newly covered for people gaining eligibilityin expansion states. Because patient identifiersoften could not be used to track patients acrosscalendar years, we restricted the sample to pa-tients whose outcomes could be observed withinthe calendar year. Those with deliveries duringthe first three quarters of each calendar yearwere analyzed for the sixty days postpartum out-come (n¼1,355,220), and those with deliveriesduring the first two quarters were analyzed forthe sixty-one days to six months postpartum out-come (n¼880,014).In addition to examining overall hospitaliza-tions we used the International Statistical Clas-sification of Diseases and Related Health Prob-lems, Tenth Revision, to categorize the primarydiagnoses for hospitalization. We first descrip-tively analyzed the primary reasons for post-partum hospitalizations during the preexpan-sion period, as grouped by body system.We thenclassified hospitalizations into two categories:those with a primary diagnosis related to com-plications of pregnancy, childbirth, and thepuerperium, and all other diagnoses.Statistical AnalysisIn unadjusted analyses,we examined average rates of postpartum hospi-talization before and after expansion in thestudy’s expansion and nonexpansion states. Wealso tested for statistically significant changesin the rates of hospitalization within each groupof states, using a mean comparison test (t-test),and we evaluated significance at the 1, 5, and10 percent levels. Two study states (Marylandand Mississippi) were missing some data yearsand were excluded from this analysis.We then used an event study model to test forpre-period differential trends in outcomes in ex-pansion and nonexpansion states, as well as totrace the effects of ACA Medicaid expansion dur-ing each year of the post period. This model wasestimated with a series of indicators for deliver-ies each year during the study period interactedwith state Medicaid expansion status; 2013 wasomitted. Each estimated coefficient on theseevent study terms provided the average differ-ence in relative outcomes for birthing people inexpansion and nonexpansion states during eachyear compared with the year before expansion,adjusted for covariates (patient age, race, andethnicity) and fixed effects for state and quarter-year of delivery.A difference-in-differences model with an in-dicator variable for birthing people with deliver-ies in expansion states in 2014 and later on pro-vided an estimate of the average difference inExpanded Medicaidmay affectpostpartum outcomesby increasing coverageand access to carebefore pregnancy.
January 2023 42:1Health Affairs19Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by Dan Morin on May 08, 2023.Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
relative outcomes for birthing people in the twogroups of states during the postexpansion peri-od. In the case of the race-specific analyses wetested for significant differences across racialgroups, using a fully interacted triple-differencemodel. For all analyses we used linear regressionmodels and clustered the standard errors bystate, using a wild cluster bootstrap procedure.19Additional details on the data, sample, andstatistical analyses are in the online appendix,20which also includes results from two sensitivityanalyses. In the first such analysis we excludedMaryland and Mississippi in the difference-in-differences sample to present the adjusted re-sults in the same sample of states that were usedfor the unadjusted analysis (see appendix tableA5).20In the second we conducted the difference-in-differences analysis for the sixty-day post-partum hospitalization outcome, including onlydeliveries during the first and second quarters ofthe calendar year (see appendix table A6).20Weimplemented this sensitivity analysis to show theresults for this outcome in the same sample ofdeliveries that was used for the second studyoutcome (hospitalizations between sixty-onedays and six months postpartum).LimitationsThis analysis had several limita-tions. The small number of sample states and thefocus on deliveries with postpartum periods oc-curring within the same calendar year may havelimited the generalizability of the study’s find-ings. We were unable to control for seasonalitybeyond the inclusion of quarter-year fixed ef-fects. We also did not observe any hospitaliza-tions if they occurred outside of a given state.Finally, we were unable to rule out the presenceof other confounders that may have differentiallyaffected postpartum hospitalizations in expan-sion and nonexpansion states.Study ResultsBefore the Medicaid expansions, the five mostcommon reasons for hospitalization during boththe first sixty days and the sixty-one days to sixmonths after delivery for birthing people witha Medicaid-financed delivery were complica-tions of pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerpe-rium; diseases of the digestive system; mentaldisorders; diseases of the genitourinary system;and injury and poisoning (exhibit 1). Pregnancyor childbirth-related hospitalizations repre-sented a much larger share of postpartum hos-pitalizations within the first sixty days (n¼10,540, 70 percent) than during the later period(n¼560, 8 percent). Between sixty-one daysand six months postpartum there were approxi-mately 50 percent fewer hospitalizations overall(15,059 versus 6,998). During this period, dis-easesofthedigestivesystem(n¼1,814,25.9per-cent), mental disorders (n¼1,041, 14.9 per-cent), diseases of the genitourinary system(n¼756, 10.8 percent), and injury and poison-ing (n¼583, 8.3 percent) all surpassed preg-nancy-related complications as the most com-mon reasons for hospitalization.Exhibit 2 reports the unadjusted comparisonof rates of postpartum hospitalization for birth-ing people with a Medicaid-financed delivery be-fore and after the ACA Medicaid expansions instates with and without expansions. We docu-ment that after the ACA Medicaid expansions,birthing people in expansion states experiencedreductions in hospitalizations within sixty dayspostpartum. In contrast, birthing people in non-expansion states experienced an increase insixty-day postpartum hospitalizations. Hospital-izations between sixty-one days and six monthspostpartum did not change substantially afterMedicaid expansion in either group of states.Based on the event study estimates, we foundno evidence of differential changes in postpar-tum hospitalizations between birthing people inthe two groups of states during the pre period.Starting at the time of expansion, the relativetrend in hospitalizations within sixty days post-partum decreased in expansion states comparedwith nonexpansion states (exhibit 3). During theentire post period we found that Medicaid ex-pansion decreased the rate of sixty-day postpar-tum hospitalizations by 0.289 percentage points(p¼0:052), or a 17 percent decrease over thebaseline rate (exhibit 4). Approximately 75 per-cent of this decline (−0.216 percentage points;p¼0:056) can be attributed to a decrease inchildbirth-related hospitalizations (see appen-dix section E).20We found some evidence of a decrease in post-partum hospitalizations between sixty-one daysand six months. The coefficient estimates fromThis study providesthe first evidence of adecrease inpostpartumhospitalizationsassociated withexpanded Medicaid.Maternal Health
20Health AffairsJanuary 2023 42:1Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by Dan Morin on May 08, 2023.Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
the event study were negative after expansion,suggesting a relative decline in expansionstates (see appendix figure A2).20The difference-in-differences estimate indicates a small declinein postpartum hospitalizations (−0.085 percent-age points;p¼0:752), an 8 percent decreaseover the baseline rate (exhibit 4), but is impre-cisely estimated. We note that analysis of thisoutcome was less well powered than the sixty-day hospitalization outcome because of a smallersample size and lower baseline prevalence.In an additional analysis we examined whetherthere was a change in sixty-day postpartum hos-pitalizations, using the same sample as for thisoutcome (that is, deliveries occurring withinthe first half of each calendar year). The effectof Medicaid expansion on sixty-day postpartumhospitalizations was similar in magnitude tothe main estimate, but less precise (coefficient:−0.244; 95% confidence interval:−0.528,0.189) (appendix table A6).20We also reran theadjusted analyses when excluding the two studyExhibit 1Primary diagnoses for postpartum hospitalizations among patients in 8 states with Medicaid-financed deliveries, bytiming of hospitalization, 2010–13
SOURCEAuthors’analysis of data for Florida, Georgia, Iowa, Maryland, Mississippi, New Mexico, Utah, and Washington from the Agencyfor Healthcare Research and Quality’sH e a l t h c a r eC o s ta n dU t i l i z a t i o nP r o j e c tS t a t eI n p a t i e n tD a t a b a s e s .NOTESThe figure presents ananalysis of postpartum hospitalizations before the Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansions for patients with deliveries between2010 and 2013.“Other”includes infectious and parasitic diseases; neoplasms; endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases, andimmunity disorders; diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs; diseases of the nervous system and sense organs; diseasesof the circulatory system; diseases of the respiratory system; diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue; diseases of the musculo-skeletal system and connective tissue; congenital anomalies; certain conditions originating in the perinatal period; symptoms, signs,and ill-defined conditions; and factors influencing health status and contact with health services.
January 2023 42:1Health Affairs21Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by Dan Morin on May 08, 2023.Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
states with data missing for certain years. Theresults were extremely similar. These analysesare described in more detail in appendix sec-tion F.20As reported in exhibit 4, we examined changesassociated with Medicaid expansion separatelyby race and ethnicity. Event study results for thisanalysis are reported in appendix figures A3 andA4.20The baseline rate of postpartum hospitali-zation during the first sixty days was 2.4 percentamong non-Hispanic Black people comparedwith 1.7 percent for non-Hispanic White peopleand 1.5 percent for Hispanic people (exhibit 4).We estimated negative difference-in-differencescoefficients in sixty-day postpartum hospitaliza-tions for all groups, suggestive of declines. Theestimate for Hispanic people had the lowestpvalue, but we were unable to rule out similar-size changes for other racial groups. We alsoestimated negative coefficients in sixty-one-dayto six-month postpartum hospitalizations for allgroups, although, similar to the overall estimate,these coefficients were accompanied by wideconfidence intervals.DiscussionPrevious research suggests that although hospi-talizations are approximately eight times morelikely among postpartum women than nonpost-partum women during the first twenty-one dayspostpartum, the difference between groups be-comes much smaller later in the postpartum pe-riod.21Consistent with these findings, we foundthat only 8 percent of hospital admissions aftersixty days for postpartum people with Medicaid-financed deliveries were related to childbirth,and there were nearly twice as many overall hos-pitalizations during the first sixty days comparedwith between sixty-one days and six monthspostpartum for this population. Some post-partum hospitalizations after sixty days for othercauses may still relate to pregnancy and child-birth, such as diseases of the genitourinary sys-tem,22or if the hospitalizations are due to con-ditions that are exacerbated by pregnancy, suchas mental health–related conditions. This sug-gests a need for long-term continuous healthcare among people recently giving birth.We found a 17 percent decrease in the occur-rence of sixty-day postpartum hospitalizationsamong people with Medicaid-financed deliveriesin states with ACA Medicaid expansions com-Exhibit 2Unadjusted rates of postpartum hospitalization among people with Medicaid-financed deliveries in 6 states before(2010–13) and after (2014–17) Medicaid expansion, by state expansion status
SOURCEAuthors’analysis of 2010–17 data for Florida, Georgia, and Utah (nonexpansion states) and Iowa, New Mexico, and Washington(expansion states) from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality’sH e a l t h c a r eC o s ta n dU t i l i z a t i o nP r o j e c tS t a t eI n p a t i e n tDatabases.NOTES“Medicaid expansion”refers to Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansions starting in 2014. Two states with missingyears of data during the study period were excluded (Mississippi, a nonexpansion state, and Maryland, an expansion state). Statisticalsignificance notation reports differences in hospitalization rates between 2010–13 and 2014–17. *p<0:10 ***p<0:01Maternal Health
22Health AffairsJanuary 2023 42:1Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by Dan Morin on May 08, 2023.Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
pared with those in nonexpansion states. This isnotable, given that Medicaid pregnancy cover-age only expires after sixty days. One potentialexplanation for this finding is that expandedMedicaid may affect postpartum outcomes byincreasing coverage and access to care beforepregnancy. For instance, some researchers havedocumented increased preconception healthcare use or the diagnosis and treatment of chron-ic health conditions under expanded Medic-aid.9,23–25In addition, greater insurance coveragebefore pregnancy has been linked to more timelyprenatal care receipt.10,11,26Establishing care ear-lier during pregnancy may help people eitheravoid or better manage conditions that may oth-erwise lead to postpartum hospitalizations.The event study estimates, albeit imprecise,suggest that the decrease in sixty-day hospital-izations occurred as soon as 2014. Most postpar-tum people in our sample during this first expan-sion year (that is, those who gave birth duringthe first three quarters of 2014) could not havebenefited yet from any changes in preconceptioncoverage. This indicates that expanded Medicaidmay also be important for early decisions regard-ing postpartum care during the sixty days cov-ered by pregnancy Medicaid. For instance, thismay be the case if the Medicaid expansions in-crease patients’knowledge about coverage dur-ing the postpartum period or affect their inter-actions with providers or recommended care.This is consistent with one study documentingan increase in postpartum visits before the sixty-Exhibit 3Effects of Medicaid expansions on 60-day postpartum hospitalizations afterMedicaid-financed deliveries in 8 states, 2010–17
SOURCEAuthors’analysis of 2010–17 data for Florida, Georgia, Iowa, Maryland, Mississippi, NewMexico, Utah, and Washington from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality’sH e a l t h c a r eCost and Utilization Project State Inpatient Databases.NOTES“Medicaid expansions”refers to Af-fordable Care Act Medicaid expansions starting in 2014.The figure depicts coefficient estimates andtheir 95% confidence intervals from the event study model described in the text. Each estimatedcoefficient on these event study terms provided the average difference in relative outcomes forbirthing people in expansion and nonexpansion states during each year compared with the year be-fore expansion, adjusted for covariates (patient age, race, and ethnicity) and fixed effects for stateand quarter-year of delivery.Exhibit 4Effects of Medicaid expansions on postpartum hospitalizations after Medicaid-financed deliveries in 8 states, overall and by race and ethnicity, 2010–17Timing of hospitalization AllWhite,non-HispanicBlack,non-Hispanic HispanicWithin 60 days of deliveryBaseline mean rate of postpartumhospitalization in expansionstates, % 1.741 1.742 2.436 1.483Difference-in-differences estimatea(95% CI)−0.289* (−0.499, 0.004)−0.251 (−0.494, 0.117)−0.279 (−0.864, 1.156)−0.181** (−0.306,−0.030)No. of observations 1,355,220 541,383 428,628 296,57061 days to 6 months after deliveryBaseline mean rate of postpartumhospitalization in expansionstates, % 1.048 1.192 1.194 0.850Difference-in-differences estimatea(95% CI)−0.085 (−0.369, 0.326)−0.137 (−0.603, 0.703)−0.086 (−1.067, 0.617)−0.042 (−0.250, 0.429)No. of observations 880,014 351,969 278,456 191,296SOURCEAuthors’analysis of 2010–17 data for Florida, Georgia, Iowa, Maryland, Mississippi, New Mexico, Utah, and Washington from the Agency for Healthcare Researchand Quality’sH e a l t h c a r eC o s ta n dU t i l i z a t i o nP r o j e c tS t a t eI n p a t i e n tD a t a b a s e s .NOTES“Medicaid expansions”refers to Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansions startingin 2014. Baseline means in expansion states are calculated among deliveries that occurred between 2010 and 2013. Difference-in-differences estimates and theirconfidence intervals are from the regression model described in the text. Each difference-in-differences estimate provides the average differencei nr e l a t i v eoutcomes for birthing people in expansion and nonexpansion states during the postexpansion period compared with the preexpansion period, adjustedforcovariates (patient age, and race and ethnicity when applicable) and fixed effects for state and quarter-year of delivery. aPercentage points. *p<0:10 **p<0:05January 2023 42:1Health Affairs23Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by Dan Morin on May 08, 2023.Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
day pregnancy coverage cutoff after Medicaidexpansion in Arkansas.7To try to better understand the decrease insixty-day postpartum hospitalizations, we fur-ther examined changes in occurrence by the pri-mary reason for hospitalization (childbirth-related versus all other diagnoses). This analysissuggested declines in both types, although thechange was largest for childbirth-related diagno-ses. The estimated change for this outcome rep-resented about 75 percent of the size of the over-all decline in postpartum hospitalizations,which is roughly in line with their representationamong the primary reasons for postpartum hos-pitalizations during this sixty-day period (seeexhibit 1). Given that sixty-day postpartum hos-pitalizations are relatively rare events (occurringfor fewer than 2 percent of postpartum people inour sample; see exhibit 4), the study was under-powered to examine more specific reasons forhospitalization. However, this analysis suggeststhat the ACA Medicaid expansions likely affectedall types of hospitalizations.Our analysis suggested a smaller decrease(8 percent) in hospitalizations between sixty-one days and six months postpartum, but thiswas imprecisely estimated with a wide confi-dence interval. Analysis of this outcome was lesswell powered because of a lower baseline preva-lence (only 1 percent of postpartum people arehospitalized during this period; see exhibit 4)and a data limitation that required a smalleranalytic sample than for the sixty-day postpar-tum hospitalization outcome.When we used thesame sample for the sixty-day measure, we simi-larly found a wider confidence interval on ourestimated decline in postpartum hospitaliza-tions under the ACA Medicaid expansions.Consistent with existing research document-ing racial disparities in postpartum readmis-sions,27we found that rates of postpartumhospitalization were much higher among non-Hispanic Black people with Medicaid-financeddeliveries compared with all other racial and eth-nic groups. Our analysis suggested that therewere declines in sixty-day as well as sixty-one-day to six-month postpartum hospitalizationsfor all groups under the ACA Medicaid expan-sions, although the estimates were again im-precise.As part of the American Rescue Plan Act of2021, states have the option to extend pregnancyMedicaid coverage through twelve months post-partum, and as of November 2022, twenty-sevenstates and Washington, D.C., had implementedthis extension.28Importantly, seven states thathave implemented or are planning to implementextensions do not have ACA Medicaid expan-sions in place. This study’s findings suggest thatexpanded coverage during the postpartum peri-od in these states may lead to reductions in post-partum hospitalizations during the first sixmonths after delivery. We found not only evi-dence of a decrease in sixty-day postpartum hos-pitalizations but also some evidence suggestinga decrease beyond this period (sixty-one days tosix months). It is possible that effects might beeven larger under the American Rescue Plan Actpostpartum extensions, as under this policy, cov-erage is automatic for people with pregnancyMedicaid, and income eligibility thresholds forpregnancy coverage surpass the 138 percent ofpoverty under the ACA Medicaid expansions. Fu-ture research focusing on a larger number ofstates, with sufficient power to examine the ef-fects of these extensions on mental health andother common causes of pregnancy-related mor-bidity in the later postpartum period, is neededto determine the full effects of pregnancy Med-icaid extensions.ConclusionThis study provides the first evidence of a de-crease in postpartum hospitalizations associatedwith expanded Medicaid. Our findings suggestthat ongoing efforts to expand Medicaid maycontribute to better postpartum health for USbirthing people.▪This article benefited from feedbackreceived at presentations at theAssociation for Public Policy Analysisand Management 2021 Fall Conferencein Austin, Texas, March 28, 2022, andthe 11th Annual Conference of theAmerican Society of Health Economistsin Austin, Texas, June 29, 2022. MariaSteenland was supported by a CareerDevelopment Award (No. K01HS027464)from the Agency for HealthcareResearch and Quality and received grantfunding from the National Institute ofChild Health and Human Development,National Institutes of Health (NIH)(Grants Nos. R21HD103943 andR03HD099428). Laura Wherry receivedsupport for this project from the RobertWood Johnson Foundation Policies forAction Program and received grantfunding from the National Institute onAging, NIH (Grant No. R01AG059731)and the National Institute of ChildHealth and Human Development, NIH(Grant No. R21HD103943). The authorsthank Elena Kuklina at the Centers forDisease Control and Prevention forgenerously sharing code and expertisewith them. The authors also thankRenata Howland and Jenny Kenney forfeedback on an earlier draft.Maternal Health
24Health AffairsJanuary 2023 42:1Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by Dan Morin on May 08, 2023.Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
NOTES1Johnson K, Posner SF, Biermann J,Cordero JF, Atrash HK, Parker CS,et al. Recommendations to improvepreconception health and healthcare—United States. A report of theCDC/ATSDR Preconception CareWork Group and the Select Panel onPreconception Care. MMWR Re-comm Rep. 2006;55(RR-6):1–23.2McKinney J, Keyser L, Clinton S,Pagliano C. ACOG committee opin-ion no. 736: Optimizing postpartumcare. Obstet Gynecol. 2018;132(3):784–5.3Johnston EM, McMorrow S,Alvarez Caraveo C, Dubay L. Post-ACA, more than one-third of womenwith prenatal Medicaid remaineduninsured before or after pregnancy.Health Aff (Millwood). 2021;40(4):571–8.4Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.State health facts: births financed byMedicaid, timeframe: 2020 [Inter-net]. San Francisco (CA): KFF;c 2022 [cited 2022 Nov 29]. Avail-able from: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/births-financed-by-medicaid/5Bellerose M, Collin L, Daw JR. TheACA Medicaid expansion and peri-natal insurance, health care use, andhealth outcomes: a systematic re-view. Health Aff (Millwood). 2022;41(1):60–8.6Gordon SH, Sommers BD,Wilson IB,Trivedi AN. Effects of Medicaid ex-pansion on postpartum coverageand outpatient utilization. HealthAff (Millwood). 2020;39(1):77–84.7Steenland MW, Wilson IB, MattesonKA, Trivedi AN. Association ofMedicaid expansion in Arkansaswith postpartum coverage, out-patient care, and racial disparities.JAMA Health Forum. 2021;2(12):e214167.8Daw JR, Winkelman TNA, DaltonVK, Kozhimannil KB, Admon LK.Medicaid expansion improved peri-natal insurance continuity for low-income women. Health Aff(Millwood). 2020;39(9):1531–9.9Myerson R, Crawford S, Wherry LR.Medicaid expansion increased pre-conception health counseling, folicacid intake, and postpartum con-traception. Health Aff (Millwood).2020;39(11):1883–90.10Adams EK, Dunlop AL, Strahan AE,Joski P, Applegate M, Sierra E. Pre-pregnancy insurance and timelyprenatal care for Medicaid births:before and after the Affordable CareAct in Ohio. J Womens Health(Larchmt). 2019;28(5):654–64.11Harvey SM, Oakley LP, Gibbs SE,Mahakalanda S, Luck J, Yoon J. Im-pact of Medicaid expansion inOregon on access to prenatal care.Prev Med. 2021;143(106360):106360.12Clapp MA, James KE, Kaimal AJ,Sommers BD, Daw JR. Association ofMedicaid expansion with coverageand access to care for pregnantwomen. Obstet Gynecol. 2019;134(5):1066–74.13Ndumele CD, Schpero WL, TrivediAN. Medicaid expansion and healthplan quality in Medicaid managedcare. Health Serv Res. 2018;53(Suppl 1):2821–38.14Geiger CK, Sommers BD, HawkinsSS, Cohen JL. Medicaid expansions,preconception insurance, and un-intended pregnancy among newparents. Health Serv Res. 2021;56(4):691–701.15Agency for Healthcare Research andQuality, Healthcare Cost and Utili-zation Project. Introduction to theHCUP State Inpatient Databases(SID) [Internet]. Rockville (MD):AHRQ; 2022 Jun 15 [cited 2022Nov 2]. Available from: https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/db/state/siddist/SID_Introduction.jsp#intro16Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.State health facts: Medicaid incomeeligibility limits for other non-disabled adults, 2011–2022, time-frame: Jan 2011–Jan 2022 [Inter-net]. San Francisco (CA): KFF;c 2022 [cited 2022 Nov 29]. Avail-able from: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/medicaid-income-eligibility-limits-for-other-non-disabled-adults/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D17Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.State health facts: Medicaid incomeeligibility limits for parents, 2002–2022, timeframe: Jan 2011–Jan 2022[Internet]. San Francisco (CA): KFF;c 2022 [cited 2022 Nov 29]. Avail-able from: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/medicaid-income-eligibility-limits-for-parents/18Kuklina EV, Whiteman MK, HillisSD, Jamieson DJ, Meikle SF, PosnerSF, et al. An enhanced method foridentifying obstetric deliveries: im-plications for estimating maternalmorbidity. Matern Child Health J.2008;12(4):469–77.19Cameron AC, Miller DL. A practi-tioner’s guide to cluster-robust in-ference. J Hum Resour. 2015;50(2):317–72.20To access the appendix, click on theDetails tab of the article online.21Steenland MW, Kozhimannil KB,Werner EF, Daw JR. Health care useby commercially insured postpartumand nonpostpartum women in theUnited States. Obstet Gynecol.2021;137(5):782–90.22Rogers RG, Leeman LL. Postpartumgenitourinary changes. Urol ClinNorth Am. 2007;34(1):13–21.23Margerison CE, Kaestner R, Chen J,MacCallum-Bridges C. Impacts ofMedicaid expansion before concep-tion on prepregnancy health, preg-nancy health, and outcomes. Am JEpidemiol. 2021;190(8):1488–98.24Wherry LR, Miller S. Early coverage,access, utilization, and health effectsassociated with the Affordable CareAct Medicaid expansions: a quasi-experimental study. Ann InternMed. 2016;164(12):795–803.25Ghosh A, Simon K, Sommers BD.The effect of health insurance onprescription drug use among low-income adults: evidence from recentMedicaid expansions. J Health Econ.2019;63:64–80.26Wherry LR. State Medicaid expan-sions for parents led to increasedcoverage and prenatal care utiliza-tion among pregnant mothers.Health Serv Res. 2018;53(5):3569–91.27Aziz A, Gyamfi-Bannerman C, SiddiqZ, Wright JD, Goffman D, Sheen JJ,et al. Maternal outcomes by raceduring postpartum readmissions.Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2019;220(5):484.e1–10.28Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.Medicaid postpartum coverage ex-tension tracker [Internet]. SanFrancisco (CA): KFF; 2022 Nov 17[cited 2022 Nov 21]. Available from:https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/medicaid-postpartum-coverage-extension-tracker/
January 2023 42:1Health Affairs25Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org by Dan Morin on May 08, 2023.Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
PRETERM BIRTH RATE BY RACE AND ETHNICITYThe 2022 March of Dimes Report Card highlights the latest key indicators to describe and improve maternal and infant health. We continue to provide updated measures on preterm birth, infant mortality, low-risk Cesarean births and inadequate prenatal care. New this year is the inclusion of the Maternal Vulnerability Index (MVI), which provides county-level indicators of where women are most vulnerable to poor outcomes. Our Supplemental Report Card summarizes state-level progress towards selected Healthy People 2030 pregnancy and childbirth health objectives, outcomes by race/ethnicity and describes March of Dimes programmatic initiatives. We continue to monitor disparities in maternal and infant health. Comprehensive data collection and analysis of these measures inform the development of policies and programs that move us closer to health equity. The Report Card presents policies like Medicaid expansion and programs like Maternal Mortality Review Committees, that can help improve equitable maternal and infant health for families across the country.9.4%PRETERM BIRTH RATE
Percentage of live births born preterm
02468109.28.9Black
WhiteMARCH OF DIMESREPORT CARDMAINEC+
Percentage of live births in 2019-2021 (average) born preterm20112021RACE/ETHNICITYPRETERM BIRTH  GRADE2022 
5.9INFANT MORTALITYRATEINFANT MORTALITYInfant mortality rates are an indication of overall health. Leading causes of infant death include birth defects, preterm birth, low birth weight, maternal complications and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).
Rate per 1,000 live births20102020Purple (darker) color shows a significant trend (p <= .05)Purple (darker) color shows a significant trend (p <= .05)INFANT HEALTH
8.37.88.18.48.58.68.78.69.09.09.4
5.46.77.07.16.66.65.75.95.55.45.9
5.4
10.5
For details on data sources and calculations, see Technical Notes: https://bit.ly/ReportCardTechnicalNotesTHE 2022 MARCH OF DIMES REPORT CARD: STARK AND UNACCEPTABLE DISPARITIES PERSIST ALONGSIDE A TROUBLING RISE IN PRETERM BIRTH RATESMarch of Dimes recommends state policy actions that are rooted in addressing disparities in maternal and infant health outcomes, see www.marchofdimes.org/reportcard © 2022 March of DimesThe March of Dimes disparity ratio measures and tracks progress towards the elimination of racial/ethnic disparities in preterm birth. It’s based on Healthy People 2020 methodology and compares the group with the lowest preterm birth rate to the average for all other groups. Progress is evaluated by comparing the current disparity ratio to a baseline disparity ratio. A lower disparity ratio is better, with a disparity ratio of 1 indicating no disparity. See Technical Notes for details.
There is a critical connection between infant health, maternal health and the health of a family. All are dependent on their lived social context, the quality and accessibility of healthcare and the policies within a state. Each factor can provide insight into how a state serves its population, among other factors.MATERNAL VULNERABILITY INDEXMAINE
MEDICAID EXPANSIONState has adopted this policy to allow women greater access to preventative care during pregnancy. MEDICAID EXTENSIONState has recent action to extend coverage for women beyond 60 days postpartum.DOULA POLICY OR LEGISLATIONState has allowed for the passage of Medicaid coverage for doula care. March of Dimes, in partnership with Surgo Ventures, examines determinants of maternal health using the Maternal Vulnerability Index (MVI)*. The MVI is the first county-level, national-scale tool to identify where and why moms in the U.S. are vulnerable to poor pregnancy outcomes and pregnancy-related deaths. The MVI includes not only widely known clinical risk factors, but also key social, contextual, and environmental factors that are essential influencers of health outcomes. 
MATERNAL MORTALITY REVIEW COMMITTEE (MMRC)State has a MMRC, which is recognized as essential to understanding and addressing the causes of maternal death.PERINATAL QUALITY COLLABORATIVE (PQC)State has a PQC to identify and improve quality care issues in maternal and infant healthcare. 25.3LOW-RISK CESAREAN BIRTHPercent of women who had Cesarean births and were first-time moms, carrying a single baby, positioned head-first and at least 37 weeks pregnant. These births are frequently considered low-risk. PERCENT
MIDWIFERY POLICY State allows for Medicaid reimbursement at 90% and above for certified nurse midwives. 8.9PERCENTINADEQUATE PRENATAL CAREPercent of women who received care beginning in the fifth month or later or less than 50% of the appropriate number of visits for the infant's gestational age. 
LegendState has the indicated organization/policy
State does not have the indicated organization/policyWaiver pending or planning is occurring
CLINICAL MEASURESPOLICY MEASURES Where you live matters.
Your healthcare matters. 
State policies matter.  Adoption of the following policies and organizations can help improve maternal and infant healthcare.Very Low0-19.920-39.980-100Very HighMATERNAL HEALTH
Has an MMRC but does not review deaths up to a year after pregnancy ends
Differences in counties are measured using numerous factors broken into six themes: reproductive healthcare, physical health, mental health and substance abuse, general healthcare, socioeconomic determinants and physical environment. The MVI assigns a score of 0-100 to each geography, where a higher score indicates greater vulnerability to adverse maternal outcomes.
Access to and quality of healthcare before, during and after pregnancy can affect health outcomes in the future. An unnecessary Cesarean birth can lead to medical complications and inadequate prenatal care can miss important milestones in pregnancy.14.5
26.340-59.960-79.9LowHighModerate*Visit https://mvi.surgoventures.org/ for more information.
For details on data sources and calculations, see Technical Notes: https://bit.ly/ReportCardTechnicalNotesTHE 2022 MARCH OF DIMES REPORT CARD: STARK AND UNACCEPTABLE DISPARITIES PERSIST ALONGSIDE A TROUBLING RISE IN PRETERM BIRTH RATESMarch of Dimes recommends state policy actions that are rooted in addressing disparities in maternal and infant health outcomes, see www.marchofdimes.org/reportcard © 2022 March of Dimes
