 
 
207.888.9826  American Cancer Society  Cancer Action Network   
hilary.schneider@cancer.org  PO Box 350, Westbrook, ME 04092 -3438  
  fight cancer.org | 1.800 .227.2345  
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Hilary Schneider, Regional Government Relations Director,  
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network  
 
In Opposition to LD 902 “An Act to Repeal So -called MaineCare Expansion ” 
May 8, 2023  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer , and members of the Health and Human Services Committee . My name 
is Hilary Schneider, and I am the Regional Government Relations Director of the North Atlantic  Region for the 
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN).  In this role, I serve as the lead Government 
Relations Director for Maine. ACS CAN, the nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy affiliate of the American Cancer 
Society, supports evidence -based policy and legislative solutions designed to eliminate cancer as a major health 
problem. As the nation’s leading advocate for public policies that ar e helping to defeat cancer, ACS CAN ensures 
that cancer patients, survivors, and their families have a voice in public policy matters at all levels of 
government.  
I would like to thank you for this opportunity to submit the following testimony  in opposition to LD 902 because 
ACS CAN strongly opposes any attempt to reduce access to adequate, affordable health coverage for Maine 
people . The American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network  believe s that everyone should have a fair and just 
opportunit y to prevent, detect, treat, and survive cancer. Cancer impacts everyone and critical  to eliminating 
disparities and ensuring health equity is to guarantee that all individuals have access to affordable health 
coverage .  
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) expan ded health insurance coverage to millions of Americans. A portion of these 
coverage gains are attributable to Medicaid expansion . As a result of coverage expansions, Maine’s uninsured 
rate is  the 13th lowest in the nation.i 
Having adequate and affordable health insurance coverage is a key determinant for surviving cancer. Research 
from the American Cancer Society shows that uninsured people  are less likely to get screened for cancer and 
thus are more likely to have their cancer diagnosed at an advanced stage when survival is less likely and the cost 
of care more expensive.ii Access to health care coverage ensures that serious diseases like c ancer can be 
detected and treated earlier but also often means better patient outcomes and less costs to the individual and 
the system. According to the Office of MaineCare Services, as of December 31, 2022, coverage through 
MaineCare expansion alone has r esulted in 12,693 breast cancer screenings, and 10,882 colorectal cancer 
screenings.iii 
Research consistently shows that expanding access to Medicaid increases insurance coverage rates among 
cancer patients and survivors, increases early -stage cancer diagnoses, access to timely cancer treatment, and 
receipt of cancer  screenings and preventive services.iv For example, a recent study showed that Medicaid 
expansion was associated with an increase in survival from cancer at 2 years post diagnosis, and the increase 
was most prominent among non -Hispanic Blacks in rural are as, highlighting how expanding Medicaid can reduce  
health disparities , including rural health disparities .v Another recent study showed that Medicaid expansion may 
 
 
207.888.9826  American Cancer Society  Cancer Action Network   
hilary.schneider@cancer.org  PO Box 350, Westbrook, ME 04092 -3438  
  fight cancer.org | 1.800 .227.2345  improve outcomes for childhood cancer . Although children are not directly covered under exp anded Medicaid,  
the study found that children  with cancer in states that expanded Medicaid had an increase in 2-year  surviv al 
rate, likely due to a combination of positive impacts from expansion.vi 
As such, in states that have yet to expand Medicaid, ACS C AN, its volunteers, and partners are working tirelessly 
to pass expansion so that uninsured and underinsured  low-income  individuals and families can gain access to 
adequate, affordable health coverage and all residents can realize the health and economic benefits that have 
been realized in states like Maine.  
For the above reasons, we urge you to vote “ought not to pass” on LD 902. We appreciate you r time and 
consideration of our comments. I would be happy to answer any questions about this testimony.  
 
i Ibid.  
ii E Ward et al, “Association of Insurance with Cancer Care Utilization and Outcomes,” CA: A Cancer Journal for  
Clinicians 58:1 (Jan./Feb. 2008), http://www.cancer.org/cancer/news/report -links -health -insurance -status -withcancer -care .  
iii Maine Department of Health and  Human Services, Office of MaineCare Services, “MaineCare Expansion: MaineCare 
(Medicaid) Update: February 1, 2023, https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/data -reports/mainecare -expansion  (accessed on April 
3, 2023).  
iv Building on the Evidence Base: Studies on the Effects of Medicaid Expansion, February 2020 to March 2021. Published 
May 6, 2021. https://www.kff.org/report -section/building -on-the-evidence -base -studies -on-the-effects -of-medicaid -
expansion -february -2020 -to-march -2021 -report/   
v Han, Xuesong, et al. Association Between Medicaid Expansion Under the Affordable Care Act and Survival Among Newly 
Diagnosed Cancer Patients. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2022 Aug 8;114(8):1176 -1185. doi: 
10.1093/jnci/dj ac077  
vi Justin M Barnes, MD, MS, Corey Neff, MPH, Xuesong Han, PhD, Carol Kruchko, BA, Jill S Barnholtz -Sloan, PhD, Quinn T 
Ostrom, PhD, MPH, Kimberly J Johnson, PhD, MPH, The association of Medicaid expansion and pediatric cancer overall 
survival,  JNCI: J ournal of the National Cancer Institute , 2023;, djad024,  https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djad024  
