Q C 
semi Ma1neEqua1]ust1ce my Kilrain del R... 
Augusta! Mame 04330‘6322 Advocacy & Programs Director 
TTY/VOICE: (207) 626-7058 I u kknramdeh-io@meJp org 
www maineequaljustice.org People Pohcy soluuans 
MEJ Testimony in Opposition to LD 902, An Act to Repeal So-called MaineCare Expansion 
May 8, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee. My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio, I use she/her pronouns, and l'm 
the Advocacy and Programs Director for Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider 
working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. I am 
speaking today in opposition to LD 902. 
MaineCare Expansion became law because of the strong support of 59 percent of Maine voters in 
November 2017. The voters will has led to lower rates of uninsured Mainers, improved access to 
critical health care services, and helped our residents weather a pandemic and associated economic 
challenges. By any measure, expanding MaineCare has been a success. 
To provide some of the numbers, as of February 1, 2023, 106,509 people were enrolled in the 
expansion category for MaineCare, including 92,884 adults without children and 13,625 parents and 
caretaker relatives? These individuals have incomes up to 138% of the federal poverty level, (ex. 
$1,677/month for a household of one or $2,859/month for a household of three). Those enrollment 
numbers are higher than originally anticipated because of the federal Public Health Emergency 
provision for states to maintain Medicaid enrollment with few exceptions until last month. Now that 
we have begun what's referred to as "unwinding" — resuming redeterminations and ending the 
continuous enrollment period — we will see those numbers drop over the course of the next year. 
But the fact that we had expanded prior to the pandemic meant that thousands of Mainers who 
lost theirjobs early in the pandemic and lost employer health coverage or could no longer afford 
coverage, had an affordable option by enrolling in MaineCare. States like ours were better 
positioned to deal with both the pandemic and the economic challenges of the past three years 
thanks to Medicaid Expansion? 
There are many health benefits to having health coverage and we see them everyday for people 
with MaineCare. Thanks to expansion, thousands of Mainers have had access to cancer screening, 
treatment for diabetes and hypertension, mental health treatment, and treatment for Substance 
1 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/data-reports/mainecareexpansion 
2 https: / /www.cbpp.org/ research/ health / states-that-have-expanded-medicaidare-better-positioned-to 
address-covid-19-and
2 
Use Disorder (see Expansion lmpact below). They've had access to prescription medications, care 
for serious illness, care because of injuries, and so much more. It is not hyperbole to say that access 
to the care MaineCare covers is life changing and lifesaving. 
Expansion Impact, 12/31/2022 
Breast Cancer Screenings 
Coiorectal Cancer Screening 
Treatment for Diabetes 
Treatment for Hypertension 
Mental Health Treatment 
Opioid Use Disorder Treatment* 
Substance Use Disorder Treatment 
‘mi iD8I> receivimg Ooioid Use Disorder Treatment data IS intluded -.-.-=t;'un n LI mu- receiving Substance Use Disorder Treatment data 
a ':;l'.laineCer-3 Claims 12,693 
10,882 
11,750 
13,863 
69,206 
17,105 
25.100 
Repealing MaineCare Expansion would result in a significant increase in uninsured Mainers, poorer 
health outcomes, and earlier deaths. There simply is no positive outcomes associated with sucha 
harmful policy change. For these reasons, we urge you to continue to support the will of l\/laine 
voters and vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 902. Thank you for your consideration and I'm happy to 
answer any questions.
