Z STATE HOUSE STATION 
3 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
Michael H. Lemelin MAINE RELAY 711 
3I3 H;1|lo\\*e|| Road 
"“ ) HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
Chelsea. ME 0-l3_~( 
I\hchael.Lemelin; ‘& leuis|:1lure.maine.:0\ 
Residence: (Z07) 798-9399 
Testimony of Rep. Michael Lemelin introducing 
LD 902 An Act to Repeal the So-Called Mainecare 
V Expansion. 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed 
members of the Health and Human Services Committee. My name is 
Representative Michael Lemelin of Chelsea representing House District 
53. l am here to present LD 902 An Act to Repeal the So-Called 
Mainecare Expansion. 
This bill is probably the greatest bill to ever come before the Health and 
Human Services committee. The reason I say this, is because it solves 
almost every problem that we face within this committee. Year after year 
every department within DHHS and all healthcare services come before 
this committee and tell us how desperate they are for money and 
resources. Regardless of how much we help, they are back for more the 
next year. Why‘? My bill, LD 902, solves 90% of these issues. We 
cannot continue to throw darts at a dartboard in an attempt to solve 
issues. Money is get the issue, “functionalijt_v_ ” is. We must take a step 
back and look at the catalyst, the root cause, of the issues facing the 
department and the stakeholders. As of now, Maine is known as the 
‘fwelfare state” and this is not a complement to our state. We want to be 
known as the state that cares for the poor, the elderly and those with 
special needs. The Mainecare system was designed to help the very 
poorest of the poor, people with special needs, and to help those who 
District 53 Chelsea, Dresden, Pittston and Randolph 
Printed on 1ec\ cled papei
have fallen on hard times, get back on their feet. Poor executive and 
management decisions have caused the problems we are facing now 
from the impact of COVID-19 and our labor force. As I have said, in the 
past, COVID-19 is a virus and not a person. Therefore, COVID-19 did 
not cause anything. The poor handling of Covid, and the high minimum 
wage, caused all the problems, and my Bill LD 902 has been developed 
to get us back on our feet, and to start us in the right direction, to solve 
all the problems facing us now Within the Health and Human Services 
department. 
First, we must change our way of thinking. As I have already stated, 
Welfare is for the seriously poor, the people with special needs and those 
that have fallen on hard times and need a short-term relief to get back on 
track. 
Second, we must open many free clinics for the poorest people, and 
privately fund them. Then have hospitals open low-cost clinics, witha 
fee of $35 and $15 for lab work, and have them operate long hours. 
People need to learn that you do not bring your child in for every little 
thing. These clinics will serve to provide care for people on hard times. 
With clinics like these, we will remove most emergency room visits and 
PCP visits which drive up cost, and provide care for those with high 
deductables, and the poor. TANF and other Medicaid options need to be 
severely time limited. People need “motivation ” to move on in life. 
Educating people to live on the system is why we are in the position we 
are in. Mainecare expansion makes welfare a “way of life” for more 
Mainers. This degrades our State. We must help everyone in need; 
however, we must make sure these individuals understand that welfare is 
temporary unless you are disabled, or in a nursing home with no other 
alternative. General assistance is not permanent assistance. Educating 
people to do drugs safely is the reason we have a drug crisis. There is 
no Housing crisis in Maine. Everyone on this committee can afford 
housing or rent. When we educate people to live on the system, and 
when we tell illegal immigrants they are new Mainers, and expand 
Mainecare to ﬁt all, then we can inventa housing crisis in order to house 
the people we ourselves invited to live in poverty. This is an extreme 
injustice. The problems within the DHHS are self-inﬂicted, through
Mainecare expansion. My Bill LD 902 gives us a fresh new start in the 
right direction away from being a welfare state, and becoming a state 
which helps its people prosper and feel good about themselves. 
On March 23, 2010, the greatest event since the resurrection of Christ 
happened. The Affordable Care Act. This was our guaranteed answer to 
health care for all. It failed; however, it did drive the cost of healthcare 
through the roof. Co-pays went from $10-15 to $35-45. Deductibles 
Went from $500 to $5000 plus. With Obama Care no person should be 
in need of Maincare, except the special needs people, and some elderly. 
By repealing MaineCare expansion, all waitlist disappears. There is 
now money to ﬁx some of the Mental Health, and home care issues. 
Our welfare system should never pay for any elective surgeries, that are 
not medically necessary, for the health of the patient. . 
We must motivate all Mainers to want to work. If my son can work 
almost anyone can. We need to teach Mainers how to live in hard times. 
This does not include living off the system. We need to educate people 
that their life choices have consequences. 
Look at the ﬁscal note on my bill. It is also perfect. This money can 
now be used to remove the waitlist and pay for the services people 
desperately need, who belong on Mainecare, and to ﬁx a broken system. 
When we expand Mainecare, we invite people to our state to live on the 
system. We need to motivate these people to want more and to move 
away from the welfare system. Illegal immigrants do not belong on our 
welfare system. If cities want to accept illegals, then they should 
provide for them, and not all Maine taxpayers. 
Mainecare expansion, and poor management is the catalyst and 
driving force behind our issues within DHHS. Mainecare expansion 
is the crisis, not Covid, housing, or labor force. 
We need to educate people away from the “welfare state” mentality, to 
become prosperous, and feel great about themselves. .
.
