Opposition to Bill 551 Cathy Daphna Harris 
Dear distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name 
is Cathy Harris and I am a retired school teacher as well as a parent and grandparent. I live in 
Mechanic Falls. I am speaking in opposition to Bill 551. 
The reason why it is prohibited to discharge a gun in a school zone is to protect the public, 
specificallychildren. Children who may be on the playground during recess, children walking to 
and from school, children being dropped off or picked up in school parking lots, and children at 
soccer practice or participating in outdoor sporting events. 
Schools are a hub of activity with concerts and sporting events going on well into the 
evenings. Many schools host open house, science fairs, and fund raisers after school hours 
and on the weekends. School playgrounds in most towns are used by the community and are 
available as a place where families can bring their children when school is not in session. 
Communities count on schools to be a safe place. 
This bill puts children, parents and school staff in danger of being hit by a stray bullet. ln 
Maine anyone can own a gun. They are not required to have a permit or have any safety train- 
ing. l am sure no one on this committee wants a kindergarten age child to be shot while play- 
ing outside at recess, or a mother to be shot in her car after she has dropped off her children at 
school, or a member of the visiting soccer team to be hit by a bullet while participating ina 
sports tournament. Yet if this bill goes forward this is the kind of risk we would face. We need 
to keep school playgrounds, parking lots and athletic fields as safe as possible. 
Last week at hearings regarding concealed weapons in schools or using teachers as 
armed security, l heard proponents speak passionately about how important it is that we pro- 
tect our children in school. Now l am hearing that a gun owner’s personal rights to fire his 
weapon at a perceived threat is more important than the safety of our school children. l can’t 
help but notice the hypocrisy. 
l urge you to keep our school zones safe and vote against this bill. 
Thank you.
