Hillary Shende
Brunswick
LD 551
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice
and Public Safety Committee, my name is Hillary Shende, and I am here to strongly 
testify against LD 551.
As legislators charged with protecting public safety, you have the opportunity to save 
lives through public policy. So the most important thing you need to know is, will this
bill save lives or endanger them? The scientifically sound studies on this subject are 
plentiful, and they all come to the same conclusion: the presence of firearms, in any 
location, makes that location LESS safe, not MORE safe, from gun violence. Studies 
published by The American Academy of Physicians, the Oxford University Press, The
National Institutes of Health, Scientific American, the Rand Corporation, Harvard 
University, the journal Nature, the New England Journal of Medicine, Boston 
University, The Kaiser Family Foundation and many others have all concluded that 
the presence of firearms significantly INCREASES the risk that people in that vicinity
will experience gun violence. 
As a mother of school age children, this bill terrifies me, because if it is made law, my
children will be much more likely to be shot and killed. If this bill or the bill to arm 
school staff passes, I will probably take my children out of school and out of state, 
because I refuse to live in a state that cares more about expanding gun usage than 
keeping children alive.
So why would anyone introduce this bill when the research on its dangerous effects is 
so clear? I’ll tell you why. It’s the same reason someone has introduced the bill to arm
school staff and to “stand your ground.” Money. When guns are allowed in more 
places, more people bring guns into those places. And the more guns we have in each 
place, the more gun violence we experience in those places. And the more gun 
violence our society experiences, the more fearful we become. And the more fearful 
we become, the more guns we buy. These additional guns, of course, bring about even
more gun violence, we become even more fearful, and we buy even more guns. 
Who benefits from this insane feedback loop? Not the people, that’s for sure. We 
become the victims of tragedy upon tragedy, getting ever more distrustful of our 
neighbors as we arm ourselves to the teeth. 
So who DOES benefit from the gun violence feedback loop? I’ll tell you who: the gun
manufacturers, their lobbyists, and the legislators they’ve convinced to do their 
bidding.  They all get paid handsomely while we suffer. This is part of their marketing
strategy. Make everybody scared with ever more gun violence so they’ll buy more 
and more guns. That’s it. That’s what this bill and all the other gun use expansion 
bills are about. Money. Trading tens of thousands of American lives every year 
simply to grow the profit margin of one industry.  So I leave you with a question only 
you can answer. How much are Mainers’ lives worth to you?
