 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 551 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 551, An Act to Strengthen Maine Citizens’ Second Amendment Rights by Allowing the 
Discharge of Firearms on Private Property That Is Within 500 Feet of School Property in 
Certain Circumstances  
 
DA: May 8, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 551.   
 
 LD 551 would create a law  inconsistent with the Criminal Code statutes governing  the 
lawful use of deadly force.    It would confuse juries tasked with applying the laws that authorize 
the use of such force in limited circumstances.   17 -A M.R.S. § 108.   It does not recognize that 
deadly force might be used by persons other than residents  of the property, and would thus give  
some people more rights than others based on a circumstance unrelated to whether the person is 
legally authorized to use deadly force .  It also does not recognize that deadly force can be used in 
limited circumstances to defend third persons.   I n addition, i t is not drafted in terms of a defense or 
affirmative defense, and thus is not consistent  with the drafting conventions of the Cri minal Code.   
Finally, CLAC was not aware of circumstances where the existing law interfered with individuals’ 
rights to defend themselves, and thus questions the need for such a change.         
 
  
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
