Testimony in Opposition to LD 551 An Act to An Act to Strengthen Maine Citizens ‘ 
Second Amendment Rights by Allowing the Discharge of Firearms on Private Property 
That ls Within 500 Feet of School Property in Certain Circumstances 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Michele Stapleton and I live in 
Brunswick. 
I wanted to share the most recent polling on gun issues because I think it strongly 
suggests how legislatures should be addressing gun issues at this time. 
Fox News Poll: Voters favor gun limits over arming citizens to reduce gun violence, 
https://www.foxnews.com/official-polls/fox-news-poll-voters-favor-gun-Iimits-arming; 
citizens-reduce-gun —violence (April 27th) 
Gun violence is now a top 3 issue in the US, behind only the economy and inflation. 
Ahead of climate change, immigration, crime, abortion, etc. 
Half of voters are extremely or very concerned that they or a loved one will be a victim 
of gun violence (51%). And, by very wide margins voters support focusing on specific 
gun safety measures; they are rejected the claim that more guns in more hands is our 
solution to reducing reduce gun violence. 
A new Fox News Poll finds most voters favor the following proposals: 
' 87% Requiring criminal background checks on all gun buyers 
' 81% Improving enforcement of existing gun laws 
¢ 81% Raising the legal age to buy a gun to 21 
' 80% Requiring mental health checks on gun buyers 
° 80% Allowing police to take guns from those considered a danger to themselves 
or others 
Q 77% Requiring a 30-day waiting period for all gun purchases 
0 61% Ban assault rifles and semi-automatic weapons 
~ 52% opposed to more citizens carrying guns to defend against attackers 
I wanted to share this poll because I think it's pretty clear that voters want lawmakers to 
focus on enacting policies aimed at preventing gun violence. Not on encouraging 
more gun ownership.
ldeally these policies would be evidence-based solutions backed up by research, but 
after the NRA pushed for the Dickey Amendment in 1997 the CDC avoided research 
on gun violence for twenty-plus years. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Dickey Amendment. And, in fact Congress did not fund any gun research for 20+ 
years. 
ln 2020 funding for gun research was finally established again. 
Research is most valuable when it can be draw from wider sources, i.e., from multiple 
states. With that in mind I urge you to make sure that you don't pass any legislation 
that unintentionally blocks access to valuable data that would othen/vise support 
important research. 
Suggestion: before the work session you reach out to people in the gun research field 
(Harvard or Rand or another leading researcher) to see for example, how non-registry 
evidence can be collected without infringing on anyone’s rights. You wouldn't want LD 
624, or another legislation, to block valuable research. 
Thank you for your time on this very important issue.
