Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety, my name is Nacole Palmer. I live in Bowdoin. I stand up to oppose LD 
551: Allowing the Discharge of Firearms within 500 feet of a School. 
I am a mom to a toddler and a step-mom to three older children. I have been an educator for 
more than two decades, and I currently teach at Colby College, where a recent shooting left 
many, including my students, paralyzed with fear and worry for weeks. t was living in 
Connecticut at the time of the Sandy Hook shootings, and l learned in the days that followed the 
carnage there that three of the children were one degree of separation from me. 
Sandy Hook is when I stopped thinking of gun violence as something that happened in far away 
places. That's when I not only witnessed but was part of an entire community who had come to 
realize that the horrific reach of gun violence can come for any person at any time, including and 
maybe especially in the places where people tell themselves, “that can’t happen here." 
I spend a lot of time thinking about our children, our schools, and how to create the kind of world 
our children deserve to grow up in, and I imagine that everyone here wants their communities, 
families, and loved ones to be safe. 
This law, though, LD 551, would create more danger and more violence in the places that 
should be most sacred: our schools. Quite frankly, I am horriﬁed to think that my son could have 
to go to school with someone doing target practice within range of a school. SeriousIy??l 
Our children should not have to worry about being shot when they go to school, I think we can 
all agree on that. Enacting this bill would only increase that risk. From ﬁrearms that have ranges 
up to and even beyond 500 feet, to a vigilante ﬁring a weapon ﬁrst and asking questions later 
when a child mistakenly crosses onto their property on the way to or from schooI...this bill is 
dangerous and would impede public safety, not add to it. I ask you to vote Ought Not To Pass on 
LD 551.
