Peggy McGehee 
Falmouth, Maine 
Good afternoon, Chairs Beebe-Center and Salisbury and Members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee: 
l am Peggy McGehee, a resident of the Town of Falmouth. l speak in opposition to L.D. 551, 
that allows a resident living closer than 500 feet to a school property to shoot a gun, for the general 
purposes of, as the bill states, “self-defense ” or "to protect the person Is residence. ” 
The bill is overbroad and would create a “stand your ground” law within the 500 foot area, 
when no other Mainer has such a right, but has a “duty to retreat” ﬁrst. Thus, this bill gives 
residents on private property located within 500 ft. of schools a broader right to shoot intruders 
than the right of other Maine residents on any other property. 
Under Maine’s current statute,l7-A M.R.S.A. §l08(2)(C)(3)(a), you can use deadly force to 
protect yourself against an attacker when he is inside, or is breaking into, your home. However, if you are 
outside of your home, you are not justiﬁed in using defensive deadly force if you can -- “with complete 
safety "—retreat. This is called a “duty to retreat”—and that duty to retreat language that is in 
Maine’s Section 108 statute is missing from this bill. 
Rather, the bill’s broad, undeﬁned language raises the question whether a resident living neara 
school could shoot to “protect” her residence if kids were egging her house on Halloween; or 
could shoot “in self-defense ” if someone threw a shoe at her while she was raking her front yard. 
As the terms “protect the person Is‘ residence, ” and “in selfdefense, ” as used in the bill, are not 
deﬁned, they are open to broad interpretation, and misinterpretation, and risk irresponsible and 
accidental shootings. 
Guns have effective ranges that can go deep into school properties from abutting and nearby 
residential properties. For example, a 9 mm pistol typically has an effective range of 150 feet but 
is still lethal up to 450 feet. The effective range, and lethal effect, of riﬂes and semi-automatics is 
much further. A stray bullet can thus injure or kill unintended victims on school grounds. 
Finally this bill cannot be lawfully enacted as it conﬂicts with the federal 1000 ft. gun ﬁee school 
zone, under the U.S. Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990, as the federal statute only exempts 
police and individuals with state-issued concealed-carry permits. 18 U.S.C. 922(q)(2)(B)(ii). As 
L.D. 551 allows abutter residents without a permit to discharge a ﬁrearm, it is contrary to the 
federal statute and accordingly unlawful. 
Please vote ought not to pass on this bill, L.D. 551. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. 
Peggy McGehee 
prncgehee4@gmail.com
