Andrew Gray
Waterboro
LD 253
TO: Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Senator Joseph Rafferty, Senate Chair
Representative Michael Brennan, House Chair
Attn: Cheryl Chapman
From: Andrew Gray
RE: L.D. 253; An Act to Add Health and Physical Education Requirements to High
School Diploma Standards; (SP0119) (Presented by Senator DAUGHTRY, M. of
Cumberland) (Cosponsored by Senator RAFFERTY, J. of York)
Date: February 6, 2023
Good afternoon Sen. Raferty, Rep. Brennan, and members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee. My name is Andrew Gray, and I am a Physical 
Education teacher in Wells as well as a father of 3 in RSU57, Massabesic District . 
This testimony is in support of LD 253.
As a physically active individual, I have been stressing the importance of health and 
wellness to my family for over 20 years. I see the benefits of being physically active 
and see the repercussions when I am not. This is an easy lifestyle for me because I 
have always been an athlete competing for over 40 years in sports during every 
season. It is clear for me to see the change in my mental health and physical health 
during periods of activity versus those times when I am not. This is undoubtedly 
because of my training as a PE teacher. My education has provided me with the info 
to substantiate the way I feel physically and mentally.
As a coach of middle school and high school athletes, the situation has been similar. I 
have tried to teach and develop training habits to improve skills and more importantly
overall well-being. Athletes see the value of skill development but even they are hard 
to convince of the importance of physical activity and wellness. The most success I 
have had is with students who associate that work with the concepts they learn in PE 
and Health classes.
Health Education and Physical Education have changed from a place for athletes to 
hone their skills and the not-so-athletic student to fear embarrassment into a setting 
where choices are given to meet standards and Social/Emotional Learning takes 
center stage. HE/PE teachers are trained to teach physical skills, concepts, and social 
skills.
Study after study, book after book, and article after article point out the correlation 
between physical activity and mental health. The link between physical 
literacy/physical activity and an individual’s health is undeniable. Physically educated
kids become physically educated adults. Physical education starts with a quality 
program in all schools and accountability with high school credit toward graduation. 
HE and PE classes must be required for graduating well-rounded, well-educated 
students.
Please make sure Health Education and Physical Education are diploma requirements.
Thank you for your time and your service.
Andrew Gray

