L.D. 253
Bill "An act to add health and physical education
requirements to high school
diploma standards (SP0119) Presented by Senator Daughtry, M. of Cumberland and
cosponsored by Senator Rafferty of York
In support
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs.
My Name is Becki Belmore and I am a physical education and adapted physical education
teacher in MSAD 51 (Cumberland/North Yarmouth). Please accept my testimony in support of
the inclusion of health education and physical education in the requirements to high school
diploma standards. The addition of these requirements proves that, as a Committee, you value
this educational content for all students and that you recognize the need for Maine graduates to
show competency is the skills necessary to lead an active and healthy lifestyle through
adulthood.
I represent the leadership board of the Maine Association of Health, Physical Education,
Recreation, and Dance; our State association that provides advocacy and professional
development to health and physical educators; typically representing a membership of over 450
professionals. I also represent the Maine Adapted Physical Education Task Force which
advocates for appropriate physical education for Maine’s students with disabilities. Both
professional organizations support the inclusion of health education and physical education in
diploma requirements.
The 2021 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey showed the following self-reported statistics
from students in grades 9 through 12:
*30.9% of students report being overweight or obese
*only 50% report being active for 60 minutes per day for five days per week
*76% report at least 3 hours of screen time per day
*75.9% report at least 2 hours of social media activity per day
*33% report their mental health as “not good” on most or all days (42.7% during COVID)
*35.9% report symptoms of depression
*18.5% report having considered suicide
*22.9% report self injurious behaviors
*31% report having used some form of vape

*25.6% report having consumed alcohol prior to age 13
*8.5% report having forced sexual intercourse
*53.8% report not using a condom during sexual intercourse
The Maine Learning Results: Health Education and Physical Education standards were recently
updated and include all of the necessary content to address overall health and wellness and the
concerns listed above. Health Education content includes: health concepts, information,
products, and services; health promotion and risk reduction; influences on health;
communication and advocacy skills; and decision making and goal setting skills. Physical
Education content includes: motor skills and movement patterns; concepts and strategies;
fitness education; responsible personal and social behavior; and recognition of the value of
physical activity.
I have been teaching physical education for 30 years and have seen the evolution of curriculum
from sport based programs to the more well rounded lifelong activity based programs of today.
Students are learning how to get fit and stay fit through a variety of opportunities and elective
classes such as cycling, hiking and outdoor pursuits, aquatics, personal fitness, as well as the
traditional team and individual sport offerings. Every high school physical education class in
MSAD 51 begins with a warm up and workout-of-the-day where students are learning a variety
of skills and techniques that they can take with them after graduation. Social Emotional Learning
has been a hot post-pandemic topic. SEL is naturally woven into all health education and
physical education lessons.
I graduated from the physical education teacher preparation program and Springfield College
where we learned under the Humanics Philosophy that calls for educating the WHOLE person;
spirit, mind, and body. As health and physical educators we believe that a person’s emotional,
intellectual, and physical lives are interconnected.
By adding Health Education and Physical Education to diploma requirements, we are not
changing what most school districts across Maine are already doing; we are not asking for the
addition of classes to be taken. We are simply officially including them right along other content
areas with a required demonstration of competency in the skills necessary to choose to be
healthy and well for a lifetime.
I thank you for your consideration and urge you to include health education and physical
education as diploma requirements to graduate from Maine high schools.
Becki Belmore
4 Dodge Estates
Freeport, ME  04032
that a person’ s emotional, intellectual, and physical
lives are interconnected
hat a
person’ s emotional, intellectual, and physical lives are interconnected
hat a person’ s emotional, intellectual, and physical lives are interconn
