TO: Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Senator Joseph Rafferty, Senate Chair
Representative Michael Brennan, House Chair
Attn: Cheryl Chapman
From: Deb Smith, Executive Director of the Maine Association for Health, Physical
Education, Recreation, and Dance (MAHPERD)
RE: L.D. 253 "An Act to add Health Education and Physical Education Requirements
to High School Diploma Standards" (SP0119) (Presented by Senator DAUGHTRY, M. of
Cumberland) (Cosponsored by Senator RAFFERTY, J. of York)
Date: February 7, 2023
Thank you for this opportunity to share my thoughts about why L.D. 253 is necessary to
become law and thank you for the work that you do on behalf of the citizens of Maine.
The issue of health education and physical education not being a diploma requirement
was brought to the attention of the MAHPERD board at the beginning of the pandemic.
When schools went to remote learning health educators and physical educators became
concerned about what remote learning would look like for them and how they would be
able to connect to their students. I had conversations with teachers who were concerned
about their jobs being eliminated because what they are teaching is not a diploma
requirement even though we all know that health education and physical education are
required in the Maine Learning Results. Teachers shared that their administrators often
reference graduation requirements and not the Maine Learning Results.
During the pandemic the importance of health education and physical education was
certainly elevated. Children were isolated in their homes and working behind a
computer screen. It was obvious that the lack of interaction with other children and
their teachers impacted their daily lives and we are still seeing the impact today.
In Health Education and Physical Education classes children learn how to manage their
emotions, how to work with others, how to problem solve, how to be a critical thinkers,
and how to share. They learn life-long skills that will help them manage their lives as
they get older.
I ask you to vote in favor of L.D. 253 and to reinstate Health Education and Physical
Education as graduation requirements.
Thank you for your time here today.
