TO: Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural AffairsSenator Joseph Rafferty, Senate ChairRepresentative Michael Brennan, House ChairAttn: Cheryl ChapmanFR: Erin Bjorkdahl, Bonny Eagle High School, Health Education TeacherRE: L.D. 253 "An Act to Add Health and Physical Education Requirements to High School Diploma Standards"(SP0119) (Presented by Senator DAUGHTRY, M. of Cumberland) (Cosponsored by Senator RAFFERTY, J. ofYork)DA: February 11, 2023Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other respected members of the Joint Standing Committee onEducation and Cultural Affairs. Thank you for taking the time to read this testimony that is in support of LD 253.My name is Erin Bjorkdahl and I am a Health Education teacher at Bonny Eagle High School. I have beenteaching Health Education for the past 18 years. I knew that I wanted to be a Health teacher from the age of 15because I wanted to teach a subject that I felt would make a real difference in a person’s life. A person’s healthstatus can impact all areas of their life, that is why it is important that we teach our young people how to take careof all areas of their health.It came to my attention recently that Health and Physical Education were no longer a requirement for high schoolgraduation. I was very surprised that these content areas were omitted from the diploma requirements. It is myhope that Health Education and Physical Education were inadvertently left out of the graduation standards whenthey were last revisited. I do recognize that the Health and Physical Education standards were still included inChapter 127 and have been required in meeting the Maine Learning Results, but I also believe that successfulcompletion of these courses should also be required for a student to graduate high school.Health Education courses teach students the skills that they need in order for them to take steps to live a healthylife. Health educators have worked hard to ensure that we are providing the opportunity to practice health-relatedskills that they will utilize throughout their lifetime. Many of the skills that we teach are also closely related to theMaine Guiding Principles. We teach students to be clear and effective communicators by providing them with theopportunity to practice using affirmative consent, refusal skills, and negotiation skills in realistic situations that theymay encounter throughout their lives. We practice the skill of goal-setting so students can become self-directedand lifelong learners. Students can become creative and practical problem solvers by demonstrating their ability touse decision-making skills to help improve their health and the health of others. They can learn how to berespectful and involved citizens by learning how to advocate for themselves and topics that they are passionateabout. Lastly, we encourage students to become integrative and involved thinkers by analyzing the differentinfluences in their lives and how they could impact their health status and teaching students how to analyze andaccess reliable sources of health information, products, and services. All of the skills that students learn in HealthEducation courses will help them both now and in the future. It is imperative that students are able to demonstratethe ability to understand and utilize health skills in order to graduate high school.In addition, there are many educational statutes that are closely related to Health Education and are very oftenaddressed and met in a student’s Health Education class. These statutes include the following:●4502. School Approval Requirements 5-b. Suicide Awareness Education and Training●4502. School Approval Requirements- Child Sexual Abuse Prevention Education and Response
●4723. Health and Physical Education including Affirmative Consent●6304. Automated external defibrillators and cardiopulmonary resuscitation●6671. Youth Mental Health First Aid Training●1902. Definitions, 1-A Maine Comprehensive Family Life Education●272. Tobacco Prevention and Control ProgramHealth education programs in school are responsible for teaching content related to healthy sexuality; nutrition;safety and injury prevention; substance abuse prevention; diseases and other health conditions (including mentaland emotional health). In teaching the above content and health-related skills, we are able to help students worktowards meeting the Maine Guiding Principles and covering statutes that are required in educational settings.In the past, in order to graduate students were required to have 1.0 credit of Physical Education and 0.5 credit ofHealth Education. I believe that this is the bare minimum of what students should have at the high school level inorder to graduate. Ideally, both Health Education and Physical Education, would be recognized and taught withthe similar requirements of English, science, social studies, and math throughout a student’s K-12 educationaljourney. But, requiring HE and PE as a graduation requirement would be a wonderful step back in the rightdirection in helping student wellness.In closing, I ask you to vote in favor of L.D. 253 and reinstate Health Education and Physical Education asgraduation requirements. It is important that students are required to show their ability to use this information anddemonstrate the skills appropriately in high school so they can then use them again in the future. Being able toassess personal well-being and intentionally practice health-enhancing behaviors and avoid or reduce health risksis something that people need to be able to do throughout their lifetime. Thank you for your consideration.
