TO:
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Senator Joseph Rafferty, Senate Chair
Representative Michael Brennan, House Chair
Attn:
Cheryl Chapman
FR:
Jamie Dillon, South Portland High School; Health and Physical Education Teacher
Maine Association for Health, Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance;
President-Elect
RE:
LD 253 “An Act to Add Health and Physical Education Requirements to High School
Diploma Standards” (SP0119) Presented by Senator Daughtry, M. of Cumberland and
Cosponsored by Senator Rafferty, J. of York.
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other respected members of the Joint Standing Committee
on Education and Cultural Affairs. Thank you for taking the time to read this testimony that is in support
of LD 253.
My name is Jamie Dillon and I am a Health and Physical Education teacher at South Portland High
School. That being said, this is only my second year teaching, ever. It is nothing of what I thought it
would be, it is better. I will share with you why. I had the privilege of growing up in Maine and
experiencing the beginning of what Health and Physical Education are today.
From a first hand experience I was offered opportunities in Physical Education to learn a variety of ways
to remain physically active and what it means to be physically literate. There were classes offered just for
individuals that were interested in learning about weight training, net games such as volleyball, tennis,
and badminton, dance, and more. It allowed me to explore my interests and the many ways I can stay
active with a healthy heart and mind for my future. Even in health class, we started developing the skills
to be healthy, not just learning what it means to prevent unhealthy habits. I was taught to analyze my
influences whether it was the people around me, social media, or advertisements and asked to evaluate
how they impacted my decisions. I was given the opportunity to learn and practice effective
communication when it came to expressing thoughts, needs, and emotions. Mental health concerns for
teenagers at that time in 2014/2015 had already started rising and the health education I was given taught
me how to seek help from reliable resources and that it is OK to need help.
In my short time teaching, I have seen the impact Health and Physical Education has had on the students I
have had the honor to teach. More often than not, we have students coming from their workshop/study
halls to ask for some time to exercise. At South Portland High School, we have eliminated the
‘change-up’ requirement for Physical Education classes as it was found participation rates from students
rose with adjustment of not having to only wear athletic clothes. This allowed more focus on the
importance of building student relationships while implementing physical literacy and other life skills
such as
how to resolve a conflict, how to set physical
fitness goals,
and even
how to work as a team with
people you do not like.
Health Education has shown its own impact on the students' behaviors. We are living in a generation
where the fear of speaking up and the stigma of mental health challenges are fading away, especially as
we see an increase of mental health challenges and issues to address within society. Students are
practicing how to refuse, negotiate, find reliable resources and services, advocate effectively, resources on
maintaining a healthy relationship, resources for leaving an unhealthy relationship, and hands only CPR.
It is a foundation for Social Emotional Learning, making sure to take the time to check in with students.
This has allowed students to feel cared for as well as a tool for students to acknowledge their emotions
and find the strategies in managing the different emotions experienced. Stigma and shame are being
addressed and changed with perspective and understanding. Research has shown the best time for learning
is ages 13-20 which is an essential time for forming skills to maintain a healthy life.
Not only is Health and Physical Education providing a new perspective on life, these courses offer
preventative methods. I ask that you all vote in favor of LD 253 and to reinstate Health and Physical
Education as graduation requirements. This is not just to support those that teach the subject, but for the
students who are the future and to set them up for a more successful future with healthy behaviors.
Thank you for your time and thoughtful consideration.
Jamie Dillon
180 Black Point Road
Scarborough, ME 04074
