- :1- ,-="' .~ 
'-‘ 
.. ~ -. 
,.. . _ ,2’; 
. "".~ ' 
4-= 
\" 
=_\“:il 
Joseph E. Rafferty THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 34 13 lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Joe Rafferty in Support of 
LD 253, An Act to Add Health and Physical Education Requirements to High School Diploma Standards 
Before the Senate Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Thursday, February 9, 2023 
Good afternoon Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs. My name is Joe Rafferty and I proudly represent the people of SD 34 including 
Berwick, North Berwick, Wells, Kennebunk and Kennebunkport. 
Currently, Secondary schools must provide a comprehensive program of study that includes instruction 
for all students in career and education development, English language arts, health education and 
physical education, mathematics, science, social studies, visual and performing arts, and World 
languages. 
Additionally, all students must complete the following minimum requirements for a high school 
diploma. These requirements reﬂect the minimum required by the State in order for a school 
administrative unit (SAU) to award a high school diploma. All SAUs have the ability, through local 
policy, to add requirements to these minimums. 
LD 253 would add Health and Physical Education requirements to the High School Diploma Standards. 
As a former physical education teacher, I can tell you ﬁrsthand how critical it is for our students to 
partake in a robust health and physical education. Physical education classes greatly increase students ’ 
activity levels both in and out of school. It also greatly increases the chances that they will lead physical 
active lifestyles for the remainder of their life even after they are done i11 school. Beyond that, physical 
education also has been proven to help students focus and perform better in the rest of their classes. The 
beneﬁts are numerous, and that is why I am happy to support this measure. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of this bill. 
Joe Rafferty 
Senate District 34 
Chair, Education and Cultural A_ﬂ"airs Committee * Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business 
Committee State House (207) 287-1515 * Fax (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Joe.Raﬂ"erIy@legislatm'e.maine.g0v * legislature.maine.g0v/senate
