John Ryan
Cumberland Foreside
LD 253
I am writing in support of LD 253: An Act to Add Health and Physical Education 
Requirements to High School Diploma Standards.
Maine not only is ranked as the oldest and one of the poorest states in the country, but
has one of the highest rates of childhood obesity in the country. Childhood obesity is 
an epidemic in Maine and in the country. Removing potentially one of the easiest and 
most cost effective ways to increase childhood physical activity rates, decrease 
childhood obesity and decrease the use and abuse of alcohol and other drugs is to 
encourage participation in healthy life long activities, is through school based health 
and physical education programs. 
Physical Education has changed dramatically over the past 30 years.  No longer are 
children being taught athletic or sport based physical activities like basketball or 
soccer.  They are being exposed to life long activities such as tennis, golf, biking, 
canoeing just to name but a few. Many schools are offering their students outdoor 
education opportunities, which leads many of these young students to take advantage 
of all that Maine’s climate and geography has to offer.
Health Education is also a vital component of a child’s education as the curriculum is 
designed to promote healthy lifestyle habits.  Maine has a serious vaping problem 
amongst it youth.  The highest in the country by many who are involved in research 
around substance use and abuse. Not only are our children learning about healthy 
lifestyle habits and choices, but they are learning how those choices affect brain 
development, how those choices affect positively and negatively the different systems
of the body, they are learning how to recognize the signs and symptoms of 
concussions, heart attacks, strokes, seizures and other life threatening conditions.  
They are learning how to save lifes through CPR/AED and first aid classes that are 
being taught in those health classes. Research is clear that administering CPR/AED 
within 2-3 minutes is the differenece between life and death.  Our students, through 
Health Education, are in a position to increase the survival rates of those suffering a 
life threatening “injury” because they have learned to recognize the signs and provide 
care in a timely fashion.
Eliminating the diploma requirement for Physical Education and Health only serves 
and continues to perpetuate our high rates of obesity, vaping and over all use and 
abuse of alcohol and other drugs, especially in the porrest regions of the state. We 
need to be advocating for physical education and health in all of our schools, K-12, 
instead of cutting these programs.  Health care costs are spiraling out of control and 
without physical education and health, and without teaching our children at an early 
age about the benefits of being physically active and making good, healthy lifestyle 
choices we will continue to see our childhood obesity rates increase and we will 
continue to watch our children die at an earlier age. Manadatory physical education 
and health is an essential part of our children’s education and must be restored as a 
diploma requirement.
John Ryan, EdD, LAT, ATC, RAA
Atheltic Trainer, South Portland High School
President-Elect, Eastern Athletic Trainers Association

