TO: Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Senator Joseph Rafferty, Senate Chair 
Representative Michael Brennan, House Chair 
Attn: Cheryl Chapman 
FR: Karyn Bussell, Skowhegan Area Middle School; Health Teacher 
Maine Association for Health, Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance; Secretary 
RE: L.D. 253 "An Act to Add Health and Physical Education Requirements to High School Diploma 
Standards" (SPo119) (Presented by Senator DAUGHTRY, M. of Cumberland) 
(Cosponsored by Senator RAFFERTY, J. of York) 
DA: February 6, 2023 
Thank you for your service to the citizens of the State of Maine and speciﬁcally the students, teachers, 
and staff in our schools. Thank you for your time and consideration of my comments supporting the passage of 
L.D. 253. It is my sincere hope that Health Education and Physical Education were inadvertently left out of the 
graduation standards during the last legislative revision. You now have the opportunity to rectify that. In all 
honesty, when I ﬁrst learned that HE and PE were no longer included with the graduation requirements, I was 
scared. I was scared of losing my job, but more importantly I was fearful that our students would lose a vital 
component of their education. I recognize that all along Health Education and Physical Education have 
remained in Chapter 127 and have been required in meeting the Maine Learning Results. However, it is my 
experience that most administrators and curriculum coordinators reference graduation requirements. Health 
Education and Physical Education being reinstated as graduation requirements will continue to establish the 
foundation of HE and PE in grades kindergarten through grade 8 as well. 
Education, including Health Education, has changed since I was a highschool freshman in 1984-1985. I 
vividly recall my Health class. HIV/AIDS was relatively new and very scary. My Mom had a significant 
accident a few years earlier. As we learned about HIV/AIDS, I was petriﬁed that she had this horrible disease 
as a result of receiving blood transfusions. As it turns out, she did not need a blood transfusion but I worried 
about it all day until she got home from work and explained things to me. Back then, Health Education wasa 
lot of “sit and get”. 
Today, we have taken fear based education out of the equation. We focus on Skills Based Health 
Education integrated with content. Health Education skills include communication, decision making, refusing 
peer pressure, conﬂict resolution, advocacy, analyzing inﬂuences, and determining reliable sources of 
information. These skills are practiced within the context of various content including nutrition, suicide 
prevention, substance use prevention, communicable and chronic disease prevention, puberty/ sexuality. Years 
of data from the Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey provides proof that teenagers take unhealthy risks. 
The purpose of Health Education is to bring these risks to light and provide the knowledge and skills so 
students can make healthy choices now and throughout their lives. We also utilize this data to prove to our 
students that “everyone ” isn't taking risks and they are not alone in making healthy choices. Health Education 
classrooms provide a safe setting for students to practice the skills they need in the “real world”.
After teaching for 21 years in MSAD 59 (Madison), I am teaching my ﬁrst year in my hometown of 
Skowhegan. My principal recently told me that my Health class has had a profound impact on his 7th grade 
son. One prime example is his son tried hummus during our nutrition lessons, something he refused to try at 
home. Quite different from my experience in Health class! As a Health Educator, I am more conﬁdent 
presenting testimony as to the importance of HE, but HE and PE go hand in hand. Students gaining the 
knowledge, skills, and conﬁdence to be physically active in school and throughout their lives is critical to their 
long term wellness. The beneﬁts of physical activity include stress reduction and chronic disease prevention. 
Students who have the opportunity to participate in quality Physical Education classes are better able to focus 
in other core content areas. HE and PE teachers also incorporate goal setting and the importance of healthy 
relationships. 
In my humble opinion, the greatest impact of the COVID pandemic has not been on academics, but the 
social and emotional wellness of our youth. HE and PE naturally and intentionally incorporate social 
emotional learning into the curriculum. SEL tasks include managing emotions, critical thinking, resilience, 
and inclusion. In schools, we often hear from students of all ages ~ “Why do I need to learn this?” “How does 
this apply to my life?” “When will I ever use this again?” I can say in all honesty that I rarely hear this from 
students regarding their Health Education and Physical Education classes. The knowledge and skills students 
are gaining in HE and PE are immediately applicable in their lives and just as importantly, will be applicable 
throughout their lives. 
In closing, I ask you to vote in favor of L.D. 253 and reinstate Health Education and Physical Education 
as graduation requirements. In a perfect world, both of these vital content areas would be taught every year, all 
year with the same time frames as English, math, science, and social studies kindergarten through graduation. 
That is a conversation for another day. Today I respectfully ask you to once again provide the foundation of 
student wellness by requiring HE and PE for graduation. Thanks again for your time and consideration.
