TO:
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Senator Joseph Rafferty, Senate Chair
Representative Michael Brennan, House Chair
Attn:
Cheryl Chapman
FR:
Kayla McGee, Oxford Hills Comprehensive High School; Health Teacher
Maine Association for Health, Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance; President
RE:
L.D. 253
“An Act to Add Health and Physical Education Requirements to High
School Diploma Standards” (SP0119) (Presented by Senator DAUGHTRY, M. of
Cumberland) (Cosponsored by Senator RAFFERTY, J. of York)
DA: February 7, 2023
Thank you for the opportunity to share my thoughts about why L.D. 253 is necessary to become
law and for the work that you do on behalf of the citizens of Maine.
It is my honor to share with you why Health Education and Physical Education should be added
into the State of Maine diploma requirements. I have been an educator for eight years, one in
the Yarmouth area, five at Lewiston High School and most recently at Oxford Hills
Comprehensive High School. Over my short time being a Health Educator, I have seen the
benefits first hand of Health Education for our students. They have the ability to gain skills in
areas that will ultimately help them for post secondary life. When we say “skills” we are talking
about learning how to access reliable information and services, communication and decision
making skills, how to advocate for themselves and how to reduce health risks and promote
healthy lifestyles. Students often refer to my class as “life class” or “the class that’s not dinner
table conversations but we need it.” These skills we teach about and practice with students are
also directly correlated to Social Emotional Learning (SEL) competencies (decision-making,
relationship building and self management). SEL is a huge part of education across all grades
spans, even more so since the pandemic.
Without my own high school health teacher, whom I’ve built an incredible life long friendship
with, I wouldn’t have taken this path to becoming a health teacher. She taught me many life
skills that without her and her class I wouldn’t have been able to accomplish as much as I have
since high school. I would not be prepared to take on and surpass stressful life situations,
demanding social needs or have the ability to make responsible decisions and set high goals
and standards for myself.
I ask you to vote in favor of L.D. 253 and to reinstate Health Education and Physical Education
as graduation requirements.
Thank you.
Kayla McGee
