Kevin Eppler
Gorham
LD 253
RE: LD 253- An act to Add Health Education and Physical Education Requirements 
to High School Diplomas 
To Whom it may Concern:
My name is Kevin Eppler and this is my 25 year teaching physical education/health in
two different states, first Arizona and now at Bonny Eagle High School.  Since the 
expansion of better technology and also the Pandemic so many students have become 
inactive or less active than they used to be.  It is starting to affect some students now 
with health problems but for many of them the issues will rise later in life causing a 
strain on the medical professionals but also their family as they won’t be able to live 
out their best life.  The information on how to properly be physically active, eat 
healthy, combat mental health issues, drug/alcohol risk reduction, and so much more, 
in my opinion, is very  important for a high school aged student to know. Obesity and 
mental health are starting to become bigger  issues for high schoolers not only in 
Maine but across the nation.  In physical education/health classes we teach students to
be clear and effective communicators by providing them with the opportunity to 
practice using affirmative consent, refusal skills, and negotiation skills in realistic 
situations that they may encounter throughout their lives. We also teach them about 
the three areas of health and how they are connected and how physical activity can 
help with all physical, mental and social health.  Lastly we teach suicide prevention 
and how to seek help for themselves or for someone they might know, as no one 
wants to have their son/daughter,  brother/sister , friend or relative pass along to early 
in life.  To ensure that our students are provided this incredibly important information 
is the right thing to do.  I ask you to vote in favor of L.D. 253 and reinstate Health 
Education and Physical Education as graduation requirements.  Thank you for your 
time and consideration.
Sincerely, 
Kevin Eppler
Bonny Eagle Health/Physical Education 

