Testimony
Support For
L.D. 253 Bill “An Act to Add Health and Physical Education Requirements to 
High School Diploma Standards” 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
My name is Rose Marie R. Angell, PhD.  I always wanted to be a physical 
educator. I have achieved my goal of working in the profession for over 35 years 
as a K-8 public school physical educator, part time faculty, assistant professor, and 
district wide adapted physical educator.  
I wish to support L.D. 253 An Act to Add Health and Physical Education 
Requirements to High School Diploma Standards.
I want to state first and foremost that Health and Physical Education were content 
areas once required for a high school diploma.  Students were never deprived of 
engaging in other content areas such as art, music, industrial arts, home economics, 
business education, etc.  It is interesting to me that today we are all here listening 
to arguments from school administrators and others that students would be denied 
access to current non-diploma courses because of health and physical education.  
In fact, it is the “current” diploma requirements that prevent students from 
achieving their afterschool pathway.
Let’s be clear.  The Maine DOE requires 4 years of English, 2 years of Math, 2 
years of social studies, 2 years of science and 1 year of fine arts.  Many high 
schools continue to include health and physical education as a diploma 
requirement, probably because few school districts realized that health and 
physical education were removed from Maine’s diploma requirement. 
In 2013 the National Academy of Science published Educating the Student Body: 
Taking Physical Activity and Physical Education to School (Kohl III, Harold, W. & 
Cook, Healthier D.)  The whole book discusses the importance of physical 
education and physical activity not only to the health and well-being of students 
but also critical to brain development, i.e., academic achievement.  For people like 
me who read research articles and noteworthy books related to physical education, 
physical activity, and brain development it is hard to fathom how professionals in 
“general” education got to a point where health and physical education are not 
worthy of being part of the Maine diploma requirements.
Let me be more explicit.  Researchers (2013, Kohl III & Cook) and those of us 
who achieve a terminal degree in physical education and teaching know the 
following the following benefits from moderate to vigorous physical activity: 
oLower adiposity
oHigher muscular strength
oImproved mariners of cardiovascular and metabolic health
oHigher bone mineral content and density (most important for girls)
oImproved mental health - assists with managing anxiety, depression, 
enhancing self-esteem and physical self-concept.
oHave positive effects on brain health
oKids have greater attentional resources
oKids have faster cognitive processing speed
oKids perform better on standardized tests
Does it not surprise anyone that students who are engaged in athletic programs are 
students who do quite well in school!  Many athletes have benefited from summer 
camps and other community-based programs that few students have access to.  
While these students derived all the benefits that physical activity can provide for 
them, which includes motor and movement skills, many students do not and 
therefore the importance of physical education programs.  Unfortunately, Maine 
school districts have exacerbated this inequity.  Students at all levels of public-
school based education are allotted different amounts of time in physical 
education.  For example, some elementary physical education programs meet with 
a class once a week where others meet twice a week.  Some middle school 
programs meet for one quarter where others meet a semester, or for the whole 
year.  
The question I ask is why are Maine school administrators and the Department of 
Education so against physical education, when research has presented time and 
time again the benefits derived from moderate to vigorous physical education 
programs?  Is motor and movement skill learning, physical activity, physical 
health, and brain development important enough to include physical education as a 
diploma requirement.  If the benefits are known and contribute to student learning 
why is physical education not a diploma requirement?
It is said that we acknowledge what is important through our words and our work 
and our actions. I have devoted my career to being a highly qualified physical 
education and adapted physical education teacher.  Yet my education doesn’t 
matter because I or people like me are not invited to the table to present facts.  The 
Maine Legislators removed the health and physical education diploma 
requirement, in my view, with little understanding of the benefits that physical 
education provides to students and to the overall school community.  I find it 
unfortunate that evidence of the benefits of physical education and health 
education could not be elaborated on during this testimony period.  
I am asking you to support L.D. 253 An Act to Add Health and Physical Education 
Requirements to High School Diploma Standards.
Rose Marie R. Angell, PhD
380 N. Hunts Meadow Road, 
Whitefield, Maine 04353
MAHPERD Member
National Consortium for Physical Education for Individuals with Disabilities
Chair of the Adapted Physical Education Task Force
2/13/2023
