Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Cross Building Room 208 
Augusta ME 04333 
Dear Chairmen Rafferty and Brennan and members of the Committee, my name is Toby McGrath. I work at 
Drummond Woodsum and represent the American Heart Association. I am testifying in support of LD 253, 
An Act to Add Health and Physical Education Requirements to High School Diploma Standards" . 
Every school day, over 170,000 young people attend schools across the Maine, meaning that school health 
programs and physical education are one of the most efficient means of reaching our children and making an 
impact on their future health, education, and social well-being. Because of the size and accessibility of this 
population, school health and physical education programs are one the most efficient ways of shaping our 
nation’s health, education, and social well-being. Today, our youth face many health, educational, and social 
challenges not experienced at such epidemic levels by previous generations of young people. These 
challenges include: violence; tobacco, alcohol and other drug abuse; healthy weight; school dropout; and 
disrupted family and home situations. Research has shown that collaborations among families, communities, 
and schools are the most effective approach for both prevention and intervention programs. Health 
Education, coupled with Social Emotional Learning, not only enhances student learning but nurtures a 
platform for students to express themselves honestly and become health-literate citizens in society. 
Physical education increases students ’ physical activity and kids do better in school when they have physical 
education. When health and physical education are taught consistently in school it provides a strong 
foundation for kid’s future health. According to the Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans, it is 
recommended that children engage in 60 minutes of physical activity every day, yet only about half of kids 
meet that recommendation. Children must be physically active at school and learn how to stay healthy 
through exercise and a healthy diet pattern. If lifetime physical activity skills and healthy food and beverage 
choices are taught at both school and home, children will have the optimal foundation for healthy living. 
One of my first jobs aﬁer college was teaching at an elementary school in Boston. These children had phys 
ed class once a week and one recess a day. These students could not stay still in their seats. They could not 
learn so, being the new teacher, I ﬁgured it was easier to ask for forgiveness than permission. I began taking 
my class out for an additional recess for thirty minutes a day. I was quickly called into the Principal ’s office 
after the third day of extra recess. 
The Principal said I couldn’t give an extra recess since it wasn’t fair to the other students and class time was 
needed. I explained that the kids were actually sitting in their seats and learning more after the recess. Being 
an astute leader, the Principal came up with a great solution. She implemented an additional recess for all the 
students. We immediately saw the beneﬁts of the children being able to concentrate and learn. 
Physically active and educated children are more likely to thrive academically and socially. Through 
effective health and physical education, children learn how to incorporate safe and healthy activities into 
their lives. Health and physical education are an integral part of a comprehensive education and developing 
the whole child in social settings and the learning environment. We believe, through this bill we will be able 
to provide expanded health and physical education in schools which will lead to prospects of better health 
among our young people. 
Sincerely, 
Toby McGrath
