 
P.O. Box 5257 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207 -204-8800 | www.mparx.org   
 
February 16 , 202 3 
 
Senator Joe Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members of the Health and Human Services Committee  
 
RE: Testimony in support of LD 282 - An Act to Allow the Department of Health and H uman Services to 
Authorize Standing Orders  
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services  
Committee:  
My name is Amy Downing and I am a resident of Smithfield and the Executive Director of the Maine 
Pharmacy Assoc iation. We are a statewide association primarily made up of individual pharmacists , 
pharmacy technicians and students . Our members are employed by both large national chain 
pharmacies , health care facilities, compounding pharmacies  and Maine -based independ ent pharmacies . 
I am submitting testimony  in qualified support of LD 282. 
The Maine Pharmacy Association supports all bills that promote patient care by expanding and 
simplifying immunization access.  Pharmacists and pharmacy technicians played a significant role during 
pandemic with testing, and providing immunizations. We are supportive of efforts to continue the 
important role of pharmacists in the health of Mainers.    
We would like to provide addit ional considerations for the committee . There is a future immunization 
bill expected this session  that has not yet been printed that our association helped with crafting . The 
Committee may want to see the language of that bill before you take action on LD 282. Both bills are, in 
essence, trying to do similar thing, but the other bill may be a cleaner way to achieve that. Certainly, this 
bill is now in the hands of the committee to act on as you see fit, but we wanted to let you know of this 
other bill . Our members  don’t  want to restrict use for eligible recipients  in this  one group but looks to 
provide greater access and better health outcomes for all patient s, Maine residents and visitors to the 
state.    
If you have any questions prior to your work ses sion, please reach out.  
 
 
 
Amy Downing  
Executive Director | Maine Pharmacy Association  
amy@mainepharmacy.org   
207-204-8800  
 

