Janet -I- 
_ Ming Maine Department of Health and Human Sei nees 
(qwemm. 7 Commissioner ’s OfﬁceI 
11 State House Station 
P V.1 
Jeanne M. Lambrew Ph.D. .. I09 Capitol Street 
(.0mmmimm_ ’ Augusta, Maine 04333 0011 
‘ “ Tel: (207) 287-3707; Fax: (207) 287 3005 
TTY: Dial 71 l (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of the Ofﬁce of MaineCare Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD 282 An Act to Allow the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Authorize Standing Orders 
Hearing Date: February 16, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Anne-Marie Toderico. I am the Pharmacy Director for 
the Ofﬁce of MaineCare Services. I am here today to introduce and speak in support of LD 282, 
An Act to Allow the Department of Health and Human Services to Authorize Standing Orders. 
Federal Medicaid regulations (SSA, 42 U.S.C. §l927 k(4)) require that an authorized licensed 
health provider must prescribe certain over the counter (OTC) drugs and vaccinations in order 
for Medicaid to reimburse a provider for a product. This requirement limits MaineCare ’s ability 
to provide its members access to OTC products by requiring members to obtain a prescription for 
these items. 
Federal guidance in support of Standing Orders was issued in a January 2017 Center for 
Medicaid and CHIP Services (CMCS) Informational Bulletin. CMCS encourages the use of 
standing orders to support the ability of pharmacists to improve access to medically necessary 
and time-sensitive drugs for Medicaid beneﬁciaries. 
MaineCare, in partnership with Maine CDC, currently has two active Standing Orders to 
increase access to over-the-counter nicotine replacement therapies (NRT) and COVID-l9 home 
tests. These Standing Orders have resulted in coverage of over 1,300 NRT claims and over 
21,000 COVID home test claims. Granting MaineCare authority to issue Standing Orders would 
reduce the administrative burden for this support of MaineCare members. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is currently considering switching certain 
naloxone products to OTC status. Naloxone is a medicine that can help reduce opioid overdose 
deaths when administered timely. With MaineCare ’s authority to issue Standing Orders for 
medically necessary OTC medications, MaineCare members would receive coverage of this 
medication at the pharmacy counter, facilitated by their pharmacist. 
This bill would expand the authority of the Ofﬁce of MaineCare Services to issue Standing 
Orders to support access medically necessary over the counter (OTC) medications and 
immunizations recommended by the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
We hope you will support this proposal, and I will be happy to answer any questions you have 
and will plan to attend the work session.
