Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth
In Support of LD 282, “An Act to Allow the Department of 
Health and Human Services to Authorize Standing Orders”
Thursday, February 16, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, please accept 
this written testimony in support LD 282, “An Act to Allow the 
Department of Health and Human Services to Authorize Standing Orders.”
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and 
New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support 
our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest 
in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty 
physician services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, 
community and tertiary hospital care, home health care and a lab. 
MaineHealth has long supported strong tobacco prevention and treatment 
programs for our patients, employees and communities – we know that 
tobacco use is one of the most preventable health problems facing our 
state and nation.  In 2001, we established the Maine Center for Tobacco 
Independence (CTI). In partnership with the Maine Centers for Disease 
Prevention and Control, MaineHealth implements the Maine QuitLink 
(MQL), training for health care providers and other professionals 
throughout the state, and technical assistance regarding tobacco-free 
policies. 
On July 29, 2021, the CTI worked in partnership with Maine CDC’s 
Tobacco Program and the Office of MaineCare Services and implemented 
a standing order for the provision of nonprescription nicotine replacement 
therapies for MaineCare members who access tobacco treatment services 
through the MQL. The implementation of the standing order allowed more 
than 1,700 MaineCare members access to evidence-based nonprescription 
nicotine replacement medications with more than 1,300 members 
receiving at least one course of medication to support efforts to quit 
tobacco use. Additionally, the standing order eliminated barriers to access 
including the requirement to schedule an appointment with primary care 
physician to receive NRT.
More than 15,000 Mainers call or are referred to the nationally recognized MQL every year. I’m 
proud to share that the suite of service offered by the MQL has resulted in a quit rate of 32% 
after 7-months of registration and boasts a 94% participant satisfaction rate.
We understand that this legislation clarifies that the Office of MaineCare Services can issue such 
standing orders, and does not have to rely on Maine CDC. This will assure the continuation of 
successful use of this tool to improve the health of MaineCare members, and it is for that reason 
we urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 282. 
As always, please feel free to contact me should you have any questions or concerns. 
