. 
_' 
its -;:~1<=- _ A 
STATE OFMAINE 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATIVE D!RECTOR 
Patrick J. Sculiy 
COMMlSS|ONERS 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1489, Resolve, to'Capitalize on Opportunities from Newly Revised Federal 
Renewable Fuels Standards by Studying the Environmental and Economic Beneﬁts 
of Electric and Steam Generation Facilities Powered by Biomass 
- 
April 18,20231 
Senator Lawrence, Representativeleigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for 
nor against LD 1489, Resolve, to Capitalize on Opportunities from Newly Revised Federal Renewable 
Fuels Standards by Studying the Environmental and Economic Beneﬁts of Electric and Steam 
Generation Facilities Powered by Biomass on behalf of the Public Utilities Commission. 
LD 1489 requires the Commission to undertake or contract with appropriate experts for a study of the 
enviromnental and economic beneﬁts of electrical and steam generation facilities powered by biomass 
(CHP facilities). The study must examine the beneﬁts resulting ﬁom 20MW, 40MW and 60 MW 
respectively of electric generation, capacity, and thermal energy from CHP facilities. It speciﬁes what the 
Commission must examine speciﬁcally in relation to the beneﬁts of CH]? facilities. It also requires the 
study include a full life-cycle analysis of carbon and other greenhouse gas emissions resulting ﬁom CHP 
facilities as compared with those resulting from electric generation systems that rely on other renewable 
resources and systems that rely on fossil fuels. The study must be peer-reviewed and a ﬁnal report of the 
results of the study is to be submitted to the Committee by February 1, 2024. 
The Commission has not conducted a study like this and would not be able to undertake this study with 
existing resources. To accomplish the.requirements of this Resolve, the Commission would conduct a 
Request for Proposals (RF P) process consistent with State procurement policies and procedures. 
Regarding the peer review, if the review raises serious concerns about the study itself, the Commission 
suggests that the Committee provide guidance as- to how the Commission should proceed in this 
scenario. Speciﬁcally, would the study be revised based on the peer review or would the peer review 
simply be provided to the Committee with the study itself. Given the timing required for the RFP 
process, resulting contract, and completion of this complex study and peer review, the Commission is 
concerned that the February l, 2024, report deadline will be difﬁcul-t if not impossible to achieve. 
As stated above, the Commission has not conducted a similar study or peer review as detailed in LD 
1489. Due to the peer reviewed component of this Resolve this study may better be suited for an 
academic institution to undertake, rather than a quasi-judicial independent agency such as the 
Commission. Given similar RFP’s we have conducted, we would expect the cost of such a study and 
peer review to be the $200,000 —$300,000 range. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session. 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowcll, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY users call Maine Relay 7ll FAX: (207)287-1039
