April 17, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 1489
Resolve, to Capitalize on Opportunities from Newly Revised Federal Renewable Fuels Standards by
Studying the Environmental and Economic Benefits of Electric and Steam Generation Facilities
Powered by Biomass 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology:
My name is Nathan Gould. I am submitting this testimony in support of LD 1489, “Resolve, to 
Capitalize on Opportunities from Newly Revised Federal Renewable Fuels Standards by Studying the 
Environmental and Economic Benefits of Electric and Steam Generation Facilities Powered by 
Biomass.”
Moving away from a reliance on fossil fuels has been a ubiquitous talking point used by 
politicians, but if that idea is to bring about any fruit—results instead of mere campaign promises— 
prudence demands all available opportunities be researched. CHP facilities provide such an 
opportunity, and their benefits ought to be considered.
Using wood industry byproducts as fuel decreases waste, and with technology designed to 
ensure a complete burn, along with pollution controls and monitoring, biomass may be a useful route 
in developing alternative energy solutions, along with providing sorely needed economic boosts to our
communities. Care should be taken to ascertain whether such projects will be successful and not 
result in the ratepayers shouldering the burden for failed programs.
With rising energy costs, the current limits of other renewable energy technologies, and the 
regrettable government-imposed limits on petroleum and hydropower, I hope a fair and responsible 
look at biomass will taken. Good stewardship of the People of Maine’s resources requires all option be
evaluated, rather than throwing money at a few favored renewable energy industries. We are blessed 
with the abundant resources of our forests and expertise to manage it, and it would be a shame to 
overlook this renewable resource that surrounds us.
I ask the Committee to vote Ought to Pass. Thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould, Winterport
