 19 Community Drive • Augusta, Maine 04330 • (207) 622-7501 • Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORSâ   12781773.1 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1931 (An Act to Foster Stable and Affordable Home Ownership in Mobile Home Parks by Amending the Laws Relating to the Sale of Mobile Home Parks) J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  May 23, 2023  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations and we represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® opposes LD 1931. The bill would require that mobile home park owners provide a minimum 60-day notice of intent to sell to all of the mobile home owners along with an option to purchase or disclosure of confidential terms of any pending offers to purchase.   Property owners wanting to sell their property should be able to do so under current law without additional regulations. As stewards of protecting private property rights, we believe that real property ownership contributes to economic stability and self-sufficiency. Property owners should be able to use, dispose and transfer real property how they see fit, to include for investment or business use. They should be able to consider all offers and not be told which offers they must consider or face “violation of unfair or deceptive trade practice” (Section 7-4).  Not only would this bill delay real property transactions and increase costs associated with the transfer and use of real property, but it would also limit the scope of the free market to mobile home park owners wishing to sell based solely on their property type.   LD 1931 unfairly targets mobile home park owners and places an undue burden on their property rights - they should not be held to a different standard than other businesses or regulated based on their property type. MAR advocates for housing policies that respond to the collective and individual needs of our society for today and tomorrow and we cannot support permanent statutory changes in response to temporary conditions.   For these reasons, we respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1931. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
