CrossWay LLC 
  #1 Water Street, Newport, Maine 04953 
 (207)368-6221  
emergencies (207)487-3680 
crosswayrentals@gmail.com  
 
 
 
131st Legislature Housing Committee: 
 
LD 1931 - An Act to Foster Stable and Affordable Home Ownership in Mobile 
Home Parks by Amending the Laws Relating to the Sale of Mobile Home Parks" 
 
 
I am writing to ask you to oppose LD 1931.  I own a small mobile home park in Central Maine.  
It had excessive deferred maintenance, vacant lots, unkempt homes and unpaying tenants, and 
water leaks.  They also had some hard working, dedicated mobile homeowners.  Years of lots of 
hard work, early days, and late nights, as well as good and fair customer service have paid off.   I 
have wonderful tenants and a community that I am proud to own and manage.  I have serious 
concerns about the violations of privacy in this bill that would require disclosure of an offer 
price.  If we open this door, the reverse would be true- to share the tenant association offer price 
with a private buyer to see if they would like to outbid them. 
Right now, if I decided to put my parks up for sale, they would be on the open real estate market 
for anyone to make an offer.   The open and transparent nature of having something up for sale 
allows for a tenant association, private investor, single resident, or anyone to make a bid.  This 
bill ties the hands if a single resident wanted to purchase the park.  Even the current condo 
association laws require 100% vote on major items.   
Additionally, If I were to sell my parks the new owner would be required to operate it as a 
mobile home park for at least two years.  This would give the current land lease holders a fair 
amount of time to find a new location for their mobile home.    Two years is a lot of time, but I 
think a reasonable and fair amount of notice to give someone to move their home because a new 
owner might want to use the park for another use. However, it would be very uncommon in the 
rural and residential areas where most parks are located to change their use by a new owner. By 
removing this provision, LD 1931 will strip the right of the land lease holder to a 2-year period 
to move their home and tie my hands on listing and selling my properties that I have worked hard 
to improve. 
Please oppose LD 1931. 
Donna Hodges 
 
 
 
