 
 
 
 
 
126 Sewall Street  
Augusta, ME   04330 -6822 
TTY/Voice: (207) 626 -7058 
Fax: (207) 621 -8148 
www.maineequaljustice.org    
 
 
 
Andrea Steward  
Policy Advocate  
(207) 626 -7058 x236  
asteward@mejp.org  
 
 
1 
 
Testimony on behalf of Maine Equal Justice in Support  of LD 1931 , An Act to Foster Stable 
and Affordable Home Ownership in Mobile Home Parks by Amending the Laws Relating 
to the Sale of Mobile Home Parks  
May 23, 2023  
 
Good afternoon , Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, distinguished members of the Special 
Committee on Housing. This testimony is submitted by Frank D’Alessandro (He/Him/His) the 
Director of Legal Services at Maine Equal Justice. We are a civil legal service s organization, and 
we work with and for people with low incomes seeking solutions to poverty through policy, 
education, and legal representation to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for 
people in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to o ffer testimony in support of LD 1931 . Maine 
Equal Justice supports this bill because it will help preserve Maine’s limited supply of  affordable 
housing.  
 
What This Bill Does  
 
This bill requires the owner of a mobile home park to give notice of the intent to sell the mobile 
home park to each mobile homeowner  of the mobile home park and requires a 60 -day window in 
which the owner is required to negotiate in good faith with a grou p of mobile homeowners  or a 
mobile homeowners’  association that makes an offer to purchase the mobile home park.  
 
Why Maine Equal Justice Supports LD 1931  
 
Maine is in Dire Need of Affordable Housing  
 
Even before the pandemic, Maine’s rental housing market  was among the least affordable in the 
nation, and our state has not done enough to protect people who are being priced out of their homes. 
Nearly 60% of extremely low -income households pay more than 50% of their monthly income 
towards rent, a threshold wh ich HUD deems severely rent burdened. The end of federal rental 
assistance has left many Mainers without help or affordable options. These families continuously 
face the threat of eviction for non -payment. Finding affordable housing has become so difficult, 
many Mainers become homeless because they simply cannot find an apartment that meets their 
budget.  
 
The pandemic has pushed Maine’s housing affordability problems to a crisis point.  
While Maine’s low -income tenants have been suffering in the re cession and the pandemic, 
business has been booming in Maine’s real estate market. Property values have increased during 
the pandemic in every county across the State. The Maine Association of Realtors reported a 22% 
increase in median sales price between Fall 2019 and Fall 2020, with a 27% increase in the number 
of units sold.1  Gains are expected to continue, fueled in part by out -of-state buyers moving to 
Maine.2 
 
While so many people are buying new Maine homes, many Mainers are struggling to stay in t heirs. 
Increasing property values are linked to gentrification. Gentrification is a process which displaces 
low-income community members, usually renters, when more affluent people move in. 
Gentrification is spurred by speculation in the real estate market  which incentivizes landlords to 
raise rents and/or evict tenants to pursue higher -end development.  This is occurring not only in 
Maine’s cities, but also in rural parts of the State.3   
 
Maine has a shortage of 22,498 affordable homes for extremely low income Mainers.4 Maine 
needs more housing, and we must ensure that new housing made available is affordable  to people 
with limited means. Currently, extremely low income tenants have insufficient income to pay the 
rent charged by affordable housing units. The  Low-Income Tax Credit Program and Rural Tax 
Credit Program are the major sources of financing to create  affordable housing in Maine. These 
programs define “affordable housing” as a unit that is affordable to households at 80% annual 
median income (AMI). 80% of the AMI for a household of 4 in Maine was $62,880 in 2021. 
New rental units created by these progr ams will not be affordable to households whose income is 
below this amount without some rent relief to help bridge the gap.  
 
Challenges to the Creation of Affordable Housing  
 
The Governor’s change package contains a proposal to dedicate 80 million dollar s dedicated to 
help fund  the creation of new affordable housing  through  Maine  Rural Affordable  Housing  Rental 
Program  and Low -Income Housing Tax Credit Program. Maine Equal Justice supports this 
proposal. Howeve r, even if this amount is approved in its entirety, it will meet only a small fraction 
of the documented need for affordable housing. The creation of new affordable housing has 
become even more challenging post -pandemic.  
 
As Maine State Housing Authority has noted  the pandemic has created additional challenges to 
the creation of affordable housing that have resulted in significant delays : 
 
1 See Glenn Jordan, Maine Home Sales Continue to Break Records Despite Pandemic , Portland Press Herald (Dec. 
22, 2020), https://www.pressherald.com/ 2020/12/22/maine -home -sales -continue -to-break -records -despite -
pandemic/ ; Maine Association of Realtors, State of Maine Single Family Home Sales , 
https://www.mainerealtors.com/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/StateofMaine20Data.pdf  (last updated Dec. 31, 2020).  
2 Id. 
3 See University of Maine School of Marine Sciences, Fishing Communities Need to Prepare For Gentrification 
Challenges  (Aug. 23, 2016), https://umaine.edu/marine/2016/08/23/fishing -communities -need -prepare -
gentrification -challenges -say-umaine -researchers -2/; Megan Mayhew Bergman, ‘ We Have No Market But Lots of 
Lobsters’: A Maine Lobsterwoman Fi ghts For Her Livelihood , The Guardian (July 23, 2020), 
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/jul/23/maine -lobsterwoman -coronavirus -climat e-change . 
4 National Low Income Housing Coalition, 2023 Maine Housing Profile, (Apr. 2023), 
https://nlihc.org/sites/default/files/SHP_ME.pdf  
 
 Pre-pandemic the average project duration was much shorter, taking between 18 months 
 and 24 months from start (planning and a pplication) to completion (residents move in) with 
 project construction lasting 10 to 12 months. Projects now take much longer both in 
 underwriting and in construction, with construction durations being dramatically affected 
 by labor shortages for const ruction managers and subcontractors, and subcontractor 
 availability. Construction phases have now been stretched,  lasting 18 to 24 months on 
 average. Labor availability and ongoing material delivery delays will continue to be a 
 major  factor contributin g to increasing project duration in 2023. While it is expected that 
 some  material costs could decrease in 2023, the remaining workforce, financing, and 
 supply  chain issues are expected to persist for the foreseeable future.5 
 
Manufactured Housing Prov ides Critical Affordable Housing to Maine Residents  
 
There are more than 600 manufactured  housing communities in Maine. This is more than any other 
New England State. The median manufactured homeowner spends only 16% of their income on 
housing and less than 25% are cost burdened making this a stable housing option.6 Mobile homes 
make up a hig her share of the housing stock in Maine than in any other state in the northeastern 
U.S. In 2020, 62,000 of the state’s 747,000 housing units were mobile homes,  about 8 percent.7 
 
Mobile Home Park closures represent a threat to mobile homeowners . Because they own their 
homes but not the land under their homes, they are vulnerable to closure of the community —the 
landowner can decide to put the land to some other use and  can force all the homeowners and 
their homes off the land. Closure of manufactured home communities is always a threat but  is 
particularly pronounced when there is a boom in commercial development, as developers eye 
these communities as prime targets for strip malls or office buildings.8 
 
This Bill Provides an Affordable Proposal to Preserve Affordable Housing  
 
An important way to combat this threat is to provide residents of mobile home parks the 
opportunity  to purchase the community when it is put up fo r sale. As of 2020, 20 states had 
adopted some form of resident purchase  opportunity legislation.9 In particular , other New 
England states including New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts,  and Rhode Island provide 
important protections to mobile home tenan ts that include  a requirement that notice be provided 
to mobile home park tenants of intent to sell  and the right of tenants to negotiate in good faith to 
 
5 https://mainehousing.org/docs/default -source/policy -research/research -reports/ outlook -reports/2023 -
mainehousing -outlook -report.pdf  
6 https://www.mainehousing.org/docs/default -source/policy -research/presentations/2019 -maine -
affordable -housing -conference/destigmatizing -manufactured -housing -presentation.pdf?sfvrsn=4190b115_2  
7 https://www.centralmaine.com/2022/09/02/maine -voices -trailer -parks -wrongly -overlooked -in-
affordable -housing -
debate/#:~:text=Mobile%20homes%20make%20up%20a,mobile%20homes%2C%20about%208%20perce
nt. 
8 https://www.nclc.org/wp -content/uploads/2022/08/cfed -purch ase_guide.pdf  
9 https://www.nclc.org/wp -content/uploads/2022/08/cfed -purchase_guide.pdf  
purchase property. 10  
 
Unlike many  of the other bills that have come before this Committee the protections provided by 
this bill to ensure  the preservation of affordable housing come at no cost to the State of Maine. In 
addition, the protections provided by this bill do not harm the mobile  home park owner seeking 
to sell the park. This bill does not require the seller to sell at a discount, or indeed, to even sell to 
the tenants of the mobile home park  at all . It only requires that the mobile home park owner 
engage in good faith negotiation s with the tenants of the mobile home park.  
 
Conclusion  
 
Everyone in Maine deserves a safe and affordable place to call home and the opportunities to 
fulfill their potential that come with it. This is critical both to the well -being of families but also 
to attract and keep the workforce necessary to ensure our S tate’s economic development. 
Investing in housing stability for Maine people is the foundation to help Mainers rebuild better.  
Keeping Mainers in their homes is critical to support their economic security and personal 
wellbeing. Of all the things we can d o to support families and individuals trying to rebuild their 
economic security post -pandemic, housing is at the top of the list.   
 
The simple, common sense proposals set forth in this bill will provide an avenue for mobile home 
park tenants to keep their  homes, thereby preserving critical affordable housing, at  no cost to the 
State of Maine or mobile home park owners.  
 
We strongly urge this committee to vote ought to pass on LD 1931 and are happy to answer any 
questions.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 Massachusetts and Rhode Island statutes provide tenants for the right of first refusal in the purchase of a 
mobile home park. https://www.nclc.org/wp -content/uploads/202 2/08/cfed -purchase_guide.pdf   
