Legal 
Services 
art; Elderly for Iv_l‘ a.-ine’s'" Seaiilorts 
May 23, 2023 
Testimony of John Brautigam, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in support of LD 
I 93 1. 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services: 
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly we testify in support of LD l93l — An Act to 
Foster Stable and Affordable Home Ownership in Mobile Home Parks by Amending the 
Laws Relating to the Sale of Mobile Home Parks. 
Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonproﬁt legal services organization with the 
mission of providing free legal assistance to Maine’s older adults when their basic human 
needs are threatened. Next year we will mark our 50"‘ year serving this population. 
As we have testiﬁed several times this session, ﬁnding stable and affordable housing is 
among the most pressing problems facing our clients. So we welcome a bill which promises 
a constructive approach to housing security for a segment of this population. 
This country has thousands of mobile home parks which are home to millions of people. 
Maine has about 750,000 housing units, and about 8 percent of them are in mobile home 
parks.‘ 
These parks have not escaped the explosion in real estate prices, and their future is uncertain 
Some park owners want to increase rents to keep pace with what they see in other types of 
housing. Others are tempted to sell out to opportunistic investors — often corporate landlords 
-- who see these parks as a quick source of proﬁt. 
Residents of mobile home parks have a unique challenge. In most cases, they own their 
mobile home while renting the plot of land upon which it sits. They may also have access to 
some common spaces, roadways, and services. 
Teclmically, the dwelling unit is mobile and is not permanently afﬁxed to the land, and can 
be moved upon completion of a lease. But the reality is quite different. Many mobile home 
1 
https1!/www.centraln1aine.com/2022/09/02/maine-voicestrailer-parks-wrongly-overlooked-in-affordable 
housing-debate/ 
LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087 Fax (207) 621-0742 
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (V oice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.0rg
May 23, 2023 Page2 
LD I931 
structures are not travel-worthy. Attaching wheels and trailering them to another site would 
risk severe damage. Another obstacle is the cost of moving. Few mobile home tenants have 
enough savings to comfortably afford the $5,000 it would take to relocate their unit— if they 
are lucky enough to ﬁnd another site. 
So this distorts the operation of supply and demand. If the dwelling cannot be moved 
affordably, the tenant is a captive customer and therefore has diminished bargaining power. 
Any threat to walk away from the rental would ring hollow because the landlord knows the 
tenant will have great practical difficulty actually moving the unit. This creates an unfair 
bargaining position to the disadvantage of the tenant. 
On top of this, we see indications of a new class of predatory corporate landlords. They 
purchase the land that makes up a park and then quickly increase rent and fees. Folks who 
have lived there for many years on a fixed income ﬁnd the rug pulled out from under them. 
This phenomenon has been covered in the New York Times,2 National Public Radio,3 and 
the Desmoines Registerf ’ to name a few. In some cases, the new owners buy up a park and 
simply clear off the renters to make way for houses.5 
This trend has prompted an increased interest among residents in coming together 
collectively to purchase the entire park through cooperatives or community land trusts. This 
gives tenants more control over the property and allows them to establish their own rules and 
regulations, including reasonable and stable rents. This protects resident owners from proﬁt- 
seeking investors seeking to leveraging the unique differential in economic power between 
the mobile home landlord and tenant. 
But mobilizing a community to gather the necessary ﬁlI1(lS and navigate the complex process 
of purchasing a mobile home park requires signiﬁcant organization, ﬁnancial resources, and 
legal expertise. Residents may face obstacles in securing ﬁnancing or ﬁnding support from 
extemal sources. And it takes time.' 
Nonproﬁts that support residents can offer technical assistance, ﬁnancing options, and 
guidance to navigate the process of obtaining resident ownership. Several mobile home 
parks in Maine have been purchased by tenants using these services. 
Resident ownership requires a committed community, access to ﬁnancial resources, anda 
supportive regulatory environment. It isn’t for everyone. But for communities facing 
escalating rents and potential displacement, resident ownership offers an alternative that 
empowers residents to take control of their housing destiny, reduces the anxiety of possible 
predation, and ensures long-term affordability. 
Previous legislatures have recognized that the unique nature of mobile home parks hinders 
the operation of the laws of supply and demand. This is why Title 10, Chapter 953 has long 
2 https://www.nytimescom/2022/03/27/us/mobile-home-park-ownership-costs.html 
3 https://www.npr.org/2021/09/03/1 033 91073 1/why-are-investors-buying-up-mobile-home-parks-and-evicting 
residents 
4 https://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/news/2019/05/05/mobi1e-home-tenants-wary-history-complaints- 
havenpark-capital-paitners-waukee-north-Iiberty-iowa-ia/364Ol 06002/ 
5 https://www.denverpost.com/2022/03/23/mobile-home-park-rent-house-bilb1287/
May 23, 2023 Page3 
LD 1931 
contained some notice requirements for tenants. LD 1931 would strengthen and enlarge the 
notice requirements and reduce the obstacles to tenant ownership while still respecting the 
landowners ’ basic rights. It would make it a little easier for residents to make a viable 
purchase offer. 
Thank you for considering our testimony and for your commitment to the population of 
unhoused and housing insecure older Mainers. We ask that you support LD 1931.
