 
 
mainehousingcoalition.org                              info@mainehousingcoalition.org 307 Cumberland Street, Portland, ME 04101  
 
131st Legislature 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition   
May 23, 2023 
In favor of 1931 - An Act to Foster Stable and Affordable Home Ownership in Mobile Home Parks by 
Amending the Laws Relating to the Sale of Mobile Home Parks - sponsored by Representative Traci Gere 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Housing, my name is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition. 
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) is a nonprofit membership organization of more than 140 
Maine housing development, architecture, construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services 
organizations. We work to address Maine’s housing crisis by advocating for the creation and preservation of 
housing for all people in Maine.  
MAHC is sharing this testimony today in favor of LD 1931 , a An Act to Foster Stable and Affordable Home 
Ownership in Mobile Home Parks by Amending the Laws Relating to the Sale of Mobile Home Parks that is 
sponsored by Representative Traci Gere. This bill requires the owner of a mobile home park to give notice of the 
intent to sell to each mobile home owner and Maine Housing. It requires a 60-day window for the owner to 
negotiate with mobile home residents to purchase the park.  
This procedural change empowers and provides equity to residents of unsubsidized affordable housing in 
mobile home parks throughout Maine. Maine has approximately 714 of these parks, housing 40,000 Maine 
people. Residents own their home, but not the land. They are vulnerable to rising lot rents, and inadequate 
water, sewer, and electrical systems. There is consolidation in ownership of mobile home parks in Maine and 
this threatens this vital source of affordable housing. These sales put residents at risk for park closure for 
redevelopment.   
There are successful examples of mobile home park purchases by residents in Maine and across the nation. 
These purchases preserve critical units of affordable housing and builds equity for these new homeowners. It 
is just the type of evidence-based, low-cost strategy that Maine must apply to ensure all Maine people have an 
affordable home for the long term.   
Maine is in a housing crisis and demand outstrips supply. The state lacks 20,000 units of affordable housing for 
those who need it most. Building new affordable housing is vital, but preserving existing affordable housing is 
equally important. LD1931 proactively supports preservation of these homes and should be a part of Maine’s 
comprehensive approach to ensuring all Maine people have a home. 
Thank you.  
Laura Mitchell
Portland
LD 1931
131st Legislature Joint Select Committee on Housing
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing 
Coalition  
May 23, 2023
In favor of 1931 - An Act to Foster Stable and Affordable Home Ownership in 
Mobile Home Parks by Amending the Laws Relating to the Sale of Mobile Home 
Parks - sponsored by Representative Traci Gere
Good afternoon, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the 
Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the 
Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition.
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) is a nonprofit membership 
organization of more than 140 Maine housing development, architecture, 
construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services organizations. We 
work to address Maine’s housing crisis by advocating for the creation and 
preservation of housing for all people in Maine. 
MAHC is sharing this testimony today in favor of LD 1931, a An Act to Foster Stable
and Affordable Home Ownership in Mobile Home Parks by Amending the Laws 
Relating to the Sale of Mobile Home Parks that is sponsored by Representative Traci 
Gere. This bill requires the owner of a mobile home park to give notice of the intent 
to sell to each mobile home owner and Maine Housing. It requires a 60-day window 
for the owner to negotiate with mobile home residents to purchase the park. 
This procedural change empowers and provides equity to residents of unsubsidized 
affordable housing in mobile home parks throughout Maine. Maine has approximately
714 of these parks, housing 40,000 Maine people. Residents own their home, but not 
the land. They are vulnerable to rising lot rents, and inadequate water, sewer, and 
electrical systems. There is consolidation in ownership of mobile home parks in 
Maine and this threatens this vital source of affordable housing. These sales put 
residents at risk for park closure for redevelopment.  
There are successful examples of mobile home park purchases by residents in Maine 
and across the nation. These purchases preserve critical units of affordable housing 
and builds equity for these new homeowners. It is just the type of evidence-based, 
low-cost strategy that Maine must apply to ensure all Maine people have an 
affordable home for the long term.  
Maine is in a housing crisis and demand outstrips supply. The state lacks 20,000 units 
of affordable housing for those who need it most. Building new affordable housing is 
vital, but preserving existing affordable housing is equally important. LD1931 
proactively supports preservation of these homes and should be a part of Maine’s 
comprehensive approach to ensuring all Maine people have a home.
Thank you. 

