 
 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, 
and honorable members of the Housing Committee.   
Thank you for this opportunity to testify on LD# 1931.  
Similar statutes in VT, NH, MA, and RI, have been very 
successful for over 30 years, providing mobile home park 
owners and the homeowners who live there an 
opportunity to preserve the largest source of 
unsubsidized homeownership in the country while 
simultaneously making full market return on their 
investment.    
My name is Mary O’Hara, and in my current position at 
ROC USA I support the ROC Association, an association of 
resident owned communities (ROCs) across the country.   
ROC Association has 308 resident owned mobile home 
parks as members. The Association would like the 
Committee to know that the homeowners living in these 
communities have successfully owned and operated their 
parks for almost 40 years now.  They hire property 
managers, they plow the snow, they pay their bills. 
 
ROCs are as small as 4 homes and as large as 430 homes.  
They have invested more than $300 million in community 
infrastructure – wells, septics, roads, electric upgrades, 
storm shelters, tree maintenance, on-site water and 
sewer systems, and not a single ROC has ever been 
foreclosed on or chosen to resell their community on the 
open market. 
ROCs are good neighbors, commercial property 
taxpayers, active citizens, and they care deeply about 
their neighborhoods and the towns and counties where 
they live. 
As a non-profit, ROC USA has spent the last 15 years 
building a national system of non-profit financing and 
technical assistance to make resident ownership possible 
for homeowners who own their homes but not the land.   
We are members of the Manufactured Housing Institute 
and work with hundreds of park owners, manufacturers, 
and dealers.  We can tell you there is no downside for 
park owners who operate in states with opportunity to 
purchase statutes such as the bill you are considering. 
ROCs purchase communities at the same price and under 
the same terms as any other buyer.  They are 
dependable buyers - once a purchase contract is signed, 
 
www.rocassociation.org 
west@rocassociation.org • midwest@rocassociation.org • newengland@rocassociation.org 
they have a 98% track record for completing the sale.  
They are timely buyers – they close transactions in 90 – 
120 days, standard timeframe.  They are flexible buyers – 
they have accommodated sellers’ needs for portfolio 
sales, for 1031 tax-exchanges, sub-divisions, home sales, 
and even on-going ownership of a personal home in the 
community.  
ROCs are motivated buyers because the homeowners 
have an economic interest in the property.  When they 
buy their community, they are preserving their 
investment in their home, stabilizing their economic 
future, and building an asset for their family just like any 
other homeowner. 
I would like to invite the Committee members to visit our 
website @ www.rocusa.org  for more information on how 
a resident owned cooperative corporation operates and 
see the testimony of both sellers and homeowners as to 
their experiences. 
I am happy to answer any questions. 
Thank you. 
 
