STATEMENT OF SUPPORT FOR LD #1931 LEGISLATION: 
 
As President of Mountainside Community Cooperative, I would like to speak in favor of the 
LD # 1931 legislation for manufactured housing communities.  
 
We are a senior 55 + community with 52 owner occupied homes located in Mid-Coast Maine. As a 
Resident Owned Community, (ROC), Mountainside provides secure affordable housing for its resident 
members. 
 
In 2019 due to health reasons, our former owner was forced to retire. Our park is in a 
premium coastal real-estate location making us vulnerable to many forms of development. 
Fortunately, he cared for the future of the park that he had owned and maintained for over 25 
years and for its residents who had chosen Mountainside to stabilize their retirement years. Rather than 
listing the property, opening it up to the highest bidder or a developer, he contacted Cooperative 
Development Institute (CDI) paving the way for current residents to purchase the park at a fair market 
value. 
 
Assisted by CDI/ROC and after many community meetings the residents of Mountainside had 
become a not-for-profit corporation, set up governance, formed a management team and 
obtained financing. On December 11, 2019, we became owners of the land beneath our homes. 
What does that mean? 
 
Permanent tenancy based on carefully drafted bylaws and rules. 
Stability of monthly lot fees based only on the actual cost of maintaining the property 
              and saving for future capital improvements. 
52 homes occupied by responsible homeowners and taxpayers. 
 
When a manufactured housing property goes on the market the seller makes their profit and the new 
owner wants to maximize their investment. The ones who pay the price are the residents within the 
parks. Depending on the plans of new owners, the very ability to remain in their homes is often 
jeopardized. Without the requirement for a private entity to maximize a profit level, we can affordably 
manage our community needs as we maintain, plan, and save for future improvements. 
 
This legislation gives a voice to those in manufactured housing communities toward their own 
future if they choose to take the initiative. 
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Margaret Jones, Board President 
 
 
Mountainside Community Cooperative 
Camden, Maine 
207-706-6391 
Mccpresident2019@gmail.com 
