May 23, 2023  
 
Housing Committee  
RE:  LD1931 – Public Hearing  
 
Committee Members,  
I am testifying today in opposition to the pro posed LD1931, An Act to Foster Stable and 
Affordable Home Ownership in Mobile Home Parks by Amen ding the Laws Relating to 
the S ale of Mobile Home Parks . 
I own a manufactured home community in Mechanic Falls, and my parents own two in 
Lewiston.  In total, we have over 450 familie s in our three communities.  We have been 
community owners for 40 years in central Maine, and have supplied affordable housing 
to thousand s of families in that time.  
I also own Country Lane Homes in Lewiston, a retailer of manufactured housing , and 
have been in business selling affordable housing since 1 984.  I am also a licensed Realtor 
in Maine for the pas t 17 years.  
Given my years in th is industry, and my experience in real estate, reading through this 
proposal, I am strongly opposed.  This proposal i s simply unnecessary.   The real estate 
market in our state is a free and open market where i ndividuals and businesses are free 
to buy and sell whenever, and to whomever they want, as long as the buyer and sell er 
agree to terms.  The sale of a manufactured home community should  be treated no 
differently.  Real estate changes hands when there is a willing buyer and a willing seller , 
and terms such as price, timing, financing, etc. are agreed to in a binding purchase and 
sale agreement.  The Representatives and co -spons ors of this propos al are asking for 
that free and open market to be eradicated  when it comes to selling this one particular 
type of real estate .  
There currently is nothing prohibiting residents and /or homeowners in manufactured 
home commu nities in  our state  from creating their own associations, making offers to 
purchase the  communities  in wh ich they currently reside , if they desire to do so .  This 
process should not be initiated A FTER a current community owner enters into a n 
agreement to sell their community to another person or entity.  Th is proposal is asking 
for a “First Right of R efusal ”, which generally  is something of value that gets recorded 
and is a right that is paid for .   
To get into more spe cifics of the proposal, price,  terms and conditions  of the sale of the 
community should remain private b etween the seller and buyer, and not disclosed .  This 
is a private transaction between a buyer and seller.  After the sale, the purchase price is 
public knowledge as it typically gets recorded with the City.  But during negotiations and 
due diligence  of the transaction, it sh ould not be disclosed to third parties .  Again, the 
homeowners can make an  offer to purchase any day of the year if they so desire.   Also, 
the com munity owner should not have to noti fy Maine State Housing  Authority about a n 
intent to se ll.  It is not clear to me in this proposal what use this would be for. 
Also, th is proposal is requiring the owner of the community to negotiate in good fai th for 
any offer made by a homeowner associa tion o f at least  51% of the homeowners , and to 
allow 60 days for a purchase offer, and another 90 days for financing.  It does not call for 
verification of funding, a n earnest money deposit, or any of the stand ard items required 
in a general p urchase offer.  This could cost the community owner severely  should the 
association not obtain fin ancing after that amount of time, and the  community owner 
has lost out o n the original offer to purchase from 5 months prior.  A buyer in the open 
market will have less incentive to offer to purchase a mobile home communi ty in our 
state  if this proposal passes, because they would be put in SECOND place, and have up 
to a 5-month  waiting perio d before knowing if they could  complete their intended 
transaction.  The  buyer  likely  will move on to other inve stments , leaving the current 
community owner to start all over again.  
I respectfully request that this proposal be rejected as proposed.   It does not comp ly 
with general  real estate transaction  practices in an open an d free market , and it 
dimi nishes the values  of the community owners  and our tenants.  
Thank you for your time and consider ation,  
Sandra Hinkl ey 
Maple Hill Estates  / Country Lane Homes  
Sandra Hinkley
Falmouth
LD 1931
May 23, 2023
Housing Committee
RE:  LD1931 – Public Hearing
Committee Members,
I am testifying today in opposition to the proposed LD1931, An Act to Foster Stable 
and Affordable Home Ownership in Mobile Home Parks by Amending the Laws 
Relating to the Sale of Mobile Home Parks.
I own a manufactured home community in Mechanic Falls, and my parents own two 
in Lewiston.  In total, we have over 450 families in our three communities.  We have 
been community owners for 40 years in central Maine, and have supplied affordable 
housing to thousands of families in that time.
I also own Country Lane Homes in Lewiston, a retailer of manufactured housing, and 
have been in business selling affordable housing since 1984.  I am also a licensed 
Realtor in Maine for the past 17 years.
Given my years in this industry, and my experience in real estate, reading through this
proposal, I am strongly opposed.  This proposal is simply unnecessary.   The real 
estate market in our state is a free and open market where individuals and businesses 
are free to buy and sell whenever, and to whomever they want, as long as the buyer 
and seller agree to terms.  The sale of a manufactured home community should be 
treated no differently.  Real estate changes hands when there is a willing buyer and a 
willing seller, and terms such as price, timing, financing, etc. are agreed to in a 
binding purchase and sale agreement.  The Representatives and co-sponsors of this 
proposal are asking for that free and open market to be eradicated when it comes to 
selling this one particular type of real estate. 
There currently is nothing prohibiting residents and/or homeowners in manufactured 
home communities in our state from creating their own associations, making offers to 
purchase the communities in which they currently reside, if they desire to do so.  This 
process should not be initiated AFTER a current community owner enters into an 
agreement to sell their community to another person or entity.  This proposal is asking
for a “First Right of Refusal”, which generally is something of value that gets 
recorded and is a right that is paid for.  
To get into more specifics of the proposal, price, terms and conditions of the sale of 
the community should remain private between the seller and buyer, and not disclosed.
This is a private transaction between a buyer and seller.  After the sale, the purchase 
price is public knowledge as it typically gets recorded with the City.  But during 
negotiations and due diligence of the transaction, it should not be disclosed to third 
parties.  Again, the homeowners can make an offer to purchase any day of the year if 
they so desire.  Also, the community owner should not have to notify Maine State 
Housing Authority about an intent to sell.  It is not clear to me in this proposal what 
use this would be for.
Also, this proposal is requiring the owner of the community to negotiate in good faith 
for any offer made by a homeowner association of at least 51% of the homeowners, 
and to allow 60 days for a purchase offer, and another 90 days for financing.  It does 
not call for verification of funding, an earnest money deposit, or any of the standard 
items required in a general purchase offer.  This could cost the community owner 
severely should the association not obtain financing after that amount of time, and the 
community owner has lost out on the original offer to purchase from 5 months prior.  
A buyer in the open market will have less incentive to offer to purchase a mobile 
home community in our state if this proposal passes, because they would be put in 
SECOND place, and have up to a 5-month waiting period before knowing if they 
could complete their intended transaction.  The buyer likely will move on to other 
investments, leaving the current community owner to start all over again.
I respectfully request that this proposal be rejected as proposed.  It does not comply 
with general real estate transaction practices in an open and free market, and it 
diminishes the values of the community owners and our tenants.
Thank you for your time and consideration,
Sandra Hinkley
Maple Hill Estates / Country Lane Homes

