 
Tex Haeuser, AICP  
                     Eric Cousens   
Maureen O’Meara, AICP  
Matt Nazar, AICP  
Shelley Norton, AICP  
Christian Roadman, AICP  
Eli Rubin  
Damon Yakovleff, AICP  
  
 
TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE ASSOCIATION OF PLANNERS  TO THE  
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE ON HOUSING  
 
WRITTEN TESTIMONY PROVIDED IN SUPPORT OF LD #1 931 
“An Act to Foster Stable and Affordable Home Ownership in Mobile Home Parks by 
Amending the Laws Relating to the Sale of Mobile Home Parks ” 
 
DATE OF HEARING: May 23, 2023 
 
Honorable Senator Teresa Pierce, Honorable Representative Traci Gere, Distinguished Members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing:  
 
“Mobile homes are a much bigger part of our affordable housing stock than people 
know ,” said Mark Stapp, who directs Ariz ona State University’s  master’s degree 
program in real estate development.  “Once it’s gone, a lot of peo ple will have no 
place to go.”1 
 
The Maine Association of Planners (MAP) strongly supports  LD #1931.  
 
In recent years the worsening  availability and affordability of housing has led community and 
regional planners in Maine to begin to think more  deeply  about the role that manufactured 
housing dwelling units and manufact ured housing communities (mobile home parks) play in the 
overall h ousing picture.   Manufactured housing communities (MHCs)  in particular command  
attention because  of the way they reduce housing costs through  both  increased density and lower 
costs of construction . 
 
While  we feel that more needs to be done in general  to make it easier to develop affordable 
manufactured housing communities  in Maine,  MAP also recognizes the need to protect the 
residents , and the affordability,  of existing  MHCs —which is what LD #1931 does.  It ensures , 
when there is a sale  of a manufactured housing community, that  the residents will get a reasonable 
opportunity to know about the sale and to have enough time to decide if they want to make an 
offer to the seller and to obtain financing.  
 
Thanks to the work of the Cooperative Development Institute, we have learned that some of the 
issues facing MCH residents in Maine include:  
 
1 Low-Income Tenants Lack Options as Mobile Home Parks are Razed , Anita Snow, Maine Sunday Telegram, May 21, 2023.  
 
Tex Haeuser, AICP  
                     Eric Cousens   
Maureen O’Meara, AICP  
Matt Nazar, AICP  
Shelley Norton, AICP  
Christian Roadman, AICP  
Eli Rubin  
Damon Yakovleff, AICP  
  
 
• No effective notice at the time of an MHC sale;  
• Limited options to match a sale offer from a third party;  
• No voice in community rules;  
• No voice in lot rent increases;  
• It is cost -prohibitive to move a manufactured home; estimates range from $10,000 -  
$20,000, making residents of MHCs “captive” tenants to the land owner.  
• No security via long -term land leases;  
• No security against MHC closure for redevelopment.  
 
To address these problems, LD #1931 would provide: 
• A proper, legal notice to homeowners and the state that the owners intend to sell the 
community;  
• A 60 -day period during which the residents can organize, incorporate as a nonprofit with 
the state, and make an informed choice about whether to make their own offer to the seller;  
• A reasonable time period after the 60 -day period to obtain financing.  
• A requirement that the selle r negotiates in good faith with the residents.  
• An effective enforcement mechanism.  
 
As a reflection of the  seriousness of MAP’s interest in manufactured housing, we are devoting the  
princip al workshop at our upcoming S pring Conference to the topic.  
 
Please support this bill— thank you.  
Sincerely,  
 
Charles (Tex) Haeuser, Member  
Maine Association of Planners Legislative Policy Committee  

