 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 39 (Support/ NFNA)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 39, An Act to Amend the Juvenil e Code  
 
DA: February  13, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in support of and neither for nor against (by section) LD 39.   
 
 CLAC supports Section 1 of the bill, which  corrects the definition of “juvenile ” to recognize  
that a person may be adjudicated  after age 18 as a juvenile  when the conduct was committed prior 
to age 18.    
 
 CLAC offers the following dra fting suggestion with respect to S ection 2.   There is no 
indication in the  draft regarding potential situations where  notice cannot be made, or what type of 
notice is required.    The Legislature  may wish to compare  the proposal to the current language in 
15 MRS  § 3304(5), which addre sses service of a su mmons on a juvenile ’s parents, guardian  or legal 
custodian, and authorizes the court to waive service in certain circumstances.    
 
 CLAC makes the fo llowing observations regarding S ection 5.   The  Juveni le Code  is not 
currently consistent with the adult Criminal Code with respect  to restitution.  For example, only  
natural persons may be awarded restitution as part of the disposition  of a juvenile matter  (e.g., if a 
juvenile  destroyed property belonging to a municipality or business entity and is adjudicated on a 
charge of criminal mischief , restitution could not be awarded) .   Compare 15 MRS § 3314 -C(4) to 
17-A MRS §§ 2002(7), 2004.    Similarly , the proposed language incorporates  some  but not all of 
the Criminal Code provisions pertaining to payment and restitution  (e.g., joint and several liability) .    
CLAC offers no specific recommendation on this policy approach, and points out this difference as 
part of its testimony NFNA to assist the Legislature as it develop s policy regarding restitution by 
juveniles.   
 
 CLAC supports Section 6 .  If the policy goal is to provide as much relevant information  as 
possible to the providers and institution  caring for the juvenile, the Legislature may wish to address 
whether  private evaluations conducted on behalf of the j uvenile and submitted to/cons idered by  the 
court are also  made available to the Commissioner of HHS, DOC or that Commissioner ’s designee .  
As drafted, th e LD references only reports of the State Forensic Service.  
  
 
 
 
 
  
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
