   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
1 
 
TESTIMONY OF  
 
CHRISTINE THIBEAULT, ASSOICATE COMMISSIONER  
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
 
In Support of  
 
LD 39 An Act to Amend the Maine Juvenile Code  
 
Senator Beebe -Center and Representative Salisbury and other distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, I am Christine Thibeault, Associate Commissioner for Juvenile Services of the Maine Department of 
Corrections providing testimony in support of LD 39.  
 
Thank you, Senator Beebe -Center, for sponsoring this bill.  
 
This is a departmental bill making several updates and corrections to statutes that impact the MDOC.  
 
To start, Section 1 corrects an oversight when the definition of "juvenile" was changed in the last legislative session.  In 
2021, the definition of “ju venile” was amended to specify that persons over 18 years of age are still considered “juveniles” 
while on probation or when committed to a juvenile correctional facility.  The language enacted during the last legislative 
session, however, is problematic i n that it states that only persons adjudicated prior to age 18 are “juveniles” while on 
probation or serving a commitment.  The definition of “juvenile” should instead include any person who is charged with a 
juvenile crime allegedly committed before the p erson reaches age 18, regardless of whether they have been adjudicated at 
any time.  This change will ensure that a juvenile who allegedly commits a crime just shy of their 18th birthday but isn’t 
adjudicated until after their 18th birthday is still charge d under the juvenile code, and not as an adult.  
 
While working on this departmental bill with CLAC and the Maine Prosecutor Association we discovered an even more 
clear way to state our intent than what’s written in LD 39.  
 
We offer an amendment, in alignment with Maine Prosecutor and CLAC:  
 
Sec. 1.  1 5 MRSA §3003, sub -§14, as amended by PL 2021, c. 326, §1, is further amended to read:  
14.  Juvenile.  "Juvenile" means a person who has had not attained 18 years of age at the time they allegedly 
committed a juvenile crime. and a person 18 years of age or older during the period of a disposition that includes 
probation or commitment to a Department of Corrections juvenile facility who was adjudicated before 18 years of 
age.  This definition does not apply to a person whose disposition includes probation or commitment to a 
Department of Corrections juvenile correctional facility when that person engages in new criminal conduct and is 
18 years of age or older at the time of the new criminal conduct.  
 
 
Section 2 of the bill adds language clarifying who shall pr ovide notice to the parents, guardian, or legal custodian of a 
juvenile of the date and time of a detention hearing. The proposed language requires the notification comes from the 
Juvenile Court.  
 
   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
2 
 
Current law requires a law enforcement officer or juvenile  community corrections officer notify the legal custodian of a 
juvenile who has been ordered detained “that a detention hearing will be held within 48 hours following [detention], 
excluding Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays.”  The law does not, however, specify who notifies the legal custodian of 
the precise day and time that the court hearing will be held.   Since the court schedules the detention hearing, it is in the  
best position to be tasked with this responsibility.  Juvenile detention hearings are increasingly scheduled for very precise 
times, and often parents/guardians are permitted to appear electronically via Zoom scheduled by the court.  Given that 
court times are increasingly very precise, and the court may (or may not) permit a parent or guar dian to appear 
electronically, the court is better positioned than DOC to provide notice to essential court participants.  
 
Section 3 also attempts to make things easier for juveniles and their families by allowing juveniles to be released at any 
time durin g the last day of confinement after serving a 30 -day or shorter period of confinement. Current law requires that 
a juvenile be released at an exact time, based on calculating a full day of their last day in confinement. For example, if 
someone arrives to t he facility at 7:45 pm, they will need to be released at 7:45pm for it to be counted as a full day. Of 
course, this is problematic as it doesn’t consider the hardship to parents and guardians who may have difficulty picking up 
a juvenile at a very specific  time, nor does it consider a juvenile who may be transferring to a placement.  
 
Section 4 simply corrects an error in a cross -reference with respect to charging juveniles probation supervision fees.  The 
Juvenile Code prohibits probation supervision fees b eing ordered for a juvenile.  Before the Criminal Code was recently 
revised, Title 17 -A, section 1807, sub -section 5 was the provision that governed supervision fees cross -referenced in the 
Juvenile Code as not being allowed for juveniles.  When the Crimin al Code was revised, the provision governing 
supervision fees was moved to sub -section 6, but the cross -reference in the Juvenile Code was not changed, due to an 
oversight.   
 
Section 5 adds cross -references with respect to the payment and collection of ju venile restitution. When new laws 
governing collection of restitution from juveniles were enacted in 2019, several previously incorporated sections of the 
adult restitution statutes were inadvertently omitted.  This section would incorporate by cross -reference several sections in 
Title 17 -A that govern collection of restitution from adults but are equally applicable to juveniles.   
 
Similar to Section 1, we reviewed this section with CLAC and representatives of the Maine Prosecutors Association. 
After discu ssions with these groups, we offer an amendment to our proposal to include sections 2008, 2009, 2013, 2017, 
2018 of Title 17 -A. 
 
Sec. 5.  15 MRSA §3314 -C, sub -§8 is amended to read:  
 
8.  Payment and collection of restitution.  Payment of restitution by and collection of restitution from a juvenile 
must be in accordance with Title 17 -A, sections 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2016, 2017, 2018.  
 
 
Section 6 requires the Juvenile Court to provide a copy of the report of the State Forensic Service examiner to the 
Department of Health and Human Services or the Department of Corrections if either agency will be involved with a 
juvenile following a compe tency determination hearing.   
 
In conversations with CLAC and Maine Prosecutors Association, we again offer an amendment to this section for clarity.  
 
 
   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
3 
 
Sec. 6.  15 MRSA §3318 -A, sub -§7 is amended to read:  
 
“…the Court shall ensure that a copy of the repo rt of the State Forensic Service examiner and any other report the 
Juvenile Court considered finding the juvenile is not competent but there exists a substantial probability that the 
will be competent in the foreseeable future is provided to the commission er or commissioner’s designee.”  
 
This added language ensures that State agencies responsible for implementing recommendations for addressing the 
juvenile’s competence receive all relevant forensic and clinical reports in a timely manner.  Currently, the pa rties must 
request permission from the Court to share forensic and other reports with DHHS and, if the juvenile is detained, with 
DOC.  Not all attorneys know to make such a request and reports may not be provided to the State agencies for weeks or 
months.  
 
Section 7 creates a new provision in the Juvenile Code alerting law enforcement agencies and juvenile justice practitioners 
regarding application of the Interstate Compact for Juveniles.  
 
 As a member of the Interstate Compact for Juveniles (ICJ), Maine  enacted law [Title 34 -A §9904 (1)(B)] adopting the 
rules promulgated by the ICJ which is administered by the Department of Corrections.   Consequently, when a runaway, 
accused delinquent, absconder, or escapee from another state is located in Maine, a juv enile community corrections 
officer must be notified immediately to determine whether the ICJ rules are to be implemented.  Law enforcement officers 
are not usually familiar with how the ICJ works resulting in youth who have been reported missing from othe r states not 
being safely returned to their home states.  Enactment of this section will alert law enforcement that they must 
immediately contact a juvenile community corrections officer when they have contact with a juvenile who is a runaway, 
accused deli nquent, absconder or escapee from another state.  
 
This concludes my testimony.  
 
I am happy to answer questions.  
 
 
 
Christine Thibeault  
Associate Commissioner, Division of Juvenile Services  
Maine Department of Corrections  
