A M Maine Municipal 
Association 
so commumw DRIVE 
AUGUSTA. MNNE 0431009-sac 
(201) ezzuma 
wwwmemunntg 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association (MMA) 
In Support of 
LD 37, An Act to Amend the_Laws Governing Property Tax Stabilization for Senior Citizens to 
Eliminate the Requirement for an Annual Application 
LD 529, An Act to Remove the Annual Filing Requirement in the Property Tax Stabilization 
Laws 
March 16, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in support of LD 37 and LD 529 on behalf of 
the 70 municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association ’s 
Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal 
interest. 
Municipal ofﬁcials are relieved to learn that there is interest among members of the 
Legislature and the Taxation Committee to address the issues associated with the 
implementation, administration, and the cost of the Property Tax Stabilization for Senior Citizens 
law. While the intent to deliver property tax relief to Maine’s senior homeowners is supported 
by municipal leaders, the manner in which the law achieves that goal is of tremendous concern. 
The act is overly generous; provides relief to some of the state’s wealthiest homeowners; shifts 
tremendous administrative burdens and costs onto assessors; relies on the will of each newly 
elected Legislature to honor the commitment to fully reimburse municipalities; and allows an 
eligible homeowner to carry the stabilized assessment from community to community. 
Additionally, the law requires qualifying homesteaders to apply for the program annually, 
with the penalty associated with failing to do so being the loss of the stabilized tax amount. The 
concerns with the existing application process are two-fold. 
The ﬁrst is with respect to the volume of work this law has created for municipal 
assessors and staff. The 146 municipalities responding to an MMA survey indicated they have 
processed 43,880 applications in the ﬁrst year of implementation, yielding a statewide projection 
of nearly 100,600 applications. 
Secondly, and most unfortunately, the law has created an environment that pits residents 
against the municipal ofﬁcials who are mandated to administer the law. If an individual fails to 
apply, it will be the tax collector or assessor, rather than the legislators who supported the bill, 
that will ﬁeld the calls from angry homeowners. Municipal ofﬁcials have already witnessed the 
strife this law has created. Prior to the August 8, 2023 implementation date, municipal ofﬁcials
were accused of holding out on providing property tax relief, even though the state had not yet 
provided the guidance and application forms necessary to implement the program. 
LD 37 and LD 529 take steps in the right direction. As proposed in both bills, the 
requirement to annually apply for the beneﬁt is repealed and in its place the homeowner needs to 
apply once to determine if they are eligible for the beneﬁt and thereafter only if a new homestead 
is established. 
While municipal ofﬁcials appreciate and support this change, much work remains to be 
done to the program to make it ﬁnancially sustainable and to reduce the pressures on limited 
municipal resources. To that end, Rep. Maureen Terry has submitted legislation on behalf of 
MMA’s Legislative Policy Committee that seeks to replace the tax stabilization program with an 
enhanced and tiered homestead exemption targeted to seniors who meet certain income 
standards. Our request is that the Taxation Committee consider postponing a decision on how to 
address the property tax stabilization law until all solutions have been presented and considered. 
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue. If you have any 
questions about our position, please contact me at kdufour.@1nen1un.org or 592-4038.
