TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 16, 2023 
LD 3'7 - An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Property Tax Stabilization for 
Senior Citizens to Eliminate the Requirement for an Annual Application 
LD 529 - An Act to Remove the Annual Filing Requirement in the Property Tax 
Stabilization Laws 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
providing testimony at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against 
LD 37 - An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Property Tax Stabilization for 
Senior Citizens to Eliminate the Requirement for an Annual Application and LD 
529 - An Act to Remove the Annual Filing Requirement in the Property Tax 
Stabilization Laws. I am providing combined testimony because both bills have 
similar goals-—to remove the annual ﬁling requirement for participants in the 
Property Tax Stabilization Program. 
LDs 37 and 529 are two of the many bills submitted this year addressing issues 
facing the State, municipalities, and property taxpayers under the Property Tax 
Stabilization Program. The issues likely to be raised by the various bills— 
balancing the program’s beneﬁts and substantial costs, possible technical changes 
to clarify program implementation, possible substantive changes to address 
program complexity, possible changes to align the program purpose with other 
existing property tax relief programs — deserve serious consideration. With
1
respect to LDs 37 and 529, if the Legislature decides to ﬁne tune the program 
while keeping its overall design intact, then removing the annual ﬁling requirement 
is a step toward addressing the administrative burden the Program places on 
taxpayers, municipalities, and Maine Revenue Services. On the other hand, if the 
Legislature decides to redesign the program more signiﬁcantly, then the necessity 
of these two bills is unclear. 
Turning to the speciﬁc provisions of the two bills, there are several technical 
concerns we would like to raise for the Committee. First, the language of both 
bills creates inconsistencies with other sections of the Stabilization Law, notably 
36 M.R.S. § 6281(3), which only allows stabilization for a single year (the year of 
application). With the removal of the annual application, that subsection should be 
amended to allow for ongoing stabilization. 
In removing the annual ﬁling requirement, both bills also make the statute unclear 
as to whether a participant needs to maintain their eligibility to continue to 
participate. For example, whether a participant needs to maintain permanent 
residency or be eligible for the homestead exemption beyond the year they apply. 
Ongoing eligibility should be clariﬁed. 
If the intent is to require ongoing eligibility, provisions should be added to both 
require participants to notify municipalities of changes in eligibility and to give 
municipalities authority to review eligibility and remove in subsequent years if 
necessary. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on both bills, 
and the important issues raised by the Property Tax Stabilization Program in 
general; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide
2
additional information and respond in detail to the Co1nmittee ’s questions. I would 
be happy to respond to any questions you may have now.
3
