Mame ASSOCIATION OF RETIREES 
L5 TO: Senator Nicole Grohoski, Chair 
Representative Joe Perry, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Taxation DATE: March 16, 2023 
FROM: Thomas Record 
Vice President, Maine Association of Retirees 
SUBJECT: LD 529, An Act to Remove the Annual Filing Requirement in the Property Tax Stabilization 
Laws 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee, I am Thomas Record and am Vice 
President of the Maine Association of Retirees (MAR), a nonproﬁt organization comprised of public service 
retirees including state retirees, retired educators, and retirees from participating local districts. 
We thank Representative Poirier for bringing LD 529 forward. 
The Property Tax Stabilization Program which was enacted during the 130th Legislature is designed to protect 
senior citizens who qualify for the Maine homestead exemption from property tax increases. During MAR’s 
regional member meetings in the fall of 2022, we leanied that the program was extremely popular with our 
members as the majority had already signed up. 
As currently structured, seniors must apply to their municipality for the program by December 1 of each year. In 
addition to the burden on seniors, this also places an administrative burden on municipalities which must process 
applications received. As currently structured, municipalities are not reimbursed for processing applications. 
By providing for only a single application for the Property Tax Stabilization Program as is already done with 
respect to the homestead exemption, LD 529 replaces needless bureaucracy with a simpler, common sense 
process. 
MAR is ready to participate in work sessions on the bill or to provide whatever other assistance the Committee 
may require. 
CC Representative J emrifer Poirier 
Leading the Way for Maine Retirees 
280 Maine Avenue, Farmingdale, ME 04344 William H. Laubenstein lll — President 
Telephone Number: (207) 582-1960 Diane M. Bailey — Executive Director 
1-800-535-6555 email: l\/lAR@MaineRetirees.0rg 
(207)707-1722 FAX www.maineretirees.org
