\ 
REGlO\'AL OFFICES 
Fg 84 H.-\RLO\\ ‘ ST. 2M) FLOOR 
Q <35‘ BA.'\‘GOR. I\/IAINF. 04401 
aw - * g%rI 
. 
E ._; TELZ <20?) 941-3070 
1 FAXI (207) 941-3075 
AARON M. FREY ;‘;~m ATTORNEY GENERAL I-E l25 PRESL‘ t\'1PS('OT ST.. SUTE Z6 
PORT]./\!\lD. IVIAINE 04103 
TELZ (207) 821-0260 
F.-\XI (207) 822-0259 
STATE or IVIAINE 
OFFICE or THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 1C4 AC"F$§' l\/ll'l'@ “"‘6’*;7§;'E~1 
TEL; (207) 625.5300 E H , ARIBOL‘ . AINE .a 
TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 6 S “TE HOL SE STATIOI‘ TELI (307) 496-3793 
Aucusm, I\/IAINE 04333-OOO6 FAXI (207)4%~3291 
Testimony Neither for nor Against LD 1603 An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the 
Committee To Ensure Constitutionally Adequate Contact with Counsel 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary. My name is Lisa Marchese and I am a Deputy Attorney General, Chief of 
the Criminal Division in the Attorney General’s ofﬁce. I am here to testify neither for nor 
against LD 1603. 
I was the Attorney General’s designee to the Committee to Ensure Constitutionally 
Adequate Contact with Counsel. District Attorney Maeghan Maloney was the District 
Attorney ’s representative to the Committee and the Maine Prosecutor ’s Association joins 
in my testimony. We had many productive meetings under the leadership of Senator 
Carney and former Representative Thom Harnett. I am testifying neither for nor against 
this LD because while the Attorney General’s Ofﬁce and the Maine Prosecutor ’s 
Association supports several of the recommendations of the Committee that lead to this 
LD, we have concerns about some provisions of the bill, as drafted. 
By way of background, as you no doubt are aware, the Attorney General’s ofﬁce is 
responsible in the State of Maine for the prosecution of all homicide cases. During the 
course of the investigations, law enforcement will listen to non-privileged jail calls for 
investigative purposes. These calls are provided to investigators through the County Jail 
system. A few years ago, the Attorney General’s ofﬁce became aware of limited 
instances where a prosecutor or a law enforcement officer received a privileged phone 
call from the county jail. This was troubling to everyone involved. Immediately, the 
Attorney General’s office adopted an informal process whereby the listener — whether it 
was a prosecutor or law enforcement, would immediately cease listening and the 
prosecutor would notify defense counsel of what had occurred. We would then follow the 
lead of defense counsel on how he or she wished to handle the situation. In those 
instances Where law enforcement or prosecutors were provided with privileged calls,I 
have been assured that nothing of substance was heard. 
As we delved into how this could have happened, we leamed that the reason we had been 
mistakenly provided with these privileged calls was the failure of defense attorneys ’ 
contact information to be registered with the jail so that the security system did not screen 
out the privileged calls. To be clear, prosecutors and law enforcement do not want 
privileged phone calls. We respect that we are not entitled to privileged calls and that all 
people charged with a crime have a constitutional right to conﬁdential communications 
with their attomeys. In July of 2020, the Maine Prosecutor ’s Association sent a letterto
\ 
all Sheriffs and Jail administrators requesting they ensure that all attomey contact 
information be provided to the jail. This letter was also sent to John Pelletier, then 
Executive Director of the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services so he would 
remind attorneys to provide their contact numbers to the jails. Through training, the 
Attorney General’s Office advised homicide detectives how to proceed in the event they 
were inadvertently provided privileged jail calls. 
LD 1603 directs the Attomey General and District Attorney ’s offices to adopt a written policy to 
protect and ensure confidential attorney-client communications. It also requires the Attorney 
General’s Ofﬁce to develop a training program by January 1, 2024 for state, county and 
municipal law enforcement officers who, as part of a criminal investigation, inadvertently hear 
conﬁdential attorney-client communications. This language codiﬁes in statute what is informally 
being done which assures the public that prosecutors take the conﬁdential attorney-client 
communications seriously. We see no problem codifying these recommendations of the 
committee. 
I would ask this committee to reconsider the language in Section A-7 which reads that any 
person who accesses, monitors, records, copies, transmits or receives a copy of the 
communication is disquali ﬁed from participating in an investigation and from appearing asa 
witness in the proceeding if the jail or correctional facility had notice of the attorney ’s name. 
When this recommendation was made to the Committee, the vote was 7 in favor, 6 opposed and 
3 members were absent. As you can see, there was not consensus in the Committee. This 
provision does not recognize the remedy that currently exists with the Courts in the form ofa 
motion to exclude or motion to dismiss. Neither prosecution nor law enforcement wanta 
detective or prosecutor to be compromised by being in possession of privileged information. 
When these situations have come up in the past, the response by prosecutors has been immediate 
and transparent. To automatically remove a homicide detective from a murder case as would be 
required by this language because he or she inadvertently received a privileged call from the jail 
and heard nothing of substance other than the attorneys name is a broad, blanket approach when 
there are Court remedies available that could consider each fact pattern on a case-by-case basis 
in order to tailor an appropriate response. As currently written, this statute could potentially puta 
serious case in jeopardy and punishes the detective and the State for using a permissible 
investigative technique and could ultimately mean that key evidence held by the detective, such 
as a confession, would not be pennissible. Additionally, even defense counsel would be 
precluded from calling the officer and there are times when defense counsel wishes to calla 
police ofﬁcer as a witness in their case. I would respectfully submit that it is the presiding 
justice who should decide if there is a constitutional violation and what the appropriate remedy 
should be. 
I would also like to raise concerns about Section A-12 which requires a block of instruction at 
the basic law enforcement training program on attorney-client communications. If you look at 
Title 25, there are limited core curriculum requirements for the basic school. While attomey- 
client communication is very important, there is limited time for law enforcement instruction and 
the Board of Trustees and those intimately involved with the curriculum are in the best position 
to prioritize what is taught. The proposed language mandates training by the Attorney General’s 
Office and District Attorney ’s offices for all law enforcement officers in the State who may
inadvertently hear conﬁdential attorney-client communications as part of an investigation. Those 
ofﬁcers who listen to jail calls will be subject to this training program designed by the Attorney 
General’s office and District Attorney ’s Office as required under this LD. I would submit that 
this is the most effective point in time to train those officers. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions you may 
have.
