 
April 19, 2023 
 
L.D. 1603  – An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Committee to Ensure Constitutionally 
Adequate Contact with Counsel   
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary , my name is Steve Gorden.  I am a Cumberland County commissioner  and the Chair man of 
the County Corrections Professional Standards Council,  and I am here on  the Council ’s behalf .   
 Council members discussed this bill and  voted to take the position of Neither For Nor Against  LD 1603 – 
An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Committee to Ensure Constitutionally Adequate 
Contact with Counsel.  
 
The County Corrections Professional Standards Council, henceforth refer red to as the Council, was 
created in statute during the 130th legislative session.  We began meeting in September of 2022 and 
we’re a well- established group.  The Council is comprised of two county commissioners, two sheriffs, the 
Maine Department of Corrections Commissioner, MDOC employee responsible for ensuring compliance 
in Maine jails, and the final member is a representative of the Maine Municipal Assoc iation.    
 
The intent  of the Council ’s position  of NFNA is to inform members of this committee of our work and 
our ability to successfully convene meetings to include partners identified in the bill language.  We agree 
that subject matter experts identified in this bill are the best equipped to  ensure successful 
development of policies and procedures  that pertain to adequate contact with counsel . Further, we 
appreciate the trust invested in the Council by the original c ommittee members. 
 
While we do not wish to weigh in on other as pects of this proposed legislation, we do hope the 
members  of this committee are confident in the commitment of Council members and our ability to 
oversee this work , if passage of L.D. 1603 occurs.  
 
Thank you f or the oppo rtunity to present today.  I am happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Commissioner Steve Gorden, Chairman  
County Corrections Professional Standards Council  

