PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.ac|umaine org 
AMERICAN CIVIL UBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
Ought to Pass W LD I603 
An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Committee to Ensure 
Constitutionally Adequate Contact with Counsel 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
April l9, 2023 
Senator Camey, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am policy director at the 
ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and 
civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge 
you to support this bill. And, while all parts of the bill deserve support, we are particularly 
supportive of section A-7, that provides consequences when the state violates a defendant ’s right 
to consult with their attorney privately. 
Access to counsel is among the most important of the rights guaranteed to citizens by the 
Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. See Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335 
(1963) (applying Sixth Amendment obligations to states under Due Process Clause of Fourteenth 
Amendment). Access to effective counsel includes the right to have confidential conversations 
with one’s attomey without the government overhearing what is said. For too many people in 
Maine, access to private conversations with their defense attorney is treated as a privilege for the 
few instead of a constitutional right for all: as one report found, jails in Androscoggin, 
Aroostook, Franklin, Kennebec, Penobscot and York counties recorded almost 1,000 phone calls 
that jailed defendants made to counsel between June 2019 and May 2020.‘ 
One of the premises of our legal system is that if you break the law, there are 
consequences. Yet when it comes to govemment ofﬁcials violating the rights of defendants to 
speak with their attorneys in conﬁdence, practically speaking, there are currently not serious 
' 
Samantha Hogan, Maine lawmakers consider making jail phone calls to lawyers free, The Maine Monitor, March 
5, 2023, accessible at https://www.themainemonitor.org/maine-lawmakers-consider-making-jail-phone-calls-to- 
lawyers-free/.
consequences imposed. This undermines the perception of fairness and actual fairness in the 
legal system. Section A-7 of this bill would make it so that attorney-client communications 
intercepted by the government are not admissible in a criminal proceeding, and any person who 
improperly intercepts that communication cannot appear as a witness in a criminal case against 
the defendant, if the govemment actor had notice that the person with whom the defendant was 
having a conversation was their lawyer. We hope that Section A-7 will incentivize government 
actors—jails, prisons, district attorneys and police-—to put into place protective mechanisms so 
that they do not violate defendants ’ rights when it comes to speaking with defense counsel. 
We ask you to support this legislation to ensure guardrails are put into place so that 
defendants ’ rights to speak privately with their attorneys are honored. Thank you for your time.
