March 20 , 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
 
RE: LD 988 – Reso lve, Directing the Department of Agriculture,  Conse rvation and 
Forestry to Conduct an Accessibility Study of All Maine State Parks and Historic Sites 
and to Develop a Plan to Remove Access Barriers  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I 
am the Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I 
appreciate this opportunity to test ify in support of LD 988, Reso lve, Directing the 
Department of Agriculture,  Conse rvation and Forestry to Conduct an Accessibility 
Study of All Maine State Parks and Historic Sites and to Develop a Plan to Remove 
Access Barriers . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guid ed by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. TNC has been working in Maine for more than 
60 years protecting land, restoring rivers and streams, rebuilding groundfish 
populations in the Gulf of Maine and developing innovative solutions to address 
climate change.  Conservation is at our core, and we are proud to be the 12th largest 
landowner in the state, owning and managing over  300,000 acres.  
 
LD 988 is a n important opportunity for Maine to conduct an accessibility st udy of ever y 
Maine state park and historic site to identify barriers to access for all Maine people and 
visitors with disabilities. The bill directs the Department of Agriculture, Conservation  
and Forestry to specifically  engage the disability community to conduct a study to 
identify access bar riers and develop a rem ediation plan.  
 
Access to nature and outdoor spaces provides many benefits to people, including 
improvements to our physical and mental health as well as overall quality of life.  
Maine ’s state parks and historic sites offer  these benefits and more – and represent  
iconic landscapes an d experiences . LD 988 recognize s that not everyone has the same 
level of access to these publi c natural spaces , and we must take concrete action 
towards  removing barriers since these places belon g to us all.  
 
We know that making something “accessible” is not as simple as removing a locked 
gate or adding trail signage. Universal design requires understanding how people with 
disabilities find, enter, and navigate these outdoor places, and then acting thoughtfully 
to remove ob stacles to access.  TNC Maine is currently navigating this same question. 
We are working to develop an accessible “All Persons Trail” on a TNC preserve in the 
Katahdin region as a first step toward making the lands we steward more accessible for 
enjoyment, recreation, and cultural uses by all.  
 
We urge this committee to pass LD  988 and take action to improve  accessibility . 
