 
Testimony of Maine Conservation Voters
“Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to Conduct an 
Accessibility Study of All Maine State Parks and Historic Sites and to Develop a Plan to Remove 
Access Barriers”
Before the Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry Committee
March 20, 2023
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and the distinguished members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation, and Forestry Committee. 
My name is Kathleen Meil, Senior Director of Policy and Partnerships at Maine Conservation 
Voters, writing in support of LD 988, “Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry to Conduct an Accessibility Study of All Maine State Parks and 
Historic Sites and to Develop a Plan to Remove Access Barriers,” on behalf of more than 13,000 
members and supporters of Maine Conservation Voters. Maine Conservation Voters is dedicated 
to ensuring equal access to Maine’s rich outdoors for all Maine citizens and visitors. This 
includes our forty-eight1 state parks and historical sites, which brought in 3.3 million visitors in 
2021 and 2022. 
Eleven percent of Maine people have mobility disabilities,2 meaning more than 150,000 Mainers 
may struggle to access their state parks. The last study conducted to evaluate the accessibility of 
Maine’s parks was completed in 1996, almost 30 years ago. Since 1996, our population has 
grown, our parks have become more attended, and we’re facing a worsening climate crisis that 
will only continue to entice people to move to Maine, where we still have “tolerable” weather.
Maine has recently launched a $50,000,000 initiative to rebuild Maine’s state parks, and a vital 
part of this rebuilding has to be addressing the inequity caused by access barriers to parks. To fix 
this inequality, the Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry must conduct 
accessibility studies to identify access barriers in our state parks and historic sites. The State 
must engage the disability community in the development of plans to remedy these barriers. The 
1 State Parks: About Us: Bureau of Parks and Lands: Maine DACF 
2 Disability & Health U.S. State Profile Data: Maine | CDC
studies should engage those with lived experience and those with expertise in conducting 
accessibility studies for developed outdoor spaces. 
Mainers know that the outdoors is truly for everyone. Maine Conservation Voters agrees and 
urges this Committee to give every person the ability to access nature in any season, without 
barriers. Maine Conservation Voters urges you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 998.
Thank you.
Kathleen Meil
Senior Director of Policy and Partnerships
Maine Conservation Voters
