 
1 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY , ESQ.  
 
Ought to Pass - LD 988 
 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to Conduct 
an Accessibility Study of All Maine State Parks and Historic Sites and to Develop a Plan to 
Remove Access Barriers  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY  
 
March 20, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwers en, Representative Pluecker , and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , greetings .  My name is Meagan 
Sway , and I am the Policy Director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization  committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support LD 988 because it would 
protect the civil rights of people with disabilities .  
People with disabilities have the lowest incomes,  lowest employment  rates, and lowest 
rates of educational access of any minority in America. According to the U. S. CDC , up to 1 in 4 
adults in the United States have some s ort of d isability , and about one in ten have a mobility 
disability with serious difficulty walking or climbing stairs.1 Too often, people with disabilities 
have been treated as second class citizens, shunne d and segregated by physical barriers and 
social stereotypes. They have been discriminated against in employment, schools, and housing, 
robbed of personal autonomy, and too often, hidden away and forgotten by the larger society.  
It is illegal for state parks to discriminate  on the basis of a disability. See generally 
American s with Disabilit ies Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101(b)(1)  (enacted  “to provide a clear and 
comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with 
disabilities.” ); § 12131  (prohibiting discrimination against persons with disabilities by “public 
entities ”). Maine has already done good work to make i ts parks more accessible , including by 
 
1 Disability Impacts All of Us, Disability and Health Promotion, U.S. CDC, Jan 5, 2023, available  at 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/disabilityandhealth/infographic -disability -impacts -
all.html #:~:text=Up%20to%201%20in%204,have%20some%20type%20of%20disability.  
 
 
  
 
 
 2 publishing the accessi bility ratings of all its parks  and historic sites .2 This bill would ensure that 
we discover, and ad dress, any room for growth.  We urge you to v ote ought to pass .  
 
 
 
 
2 Maine Bureau of Parks and Lands: Access for the Disabled, available at  
https://www.maine.gov/dacf/parks/vi sitor_accessibility/access_guide.pdf  
