TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
I 
WILDLIFE 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 221 
”An Act Regarding Airboat Noise" 
Presented by Representative HEPLER of Woolwich. 
Cosponsored by Representatives: AN KELES of Brunswick, ARFORD of Brunswick, DILL of 
Old Town, GOLEK of Harpswell, LANDRY of Farmington, O'CONNELL of Brewer, SACHS of 
Freeport. 
DATE OF HEARING: May 8, 2023 
Good morning Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. l am Warden Lt. Jason Luce, of the Maine Warden 
Service, speaking on behalf of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, in support of L.D. 221. 
During the 130"‘ Legislature, LD 1873 extended the sunset on the existing decibel limits 
for airboats from September 30, 2022 to September 30, 2023. lt also reconvened the 
stakeholder working group that has been discussing the noise associated with airboat 
operations. That group was directed to report back to this committee with any 
recommendations by January 3, 2024, and the committee has the ability to report outa 
bill to the Second Regular Session of the 1315‘ Legislature. 
As you have heard from the progress report provided by Lt. Luce and Sgt Dean, the 
working group has continued to meet to evaluate the success of the existing decibel 
limits in ameliorating concerns from riparian landowners and to consider other actions. 
The group met in July, August, and November of 2022, and March and April of 2023. At 
their most recent meeting, the working group considered either extending the 
timeframe of the existing decibel limits or removing the sunset provision so that the 
decibel limits remain in effect indefinitely. Ultimately, the group reached consensus to 
recommend extending the timeframe, rather than removing the sunset provision. 
The additional time provided by the extension will allow DMR and IFW to continue to 
monitor noise levels from airboats and the effectiveness of the current limits. ln the 
event that any violations for exceeding the decibel limits are issued, it will also allow the 
evaluation of the enforceability of these decibel limits, which has not yet been tested.
Concurrently, the working group has determined that educating airboat operators 
regarding best practices to reduce unnecessary noise would also provide benefits. To 
that end, they have sent a letter to all individuals who have registered an airboat, in 
hopes that some additional information in advance of summer might further mitigate 
any complaints. Specifically, the letter advised on the following points: 
0 Adjusting the blades on the prop to a lesser pitch to reduce noise level; 
0 Having a muffler in good working condition; and 
¢ Keeping RPMs lower by idling in rivers and coves in the early morning hours, 
especially in more populous areas. 
ln closing, the working group has been striving to find solutions that will allow airboats 
to continue to operate as part of Maine's working waterfront, while reducing noise and 
concerns from riparian landowners. While this has at times been a difficult balance, the 
situation is improving, and will continue to do so as more is learned about effective 
strategies to reduce conflict. 
By extending the existing sunset, LD 221 provides additional time for the working group 
to continue its efforts without the decibel limits being eliminated. For this reason, the 
Department asks you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 221. Thank you for your 
consideration, and I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the 
work session.
