May 8, 2023
 Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
 Maine Legislature 
 Augusta, ME 04330 
 Dear CIFW Members: 
 Airboat noise is a contentious issue and the Stakeholder Group formed by this committee two years ago has been 
 successful in bringing new ideas forward on how to address it in a way that is fair to both operators and affected 
 residents. 
 The advocacy group I lead, Citizens Against Airboat Noise (CAAN) represents hundreds of residents in Freeport, 
 Brunswick, Harpswell, Bath, and Saco.  Many of us came into this process with a mindset to impose strong limits 
 on airboat use.  But in the process of exchanging views in various forums over the last two years most have evolved 
 to embrace the collaborative approach embodied by the Stakeholder Group.  We recognize that operators are 
 generally our neighbors who are trying to find a better way to do their jobs. 
 The interim noise limits implemented last year were a serious first effort at addressing our noise concerns.  We 
 recognize that the early morning limits in particular require tangible sacrifices on the part of operators. 
 However, we believe that this process is not finished.  We think solutions exist that are mutually acceptable, but 
 finding them will require innovation, creativity, and a persistent effort on the part of all stakeholders to continue 
 working together. 
 We believe it is important to identify an achievable technical standard to make airboats quieter, and thereby make 
 operating limitations less important.  Some people are skeptical of this notion, but our research suggests that 
 significant improvements are possible and CAAN is actively working to bring specific proposals forward.   We 
 anticipate any equipment standards would be implemented on a long-term time horizon, with a focus on compliance 
 of new boats. 
 We intend to pursue opportunities to expand shoreline access.  Finally, we do continue to believe there are localized 
 noise sensitive areas that deserve special protection from very early operations. 
 In brief,  CAAN supports the extension of current temporary noise rules for another 2 years as contemplated 
 by LD221, and recommends an amendment to continue a study group to help elaborate long term solutions 
 that are beneficial to all stakeholders. 
 Respectfully submitted, 
 Jeremy Wright 
 President 
 Citizens Against Airboat Noise (CAAN) 
