I, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
If? AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Melanie Sachs TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
84 Kelsey Ridge Road 
Freeport, ME 04032 
Residence: 207-299-6825 
Melanie.Sachs@legislature.maine.gov 
May 8, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Melanie Sachs, cosponsor of 
LD 221, An Act Regarding Airboat Noise 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is Melanie Sachs, and I represent House 
District 102 in Freeport. I am here as a cosponsor and supporter of LD 221, “An Act Regarding 
Airboat Noise.” 
I am honored to work with the members of the airboat stakeholder group, whose mission and 
purpose were ﬁrst authorized by LD 114, and again in LD 1873 during the 130th Legislature. 
This group, comprised of three commercial marine shellfish harvesters who operate airboats, 
three resident coastal property owners, two municipal marine shellﬁsh ofﬁcers and two coastal 
municipal administrators, have been working together for years at this point, both formally and 
informally, to bring forward consensus-based recommendations on this issue. These 
recommendations are indeed the result of the hard work and productive conversations by those 
most impacted by this issue. LD 221 , and the proposed amendment by the sponsor, will 
accomplish two goals: 
l) Extend the “sunset date” of the current law to 09/ 3 0/2025. This will allow marine 
ofﬁcials and others involved in this effort three seasons to monitor the progress of the 
initiative and compile data. This was a unanimous recommendation of the group. Usable 
data is just now begimiing to be compiled, which has been quite valuable to the process. 
2) Continue the stakeholder group, which has committed to continue to meet and work 
cooperatively to monitor the progress of the initiative. Attendance at these meetings, even 
with so many competing member responsibilities, is robust and the members tackle these 
tough issues together. The co-chairs, Sgt. Wesley Dean of DMR and Lt. Jason Luce of 
IF &W, have been exemplary in their leadership. 
First as a Town Councilor, and now as a State Representative, I have been involved in 
community discussions around airboats since 2013. It has truly been my pleasure to see this issue 
continue to evolve through the productive and positive efforts of this group and I believe that this 
consensus-based process continues to move the work forward. Thank you for your time, andI 
am happy to answer any questions. 
District 102: Freepoit
