Thomas Haible
Harpswell
LD 221
May 8, 2023
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee
Maine Legislature
Dear Committee Members,
I am writing in support of LD 221/HP 242 that you are considering today.
My name is Thomas “Spike” Haible and I have been a citizen member representing 
Harpswell on the IFW Airboat Working Group since its inception several years ago.  
The Working Group has come a long way.  Its beginnings were a bit contentious and, 
because airboat noise pollution was a new issue, we had some trouble finding our 
feet.  But over the past several years the Group has accomplished quite a bit under the
able direction of Sgt. Wes Dean (DMR) and Lt. Jason Luce (IFW).  They have 
wrangled a diverse bunch with often adversarial views into a cohesive unit trying its 
best to create solutions to airboat noise.
Our most recent meeting in April focused on two important items.  One was to agree 
that extending the sunset provision for the existing airboat rules was necessary and 
supportable; we unanimously agreed to that. The second was to underscore that 
continuing to gather data about airboat use patterns, noise and noise complaints was 
essential to moving forward.  Without data we can’t accurately and fairly make 
decisions that benefit all parties.  We all agree that airboats are a very useful tool for 
shellfish harvesters, but their noise is a hindrance to coastal property owners and their 
peaceful enjoyment of their property and needs to be solved. 
I would like to say that the ultimate solution to airboat noise pollution will be 
technological as advances in propeller design, materials and electric propulsion move 
forward.  Early on in our IFWWG meetings the airboat operators agreed that if they 
had a boat that could do what an airboat does without the noise, they’d adopt it 
readily.  In that vein, I have been attempting, albeit with no success to date, to engage 
the University of Maine College of Engineering in a project focused on airboat 
technology.  I am hoping that they can be convinced to take up this interesting 
challenge and, if not them, another engineering institution could be approached.
In closing, I hope you will support this effort by agreeing to extend the sunset 
provision for LD 221/HP 242.  As well, the IFWWG has worked hard and with great 
focus and believes it should continue its work in concert with an extended sunset 
provision.  We trust you will see the merit in this.
Sincerely,
 
Thomas Haible; 
Member, IFW Airboat Working Group 
Harpswell, Maine

