/3 t 3 g 
5 5 SenatorAnne Carney /6 
3 State House Station 
Senate aif .4ZlgZlS[Cl, ME 04333-0003 
()ﬂ?ce (20?)2s7~1515 
.$' e/zale Zéiﬂud Z9 
Testimony of Senator Anne Carney introducing 
LD 133, An Act to Include a Representative of Newspaper and Other Press Interests on 
the Archives Advisory Board 
before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
January 31, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and esteemed members of the Committee on State 
and Local Government, l am Anne Carney, representing Senate District 29. I am pleased 
to be with you today to introduce LD 133, An Act to Include a Representative of 
Newspaper and Other Press Interests on the Archives Advisory Board. The purpose of 
this bill is to ensure that newspaper and press interests have a voice on the Maine 
Archives Advisory Board. This legislation came about through discussions during" the 
2022 Right To Know Advisory Committee meetings. 
I will begin with a little background on the Right To Know Advisory Committee. The 
committee was established by the Legislature in 2005 to serve as a permanent advisory 
council responsible for ensuring compliance with and upholding the integrity of Maine’s 
Freedom of Access Act (F OAA). l MRS §41l. The committee meets at least four timesa 
year to review current law, consider public access issues that have arisen over the year, 
and recommend changes in the law. Ensuring the public’s right to access the records of 
public bodies is one of the central purposes of FOAA. 
Maine also has an Archives and Records Management Law. 5 MRS §91. Broadly 
speaking, this law ensures that public records and documents are, as a practical matter, 
available to the public to obtain knowledge of government affairs, as well as for study 
and research. Maine’s State Archivist, Kate McBrien, who is here today, is the custodian 
of those records. Her role includes setting policy regarding the “use, maintenance, 
retention, preservation and disposal of’ public records. 5 MRS §94. 
The State Archivist preserves many important historical documents — at a recent Judiciary 
Committee meeting, she showed legislators a letter written by Joshua Chamberlain while 
he was on the battleﬁeld at Gettysburg. The State Archivist also sets important policies
1
related to managing public records, for example which records should be retained for 
administrative, legal, audit or historic purposes. 5 MRS §95-C. 
The State Archivist receives guidance from the Archives Advisory Board. 5 MRS §96. 
Adding a representative of newspaper and press interests to the expertise of the Archives 
Advisory Board will further enhance the work of the Board and the State Archives to 
ensure that public records and historic documents are available to the public. 
Thank you for your consideration today. I urge the committee to vote ought to pass on 
LD 133. I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Anne Carney 
State Senator, Senate District 29 
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough
2
