 
TO:   Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan  
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs   
FROM:  Becky Smith, Director of Government and Community Relations  
RE: Testimony in opposition to LD 64 , An Act to Ensure In -state Tuition for Postsecondary 
Students Who Are Registered to Vote in the State  
DATE:  February  7, 202 3  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs.  My name is Becky Smith, and I am providing t estimony in opposition to LD 64, 
An Act to Ensure In -state Tuition for Postsecondary Students Who Are Registered to Vote in the State , 
on behalf of the Maine Community College System.  I am sorry that I cannot be in committee  this 
afternoon, but I am traveling out of state.  
The Maine Community College System has a clear policy , set by our Board of Trustees , to determine 
who is qualified for in-state tuition that reads in part:  
For purposes of this policy, a student has established a “Maine residence” if the student established a primary 
residence in Maine for at least the 12 consecutive months immediately prior to the date of admission (not 
application, registration or enrollmen t). For purposes of this policy, “primary residence” means the student’s 
primary physical presence, degree of settled connections and sincere regard for that domicile as home.    
Establishing residency for the purpose of voting is different from establishin g residency for the purpose 
of enrolling in college . Were we to change our definition to meet the Secretary of State’s guidelines  for 
voting by college students it would have a significant  fiscal impact on Maine Community College 
System.  
The right to vote  is sacrosanct in our society.  We are fortunate to live in a state where access to voting 
is given high priority. We set such a high  value on the right to vote that we, like many other likeminded 
states, recognize that for many college students were they not able to vo te in the community in which 
they attend college, communities they  have  become a part of, they might  not be able  to vote at all. Our 
students , no matter their hometown , work in our communities, shop at our stores , pay rent  and taxes  and 
engage with local organizations.  They deserve the same access to registration and voting that are 
provided to all Mainers.  Some may choose to continue to call a different town or state home and vote 
accordingly.  As long as they only vote in one locat ion, that is their right.  
As you have heard from us in the past, the Maine Community College System staff are often filling 
more than one role a t our institutions . There is no practicable way for us to ascertain who is or will be 
registering to vote with their school address  theref ore we  would have to eliminate out -of-state tuition for 
all students who take in person classes.  We have determined that this will create a  $1,487,232 per yea r 
reduction of tuition dollars across the System.  
Thank you.  

