V 
i\3’7Ciif7%3i§ 
i"~’l,.It"J//C 
L/niverisi fies 
UNIVERSITY OF MMNE SYSIEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System presented by 
UMS Director of Government & Community Relations Samantha Warren 
LD 64, An Act to Ensure In-state Tuition for Postsecondary 
Students Who are Registered to Vote in the State - Feb. 7, 2023' 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs: My name is Samantha Warren and l am the Director of 
Government Relations for the University of Maine System (UMS). We are proud that our public 
universities are the largest single importer of talent to Maine - attracting about 6,000 students to the 
state each year as well as new faculty and staff and their families. . 
In most, but not all, cases, the out-of-state tuition rate is higher than in-state and rises more rapidly 
because it is not subsidized by the Legislature and Maine taxpayers. Still, the cost of attending UMS 
universities is on-par or even lower than what out-of-state students would pay for public postsecondary 
education in their sending state (e.g. our successful Flagship Match program). 
The revenue generated by this differential in tuition rates for out-of-students has been critical to our 
System’s relative fiscal stability, allowing us to maintain both enrollment across our public universities 
and nation-leading tuition affordability for the sons and daughters of Maine. Many of these students 
also stay in Maine to continue to live, work and contribute to our communities after they graduate— 
advancing our oldest-in-the-nation state's talent attraction goals that are necessary to move our 
economy forward and sustain our rural regions. 
How UMS determines residency for the purposes of tuition rate classification differs from how the 
State and other institutions determine residency for a myriad of purposes, including voting and 
taxation. UMS policy generally requires that an individual must have lived in Maine for one year prior 
to their first day of classes for purposes other than education in order to qualify for in-state tuition. 
UMS appreciates that the sponsor of LD 64 recognizes the tremendous success of our public 
universities and other Maine postsecondary institutions in bringing bright young people here and that 
our students from out-of-state are highly engaged on our campuses and in Maine communities and 
companies. Our System’s out-of-state tuition rates are already highly competitive, and our significant 
growth in out-of-state student enrollment (+41% since 2014 despite an overall decline in UMS 
enrollment) reflects this affordability. 
If the Legislature wishes to further incentivize students to come to Maine, in addition to the 
appropriations increases already proposed by Gov. Mills’ FY24-25 biennial budget, UMS will need as 
much as $68.7 million more added to our base in FY24 (and then ongoing increases) to offset the 
current and future revenue expected from the existing tuition differential. Given a funding increase of 
that size is unlikely, UMS cannot support LD 64 but welcomes conversations with this Committee 
about State policy and investment that could further enhance our recruitment and retention efforts, 
including for out-of-state students. 
Thank you for ongoing support of the University of Maine System. 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent- University of 
Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
