To: Appropriations Committee  
Fr: Frank Strout  
Re: LD 1480  – An Act to Protect Union W harf and S ustain  Maine ’s Maritime Indust ries 
 
Dear Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and Members of the Appropriations Committee , 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today in support of LD 1480 An Act to Protect 
Union Wharf and Sustain Maine’s Marine Industries  
My Name is Frank Strout, I’m a lobsterman from Cape Elizabeth I’ve berth my boat and worked 
off Union Wharf for  over  40 years.  I store my gear, buy bait, sell my catch and use many of the 
marine related business on the wha rf. 
I formally served on the Zone F and Lobster Advisory Council s. 
I currently serve on the Land for Maine Future Working Waterfront Review Committee since its 
inception in 2005. This program has protected many piers, wharfs, docks and a ccess along the 
coast. Great Program that works very well for smaller projects. Funding, however,  is very limited  
for properties like Union Wharf with its diversity of M arine  related businesses.  
I have served for 30 + years on the Cape Elizabeth Land Trust  Board  working to protect farmland 
so I know a little b it abou t conservation easements.  
Union Wharf is at the heart of Portland’s Working waterfront and needs  to be protected. Zoning 
and deed restrictions will not assure the future of the wharf for Commercial fishing and ot her 
marine related businesses.  
These fund with be used to permanently protect Union Wharf by recording a declaration of 
covenants and restrictions encumbering Union Wharf. The se restrictions will be enforced to 
ensure  the wharf will permanently remain part  of the Working Waterfront.  
Union Wharf not only serves the fisherman of Portland but throughout the state. As I have 
traveled the coast from Harpswell, Spruce Head , Tenant’s Harbor , Port Clyde and others I was 
asked when  Union Wharf  was listed for sale what the future would be. The pressures of 
development of non -marine activity in Portland are rapid with condominiums selling for over 1 
million dollars on the non -seaward side of commercial street.  
Once it was announced that The Gulf of Maine Research Institute was negotiating and 
purchasing Union Wharf there was huge support from the entire fishing community  and the 
public.  
I believe that your support and passage of LD 1480 will not only benefit the working waterfront 
in Portland , throughout the state but will serve as a model to protect future access.  
 
Again, thank  you for the opportunity to speak  in support of LD 1480.  
I would welcome any questions  
 
 
