 
339 Water Street 
Gardiner, ME  04345 
(207) 622-0136 
www.maineaqua.org 
 
 
The Honorable Margaret Rotundo, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Melanie Sachs, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
State House, Room 228 
Augusta, ME. 04333 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, Honorable members of the Joint 
Committee on Marine Resources: 
 
My name is Sebastian Belle and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Aquaculture 
Association (MAA). The MAA represents Maine’s aquatic farmers and the many 
infrastructure companies that provide goods and services to our producers.  Our 
farmers annually produce over 100 million dollars in farm gate revenue and directly 
employ roughly 700 Maine citizens year-round. We purchase goods and services from 
over 400 Maine businesses and our total economic impact is roughly 150 million 
dollars annually.  
 
My apologies I am unable to appear before you in person today because we are co-
hosting a three day conference on Seaweed aquaculture in Portland. I wish to present 
testimony in strong support of LD 1480, “An Act to Protect Union Wharf and Sustain 
Maine's Maritime Industries” Sponsored by Senator Stacy Brenner.  
 
Maine’s working waterfronts are under siege. Little by little our states commercial 
waterfronts are being bought up and converted to residential use. Although there have 
been lots of studies documenting the speed of the erosion of our working waterfront 
infrastructure the Gulf of Maine Research Institute under the thoughtful leadership of 
Don Perkins took action and stepped in to save Union Wharf from that fate. Union 
Wharf is one of the last commercial working waterfronts in Portland and is vital to the 
commercial fishing and aquaculture communities of southern Maine. Through creative 
financing and fundraising Don was able to quickly step in and prevent Union Wharfs 
conversion to non working waterfront use. He dd that at great risk and now needs help 
to make the acquisition financially viable. LD 1480 would help do that and support the 
preservation of regionally critical infrastructure.  
 
Maine seafood is an iconic part of the Maine brand and Maine aquaculture products 
have earned their place as part of that brand. Please help us continue to build that 
brand and defend Maines working waterfronts. Vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1480. I 
thank you for your attention and patience and would be glad to answer any questions 
you may have. 
 
 
339 Water Street 
Gardiner, ME  04345 
(207) 622-0136 
www.maineaqua.org 
 
 
Sincerely, 
      
 
Sebastian M. Belle 
Executive Director 
 
 

