295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
          
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1178  
“Resolve, to Reduce Barriers to Recovery from Addiction by 
Expanding Eligibility for Targeted Case Management Services ” 
Sponsored by  Representative  Colleen Madigan  
April 10, 202 3 
 
Good afternoon  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services.  I am Malory 
Shaughnessy of Westbrook  Maine, and the Executive Director  of the Alliance for 
Addiction and Mental Health Services. Please accept this testimony on behalf of the 
Alliance in Support of  LD1178 , “Resolve, To Reduce Barriers to Recovery from 
Addiction by Expanding Eligibility for Targeted Case Management Services. ” 
The Al liance represen ts Maine’s safety net community -based mental health and  
substance use treatment agencies. We advocate for sound policies and evidence -
based practices that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our  
behavioral health care system.  
 
The Alliance and its members strongly believe that Targeted Case Management 
(TCM) should be available to all adults seeking substance use disorder  (SUD) 
treatment, no t just those that are pregnant or have HIV as is currently required by 
MaineCare under Sec.  13.03.  
Research proves that SUD treatment and recovery success hinges on much more 
than simply the reduced use o f, or abstinence from , substances. The success of 
treatment and recovery models depend on connecting those seeking treatment to 
personal, social, and community recover y assets. What p eople in treatment and 
recovery from substance use need to live a full life does not differ markedly from 
any person’s basic needs, of food security, housing, employment, and meaningful 
social engagement.  
Case managers ens ure substance use disorder clients  are more likely to receive  
individualized treatment  and follow through on all of their barriers to recovery , not 
just the physical addiction component of their disease. Comprehensive treatment is 
a necessity in substance use treatment; the case manager can assist the individual in 
using all of the resources available to help them successfully recover and become 
active, healthy members of their communities.  
While job descriptions vary, SAMHSA suggests the case management role include 
five key components:  
o Assessment of the patient’s situation  
o Treatment/case planning  
o Linkage/referrals to other programs and services like housing,  food, 
education and employment  
o Monitoring and follow up  
o Advocacy and support  
 
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
Though w e know that not all people in SUD treatment need or want full case management services, it is 
important to be able to connect clients with the service as needed without stringent eligibility 
requirements.  Research shows that Targeted Case M anagement is crucial to building recovery assets 
and is proven to decrease recidivism rates and sustain long -term recovery.  
In a recent Alliance demonstration pilot program, The Pleaides Project, Targeted Case Management was 
offered to all people seeking SUD treatment regardless of the severity of their disease and with no 
eligibility requirements at 4 pilot  sites around the State.  With the addition of the Case Manager, the 4 
demonstration agencies each saw significant improvement in their ability to provide comprehensive 
services at the appropriate level to clients. The Pleiades Demonstration Project results i ndicated that a 
team -based care approach really works.  Agencies uniformly expressed that working as  a team of 
clinician and case manager, and in many cases with a peer recovery coach as well, resulted in improved 
services and outcomes. All 4 agencies expres sed regret that the demonstration project came to an end 
and they could no longer offer Target ed Case Management as needed to the majority of their SUD 
clients.  
The Alliance Pleiades Demonstration Project treatment participants receiving full TCM services  showed 
improvement from baseline to final follow -up assessment in all recovery asset areas measured; recovery 
engagement, recovery support, housing, food stability, transportation, employment, income, medical 
care, mental health, family relations, educati on, and legal issues.  
One Pleiades Program participant who had suffered from extreme trauma was able to receive 
comprehensive support while in her residential treatment program due to having a Case Manager 
through the Pleiades P roject. She was able to bene fit from daily check -ins with her substance use 
therapist, sessions with her mental health counselor, and group therapy. She was also connected to a 
peer recovery coach, who had the lived experience of being in her shoes.  
 
Ultimately t he client successfull y graduate d from the sixth -month program with  new skills. The Provider 
reports that this client improved on her ability to communicate with her family, gained in self -worth and 
was able to plan future goals. Additionally, she was able to finish her schooli ng and build healthy 
relationships with peers.  
 
It is clear that Targeted Case Management can and will improve treatment outcomes and future 
community integration success if offered to clients as needed. As we all know, when substance use 
treatment is succ essful, we all win. With the relatively small investment  required to offer  these services 
to those that need them, the State of Maine stands to save treatment dollars spent on repeated 
emergency room visits, incarceration and escalation of treatment needs.   By passing LD 1178  we are 
helping build successful, healthy communities, reducing overall expenditures over time, and preventing 
an increase in SUD related illness and death.  
The Alliance urges you to vote in favor of LD 1178  
 
