PO BOX 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.aclumaine org 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine‘ 
-' 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1178 — Ought to Pass 
Resolve, to Reduce Barriers to Recovery from Addiction by Expanding 
Eligibility for Targeted Case Management Services 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, greetings. My name is 
Meagan Sway, and I am the policy director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties 
guaranteed by the' Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge 
you to support LD 1178, that would allow greater chances at sustained recovery for 
people with substance use disorder who are eligible for MaineCare. 
Substance use disorder is a complex psychosocial disorder. This means that 
psychological, social, cultural, and environmental factors all affect a person with 
substance use disorder and how they are able to find and maintain recovery. 
Substance use disorder is also a recurring disorder, meaning that it is likely thata 
person will engage in problematic use several times in their lives. Finally, substance 
use disorder can and often does involve polysubstance use, not just intravenous drug 
use. 
Currently, the rMaineCare Benefits manual only provides targeted case 
management services for adults with substance use disorder who are pregnant, living 
with minor children, and/or is a person who uses intravenous drugs.1 This resolve 
would require the Department of Health and Human Services to remove these 
prerequisites to eligibility for targeted case management services. 
We support the proposed rule change because everyone should have the 
resources they need to thrive on their own terms. But, too often, lack of resources 
dictates who is able to thrive and who is left behind. Changing the MaineCare rules 
to ensure that more people can access targeted case management services will remove 
barriers for people with low-incomes who need these targeted supports. Removing 
I 
Chapter 101: MaineCare Benefits Manual Chapter ll, Section 13.03-4(B).
barriers to recovery is key to ensuring that every person is able to fully access their 
civil liberties, and for that reason, We urge you to vote ought to pass.
