 
April 4, 2023 
 
Greg Payne 
Senior Advisor, Housing Policy 
Governor’s Office of Policy, Innovation and the Future 
181 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  
Dear Greg, 
I’m reaching out to alert you to a deeply concerning decision from DHHS/Maine Care to re-
interpret a longstanding rule governing Targeted Case Management for Homeless Services (“TCM 
13”) and to ask for your help.  That rule, which has been in place, audited and accepted ‘as is’ for 
nearly a decade, has now been reversed, leaving our organization and many others scrambling to 
determine how to continue to provide services for this very vulnerable population 
Our Agency has been accurately, respectfully and successfully delivering on Targeted Case 
Management—inclusive of post housing care or what we call ‘aftercare’—critical to reaching 
successful independence—for almost a decade. TCM 13 has allowed us to amplify human 
support in addition to sheltering resources as part of our partnership with Maine State Housing 
Authority.  The impetus of TCM 13 is a comprehensive catchment for humans who do not 
otherwise qualify for case management services.  Homelessness itself is traumatic, and the vast 
majority of our population has a multitude of co-occurring needs and complex histories.  While 
achieving housing lessens the acuteness of immediate need, it is only the beginning to long term 
stabilization and independence. That stabilization and sustainable independence can only be 
reached with consistent and comprehensive support in the form of skilled case management 
provision based on client need. 
As you may know, reimbursement under TCM 13 is contingent on a client having both an ongoing 
medical need and experiencing homelessness (utilization of shelter and/or without a permanent 
address).  We are aware of these requirements and ensure that clients entering our program 
under TCM 13 meet both criteria.  For over 10 years, the homeless services community has 
understood these criteria as applying at the time of intake – and not as a continuous 
requirement to remain under TCM 13.  However, DHHS has now informed us that the moment a 
client becomes housed (with the exception of 90 days of eligibility following a shelter stay)— 
they are ineligible.  This interpretation creates an illogical and harmful result on an intended path 
to independence. 
These are some of our most vulnerable residents - and the minute we house them under the new 
interpretation—these humans no longer have access to the necessary services needed to build 
toward sustainable independence.  As mentioned above, KCHC has billed TCM 13 under the “old” 
interpretation (eligibility at intake, continued medical need even if housed) for over 10 years and 
has never had an issue with reimbursement.  KCHC was audited by DHHS in 2016 and that audit, 
including TCM 13 reimbursements, found no issues or concerns about eligibility for continued 
services. 
In January 2023, our billing management and auditing company was informed by DHHS that 
KCHC could no longer establish continued eligibility for clients following the achievement of 
housing and/or following 90 days after a shelter exit. That new interpretation caused shock 
waves through the service providers subject to the new information and may, in fact, cause 
vulnerable Mainers to suffer or worse—return to homelessness-- when critical comprehensive 
services are no longer available. 
As someone intimately familiar with the challenge of housing vulnerable populations, we are 
reaching out to ask for your help in finding a path forward with DHHS.  Our meetings with them 
to date have been cordial, but have not resulted in a shift in the reinterpretation.  Without 
intervention, KCHC and others will be unable to continue supporting these very vulnerable 
Mainers.  While we know you are aware of the importance of the issues, we would be remiss if 
we didn’t lay out exactly what we see as the impact of this re-interpretation. Despite careful 
efforts to identify alternative support, this new interpretation leaves a large subpopulation 
without a viable pathway to services. Which will without a doubt result in a high percentage of 
individuals and families who return to homelessness.  The cost of sheltering and triaging far and 
away exceeds the costs of providing case management to families while building toward 
sustainable independence with long term stability.  This pathway ensures that most families 
engage in regular, and preventive medical care, limiting ER visits, high percentages of educational 
engagement, as well as employment.    
How will this new interpretation of the rule impact the Mainers now received services? 
• Stop any support—thus progress—after stable housing is secured. Removing 
reimbursable support upon achieving safe stable housing removes the chance for a 
client to begin to receive services they need in critical areas of mental health, SUD, 
physical health, vocational and life skills education and so much more. Clients are not 
able to actively engage in the important learning and support they need while living in 
unsafe and uninhabitable situations—and in Trauma. 
• Interrupt critical consistency of relationship with comprehensive case management 
staff. Consistency of care and a trusted relationship are key to bringing those 
experiencing homelessness and trauma back to sustainable independence. 
•  Completely works AGAINST best practice in successful delivery of mental health 
services. 
•  Completely works AGAINST the significant commitment to and investment in support 
after housing is attained that leadership of Maine State Housing Authority supports and 
believes in. 
• Send families and individuals in a very tender transition period (newly housed) out to a 
body of unfamiliar disjointed providers leaving them to juggle a system that is 
fragmented geographically and philosophically—unmanageable for people without 
transportation, phones and internet connectivity/computers and likely to send them 
back into homelessness. 
• Derail the top two performing agencies in Maine—and others—in their track record of 
achieving sustainable independence with their clients. The current client success data is 
proof that service delivery beyond housing is the key to success for these families. Client 
care prior to housing is ‘triage’—important—but does not create a path to sustainable 
productive independence. 
How will this negatively affect the already overloaded agencies who depend on this 
reimbursement to support Case Management Service delivery that is effective? 
• Second to the negative human impact—were this reinterpretation to be implemented, it 
would result in cuts to already overtaxed comprehensive case management services 
that only a few providers deliver in a way that is effective for persons experiencing 
homelessness. 
• Human beings and families experiencing homelessness will be left with a fragmented 
and geographically scattered list of providers who are not able to coordinate anything 
close to comprehensive care. 
•  The loss of revenue may cause some agencies to close or cut the only critical 
comprehensive and targeted services for homeless case management available. 
• There will not be an avenue for comprehensive goal setting and planning based on client 
needs for these families. 
In addition to outlining the critical impact and concerns, it is also worth noting that KCHC does 
not stand alone in our position.  This re-interpretation negatively impacts a number of other 
homeless service providers across the state, as well as undercutting the mission of MSHA and its 
homeless service division.  MSHA and lead agencies on mental health, such as NAMI stand 
behind this call for resolution.  A resolution to simply return and maintain a system that has been 
effective and fiscally efficient for 10 years.    
We would be grateful for the opportunity to share what we know about what works in our 
efforts to end and prevent homelessness and hope to turn this around before we see damage to 
the fragile system of forward motion that is in place in our state. 
We appreciate any support you are able to offer to clear up this matter. 
  
Respectfully and with gratitude, 
 
Stephanie Primm 
Executive Director 
 
CC: Representative Vicki Doudera, Senator Pinny Beebe Center 

 
 
 
