 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 1178, “Resolve, to Reduce Barriers to Recovery from 
Addiction by Expanding Eligibility for Targeted Case Management 
Services” 
Monday, April 10, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Sarah Calder, Senior Government Affairs 
Director at MaineHealth, and I am here to testify in support of LD 1178, “Resolve, to Reduce 
Barriers to Recovery from Addiction by Expanding Eligibility for Targeted Case Management 
Services.” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a continuum of health 
care services to communities throughout Maine and New Hampshire. As part of our vision of 
“Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest in America,” MaineHealth provides a 
range of behavioral health services throughout our footprint. These range from community based 
outpatient therapy, medication management, substance use treatment and care management to 
inpatient treatment in four community hospitals and Spring Harbor Hospital.  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare (MBH) serves as the leader of MaineHealth’s effort to address the 
substance use epidemic. Our multi-faceted approach involves prevention, education, and 
treatment across the entire MaineHealth footprint, including intensive treatment “hubs” run by 
MBH and overseen by psychiatrists, and intermediate and ongoing maintenance level treatment 
in primary and specialty care practices located in each of our local health services areas. In Fiscal 
Year 2022, we served 1,939 patients with opioid use disorder, but at a significant loss of 
$916,000 due to inadequate MaineCare reimbursement. 
Currently, Targeted Case Management is only available to MaineCare members with substance 
use disorder who are pregnant or parenting or who use substances intravenously. The legislation 
before you today expands this valuable service to all MaineCare adults seeking substance use 
disorder treatment.  
The role of case management is integral to the whole health wellness of someone experiencing 
challenges in various social determinants of health, and can improve the connection someone has 
to their health care providers and reduce the use of emergency medical and behavioral health 
services. Case management involves meeting clients to work on goals identified in their 
treatment plan, including finding and maintaining housing, applying for SNAP benefits, 
identifying and pursuing educational opportunities, and connecting with vocational supports.  
Our team is currently caring for a patient who is seeking care for his opioid use disorder – the 
severity of his disease is so significant it was affecting his ability to even feed himself. He lives 
on a fixed income and does not have access to reliable transportation, but he does not meet the 
 
current MaineCare requirements to qualify for Targeted Case Management. We are doing what 
we can – importantly, without reimbursement – to connect him with the mental and physical 
health care he needs, arrange for reliable transportation, and address his financial challenges. But 
with significant losses, and a workforce stretched thin, this is not sustainable.  
This may sound familiar to those of you returning to the Legislature as this bill was considered 
by this Committee last Session and was ultimately combined with Rep. Paul Stearns’ bill (LD 
415). While we are grateful that the components of Rep. Sterns’ bill were funded, expanding 
Targeted Case Management to all adults with substance use disorder was not.  
With a record number of overdose deaths last year, it is our sincere hope that it will finally be 
addressed this Session. 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
