TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 1879 
"An Act to Align Laws Governing Crossbow Hunting with Those 
Governing Archery Hunting" 
PRESENTED BY: Representative LANDRY of Farmington 
DATE OF HEARING: May 8, 2023 
Good morning, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife Committee. I am Tim Peabody, Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking in support of L.D. 1879. 
This bill is the final step in a multi-year effort to align crossbows with regular bows and arrows 
for hunting purposes. This process began in 2019, when the Legislature allowed the use of 
crossbows during the fall turkey hunting season and the regular archery season on deer for the 
2020, 2021, 2022 hunting seasons, and required the Department to report back in January 2022 
outlining any conflicts and recommendations to move forward. 
That bill was followed by 2020 Public Law Chapter 637, which further clariﬁed some crossbow 
laws including requirements forjunior and apprentice hunters and hunters over the age of 65 
and created a separate crossbow education course. 
Finally, Public Law 2022 Chapter 599 removed the sunset provision from the 2019 bill, 
permanently allowed the use of crossbows during the regular archery season on deer and the 
fall wild turkey season, and aligned antlerless deer permit requirements for those hunting witha 
crossbow with those for a regular bow and arrow. That law also required the department to 
determine the statutory changes necessary to remove the remaining distinctions between 
hunting with a bow and arrow and a crossbow and bring these back to this Committee in 2023. 
This is a department bill that will make several changes to the laws surrounding crossbows and 
regular bows. I will go down through the bill by section. 
Sec. 1. & 2. Provide consistency between Title 12 Chapter 220 within the jurisdiction of the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of Parks and Lands and Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife ’s statute such that a person a commits a Class E crime if the person 
discharges archery equipment within 300 feet of any picnic area, designated camping area, 
parking area, building, shelter or boat launching site or in violation of park rules or in areas 
closed to hunting by rule, law or ordinance.
Sec 3. Defines "archery equipment" to mean either a bow or crossbow, and changes references 
in the hunting laws to "bow and arrow" and "bow and arrow or crossbow" to "archery 
equipment." 
Sec 4. Adds "vertical" limbs within the definition of hand-held bow or bow. 
Sec 5. Strikes reference to recurved and compound bows within the definition of "hunting 
equipment" because archery equipment is now defined to include all types of vertical bows as 
well as crossbows. 
Sec. 6. Within the prohibited act of possession of hunting equipment on Sunday it 
Se. 7. This changes the reference of "bows and arrows" to "archery equipment" within the 
section that explains seizure of fish, wildlife and equipment and libel proceedings. 
Sec. 8. This reflects the new definition of archery equipment within the civil trespass caused bya 
projectile prohibition. 
Sec. 9, 10, 12, & 13. Make changes to references to crossbow or bow and arrow to now include 
archery equipment. This also allows a person beginning January 1, 2024, who has previously 
held a crossbow permit to be eligible to obtain an archery hunting license which allows them to 
hunt with either a crossbow or bow and arrow. 
Sec. 11. Repeals section 10953 because crossbow use will be allowed anytime bow and arrows 
are allowed for hunting. 
Sec. 14, 15, & 16. This repeals the crossbow permit requirement, fees and the crossbow specific 
hunter education course, allowing a person to hunt with a crossbow during any open hunting 
season, except the muzzle-loading only deer season, if that person holds a valid archery license. 
Sec. 17. This removes the requirement that a crossbow hunter wear hunter orange clothing 
during the open firearm season on deer. 
Sec. 18. & 20. This adds regular bows to the laws governing loaded weapons in motor vehicles 
and hunting or shooting from motor vehicles. 
Sec. 19. This section will allow the discharge of a crossbow within 100 yards of a building or 
residential dwelling without the permission of the owner and allows the discharge of a crossbow 
on a landowner's own land for any purpose, including target practice and hunting. It also 
provides that a person may not discharge an arrow or bolt from archery equipment when on 
land of another person and within 100 yards of a building or residential dwelling on that land 
without the permission of the owner of that building or residential dwelling or cause an arrow 
or bolt from archery equipment to pass across the land of another person and within 100 yards 
of a building or residential dwelling on that land without the permission of the owner of that 
building or residential dwelling.
Sec. 21-24, 26. All refer to the definition of archery equipment to have consistency throughout 
Title 12. 
Sec 25. This moves all the crossbow equipment requirements to the section of law that lists 
illegal hunting implements. 
Sec. 27. This specifies that there is a continual closed season on deer on the Cranberry Isles in 
Hancock County, except that a person may hunt deer on the Cranberry Isles with a shotgun or 
bow in accordance with applicable laws and rules. 
Sec. 29. This provides that a person may not hunt wild hares or rabbits in any manner except by 
the ordinary method of shooting with guns, archery equipment or by falconry. 
Sec. 30. This provides that a person may take suckers by the use of a hand spear, by archery 
equipment or by snagging. 
This bill makes the statutory changes that the department feels are necessary to implement the 
direction provided to us by this Committee during the 130*“ Legislature. The bill includes 
numerous provisions and touches upon many aspects of our work, including deer management, 
law enforcement, licensing and permit requirements, and safety courses. 
We feel that allowing the use of crossbows during traditional archery seasons has been very 
successful, and the changes in this bill are necessary to reduce the complexity and confusion 
surrounding crossbow laws. 
We would ask this Committee if they would consider a friendly amendment that would createa 
delayed effective date oflanuary 1, 2024. Since this bill has come out so late in the legislative 
session and the need to have some rulemaking completed to align with any new statutory 
changes from this bill, we believe it would be simpler to havean effective date in 2024. This 
would allow the department to educate the hunting public on any changes for the 2024 fall 
season. 
l would be happy to answer any high-level questions at this time, but since this bill involves so 
many of the department's programs, l will defer detailed questions to our staff at the work 
session.
