TESTIMONY FOR LD 1473 
I have lived in Auburn since 1979. When I moved here, I was told that farsighted people 
had passed laws and formed overseeing bodies to protect Lake Auburn ”forever." The 
naive environmentalist in me assumed that "forever" truly meant "forever." I barely 
understood climate change at that time, but now it is recognized everywhere as a force 
to be reckoned with, especially in water supplies. 
I have learned more about eutrophication since 1979. Eutrophication occurs when 
phosphorus, an essential nutrient for life, accumulates in a water body to the point 
where algae, that depend on phosphorus for their own lives, multiply rapidly, and cause 
an algal bloom. “Bloom” is a good name for the phenomenon because it conjures up an 
image of an explosion. You only need to type ”pictures of an algal bloom" into your 
search box to see vivid gross-out pictures of algal blooms in bodies of water of all sizes. 
Algal blooms kill ﬁsh and can kill people. 
An algal bloom happened in Lake Auburn in 2012. I knew enough about lakes by that 
time to realize that once an algal bloom had happened, it was almost impossible fora 
body of water to become healthy again, because an algal bloom starts a feedback loop. 
Phosphorus that has previously congealed and sunk to the bottom rises again. 
I remember being sick at heart in 2012. I don't clearly remember if I actually saw the 
green scum, but the mental image from seeing green water or seeing a photo of it stuck 
in my memory. I don't ever want to ”see" green scum on Lake Auburn again. 
Fortunately, the Lake Auburn water district was able to put alum in the water, and 
precipitate some phosphorus to the lake bottom. But they can't keep doing that forever. 
LD 1473 will prevent the extensive development of the Lake Auburn drainage basin that 
could happen under current state law. Lake Auburn right now is teetering between 
health and eutrophication, which almost always means death for a lake. LD 1473 is part 
of a plan that will hopefully allow Lake Auburn to avoid algae, greenness, and toxicity for 
a long, long time. 
Ben Lounsbury 
505 West Auburn Road 
Auburn, ME 04210
