Bonnie Lounsbury
Auburn
LD 1473
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1473, An Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking 
Water Sources for Public Benefit
To: Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Environment & 
Natural Resources Committee
Good afternoon.
I am Bonnie Lounsbury, writing in support of L.D. 1473. I live in Auburn.
Water has been called the oil of the 21st century- a precious and finite resource 
essential for life and economic growth. Maine’s largest communities- Portland, 
Lewiston-Auburn and Bangor-- are extraordinarily fortunate to have that oil--lakes 
that supply drinking water without the need for a prohibitively expensive filtration 
plant. 
Those water supplies are under threat from a variety of sources. One is development 
of residential structures. Development increases the amount of runoff to lakes and that
runoff contains phosphorus and nitrogen that feed algal growth. Too much 
phosphorus and nitrogen and even the cleanest drinking water source can be choked 
with algae that preclude its use as a water supply without filtration. (If algae become 
persistent and pervasive, even a filtration plant will ultimately fail).  Towns in the 
watersheds of lakes that provide drinking water without filtration must be able to 
control land uses in order to protect the drinking water supply and keep the water 
rates low.
LD 1473 addresses one barrier to that essential control. It allows towns to prohibit 
accessory dwellings on residential lots in the watershed. Towns can still zone for 
residential use if they choose to do so, but are not forced under state law to allow 
additional dwellings on those lots. Watershed land is not land necessary for 
construction of additional housing. It is land that is essential for protection of water 
supplies that keep housing affordable. 
L.D. 1473 alone will not protect our drinking water sources. Many more local actions 
are critical, actions like increasing forest cover and preventing erosion. But it is one 
step that the state can take to give towns the flexibility they need. 
I urge you to vote to pass L.D. 1473.
Thank you.
Bonnie Lounsbury
 
 

