 
 Testimony in favor of LD 1473   
An Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking Water Sources   
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources   
Senate Chair Brenner, House Chair Gramlich and Members of the Joint Standing Committee, my 
name is Kathy Shaw reading the testimony of Camille Parrish who is representing the Lake 
Auburn Watershed Protection Commission.   
The Lake Auburn Watershed Protection Commission urges you to pass this bill to protect the 
watersheds of public drinking water sources that have been granted EPA waivers from filtration 
otherwise required by the federal Clean Water Act.  Lake Auburn is one of these drinking water 
sources and supplies public water to the municipalities of Auburn, Lewiston, and part of Poland.  I 
am writing as the chair of  the  Commission which was created as a requirement of  the approval of 
the filtration waiver for Lake Auburn.  Our directive is to protect and control the Lake Auburn 
watershed and to prevent pollution from entering the lake which would degrade its water quality 
and threaten the filtration waiver.  The Commission develops and implements a watershed 
management plan, in conjunction with outside experts, to achieve these goals.  We take our 
charge seriously since it affects the availability and affordability of public water for our citizens. 
LD 1473 is urgently needed to minimize the detrimental effects of additional development on Lake 
Auburn’s water quality, and to allow for continued control of its watershed. Several recent studies 
solicited by the city of Auburn and the Commission have concluded that further development, 
specifically within the Auburn portion of the Lake Auburn watershed, would have negative impacts 
on Lake Auburn’s water quality and is not recommended.   In addition, conserving land and/or 
limiting development within upstream towns in the watershed is advised, namely in Turner, Minot, 
Buckfield, and Hebron. As you know, development increases sediment runoff, removal of 
trees/vegetation, and harmful amounts of phosphorus that flow into the local waters through septic 
systems. These factors lead to increased algal growth and decreased clarity and taste within the 
water supply, threatening the filtration waiver and the recreational/aesthetic qualities of the lake 
and adjacent watershed.  As a result, LD 1473’s passing is critical in our efforts to protect and 
control Lake Auburn’s watershed.  
Maintaining the filtration waiver is a high priority because it affords lower operation and 
maintenance costs.  The Lake Auburn Watershed Protection Commission has taken steps over the 
years to maintain the waiver by purchasing land and conservation easements, overseeing forestry 
practices, educating citizens, and reviewing land use changes in the watershed.  These efforts, 
among others, have been successful so far, but the filtration waiver and affordable water rates for 
homeowners, city services, and businesses are at risk from future development under LD 2003.  
Housing is a priority within the communities of the Lake Auburn watershed, however there is ample 
land outside of the watershed in which development of affordable housing can be constructed.  
Thus, passage of LD 1473 does not pose a risk to the intention of LD 2003 (to provide additional 
housing) within these watershed communities.  Therefore, in order to maintain the filtration waiver 
 
 and affordable rates the Commission urges you to pass LD 1473. 
 Please vote OughtTo Pass on LD 1473 “An Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking Water 
Sources”  Thank you for your time and service to our communities and to the State of Maine.  
