May ‘l, 2023 
Dear Members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee: ~ 
Thank you for being on this important committee representing 
The State of Maine. Your hard work is appreciated. 
l am a resident of Auburn, Maine and I am here to support LD 
1473. We, in the Lewiston —Auburn cities are at risk of loosing our 
clean, affordable drinking water. LD 1473 will protect our public 
drinking water supply in keeping it clean and affordable. 
A couple of questions come to mind when thinking about 
affordable clean drinking water— 
ls access to clean and affordable drinking water a basic human 
right? 
Should we then be responsible for protecting our natural sources 
that supply public drinking water?_ 
In Auburn, we have situations where watershed areas have been 
rearranged. What? How does that happen? 
A watershed is an area of land that drains into a particular body 
of water, such as a stream, river, pond or lake. A watershed is 
not determined by political boundaries, but instead is shaped by 
natures’s hills and valleys. 
It is surprising, or maybe not, that we have elected city officials 
who are choosing where a watershed exists despite scientific 
geologic and hydrologic data proving othenlvise. Shouldn’t 
watershed areas be protected? Of course, one might think.
Why is the watershed of Lake Auburn a contentious issue, one 
might wonder. The answer is one of convolution. 
Lewiston and Auburn exist on approximately 100 square miles. 
Our public drinking water supply comes from Lake Auburn. The 
twin cities have diligently maintained the levels of clean public 
drinking water. 
The convolution aspect has gradually grown when the watershed 
boundaries were rearranged, and LD 2003 comes along to 
promote housing affordability opportunities. What does one bill 
have to do with the other. A small number of elected city 
government officials in Auburn have determined that affordable 
housing needs to happen in the watershed. 
The crux of the matter is a small handful of people who will 
financially benefit from developing the watershed area of Lake 
Auburn have purposely convoluted is a way to compromise our 
clean and affordable drinking water because they just don’t care. 
Building on the watershed, of all places, will compromise our 
affordable and clean drinking water. Developing this area will 
inevitably lead to the need to build a 45 million dollar water 
filtration system on the back of citizens in Lewiston and Auburn. 
Without the support of LD 1473 we will no longer have affordable 
drinking water.‘ 
Again, thank you for your hard work in this legislative session. 
Sincer " 
yours, 
Joan uckley Wenzel 
Au’burn, Maine‘ 
joanwenzel5@gmail.com
