Testimony in Favor of LD 1473 
An Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking Water Sources 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
 
Dear Senate Chair Brenner, House Chair Gramlich and Members of the Joint Standing Committee,  
 
My name is Joshua Nagine. I am a public water ratepayer residing in Lewiston who depends on a 
watershed connected to a body on water that currently enjoys a waiver from filtration granted by the 
EPA.  I also sit on the planning board in Lewiston, hold a position on the board at the Lewiston Farmers 
Market Association, Downtown Lewiston Association (an economic development advocacy group 
focused on downtown businesses, residents and property owners) and am the current Board President 
of Androscoggin Land Trust, an accredited land trust that holds and monitors conservation easements in 
the Lake Auburn watershed for public benefit by protecting portions of the 15 square miles of 
watershed that sits in five different communities, and is the source of drinking water for three 
municipalities.    
 
The science behind managing and maintaining the EPA waiver from filtration can sometimes be 
confusing and complex, especially for laypersons with no background in water quality monitoring and 
watershed management. Encroachment, surface water runoff, canopy cover, impacts of specific septic 
systems, anthropogenic climate change, and many other factors influence predictions of what can 
happen to water quality when changes occur in our watersheds. What isn’t hard to predict is that 
development within environmentally sensitive watersheds threatens to carry an impact which affects 
water quality in many communities. Protecting the quality and affordability of our drinking water is 
paramount to protecting the quality of life and affordability of our communities.   
 
As a planning board member, I understand and value LD 2003 and appreciate the options that are aimed 
at removing barriers to creating more housing, specifically more affordable housing. I would point out 
that the relatively small footprints and locations of the lands that fall into the watersheds of bodies of 
water that are currently exempt from filtration as a drinking water source in Maine are minuscule in 
relation to the amount of developable lands in the State, that they are not likely to produce any 
measurable results LD 2003 was written to address, particularly affordable housing, and that fixed costs 
such as the management of public water supply are passed on to consumers. This affects the cost of 
living of individuals as well as the operating budgets of businesses, local food producers and 
municipalities that rely on public water. In short, affordable water is part of affordable housing, and the 
development impacts in a limited area could affect the affordability of housing in entire communities.  
 
Maine’s management of the State’s natural resources for public benefit have long been the envy of 
others, creating a uniquely Maine tradition where surface water provides a source of drinking water for 
so almost half of the State’s residents. Out of the handful of bodies of water in the entire country that 
currently enjoy a waiver from filtration, a quarter of them are found in Maine and provide over a third of 
public water utility customers with affordable, safe, clean drinking water.  For these reasons and more, I 
strongly urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1473 when the vote is taken to Protect Certain 
Unfiltered Drinking Water Sources.  
