Monday, May l, 2023 
To: Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Environment & Natural Resources 
Committee 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1473, An Act to Protect Certain Unﬁltered Drinking Water 
Sources 
My name is Julia Harper and I live in Lewiston. l am speaking as a mom and concerned taxpayer to urge 
you to vote “ought to pass” on LDI473. 
l’m an advocate for affordable water AND affordable housing. 
l’m a member-owner of Raise-Op Housing Cooperative, an affordable housing organization owned and 
managed by its residents. Our members are painfully aware of the shortage of affordable homes, and thus 
as part of our mission, take part in affordable housing advocacy. We advocated for LD2003 last year, and 
were glad to see it pass. We also democratically manage our apartment buildings together, and observe 
how the cost of public water impacts the affordability ofour homes, especially for our low-income 
residents. 
Last year, l got involved when it became clear that the quality and aﬂordability of our drinking water was 
at risk. The most urgent risk was proposed ordinance changes within the boundaries of Lake Auburn’s 
sensitive watershed that favored additional development, which would be exacerbated by LD2003. Right 
now, our water rates are some of the lowest in the state. As a result of development in the watershed, 
however, water rates for 40,000+ people, including my neighbors on low and ﬁxed incomes, could more 
than double, and all taxpayers in our cities would see the mill rate rise to pay for a ﬁltration plant as the 
cities are one of the largest water users. 
There are less than 40 remaining drinking water sources left in the country that are clean enough to 
maintain ﬁltration waivers, and nearly one quarter of these are in Maine. 
A few weeks ago, the United Nations Secretary General said, “humanity ’s survival will depend on 
how people manage water” . The U.N. had released a report showing that nearly half the world’s 
people will suffer severe water stress by 2023. 
Of Maine’s 9 unﬁltered drinking water sources that this legislation aims to protect, Lake Auburn may be 
the most currently at risk, however it is clearly a ‘canary in a coal mine’ . All signs — including our 
changing climate — point to the fact that someday all these water sources will face a similar fate. 
As an affordable housing advocate, l also want to address the claim that LDI473 will limit affordable 
housing. This bill addresses limited ecologically sensitive areas, and does little to limit the "affordable" 
housing provisions in LD2003. The primary way that LD2003 directly supports the creation of affordable 
housing is the "density bonus" for affordable housing projects in areas where a town has already zoned for 
multi-unit housing -- in those limited areas, developers can exceed the density limit for housing projects 
1of2
that meet speciﬁc "affordability" criteria. In areas where multi-unit housing is NOT already allowed, 
however, there is nothing in LD2003 requiring the additional housing it allows to be ‘affordable ’ OR for it 
to be used as a primary residence. Therefore, much of the new development allowed in these watersheds 
by LD2003 could end up, for example, as short term rentals utilized by folks who already have plenty of 
housing options. Housing can be built in many places - and I feel strongly that housing guaranteed to be 
affordable SHOULD be built in many places throughout the state — however, watershed land that 
maintains drinking water quality and affordability is ﬁxed and extremely threatened by housing 
development. 
Passing LD1473 is the right thing to do NOW for thousands of taxpayers and Maine’s unique and 
precious drinking water. Together, let’s ensure that additional housing does not come at the cost of 
ﬁnite, affordable drinking water. 
I urge you to vote “Out to Pass” on LD1473. Thank you. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Julia Harper 
75 Maple Street 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
2of2
