Testimony in favor of LD 1473  
An Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking Water Sources 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Senate Chair Brenner, House Chair Gramlich and Members of the Joint Standing Committee, my name 
is Neria Douglass of Auburn.  
 
I’m here today to urge you to pass LD 1473, An Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking Water 
Sources. Water sustains life. We need to protect these watersheds.  The EPA agrees that water in nine 
Maine municipalities meets requirements of the federal Safe Drinking Water Act, and is pure without 
high filtration costs. For over 100 years, Lake Auburn has been the drinking water for Lewiston and 
Auburn, and now part of Poland. Since 1991 it has been annually exempted from filtration.  
 
The bill aims to help maintain these waivers with no negative effect on our goals of creating affordable 
housing. It is important to our communities. Affordable water rates are part of affordable housing. The 
cost of filtration will double or triple our water rates: residents, schools, businesses, hospitals, fire 
protection. That must be true in the other six communities with unfiltered drinking water: Portland, 
Raymond, Casco, Sebago, Frye Island, Bangor, Damariscotta, Presque Isle, Bar Harbor, and Mount 
Desert. 
 
We have worked hard to protect Lake Auburn. In 1993, over thirty years ago, the Lake Auburn Water 
Protection Commission (LAWPC) was created by Auburn and Lewiston. It purchased as much land as it 
could and acquired conservation easements and life estates in the watershed.  Camps were removed and 
returned to woodland. Two miles of Whitman Spring Road on the lakeshore were closed to motorized 
vehicles and gated for a nature trail. Boat launches on the western shore were closed. Strict septic 
system requirements limited development. Citizen education and other measures were taken. 
 
However, the unfiltered drinking water of Lake Auburn is under threat. Warming climate and fewer 
months of ice cover are threats.  Algae blooms have already occurred requiring alum treatment. Large 
tracts of open land in our watershed have been purchased by developers. Development will add 
phosphorus and other contaminates. Housing near Lake Auburn will not  be affordable. One developer 
plans to build over 1,000 housing units at market rates in the watershed extremely close to the southern 
shore. That large area is next to the capped former Auburn Dump containing toxic waste. So far the 
dump has been undisturbed by human activity, but that will change with nearby buildings. We must take 
action to protect our drinking water. This bill is part of that effort. 
 
My home is in the watershed and has a well.  We have woodland that we might be able to further 
develop without passage of this bill. We choose to protect our natural resources.  We support pure, 
affordable water.  Please help us keep our water rates affordable. Passing this bill will not diminish our 
goals of creating more affordable housing. In fact, it works to keep living affordable. Water is as 
important as shelter. I urge you to pass LD 1473.  
 
Please vote OughtTo Pass on LD 1473 “An Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking Water Sources” 
Thank you for your time and service to our communities and to the State of Maine. 
