ST A T E  O F  MA I N E
  
GO V E R N O R ’S OF F I C E  O F  PO L I C Y  IN N O V A T I O N  A N D  T H E  FU T U R E  
181  ST A T E  HO U S E  ST A T I O N  
AU G U S T A , MA I N E  
0 4333 -0 181  
  
Testimony Neither For, Nor Again st 
L.D. 1473, An Act to Protect Certa in Unfiltered Drinking Wa ter Sources  
 
May 01 , 2023  
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and distinguished members of the Joint 
Select Committee on Envi ronment and Nat ural Resources , my name is Ryan Fecteau  
and I am the Senior Advisor on Community Development and Strategic Init iatives in the 
Governo r’s Office o f Policy Innovation and the Future. I am here today to offer 
testimony neither for, nor against  L.D. 1473, An Ac t to Protect Ce rtain Unfiltered 
Drinking Water Sources.  
 
There are nine drinking water sources in Maine with waivers from filtration . There are 
fifty fil tration w aivers  in total nationwide . This bill proposes to exempt lot s located 
within watersheds that have these filtration waivers fro m some of the provisions  of law 
related to zoning . These pr ovisions were part of legislation , now kno wn commonl y as 
L.D. 2003,  passed by bipartisan majorities in both chambers during th e 130th 
Legislature. L.D 1473 seeks to ex empt these lots from the following requirements:  
 
• Density  Bonus : A density  bonus of 2.5x t he base density for affordable housing 
projects which must be in  growth areas according to a town ’s comprehensive 
plan , multi -family housin g must already by allowed by  the town, and th ere must 
be access to public sewer  and public wat er. It’s not clear how many lots within 
these watersheds meet such requirements, but it ’s likely relatively few . 
• Unit Increase : An allowance of up to 2 -units of housing on  empty  lots outside 
of growth areas  (contained in a single structure) . An allowance of up to 4-units of 
housing on empty lots within growth areas or where public sewer /public w ater 
exists  (contai ned in a single structure ). It’s likely most emp ty lots zoned for 
residential use in these  watersheds would qualify for the up to 2 -units , but not 
the up to 4 -units . 
• Accessory Dwelling Units : An allowance for accessory  dwellin g units (ADUs) 
to be added on lots where single -family home s already  exist . The allowance 
removes most requirements that would other wise be applied  to constructing a 
new s tructure . Lots with single -family homes within these watersheds would be 
granted the al lowance of an ADU . 
 
There are two notable  watersheds that would be im pacted by the passage of this law: the 
water shed around Lake Auburn and the watershed around Seb ago Lake. It appears th is 
bill exists due to real concern s about the former, Lake Auburn , and the future of its 
filtration waiver . As the committee knows, a filtration system would cost millions . 
Residents and leaders served by water from Lake Auburn are concerned that activity  
around the lake could impact its quality and thus future approval of its filtration waiver.  
 
ST A T E  O F  MA I N E
  
GO V E R N O R ’S OF F I C E  O F  PO L I C Y  IN N O V A T I O N  A N D  T H E  FU T U R E  
181  ST A T E  HO U S E  ST A T I O N  
AU G U S T A , MA I N E  
0 4333 -0 181  
  
The Drinking Water Program  (DWP) at the Maine Center for D isease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) oversees the filtration waivers and monitors the quality of the water 
source. They have provided a letter with additional background which I would 
encourage the committee to consi der. 
 
It’s imp ortant to note that the activities exempt ed by th is bill could still occur if 
approved by local authorities . In other words, the bill does not prohibit residential 
development  from occurrin g within the watershed b oundaries . It seems a prov ision of 
federal law is the impetus for L.D. 1473. The federal  law states  in part , “The public water 
system must demonstrate through ownership and/or written agreements with 
landowners within the watershed that it can control all human activities which 
may have an adverse impact on the microbiological quality of the source 
water .” It could  be argued  that the compulsory nature of L.D. 2003 runs up against the 
idea of “control [ling] all human act ivities ” described by federal law . It’s not clear this is 
the case , however . Local jurisdictions do retain control over several  requirements as 
outlined in L.D. 2003 including water and wastewater requirements, design standards, 
and dimensional requirements such as  setbacks , and more . Whether this is enoug h 
control to meet the spirit of the federal law is murky . Howev er, given the cost of a 
filtration system and the imp ortance of the drinking  water  source, it makes sense that 
major concerns exist in Lewiston/Au burn regarding the implication s of L.D. 2003 .  
 
What is clear is that residential  development itself is not an activity that  causes 
disapproval of filtration waiver s. Residential development has occurred  with in 
watersheds where filtration waivers exist. Of course, overtime , residential activities  from 
construction to da y-to-day activ ities like gardening could impact the water source ’s 
quality . We also know the need for housing is significant in areas like Lewiston/Auburn 
and the Sebago region . This bill could impact the availability of housing in areas where 
filtration waivers  have been granted . 
 
Given the complex nature of this proposal, we offer a pos ition neither for, nor against  
L.D. 1473. The committee coul d consider a few approaches regarding this bill including 
an amendment to focus on the Lake Auburn watershed which appears to be the driving 
force behind the bill. Whichever way  the committee would lik e to proceed, we are happ y 
to be a r esource and can answer any questions you might have. Tha nk you.  
 
