Tes$mony in Favor of L.D. 1473 An Act to Protect Certain Unﬁltered Drinking Water Sources  Joint Standing CommiFee on Environment and Natural Resources  My name is Sarah Strong.  I am a re$red college teacher, living in Auburn, Maine.  I want to urge Senate Chair Brenner, House Chair Gramlich and Members of the Joint Standing CommiFee to pass L.D. 1473, an Act to Protect Certain Unﬁltered Drinking Water Sources in Maine.  My present home is in Auburn within the watershed overlay of Lake Auburn, one of the several bodies of water in Maine with a waiver of ﬁltra$on.  Before moving here, I lived for over twenty years in Lewiston, one of the two other municipali$es that, in addi$on to Auburn, rely on Lake Auburn as their source for municipal drinking water.  As a ratepayer for the City of Lewiston’s water, I learned to appreciate the water’s aﬀordability and its reliably high quality.  Today excessive development around and upstream of the lake threatens the quality of the water and the loss of the ﬁltra$on waiver.  That loss would have a harsh impact, most likely causing the cost of water to more than double for those on city water.  I don’t want that to happen to my former neighbors, many of whom are on ﬁxed income, and to the ratepayers in Auburn and Poland.  Our communi$es have the right to aﬀordable drinking water.  Living close to Lake Auburn now, I am unfortunately not on municipal water and need to rely on a well.  But I am able to see the lake oYen, in all seasons.  It is beau$ful.  However, in the past few years I’ve stood on the lake’s shore in August and seen $ny balls of blue-green algae suspended in the water.  Winter aYer winter I’ve observed the ever-shorter periods of the protec$ve ice cover, and this spring aYer ice-out noted a greener cast to the water than the year before.    In her talk about Lake Auburn at the Great Falls Forum in March of 2019, Holly Ewing, Bates College Professor of Environmental Studies, a scien$st who with her students has carried out a sustained study of the lake since 2008, pointed out the dangers posed to water purity by increasing levels of phosphorus and she emphasized the importance of the watershed in controlling those levels.  “We’ve got to do something about the watershed,” she warned, “we have to really do something.”    L.D. 1473 will do something for the Lake Auburn watershed and for the watersheds of the other bodies of water with ﬁlter waivers in Maine.  It is in step with the United Na$ons call for global water equity made last month in New York.  It is important for this bill to go forward and pass into legisla$on.     
Sarah Strong
auburn
LD 1473
Testimony in Favor of L.D. 1473
An Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking Water Sources
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources
My name is Sarah Strong.  I am a retired college teacher, living in Auburn, Maine.  I 
want to urge Senate Chair Brenner, House Chair Gramlich and Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee to pass L.D. 1473, an Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking 
Water Sources in Maine.
My present home is in Auburn within the watershed overlay of Lake Auburn, one of 
the several bodies of water in Maine with a waiver of filtration.  Before moving here, 
I lived for over twenty years in Lewiston, one of the two other municipalities that, in 
addition to Auburn, rely on Lake Auburn as their source for municipal drinking water.
As a ratepayer for the City of Lewiston’s water, I learned to appreciate the water’s 
affordability and its reliably high quality.  Today excessive development around and 
upstream of the lake threatens the quality of the water and the loss of the filtration 
waiver.  That loss would have a harsh impact, most likely causing the cost of water to 
more than double for those on city water.  I don’t want that to happen to my former 
neighbors, many of whom are on fixed income, and to the ratepayers in Auburn and 
Poland.  Our communities have the right to affordable drinking water.
Living close to Lake Auburn now, I am unfortunately not on municipal water and 
need to rely on a well.  But I am able to see the lake often, in all seasons.  It is 
beautiful.  However, in the past few years I’ve stood on the lake’s shore in August 
and seen tiny balls of blue-green algae suspended in the water.  Winter after winter 
I’ve observed the ever-shorter periods of the protective ice cover, and this spring after
ice-out noted a greener cast to the water than the year before.  
In her talk about Lake Auburn at the Great Falls Forum in March of 2019, Holly 
Ewing, Bates College Professor of Environmental Studies, a scientist who with her 
students has carried out a sustained study of the lake since 2008, pointed out the 
dangers posed to water purity by increasing levels of phosphorus and she emphasized 
the importance of the watershed in controlling those levels.  “We’ve got to do 
something about the watershed,” she warned, “we have to really do something.”  
L.D. 1473 will do something for the Lake Auburn watershed and for the watersheds 
of the other bodies of water with filter waivers in Maine.  It is in step with the United 
Nations call for global water equity made last month in New York.  It is important for
this bill to go forward and pass into legislation.  

