’ 
=5-'s'<:=..:." s:~'~§=i:1" ===- 
'1=‘=2=.=i=5%55E=E=E=E!=E'E5". 
gsil \_., . 
\.__.. 
Solutions for ca 
Toxic-Free Tomorrow 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
In Support of LD 1473 “An Act to Protect Certain Unﬁltered Drinking Water Sources” 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
May l, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee. My name is Sarah Woodbury. I am the director of advocacy for Defend Our Health. 
Defend Our Health’s mission is to make sure that everyone has equal access to safe food and 
drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-free and climate friendly. I am here to 
testify in support of LD 1473 “An Act to Protect Certain Unﬁltered Drinking Water Sources”. 
LD 1473 would exempt lakes like Lake Auburn and other lakes with ﬁltration waivers from the 
additional development requirements that were passed last session under LD 2003, the affordable 
housing act. This would help protect areas of these lakes from develpment that may contaminate the 
sensitive water supplies. While we are fully in support of making housing more affordable for all 
Mainers, we do need to make sure that we are taking into account the effects that high density 
housing may have on some of our most delicate drinking water systems. The water quality of these 
sources and their current ﬁltration waivers are threatened by a law allowing increased state-wide 
development without consideration of the effect on these watersheds. 
Very few water supplies are granted waivers of ﬁltration by the Environmental Protection Agency. In 
fact, only 40 water supplies have been granted this waiver and, due our abundant and pristine 
drinking water sources, Maine has been granted 9 out of the 40 waivers. These ﬁltration waivers 
prevent local taxpayers from bearing the costs of extremely expensive water ﬁltration systems and 
helps keep the rates low for the communities that have these ﬁltration waivers. In fact, communities 
with these ﬁltration waivers have some of the lowest rates in the state. A loss of this waiver would 
cause the rates for those communities to more than double. 
The impacts of climate change along with the current levels of runoff from current development may 
lead to the loss of the ﬁltration waiver down the road but, exempting these communities from 
additional development now will give the communities more time to plan for an intentional transition 
and save taxpayers money. We must ensure that we protect the safety and affordability of these water 
sources for as long as possible. 
Access to safe drinking water is a basic human right. We must make sure that these unique drinking 
water sources are protected for as long as possible. Limiting development along the shorelines of 
these communities with waivers of ﬁltration will help protect vital drinking water sources. Therefore, 
Defend urges the committee to unanimously vote “ought to pass” on Ld 1473, 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 I (207) 6996795 I info@defendourhealth.org I defendourhealthnrg
