Testimony in SUPPORT of: 
LD 1473, An Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking Water Sources 
Submitted to the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
May 7, 2023 
Good afternoon, Chair Brenner, Chair Gramlich, and Distinguished Members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear 
before you today in support of LD 1473. My name is Susan Gallo, and I am the Executive 
Director of Maine Lakes. Our membership organization includes more than 6,000 
supporters and volunteers as well as over 80 Lake Associations. We are dedicated to our 
mission of promoting, protecting, and enhancing lake water quality and habitat, and of 
preserving the ecological, economic, recreational, and aesthetic benefits of Maine's lakes 
for all Maine people. 
Development in the shoreland zone around Maine's lakes, rivers and streams has serious 
consequences for lake health. In a natural, undeveloped watershed, rainwater would first 
be intercepted by many layers of vegetation. The rain getting to the forest floor would then 
be infiltrated into the ground, which would be uneven, with loose, absorptive soils. Very 
little rain would have the chance to erode soil and carry phosphorus into the lake. 
Phosphorus is the key nutrient that feeds excess algae growth and degrades water quality 
and wildlife habitat. 
Maine Lakes’ work focuses on outreach and actions that make developed land, where we 
have built roads, parking areas, roofs, and structures, act like undeveloped land. We try to 
"slow the flow" of rain over land in the shoreland zone, encouraging more vegetation along 
the shoreline and “best management practices" such as infiltration trenches and rain 
gardens that serve to soak up rainwater and keep it out ofthe lake. But even the best 
managed developed land does not have the same protective value as undeveloped land.
While we agree that Maine is in a housing crisis, and that we need to come up with 
innovative solutions to expand access to and increase the sheer volume of housing, we 
believe we must do so in a way that maintains the quality of Maine's waterbodies, 
especially those that are drinking water sources currently not required to have filtration 
systems. 
Even with our strong shoreland zoning standards in place, adding accessory or other 
dwelling units onto existing structures in the shoreland zone will have consequences for 
lake health. Any time we develop property, even when we do it as carefully as possible, we 
inevitably lose vegetation, compact soils, and add impervious surfaces to the landscape. 
We increase the amount of rainwater that will be channeled, increasing the speed of flow 
and eroding soils, ultimately bringing more unwanted phosphorus into the lake. 
We are concerned that adding to existing houses on lots in the shoreland zone pushes 
past the protective measures that existing shoreland protections provide, and that they will 
pose lake health risks to all Maine lakes. Ultimately, we would like to see an analysis of th 
adequacy of our existing shoreland zoning rules in light of this expanded development. 
But for now, we enthusiastically support LD 1473 as a way to protect lakes that are 
drinking water suppliers and that currently have water treatment waivers. 
Thank you for voting to support this important water protection bill.
2
