May 1, 2023 
To: Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Environment & Natural 
Resources Committee,  
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1473, An Act to Protect Certain Unfiltered Drinking Water 
Sources  
My name is Toby Haber-Giasson and I live in Auburn.  
I am writing as a concerned citizen to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 1473. 
In 2019, I wrote an article about the work of the Lake Auburn Watershed Protection Commission 
(LAWPC) for a local magazine. That’s how I learned about Auburn Water District’s unique distinction 
as one of a handful of community water systems to qualify for a waiver from water filtration. 
My research leads me to urge you to support continued compliance from both an environmental and 
economic standpoint: 
• The filtration waiver requires diligence to comply with stringent quality criteria, through water 
treatment and watershed protection, in order to meet Maine’s drinking water standards.  
•  
• The filtration waiver keeps us taxpayers from having to shoulder the costs of an expensive 
water filtration plant. According to the EPA information, filtration would be 30-40 times more 
expensive than current preventive measures. Construction cost has been estimated at $35-
45 million, plus annual operational maintenance of $1-2million.  
•  
• Thanks to the filtration waiver, Auburn Water District's rates are among the lowest in the 
state - 11th out of 118 water districts, according to Maine PUC’s Comparative Water Rates 
table for 2022.  
•  
• If a community water system loses its waiver, their water ratepayers will likely see rates 
increase more than 50%. 
•  
• All rate payers would see tax bills rise. That means residential customers like me, and also 
businesses like our hospitals and manufacturing facilities. These high utility costs could 
discourage families and businesses from living and doing business in Lewiston/Auburn, the 
state’s second largest population center. 
It makes sense from both an environmental and economic standpoint to do whatever we can to 
protect unfiltered water sources. It’s far wiser to keep the water clean in the first place than to try to 
clean it up after we’ve ruined it. 
Respectfully submitted,  
 Toby Haber-Giasson 
 Auburn, Maine 
 
 
