Testimony in Opposition to LD 109 “An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery
Residences”
January 29, 2023
Dear Senator Bee-Bee Center, Representative
Salisbury
,
and honorable members of the Joint
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,
My name is Adrienne Horne, I am a resident of Appleton, and I am sharing my testimony in
opposition to LD 109. Recovery housing is more critical than ever as overdose deaths continue
to increase in Maine. And in the middle of a housing crisis impacting most Maine residents, we
must ensure recovery housing is accessible to our most vulnerable residents.
As a Maine resident for most of my life, I am familiar with how difficult it is to find affordable
housing anywhere right now. And as someone with many close friends currently in recovery, I
know that stable housing and supportive community are two key elements to continued
recovery.
While LD 109 mentions improving safety for individuals living in recovery, it fails to take into
consideration the real danger residents will face of losing their homes if this bill is passed and
recovery houses across Maine are forced to close. LD 109 would threaten housing only recently
secured through LD 353 in the 129th Session. LD 353 was unanimously passed with testimony
and decisions from the Assistant State Fire Marshal and the Maine State Attorney General’s
Office who found that not enforcing sprinkler rules would be a reasonable accommodation, and
failing this would likely violate the Fair-Housing and the Americans with Disabilities Act. We
must protect fair housing for our Maine residents in recovery.
Thank you for the work you have done and are doing to ensure public safety in our state. Fair
and accessible housing ensures safety not just for residents but for our entire communities. I
ask you to please join me in opposition of LD 109 “An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals
Living in Recovery Residences” to protect our Maine residents in recovery.
Sincerely,
Adrienne Horne
adriennehorne@protonmail.com
Adrienne Horne
Appleton
LD 109
Testimony in Opposition to LD 109 “An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living
in Recovery Residences”
January 29, 2023
Dear Senator Bee-Bee Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,
My name is Adrienne Horne, I am a resident of Appleton, and I am sharing my 
testimony in opposition to LD 109. Recovery housing is more critical than ever as 
overdose deaths continue to increase in Maine. And in the middle of a housing crisis 
impacting most Maine residents, we must ensure recovery housing is accessible to our
most vulnerable residents.
As a Maine resident for most of my life, I am familiar with how difficult it is to find 
affordable housing anywhere right now. And as someone with many close friends 
currently in recovery, I know that stable housing and supportive community are two 
key elements to continued recovery. 
While LD 109 mentions improving safety for individuals living in recovery, it fails to 
take into consideration the real danger residents will face of losing their homes if this 
bill is passed and recovery houses across Maine are forced to close. LD 109 would 
threaten housing only recently secured through LD 353 in the 129th Session. LD 353 
was unanimously passed with testimony and decisions from the Assistant State Fire 
Marshal and the Maine State Attorney General’s Office who found that not enforcing 
sprinkler rules would be a reasonable accommodation, and failing this would likely 
violate the Fair-Housing and the Americans with Disabilities Act. We must protect 
fair housing for our Maine residents in recovery.
Thank you for the work you have done and are doing to ensure public safety in our state. Fair 
and accessible housing ensures safety not just for residents but for our entire communities. I 
ask you to please join me in opposition of LD 109 “An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals 
Living in Recovery Residences” to protect our Maine residents in recovery.
Sincerely,
Adrienne Horne
adriennehorne@protonmail.com
