76 Main Street, Livermore Falls ME 04254 ▪ Office: 207.320.3305 ▪ Fax: 207.645.2372
www.lifelineforme.org/recoveryDear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Amanda Ricci. I am a Licensed Alcohol and Drug Counselor and certified crisis 
service provider and I own a mental health and substance use disorder agency in Livermore 
Falls. I am a nationally certified firefighter, fire instructor, and EMT, and for more than a decade 
held positions with the American Red Cross of Northern New England. Additionally, I have also 
started a non-profit organization and while I hope this isn’t true, LD 109 seems to be a classic 
not-in-my-backyard effort, directly related to our efforts to open the first recovery residence in 
Franklin County.
As part of the process to open the house, I was asked to present to the Farmington Board of 
Selectman regarding our plans after submitting an ARPA application to help support the project. 
At that meeting, I was able to address many questions about the structure of recovery residences, 
shared with them that our ARPA application was (and remains) tabled and that I was going to 
have to regroup to create a new funding plan for the project.
In December of 2022, the organization was able to identify a new option and signed a lease 
agreement on a 3-bedroom, 1-bathroom house, which will house 6 men (2 per bedroom), with 
the hopes of opening a few weeks later. I checked in with the Farmington Code Enforcement 
Officer to notify him that we were opening. At that time, he asked me to submit applications to 
the zoning board and the planning board, as some of the people who served on these boards held 
the opinion that the recovery residence would be classified as a group home.
On January 11th, 2023, I appeared before the zoning board. At the meeting, I was asked 
questions that reiterated to me that many on the board did not understand what a recovery 
residence was, the protections that recovery residences have under federal law, or what the value 
of a recovery residence is.
Ultimately, the zoning board tabled my application, stating they would like guidance from the 
town’s attorney on this matter, without a date to return for further discussion. The individuals 
involved in the many conversations I have had throughout the community and in these positions 
of power likely have the best interests for the safety of individuals at heart, but also may be 
allowing their personal opinions about substance use disorder to cloud their judgment. 
Repealing LD 353 feels punitive and will stunt the growth of this much-needed service both in 
rural Franklin County where it is desperately needed, and has a long-reaching impact throughout 
the entire state of Maine for both homes already operating and those that could open in the 
future.
I am asking that your committee vote ought not to pass on LD 109. 
Thank you for your time. I am happy to answer any questions. 
Sincerely, Amanda Ricci
