Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and esteemed members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee,
I am writing today to express my opposition for LD 109, “An Act to Improve Safety for
Individuals Living in Recovery Residences” I understand the need for safety in recovery 
residences and I believe the sponsors’ intentions were good. The bill, however, has the 
potential for catastrophic consequences in my own community, in my district and even on my 
block.
As I understand it, the bill would effectively close most, if not all, of the recovery residences in 
Bangor and force several folks in recovery onto the street. Many of our recovery residences 
here are designed to help folks pursuing recovery leaving the carceral system. The support of 
these recovery residences is absolutely critical. We have a less than 1% vacancy rate in Bangor 
so people with inconsistent rental records, felonies and/or no credit history don't have a 
chance of finding a new apartment should recovery houses close. Recovery residences provide 
people with support systems critical to recovery and re-entry. Even if all current residents could 
find an apartment they would be without the support of a house manager, workforce 
navigation, grants for work clothes and laptops and regular recovery support meetings. 
This is deeply personal to me. The house next door to me is one of those recovery houses. 
Fresh Start Sober Living has rapidly become one of the more important organizations helping 
folks with transitional, recovery supported homes in Bangor. I cannot imagine what it would be 
like for these folks to lose the loving and supportive home that they have now. They are my 
neighbors. They are my friends. They are the people who saw me struggle to shovel out my 
driveway during my first winter on my own in a new house and woke up extra early to shovel 
my driveway before I left for work because they wanted to help out a neighbor. They're the 
folks who always say hello and never fail to have a kind word to spare. They are a beloved and 
valuable part of our community and it would be devastating to see them lose their home.
I am not so naive as to think that all recovery residences are like the ones I know and I won’t 
deny there are bad actors in the field. I won’t deny that something has to be done to hold those 
bad actors accountable. I do not believe that this is the bill to do that, however. I encourage this 
committee to find a way to help without harming, to support the people doing the good work 
while holding those exploiting the system accountable. Thank you for your time and hard work 
and I hope you will vote ought not to pass.
