Submitted Written Testimony
:
Testimony in Opposition to LD 109 “An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery
Residences”
January 30, 2023
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Doudera, and honorable members of the Joint
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,
My name is Astara Zuorski, I am a resident of Rockport, and I am sharing my testimony in
opposition to LD 109. Recovery housing is more critical than ever as overdose deaths continue
to increase in Maine. And in the middle of a housing crisis impacting most Maine residents, we
must ensure recovery housing is accessible to our most vulnerable residents.
As a Maine resident and a former behavior specialist teacher for some of our most marginalized
local citizens, I am very familiar with how incredibly difficult it is to find affordable housing and
intensive recovery support in Maine. And as a recovering addict myself, I know that stable
housing, a supportive community, and spaces dedicated to keep recovering addicts safe and
protected are three components that allow for effective recovery (and therefore reduce the
number of drug-related deaths in Maine).
While LD 109 mentions improving safety for individuals living in recovery residences, LD 109
repeals a fundamental law for MARR-certified recovery residences (LD 353), the law that allows
them to be considered single-family residences for the purposes of fire safety requirements.
Repealing the current law would mean that, due to the extremely high costs of installing fire
sprinkler systems (in order to meet LD 109), rent would increase and become unaffordable to
Maine residents and many certified recovery residencies will have to close. In addition,
repealing LD 353 (a law that was unanimously passed with testimony from the Assistant State
Fire Marshall and Maine State Attorney General’s Office) would likely violate the Fair Housing
and the Americans with Disabilities Act. As a state that is already suffering from increased
deaths related to addiction, we must protect fair housing for our Maine residents in recovery.
I cannot urge you enough to reconsider the severe consequences that LD 109 would place
upon Maine residents in recovery. Thank you already for all the work you have done, and
continue to do to support Maine residents and ensure public safety in our state. In this case,
opposing LD 109 would equate to fair and accessible housing, which provides safety for so
many in need. I ask you to please join me in opposition of LD 109 “An Act to Improve Safety for
Individuals Living in Recovery Residences” to protect our Maine residents in recovery.
Sincerely,
Astara Zuorski
astarazuorski@gmail.com

Astara Zuorski
Rockport
LD 109
Testimony in Opposition to LD 109 “An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living
in Recovery Residences”
January 30, 2023
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Doudera, and honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,
My name is Astara Zuorski, I am a resident of Rockport, and I am sharing my 
testimony in opposition to LD 109. Recovery housing is more critical than ever as 
overdose deaths continue to increase in Maine. And in the middle of a housing crisis 
impacting most Maine residents, we must ensure recovery housing is accessible to our
most vulnerable residents.
As a Maine resident and a former behavior specialist teacher for some of our most 
marginalized local citizens, I am very familiar with how incredibly difficult it is to 
find affordable housing and intensive recovery support in Maine. And as a recovering 
addict myself, I know that stable housing, a supportive community, and spaces 
dedicated to keep recovering addicts safe and protected are three components that 
allow for effective recovery (and therefore reduce the number of drug-related deaths 
in Maine). 
While LD 109 mentions improving safety for individuals living in recovery 
residences, LD 109 repeals a fundamental law for MARR-certified recovery 
residences (LD 353), the law that allows them to be considered single-family 
residences for the purposes of fire safety requirements. Repealing the current law 
would mean that, due to the extremely high costs of installing fire sprinkler systems 
(in order to meet LD 109), rent would increase and become unaffordable to Maine 
residents and many certified recovery residencies will have to close. In addition, 
repealing LD 353 (a law that was unanimously passed with testimony from the 
Assistant State Fire Marshall and Maine State Attorney General’s Office) would 
likely violate the Fair Housing and the Americans with Disabilities Act. As a state 
that is already suffering from increased deaths related to addiction, we must protect 
fair housing for our Maine residents in recovery.
I cannot urge you enough to reconsider the severe consequences that LD 109 would 
place upon Maine residents in recovery. Thank you already for all the work you have 
done, and continue to do to support Maine residents and ensure public safety in our 
state. In this case, opposing LD 109 would equate to fair and accessible housing, 
which provides safety for so many in need. I ask you to please join me in opposition 
of LD 109 “An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery 
Residences” to protect our Maine residents in recovery.
Sincerely,
Astara Zuorski
astarazuorski@gmail.com
