Testimony in Opposition to LD 109: “An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery
Residences”
January 29, 2023
Dear Senator Bee-Bee Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,
My name is Claire Horne, I am a resident of Appleton, Maine, and I am writing this
testimony in opposition to LD 109: An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery
Residences. I care deeply about making sure that Mainers in recovery have safe and accessible
places to live and receive the care they need.
We are currently at the convergence of multiple overlapping crises here in Maine. We
have a housing crisis that is one of the worst that we’ve ever had, which makes affordable
housing incredibly scarce. In addition, there is the crisis of opioid addiction that has affected so
many individuals as well as their families and communities. There continues to be an epidemic
of overdose deaths in Maine, and it’s clear that Mainers are in need of more opportunities for
recovery and healing. Recovery housing exists within both crises, remedying at once the need
for treatment programs and safe housing for those in recovery. These programs need more
funding and support, not more pressure and restrictions. Realistically, if LD 109 passes, that
could mean that recovery houses that provide essential care and housing could be forced to
close. Mainers cannot afford to lose any of these safe and effective places for recovery.
I believe residents are safe in houses that adhere to the existing Sec. 1. 25 MRSA
§2452, sub-§4, and they are certainly much safer than if recovery houses close and they are
forced onto the street. Therefore, I do not see this act creating more safety, it’s far more likely it
will take away safety from those living in recovery housing. I thank you for your work, and advise
that you oppose LD 109.
Sincerely,
Claire Horne
Claire Horne
Appleton
LD 109
Testimony in Opposition to LD 109: “An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals 
Living in Recovery Residences”
January 29, 2023
Dear Senator Bee-Bee Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,
My name is Claire Horne, I am a resident of Appleton, Maine, and I am writing this 
testimony in opposition to LD 109: An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living 
in Recovery Residences. I care deeply about making sure that Mainers in recovery 
have safe and accessible places to live and receive the care they need. 
We are currently at the convergence of multiple overlapping crises here in Maine. We
have a housing crisis that is one of the worst that we’ve ever had, which makes 
affordable housing incredibly scarce. In addition, there is the crisis of opioid addiction
that has affected so many individuals as well as their families and communities. There
continues to be an epidemic of overdose deaths in Maine, and it’s clear that Mainers 
are in need of more opportunities for recovery and healing. Recovery housing exists 
within both crises, remedying at once the need for treatment programs and safe 
housing for those in recovery. These programs need more funding and support, not 
more pressure and restrictions. Realistically, if LD 109 passes, that could mean that 
recovery houses that provide essential care and housing could be forced to close. 
Mainers cannot afford to lose any of these safe and effective places for recovery.
I believe residents are safe in houses that adhere to the existing Sec. 1. 25 MRSA 
§2452, sub-§4, and they are certainly much safer than if recovery houses close and 
they are forced onto the street. Therefore, I do not see this act creating more safety, 
it’s far more likely it will take away safety from those living in recovery housing. I 
thank you for your work, and advise that you oppose LD 109.
Sincerely,
Claire Horne
