To whom it may concem, 
My name is Clifford Conway. I am a resident of Sanford, formerly Lewiston and I am here 
to testify in opposition to LD109. Which I feel is a subterfuge to keep recovery houses out of the 
community ofigannntpeople who are choosing to ignore the opioid crisis that affects everyone, 
including those who are in favor of this bill. 
There is a need now more than ever for people to have a safe sober place to leam the 
life skills to stay sober, in an environment which is conducive to healing from trauma. The drug 
epidemic effects all Maine people and addicts need these houses to do that. 
I am a person in recovery who has struggled with relapse my entire adult life. I just 
tumed 50 last month and it has taken ,me this long to put together 5 months of recovery. I ama 
father of two children who have children and when I put together a year l want to attempt to 
repair the damaged relationship that has been the result of addiction. I go to IOP at ENSO 
Recovery in Sanford, and I am residing at the Joumey House. I've never been able to -put 
together more than a month, constantly relapsing, but not for a lack of trying. l have been to 
countless 30 day places, meetings, and detox but I wasn't able to be in a safe and sober 
environment upon releases. 
I've been in and out of county jail and that environment is not healthy. Only now that l’ve 
relocated out of my area of familiarity and active using was I able to put together the quality of 
sobriety that I have now. Without the opportunity to live at Joumey house, I would still be out 
negatively affecting my community and family. Too often people like me never make it to places 
like this because there arent enough beds and by the time there name is called on the list its too 
late. We need more recovery houses, not less and iof this bill passes I wouldnt be able to atford 
to stay if joumey house could even stay open. 
'l'hank you all for your time and I hope you will chose the right de ision and oppose 
LD109 and continue to give others like me the Golden opportunity that I was given. Thank you. 
Clifford Conway
