T ﬂ Recoveryl 
Q Advocacy ‘‘ 
J 
€ Project 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 109 
An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery Residences 
January 30, 2023 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, 
My name is Courtney Gary-Allen. I am the Organizing Director of the Maine Recovery 
Advocacy Project (ME-RAP). I have extensive expertise in recoveiy policy and have helped to 
propose, write, and pass countless pieces of legislation on matters relating to criminal justice 
reform, recoveiy housing, and increasing access to treatment, prevention, and hann reduction 
services in Maine. I am here today to testify in opposition to LD 109: An Act to Improve Safety 
for Individuals Living in Recovery Residences. 
As this public hearing progresses, you will hear from Ron Springel, Executive Director of the 
Maine Association of Recovery Residences, Amanda Ricci who has been working to opena 
recovery residence in Farmington, from Scott Pardy, an operator Working miracles in Bangor 
who will share his experience with the state fire marshal’s office in 2019, Brittany Reichman and 
Madison Weymouth, MARR inspectors Who Will detail their stringent ﬁre safety guidelines, 
MARR board president Alison Webb, author of Recovery Allies, who will share more details 
about the organization ’s mission, and from countless other recovery housing operators, recovery 
housing residents, the greater recovery community, and our allies. 
My part in this conversation is to help your committee understand how We got to this point and 
What LD 109 does. 
LD 109 seeks to repeal Sec. l. 25 MRSA_§2452 _, sub-§4, which classiﬁes recovery residences 
that are certiﬁed by national standards, house no more than 2 people per bedroom, 6 people per 
bathroom, and follow all other applicable housing codes as a single-family home for the 
purposes of ﬁre code. This section of the law was proposed by tlien-Representative Justin 
Fecteau during the 129th Legislative Session and passed unanimously by the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, ﬂew through the House and Senate, and was signed into law by 
Governor Janet Mills.i 
I know this because this law was one of the very ﬁrst pieces of legislation I ever worked on. At 
the time, Iwas the Executive Director of James’ Place, a small non-proﬁt recovery residence in 
Augusta, Maine.
' 
w Recovery 
@ Advocacy 
_‘ - 
W Project 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 109 
An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery Residences 
As background, on November 2nd of 201 8, I received communications from the Augusta Code 
Enforcement Office that James’ Place would be categorized “into the definition of a lodging or 
rooming house found within the 2009 NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, section 26.1.1.1 .” 
This section of the code deﬁnes a Lodging of Rooming House as “a building that provides 
sleeping accommodations for 16 or fewer persons on either a transient or permanent basis, with 
or without meals, but without separate cooking facilities for individual occupants. ” The officer 
required James’ Place to house “no more than 3 outsiders ” , install a sprinkler system, or face him 
in court. 
I knew these to be discriminatory practices because recovery housing is protected by the Federal 
Fair Housing Act, and the Americans with Disabilities Act but I was not Willing to risk my 
guests being evicted from their homes. Instead, we enlisted Rep. Justin Fecteau and vowed to 
bring it to the legislative session. 
During the public hearing on LD 353, then Assistant State Fire Marshal, Richard McCarthy, 
testified neither for nor against the bill and confirmed that “recovery houses and their residents 
have protection under the Americans with Disabilities Act as a protected class” . In his testimony, 
he states that the issue of if these protections extend to fire and building codes were reviewed by 
a member of the Maine State Attorney General’s Office and that the decision was as follows: 
A failure on the part of the State of Maine to make reasonable accommodations, 
namely non-enforcement of the sprinkler rules, would likely be found to violate the 
Fair-Housing Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
The Maine Attorney General's Office advised allowing recovery residences to operate without 
sprinkle systems that would be otherwise required by law. 
This is a long-standing legal opinion, first discussed in a 1993 decision by Mar)/land ’s 
then-Attomey General Joseph Curran, Jr. whose opinion was that: 
The Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act prohibits enforcement of fire safety 
code requirements in a small private group home for the mentally ill if the 
requirements are neither imposed on single-family dwellings nor tailored to the 
unique and speciﬁc needs and abilities of the home’s residents.
@ Recovery i' 
, 
E Advocacy * 
3 Project 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 109 
An Act to Improve Safety for individuals Living in Recovery Residences 
These ﬁndings continue in caselaw, including in Brockton Fire Department vs. St Mary Broad 
Street, LLC, Tsombandis vs. Citv of West Haven CT, and Oxford house versus H. “Butch” Browning. 
The bottom line is that for better or worse, the State cannot impose excessive ﬁre code 
regulations on recovery houses. 
During today’s hearing, you will hear countless testimonies about the dire impacts of repealing 
Sec. l. 25 MRSA §2452. sub-$4 could have on the recovery housing community in Maine, 
namely the closure of countless houses, which is a valid and important concern in the middle ofa 
housing and overdose crisis. And to be clear, in the State of Maine, not a single person has died 
in a house ﬁre while living in a recovery residence, yet in 2022 we are expected to lose over 650 
people to overdoses. 
That being said, I speciﬁcally think it's important to underscore that if you repeal this section of 
the law, you will be opening the State of Maine to a lawsuit for a violation of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act and the Federal Fair Housing Act. 
Thank you for your time. I am happy to answer any questions. I will also be available to you 
during the work session on the bill. 
Sincerely,i 
Courtney Gary-Allen 
Organizing Director, ME-RAP 
courtney@recoveryvoices.com 
(207) 593-6251
APPROVED CHAPTER 
JUNE 18, 2019 3 58 
BY GOVERNOR PUBLIC LAW 
STATE OF MAINE 
IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 
TWO THOUSAND NINETEEN 
H.P. 279 - L.D. 353 
An Act Regarding the Safety of Recovery Residences 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sec. 1. 25 MRSA §2452, sub-§4 is enacted to read: 
4. Exception. Notwithstanding chapter 314 and Title 10. chapter 1103, a recovery 
residence must be treated as a residence for a family if the recovery residence meets the 
following reguirements: 
A. The recovery residence must be certiﬁed based on criteria developed bya 
nationally recognized organization that supports persons recovering from substance 
use disorder 
B. The recovery residence must have no more than 2 residents per bedroom; 
C. The recovery residence must have at least one full bathroom for every 6 residents; 
D. The recovery residence must meet the requirements of all adopted building codes 
and sections 2464 and 2468 applicable to a one-family or 2-family residence with 
regard to smoke detectors, carbon monoxide detectors and ﬁre extinguishers; and 
E. If the recovery residence is located in a multiunit apartment building, the recovery 
residence must meet all state and local code requirements for the type of building in 
which the recovery residence is located. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "recovery residence" means a shared living residence 
for persons recovering from substance use disorder that is focused on peer support, 
provides to its residents an enviromnent free of alcohol and illegal drugs and assists its 
residents by connecting the residents to support services or resources in the community 
that are available to persons recovering from substance use disorder. 
Page 1 - 129LR1662(04)-1
_ p House OF REPRESENTATIVES 
an 2 STATE Hoosn STATION 
p AUGUSTA, ix/nma 045330002 
‘ 
(207) 28"/11440 
Justin Fecteau 
7 Davis Street 
Augusta, ME 04330 
Cell Phone: (207) 248-7183    
Justin.Fecteau@legislamre.maine.gov 
April 26, 2019 
Testimony in Support of LD 353: 
An Act To Classify Recovery Residences as One-family Dwellings 
for the Purposes of the Fire Code 
Good morning Senator Deschambault, Representative Warren, and my esteemed colleagues on the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. I am Representative Justin Fecteau. 
I am a German teacher currently on leave from Maranacook Community High School in Readﬁeld 
to serve the ﬁne people of District 86, which is West and North Augusta. 
I am proud to support our recovery community. I am sure I don’t need to tell anyone on this 
committee how much substance abuse has affected our state - or how many times we have tried 
searching for the right answers and have come back with nothing. 
We are blessed with a ready and willing group of recovery leaders in our state. They are opening up 
recovery residences and getting our friends, family, and neighbors back on track. In my area, we 
have a non—proﬁt called James’ Place and they are doing exactly that; and with the evidence-based 
guidance from organizations like the Maine Association for Recovery Residences (MARR), the safe 
and reputable establishments can be clearly identified. 
But they’ve reached out to me for some help. Access to safe and effective recovery housing is not 
equitable in our state. That’s why I submitted LD 353: An Act To Classify Recovery Residences as 
One-Family Dwellings for the Purposes of the Fire Code. 
I Want to be clear. I have no interest in diminishing publicsafety or reverse-discriminating against 
our neighbors recovering from substance use by providing them living spaces that are less safe from 
those who are not recovering. I am trying to recognize these alcohol and illegal substance free 
homes as single family homes. 
These residents live together, shop together, cook together, go to meetings together, and are all 
active in the community and with employment and post-secondary education. If we were to allow 
these families to be burdened with tens-of~thousands of dollars worth of sprinkler systems they 
would never open - and they may never find their way back to normal.
This bill restricts these residences to a house, lists the number of people that can live within each of 
these single family residences, and applies a smoke detector and ﬁre extinguisher code that is beyond 
the requirements of a normal single family home. Furthermore, it provides a sound deﬁnition ofa 
“recovery residence ” to keep them all honest. 
It is my understanding there will be groups to address subsection 4b of my bill. Apparently the 
number 6 should read “6 occupants per sink, toilet, and shower.” The way it was briefed to me, it 
may be an important provision the committee considers. It may actually prevent some unsafe 
practices happening in some recovery residences throughout the state that don’t have the National 
Association of Recovery Residences certiﬁcation. I looked through the list this past weekend and it’s 
quite thorough and extensive. 
While I’d love to be able to answer all of your questions, I have brought plenty of back up to help us 
through this process. 
I sincerely appreciate your time. Thank you. 
Respectfully, 
Rep. Justin Fecteau
TESTIMONY OF RICHARD MCCARTHY 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
OFFICE OF STATE FIRE MARSHAL 
(Neither for Nor Against) L.D. 353 
“An AC1: to CLASSIFY RECOVERY HOUSES AS ONE AND TWO 
FAMILY DWELLINGS" 
Presented by: Representative Fecteau 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
Hearing Date: Friday, April 26“ , 2019 at 9:00 AM in Room 436, State House 
Good morning Senator Deschambault, Representative Warren, and members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. 
My name is Richard McCarthy and I am the Assistant State Fire Marshal 
Inspections and Prevention Division for The Ofﬁce of the State Fire Marshal. I am here 
today representing the Department of Public Safety and the Ofﬁce of State Fire Marshal 
to testify neither for nor against this bill. 
A single family home as deﬁned within State adopted Life safety Codes isa 
“dwelling unit that is occupied by members of a single family with not more than three 
outsiders if any in rented rooms” . Since there is no deﬁnition of family Within the Code 
it is left up to the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) to interpret Whether the occupants 
of a home are to be considered a single family. If a building does not qualify as single 
family the next level would be rooming and lodging Where up to 16 people in rented 
rooms. Placing Sober Houses in this category would require more restrictive Fire Safety 
measures to be added to the building such as sprinklers and ﬁre alarms. 
Our office inspects substance abuse recovery facilities that are licensed by DHHS, 
these facilities by statute are considered small residential care facilities if _housing under 
16 residents. This Bill if it passes will create 2 distinct levels of protection for the 
residents of recovery facilities, licensed facilities providing a higher level of Fire safety 
and unlicensed providing what would be required for your home. 
. Recovery Houses and their residents have protection under the Americans with 
Disabilities Act as a protected class as to not prohibit or restrict Where these recovery 
houses are located. It is less clear whether this protection extends to the Fire and Building 
Codes. This issue was reviewed by a member of the Maine State Attorney General’s 
Office and the decision was as follows. ” A failure on the part of the State of Maine to 
make reasonable accommodation, namely non-enforcement of the sprinkler rules, would
likely be found to violate the Fair-Housing Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act 
Our ofﬁce was advised to allow these substance recovery homes to operate without the 
sprinklers that would be otherwise be required by law.
> 
l. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have at this time or during the 
work session.
Good morning Senator Deschambault, Representative Warren and other distinguished members 
of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, April 26"‘ , 2019 
My name is Courtney Allen. I am the Founder and Executive Director of James’ Place;a 
nonproﬁt recovery residence here in Augusta and a certiﬁed alcohol and drug counselor. I serve 
on the committee for Maine Association of Recovery Residences and as Chapter Leader for 
Young People in Recovery. I am here today to testify in favor of LD 353; An Act to Classify a 
Small Recovery Residence as a Single-Family Home for the purpose of Fire Code. 
On November 2"" of 2018, I received communication from the Augusta Code Enforcement 
Office that James’ Place would be categorized “into the deﬁnition of a lodging or Rooming 
house found within the 2009 NFPA 101, Life Safely Code, section 26. l . l.l.” This section of the 
code deﬁnes a Lodging of Rooming House as “a building that provides sleeping 
accommodations for 16 or fewer persons on either a transient or permanent basis, with or without 
meals, but without separate cooking facilities for individuals occupants. ” The officer required 
James’ Place to house “no more than 3 outsiders ” or face him in court. 
I knew these to be discriminatory practices because recovery housing is protected by the Federal 
Fair Housing Act, the American with Disabilities Act and the precedent created by Oxford house 
versus H. “Butch” Browning but I was 11ot willing to chance my guests being evicted from their 
home. Because of these discriminatory practices I was forced to open the houses as single 
occupancy rooms and vowed to bring it to this legislative session. 
Operating a recovery residence with only three people living in it has presented many challenges. 
We operate as a low-barrier, low-cost house. What that means is that 72% of our guests in 2018 
received either a scholarship from James’ Place, a church or general assistance to pay for their 
ﬁrst week of rent. It means that when someone comes to us without the ability to pay, we do not 
turn them away. It is not economically viable to continue operating this way — we have no paid 
staff members and barley keep the doors open month to month." 
There is no governmental funding being directed towards recovery housing, yet. Grant writing 
takes exactly what we do not have; time. There are more than l person dying a day on the streets 
of Maine and I have a 20-person waitlist. That is 20 people that tonight will sleep in subpar 
environment for their recoveries. That is 20 people who tonight I will go to bed worried about. 
This bill will double our ability to get people off the streets and into safe housing, as well as 
create a precedent going forward for recovery houses across the state. 
Beyond ﬁnancial hardships, single occupancy rooms present serious safety concerned in the 
population we are serving. In the state of Maine, not a single person has died in a house ﬁre 
while living in a recovery residence, yet overall 418 people died last year as a result of overdose. 
Substance Use Disorder is a chronic relapsing condition and the reason recovery housing works 
is because of the added accountability between house mates. 
hé 
On the ground, single occupancy rooms mean that a guest could resume use in their room a11d be 
dead before anyone ﬁnds them. James’ Place mission is to provide safe housing to people 
seeking recovery. I cannot fulﬁll this mission when I am forced to house people in single 
occupancy rooms. 
Recovery housing works as a viable solution to curbing substance use in Maine. At the time of 
intake, a person averages a recovery capital score of 111.36. After only 30 days at James’ Place 
that score jumps to 138.93 — averaging a 27.57 increase. 
The people who live at James’ Place are not only working, going to school or volunteering, 
remain sober and becoming a part of their communities - they are statistically different than the 
person who ﬁrst moved in. By passing this bill, the committee will be putting an end to the 
misunderstandings between recovery residences and ﬁre code officials and granting state wide 
permission to continue our work. And in a state where so many people are dying, we must 
continue. 
I Want to thank the committee for your time and I am willing to answer any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Courtney Allen
Testimony of Ronald D. Springel, MD 
IN FAVOR OF 
LD 353 AN ACT TO CLASSIFY A SMALL RECOVERY RESIDENCE AS A SINGLE FAMILY 
HOME FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE FIRE CODE 
some mes rem mun». rm Journey House is the operator in Sanford. Other than them extemporizingto the City Council for half 
an hour at a City council meeting and accosting me on the streetthe morning after the.live-buiiding- 
fire last October, they have supposedly setup 2-4 sober houses in Sanford. They have re_gpeste_d GA 
funds on an individuai_besis. One person has received Gﬂlfunds as l learned last 
u1‘é»Iéh&ere ‘rs.;s noﬂiingireu an as 1:-‘ti 
ere are in 
Oxford House has proceeded with a model where they set up 
as ,g1 ggayga disability. (Qnrg abuyse and recovery is not a disabiiityaccordingto 
the Federaitaw; alcoholismis.)l expect that the State would create a carve~outdk-ability related to 
opioid addiction. 
The license I propose isspeciflcto Sanford. Sanford delinesa family lncludinga "group home." Group 
homes are disability housing for B or fewerpeopie. 
Where municipalities have run afoul of the Federal Laws regarciingfamily and peopiewith disabilities 
is equitable application and dlscrin1lnation.lfa group home wants to operate in a slngiefamiiy zone 
they may and there is nothing the BOA can do to prevent that other than bring on a lawsuit and lose. 
Here is some serious reading on the matter. 
This email makes clear the contempt applied to recovery houses when it comes to federal protections by 
city officials. The “license” proposal is just one way towns and cities try to exclude recovery residences. 
Another is through the code enforcers - they fail to treat a house as a single family home, instead 
classifying it as a "boarding house" or "group home" , therefore requiring it to install fire doors, 
expensive sprinkler systems and other equipment. Since the cost ls prohibitive to almost all residence 
operators, they must move on to another town without these types of discriminatory practices. Federal 
court rulings, both in Louisiana and Connecticut, have affirmed that recovery residences operate as 
families, not Individual boarding residents and they are entitled to the protections of both the 
Americans With Disabilities Act and the Fair Housing Act. 
MARR urges OUGHT TO PASS on LD 353. 
For the record, we wish to thank the Office ofthe State Fire Marshall for their stance on this bill and 
understanding that many more Mainers are at risk of dying from drug poisoning than from fire hazards 
in certified recovery residences. Attested and submitted: Ronald D. Springel, MD, Maine Association of 
Recovery Residences, April 26, 2019 
2|Page 
Testimony of Ronald D. Springel, MD 
IN FAVOR OF 
LD 353 AN ACT TO CLASSIFY A SMALL RECOVERY RESIDENCE AS A SINGLE FAMILY 
HOME FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE FIRE CODE 
Senator Deschambault and Representative Warren and other distinguished members of Criminal Jutice 
and Public Safety Committee, my name is Dr. Ron Springel and l am a resident of Cape Elizabeth. I am 
here today as a representative of the Maine Association of Recovery Residences (MARR), a Maine non- 
profit. MARR is the Maine state affiliate of the National Alliance of Recovery Residences - a group that 
has developed a national certification program for recovery residences (RR). To date we have certified 
26 recovery residence in Maine and are working to certify many more. Separately, i publish and edit the 
Maine Recovery Residence Directory, a free resource listing all 100 currently know recovery residences 
in Maine and identifying those that have received certification at the standard of the National Alliance of 
Recovery Residences (NARR). 
My background includes not only being trained as a physician in Emergency Medicine but also working 
in the field of Addiction Medicine. l have appended some work experience relevant to this testimony at 
the end of this written document. 
Since recovery residences began proliferating In the 1980s’ largely under the "Oxford House" model, 
they have been met with a variety of challenges to their successful operation. Families that desperately 
seek services for their loved ones at the same time complain, ”not in my backyardl" Discrimination 
against this protected group has been rampant in our own state, OFTEN BY PAID GOVERNMENT 
EMPLOYEES. 
The following is part of an email exchange obtained through a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
request. I attest to its authenticity as a true original and unedited copy. I have extracted this section and 
erased identifiers regarding the author's name, position and affiliation. it was part of an email 
conversation between the City of Sanford and another Maine municipality. It references a phone call 
that took place between the entities. Highlighting is mine. 
PLEASE GO TO NEXT PAGE 
1 I P a gig
Fire codes and recovery housmg 
Summary of recent findings, legal opinions and court rulings, 3 National Alliance for 
T I » 
Recovery Residences 
Community - Standards - Ethics - Education 
and index to source documents 
January 2021 
updated April 2021
Fire codes and recovery housing 
Document index and summary 
January 2021 
updated April 2021 
This document is an index to a family of related material related to the permissible application of state 
and local fire codes to residential dwellings — primarily single family residences occupied by households 
of recovering individuals. 
Source documents are available online in a Google Docs folder, and links are included in the descriptions 
below. 
Life Safety Code 2021 revision 
The International Fire Protection Association maintains the Life Safety Code, referenced by most local 
governments in writing and modifying their own fire codes. A proposed 2021 revision supports the 
intent to treat households of unrelated persons that operate as families in accordance with the 
regulations applicable to single family dwellings. 
References: 
Current version of the code 
Proposed language related to shared housing 
Maryland Attorney General's opinion on fire codes and shared housing 
This ruling was an important element in recent discussions in Maryland about appropriate requirements 
for sober home providers. 
Reference: opinion 
Maryland agreement letter — Kim Savage 
This memorializes the decision by the Maryland fire marshal that shared occupancy of single family 
dwellings by recovering individuals operating as single households are exempt from fire inspection 
requirements and that occupancy is to be treated in the same manner as occupancy by a natural family, 
Reference: letter 
Case law - Brockton MA federal court decision 
Finding in this 2016 case in favor of the defendant recovery residence operator was that the 
Massachusetts Zoning Act prohibits discrimination against disabled persons in the enforcement of local 
laws including zoning, health and safety codes, notwithstanding the existence of the state's "sprinkler 
law” covering boarding/rooming houses. 
Reference: Brockton Fire Department vs. St. Marv Broad Street LLC
, 
Page 2 of3
Case law — Connecticut and Louisiana federal court decisions 
Findings in both cases were that recovery residence households operating as the equivalent of natural 
families, i.e. as single households, must be treated in the same way a family would be treated. The 
Louisiana case specifically addresses the fire code issue while the Connecticut case addresses a wider 
range of regulatory issues. 
References: 
Tsombandis vs. City of West Haven CT 
Oxford House vs. Browning (Louisiana) 
State enforcement action - California Department of Housing and Community Development 
Fair housing protections under California state law roughly parallel federal protections. Nevertheless 
several cities have enacted zoning and related ordinances that discriminate against recovery residences 
in various ways. In i\/larch 2021 the state issued a cease-and-desist order to the City of Encinitas directing 
them to rescind their ordinance completely. The order addresses several significant violations of both 
state and federal law. Fire codes are addressed but most violations cited relate to other aspects of the 
city's regulations. 
Reference: City of Encinitas Notice of Violation 
Supplementary material on fair housing and current oversight of recovery housing 
The documents below don't bear exclusively on the fire code issue, but include important background 
information of federal fair housing law and on the preferred framework for recovery housing oversight in 
light of that body of law. 
The first item, a joint statement from HUD and DOJ, is one we recommend to anyone in state or local 
government seeking to understand the requirements under the Fair Housing Act, Americans With 
Disabilities Act and related federal regulations. The second item is a guide co—produced by the National 
Council for Behavioral Health and NARR almost three years ago. it includes recommendations for state 
oversight of recovery housing systems, and also contains a summary table of major regulatory features 
of representative states as of publication date (March 2018). 
References: 
Joint statement, HUD and U.S Department of Justice 
Building Recovery: State Policv Guide for Supporting Recovery Housing 
Page 3 of3
