Testimony of Doug Dunbar from Hermon, Maine
In Opposition to LD 109
An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery Residences
Public Hearing: January 30, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Members of the Committee, my name is 
Doug Dunbar. I’m a person in recovery, live in Hermon and appreciate the opportunity to 
express my opposition to LD 109.
While in government, I paid little attention to issues related to substance use disorders (SUD) or 
recovery—even as I was drinking myself to death. I was fortunate to work in the Legislature, as 
John Baldacci’s press secretary in the Governor’s office and his communications director in 
Congress. I’ve also worked for Senator George Mitchell and served as Maine’s Chief Deputy 
Secretary of State.
The reason I mention this is because that three-decade career ended five years ago when I went 
to jail for over four months, followed by more than a year in the Penobscot County Adult Drug 
Treatment Court. While incarcerated, I realized how much we’ve failed as a society. Almost all 
of the individuals in jail with me were young, poor and sick.
Like me, most weren’t bad people. Like me, they were suffering from one or more illnesses. In 
my case, I began self-medicating with alcohol in 2001 to deal with life-long concealed mental 
illnesses (OCD and anxiety) that spiraled out of control on 9/11 when the terrorist attacks 
occurred and I was working on Capitol Hill in Washington.
Sick with a substance use disorder, I made a series of very poor-choices, experienced six arrests 
and time in three Maine jails. Upon my release, I had a goal of opening a recovery residence, 
because the need was painfully obvious and few existed in the Bangor area.
Although I didn’t have the resources to purchase a house for this purpose, I soon met Scott 
Pardy. At the time, he was preparing to open the first Fresh Start Sober Living House in Bangor. 
Scott took a significant risk in buying that first property. Today, in little more than four years, 
there are twelve Fresh Start houses. If you’ve given up on the idea that one person can make a 
difference, you haven’t met Scott Pardy.
During the past four years, I’ve had the pleasure of lending a hand to the Fresh Start movement 
and watching it grow, save and improve lives, and make safe, dignified housing available to 
many people who might otherwise be struggling on the streets.
There are three key points I hope you’ll keep in mind as you consider LD 109. First, as you 
know, Maine is experiencing a crisis of homelessness and lack of affordable housing. There are 
over 100 beds in recovery residences in the Bangor area (roughly 90 at Fresh Start houses). 
Without those houses, homelessness would be even worse. We can't afford to lose quality 
housing options.
Second, Maine is also suffering from an unprecedented crisis of overdoses and deaths. We 
need more substance use disorder (SUD) recovery supports, particularly sober housing options. 
Any unnecessary barriers, like those made likely by LD 109, would slow or end the ongoing 
expansion of recovery residences.
Third, as the saying goes, ‘If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.’ This bill seems to be searching to solve 
problems that don’t exist in any meaningful way.
LD 109 poses a serious threat to recovery housing at a time when those homes are needed more 
than ever. The Maine Association of Recovery Residences (MARR) plays an active role in 
providing oversight of this housing and has meaningful safety standards.
LD 109 would be a step backward and potentially leave many people seeking recovery out in the 
cold—literally, in some cases. Please oppose this bill. Thanks for your time and consideration of 
this testimony. If there are questions or additional information is desired, please contact me by e-
mail ( dougdunbar@yahoo.com) or calling (207) 299-5626.
Doug Dunbar
Hermon
LD 109
Testimony of Doug Dunbar from Hermon, Maine
In Opposition to LD 109
An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery Residences
Public Hearing: January 30, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Members of the Committee, my 
name is Doug Dunbar. I’m a person in recovery, live in Hermon and appreciate the 
opportunity to express my opposition to LD 109.
While in government, I paid little attention to issues related to substance use disorders
(SUD) or recovery—even as I was drinking myself to death. I was fortunate to work 
in the Legislature, as John Baldacci’s press secretary in the Governor’s office and his 
communications director in Congress. I’ve also worked for Senator George Mitchell 
and served as Maine’s Chief Deputy Secretary of State.
The reason I mention this is because that three-decade career ended five years ago 
when I went to jail for over four months, followed by more than a year in the 
Penobscot County Adult Drug Treatment Court. While incarcerated, I realized how 
much we’ve failed as a society. Almost all of the individuals in jail with me were 
young, poor and sick.
Like me, most weren’t bad people. Like me, they were suffering from one or more 
illnesses. In my case, I began self-medicating with alcohol in 2001 to deal with 
life-long concealed mental illnesses (OCD and anxiety) that spiraled out of control on 
9/11 when the terrorist attacks occurred and I was working on Capitol Hill in 
Washington.
Sick with a substance use disorder, I made a series of very poor-choices, experienced 
six arrests and time in three Maine jails. Upon my release, I had a goal of opening a 
recovery residence, because the need was painfully obvious and few existed in the 
Bangor area.
Although I didn’t have the resources to purchase a house for this purpose, I soon met 
Scott Pardy. At the time, he was preparing to open the first Fresh Start Sober Living 
House in Bangor. Scott took a significant risk in buying that first property. Today, in 
little more than four years, there are twelve Fresh Start houses. If you’ve given up on 
the idea that one person can make a difference, you haven’t met Scott Pardy.
During the past four years, I’ve had the pleasure of lending a hand to the Fresh Start 
movement and watching it grow, save and improve lives, and make safe, dignified 
housing available to many people who might otherwise be struggling on the streets.
There are three key points I hope you’ll keep in mind as you consider LD 109. First, 
as you know, Maine is experiencing a crisis of homelessness and lack of affordable 
housing. There are over 100 beds in recovery residences in the Bangor area (roughly 
90 at Fresh Start houses). Without those houses, homelessness would be even worse. 
We can't afford to lose quality housing options.
Second, Maine is also suffering from an unprecedented crisis of overdoses and deaths.
We need more substance use disorder (SUD) recovery supports, particularly sober 
housing options. Any unnecessary barriers, like those made likely by LD 109, would 
slow or end the ongoing expansion of recovery residences.
Third, as the saying goes, ‘If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.’ This bill seems to be 
searching to solve problems that don’t exist in any meaningful way.
LD 109 poses a serious threat to recovery housing at a time when those homes are 
needed more than ever. The Maine Association of Recovery Residences (MARR) 
plays an active role in providing oversight of this housing and has meaningful safety 
standards.
LD 109 would be a step backward and potentially leave many people seeking recovery out in 
the cold—literally, in some cases. Please oppose this bill. Thanks for your time and 
consideration of this testimony. If there are questions or additional information is desired, 
please contact me by e-mail (dougdunbar@yahoo.com) or calling (207) 299-5626.

