  
 
102 Bishop Street,  
Portland, ME 04103  
207.553.2575  
info@ portlandrecovery.org  
 
www. portlandrecovery.org  
 
Written Testimony of Emily Davis  
In Opposition to LD 109:  
An Act To Improve Safety for Individuals in Recovery Residences  
 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Emily Davis  
Volunteer Coordinator  
Portland Recovery Community Center  
102 Bishop Street  
Portland, Maine 0410 3 
 
Re: PRCC Position on  LD 109  
 
January 30, 2023  
 
Senator Bee-Bee Center , Representative Salisbury,  and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety , 
My name is Emily Davis, and I am the Volunteer Coordinator of Portland Recovery 
Community Center (PRCC). In addition, I currently manage and live at the Washington Ave 
Women’s Sober Living Residence and am a former manager and resident of Payson Place 
Extended Care, Women’s Sober Living Residence. Both of these houses are MARR certified 
residences in Portland, ME. I am joining PRCC and the Maine Association of Recovery 
Residences today in opposition to LD 109.  
I am also a person in long term recovery from substance use disorder. For the last 16 
months, I have lived at those two recovery residences in Portland. I have seen and supported over 
150 women in a variety of stages in their lives. Many women who have completed treatment, use 
their time in a recovery residence to build critical life skills. The women I have lived with were 
more than roommates or guests, they are important members of th e Portland community. Serving 
  
 
102 Bishop Street,  
Portland, ME 04103  
207.553.2575  
info@ portlandrecovery.org  
 
www. portlandrecovery.org  
 
as workforce labor, volunteers, and citizens living each day to better their own life and be of 
service to others.  
Part of my job as house manager is to implement critical safety practices. MARR helps 
guide all their recovery  residences to be at the top of safety standards. Each month, I facilitate 
safety inspections and outline protocol. At our weekly accountability meeting, we actively 
rehearse a fire drill, including identifying all points of egress, and location of fire ex tinguishers. 
All smoke alarms are up to fire safety code, and we test batteries monthly. Every guest 
acknowledges their understanding of the protocol.  
Safety is paramount, but why I’m really testifying is to remind everyone that this is a 
matter of life an d death. Every single recovery residence is giving people a chance to rebuild 
their lives.  
I’ve interacted with many parents of guests as a house manager. One father in particular 
stands out to me – in the middle of a cold winter night, with tears in his eyes – he drop ped off his 
only daughter to my sober house. At first, he seemed unfriendly, and standoffish. I greeted him 
with a smile and stuck my hand out in hopes he would see me as an ally. He softened as he 
stepped inside our clean, warm, well -kept home . The fear in his eyes went away and I could tell 
he would sleep peacefully that night. As a result of a recovery residence, that father has his 
daughter back – her brother has his sister back and thousands of families will have that same 
peaceful feeling f or years to come.   
This is life or death, we need these houses and each bed in them. One of those beds could 
be for your daughter, your niece, your sister, or your friend. We cannot afford to lose any 
  
 
102 Bishop Street,  
Portland, ME 04103  
207.553.2575  
info@ portlandrecovery.org  
 
www. portlandrecovery.org  
 
recovery residences in the state of Maine – and that’s  why I am in  opposition of LD 109. Thank 
you for the opportunity  to write my testimony.  
Sincerely , 
Emily Davis  
 
