My name is Jeremy Hiltz, I am a person in long term recovery, a person who transitioned from 
incarceration into a recovery residence. I also founded and am the CEO of Recovery 
Connections of Maine and Recovery Housing of Maine. We operate a outpatient addiction clinic, 
4 MARR Certified recovery residences, and a 20 bed residential program. I strongly oppose LD 
109. 
One of our biggest partners is the Department of Corrections where approximately half of our 
population is either reentering from prison or are on the home confinement program. Currently 
we have 7 men enrolled in college, 12 working full time, 2 have started their own construction 
businesses.7 have obtained their drivers licenses and vehicles, 5 regularly volunteer in the 
community and all are in substance use disorder treatment. We have transitioned 32 men into 
their own apartments or back with their families over the last 22 months. Most importantly they 
have found community and family. They go shopping together, eat meals together, set goals 
together and coexist together. Just like any other family. Any other family of the same size would 
not need a sprinkler system installed in their home and the risk is the same. 
We have been able to expand our programming over the last year due to a need that we have 
seen in the community as well as in the Department of Corrections. There is a lack of housing in 
Maine in general. The passage of LD 109 will in fact make that problem worsen. It has the 
potential to displace hundreds of vulnerable people. Not allowing LD 109 to pass will allow 
Maine to continue to grow its ever evolving recovery community and provide places for people 
to have a chance to safely transition back in tot the community. 
I want to acknowledge the safety concern that LD 109 wishes to address. As a member of the 
Maine Association of Recovery Residences we are required to have home inspections, carbon 
monoxide and ﬁre alarms, fire extinguishers, evacuation plans on the walls, egresses free of 
barriers and more to ensure that this home is safe. MARR has been a guide when I have had 
questions and they have held me accountable to ensuring that the homes are safe. MARR 
provides some peace of mind to me that its members are also running safe houses. Adding 
unnecessary (sprinkler systems) equipment at exorbitant costs would shut our program down. 
Thank you for your time.
