My name is Joshua Leonard. I am currently serving on the Board of Directors of the Maine 
Association of Recovery Residences as well as the Program Director and operator of Portland 
Sober Living. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today and I am here to stand in opposition 
to this bill.
I have been a part of Portland Sober Living for over 5 years. Through this time, the people in 
recovery who have been a part of our program, current and past, are people I consider part of my 
family. With how much these people mean to myself and my partners, their safety is ALWAYS 
our primary concern. Safety is the foundation to our entire program. This is one of the reasons 
our program has chosen to join membership with the Maine Association of Recovery 
Residences. To put it simply, there is no need to risk putting recovery residences financial 
viability at risk with a $20-$40,000 sprinkler system to have adequate fire measures. You may be 
surprised to know we already have those measures.
MARR bases its safety protocol on NARR 3.0, a nationally accepted set of standards. Included in 
their fire safety protocol are standards including hanging evacuation plans, having fire 
extinguishers which have to be inspected annually, CO and smoke detectors and mandatory fire 
drills. We require electrical cover plates on all plugs and switches, we have window size 
requirements for adequate fire escape, limitations on outlet splitters, and evacuation ladders on 
upper floors that need to be at the ready, inspected and the windows clear from obstruction for 
emergency usage. Portland Sober living takes additional measures like cleaning ceiling fans 
quarterly, gas detectors and more
Considering all the VAST measures we take for fire safety, I’m hard pressed to believe that this 
bill that would force nearly 35-40 residences to go under, is a bill that can be justified. It stands 
to put 10 human beings in my house, and potentially over 400 people in recovery across the 
state, in the streets. We and many other programs simply can’t afford to install a system like this. 
Even if we had all the money to do this work, our landlord would not permit us to carry out the 
work. Never mind the additional cost for service, maintenance, testing and upkeep on these 
systems even if our landlord would let us. Closing is our only option if this bill passes.
My family at Portland Sober Living and I, as well as countless people in the recovery 
community, urge you to vote no. Thank you for your time and consideration.
    
