  
 
Laurie Osher, PhD  
13 Mayo Street  
Orono, ME 04473  
Phone:   (207) 944 -6743 
Laurie.Osher@legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE   04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 
 
                January 30, 2023  
 
Testimony of Representative Laurie Osher in opposition to  
 LD 109, An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in 
Recovery Residences  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
Good morning Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. I am Representative Laurie Osher 
from Orono. Thank you for the opportunity to present my opposition to  LD 109, An Act to 
Impro ve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery Residences.  
 
LD 109 repeals the law that allows recovery residences to be considered single -family homes or 
duplex buildings for the purposes of fire safety requirements.  
 
My concerns about LD 109 are these: F irst, the bill proposes a change that is not necessary.  
Second, passing the bill puts Maine at risk of violating two Federal laws. Third, the requirements 
proposed in this bill will put a large financial burden on business people that own the buildings 
housing the recovery homes. Fourth, the chance of getting contractors to do the work in a timely 
manner is slim. As such, this bill will result in the elimination of some of the already too few 
places  in which Maine’s citizens recovering from substance abuse  can live while they do the 
challenging work of transitioning to long -term sobriety.   
 
The bill isn’t necessary because the Maine Association of Recovery Residences (MARR) has 
strict guidelines for resident safety and facility operation. The fire codes fo r these homes are 
adequate to ensure the safety of tenants. Initial certification and annual re -certifications require a 
rigorous fire safety inspection. In fact, the Attorney General’s Office stated that if this bill passes 
and recovery houses are require d to install sprinklers, Maine would likely be in violation of the 
Fair Housing Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act.  
 

The estimated cost per recovery home to install sprinklers is between $20,000 and $40,000.  
Landlords who install the sprinklers w ould need to raise rental rates to cover the costs, making 
the recovery homes unaffordable to their clients. Where these costs must be covered by the 
recovery home operators, it is likely that they will be unable to afford the changes and will have 
to clos e. The sprinklers would need to be installed by plumbers with this specialized expertise 
and the openings created for the plumbing would need to be patched by finish carpenters. With 
the limited number of plumbers and carpenters and the demand for their se rvices since the start 
of the COVID pandemic, the likelihood of getting the work done within a year of the bill’s 
passage is slim. I mention this because I was a general contractor from 2010 to 2022, and I 
experienced the challenge of finding subcontractor s to work at my client’s homes. If the building 
owners can find and employ these contractors, the financial outlay will be significant. It is likely 
that if this bill passes , most  of these homes will close.  
 
Penobscot County is currently facing crisis le vel figures of drug overdoses and deaths and 
homelessness. Across the state, we need more recovery houses, not fewer. This bill compromises 
our ability to care for recovering Mainers, inhibiting the possibility that they will be able to find 
safe and stabl e housing with support services. These Mainers are our family members and they 
need us to refrain from putting roadblocks in their path to recovery.  
 
MARR -certified recovery residences give people in early recovery one of the best environments 
for starting  their healing journey. This law would take away this option for our constituents. I 
urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass.  
 
  
