Testimony on 
L.D. 109, “An Act to Improve the Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery 
Residences”
Criminal Justice and Public Safety
Monday, January 30, 2023
Good Afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Lisa 
Sockabasin and I am a citizen of the Passamaquoddy Tribe. I am submitting written testimony 
today as a member of the public. I am in strong opposition to L.D. 109 An Act to Improve the 
Safety of Individuals Living in Recovery Residences. I currently work in the public health, 
wellness, and recovery field as the co-CEO of Wabanaki Public Health & Wellness (WPHW). 
An organization that has grown quickly, urgently trying to meet the recovery and healing needs 
within our communities and tribal Nations.  
Our country and state remain in crisis. It is a crisis felt by many and a crisis that will take all of 
us to solve. For those of us working in the healing and recovery fields, we know the hours we 
spend supporting people who are ready to heal and serving those who have not yet found their 
way. We work in this field because of the love and protection we hold for all those suffering 
from substance use disorder and trauma. And while I appreciate L.D. 109’s name, and hopefully 
the intention of this bill, it does exactly the opposite of its words “to improve safety”. The 
hundreds of people who find safety and wellness within the existing recovery homes in Maine 
today are at risk. Safe, supportive, family style housing has offered many of our tribal 
community members and others the lifesaving housing supports necessary for comprehensive 
humane healing.  I ask you to oppose L.D. 109, a bill that will negatively impact many lives 
today desperately trying to heal. 
The organization I help to lead has experience in licensing, developing healing centers, and 
recovery housing. We have recently installed a sprinkler system for a building that will be used 
for a service that requires sprinklers, medication withdrawal services. The installation process 
was long and expensive. Our recent installation costing more than $165,000, a price tag 
unattainable for many nonprofits and recovery residence owners. The time and resources needed 
for sprinkler installation, in homes that have already been deemed family homes, is not 
improving safety, it is reckless. People are finding sobriety in these homes, people are feeling 
safety in these homes, people are experiencing healing in these homes. Please keep this healing 
going.  
Distinguished members of this committee, thank you for your time and I hope you will join me 
and all the others here today in opposing L.D. 109. This work, critical to the success of the State 
of Maine overall. 
In partnership and with gratitude, 
Lisa Sockabasin 
Passamaquoddy Citizen 
Lisa.Sockabasin@icloud.com 
Lisa Sockabasin
Greene
LD 109
Please see final testimony attached, my apologies. Disregard the previous submission.

