Michael Beck
Bangor
LD 109
Testimony of Michael Beck of Bangor, Maine on January 30, 2023
(These remarks to be delivered in person before the committee.)
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. 
My name is Michael Beck. I am a resident of Bangor, Maine.  I am testifying today in
opposition to LD 109.  I offer this testimony not just as an ally of the recovery 
community, but as a father raising children in the same neighborhood as a recovery 
home. I appreciate the work my neighbors in recovery are putting in. Not just into 
their own recovery, but for their contributions to our city as fellow Bangoreans. They 
possess a spirit of service that I admire and am grateful for.  Recovery houses have 
made Bangor a better place. 
Recovery houses provide a stable and safe environment to individuals who are 
recovering from addiction and rebuilding their lives. LD 109 would undo the good 
work this committee and the legislature did in 2019 with LD 353. It removed a 
financial barrier to opening more of this type of housing.  If LD 109 becomes law, the
financial cost of additional building code compliance could ultimately lead to the 
closure of many of these recovery houses. The closure of any recovery housing would
be a tremendous loss to individuals who are trying to overcome addiction and would 
put them at a greater risk of relapse.  We are in a statewide crisis with addiction and 
should be taking actions that expand access to recovery, not diminish it. 
It has taken great courage for the people here today to share their personal stories of 
recovery, especially in a formal setting such as this. Throughout all of this process 
they have leaned on each other and supported one another.  They are not strangers 
that simply share the same landlord and randomly pass each other in the hallways.  In 
each of these recovery homes they look out for each other.  They lift each other up. 
They share the same food and even take turns preparing meals. These are people who 
care about one another. That sounds exactly like my family. Those living in recovery 
houses are a family, bonded through struggle and purpose. The current Maine law that
recovery homes are to be treated as a family residence couldn’t be more appropriate. 
LD 109 would strip that away.
It is my testimony today that the financial burdens placed on recovery houses by 
enacting LD 109 would do tremendous harm to Maine. Not only to recovery houses 
and their residents, but to communities like Bangor who are beneficiaries of the spirit 
of service and outreach that our neighbors in recovery generously give us. I am asking
this committee to reject this bill.
Thank you for your time and for the chance to speak today. 
Michael Beck
Bangor, Maine
