To the Legislature:
I have appeared before this body years ago to support substance abuse services and other programs 
being maintained at their current levels at the Bolduc Correctional Facility, knowing that the relevant 
proposal would harm the mission of correction that needs to be present in institutions that bear that 
label. I worked in support of Crossroads way back when there was an effort to shut down one of the 
way-too-few programs for women in the state. I’ve been doing this for a long time, and I’ve seen too 
many political movements to eliminate good programs, one of which allowed my addicted son to 
reclaim his life.
This letter is similar. I’m not certain what is to be gained by adding restrictive measures to sober homes. 
We are in the midst of an epidemic that is costing Maine more than one young life per day. To make it 
more difficult for the using population to get help, and for those of us in the helping professions to give 
it, is beyond reason. In fact, it offends the very idea of being concerned about this nationwide problem.
Maine already is woefully unprepared to handle the numbers of people who not only need, but who 
want, treatment; who want simply a safe place to live, surrounded by like-minded individuals working to 
change their lives, to alter their paths, their futures. I’ve seen positive programs closed by recently-
defeated politicians (who will remain anonymous) who fail to grasp the critical importance of a 
residence that supports people who struggle with chemical dependence.
This is not the time to make it more difficult to offer help to this population. There are already too few 
alternatives for those seeking help, and this is even more true for those who have been incarcerated for 
drug charges. 
Consider, if you will, the frustration of working with someone in a correctional facility, watching him 
start to get it, beginning to have hope, to see himself as something other than a loser, only to lose it 
when there’s no place safe for him to go after his release. I have lost too many former clients to 
overdoses, and the presence of sober houses at least offers possibility to those who need it.
If you truly are concerned about the opioid epidemic; if you truly are concerned about being part of the 
solution to this killer of young people; if you are truly concerned about a problem that doesn’t care if 
you’re the son or daughter of a politician: then how can you consider making it more difficult to find 
safety?
Thank you.
Richard K. Horton, MSEd, LADC
Enso Recovery Senior Clinician
Concerned Parent
