TESTIMONY OF RICHARD MCCARTHY 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
OFFICE OF STATE FIRE MARSHAL 
(Neither for Nor Against) L.D. 109 
“An Act to Improve Safety for Individuals Living in Recovery Residences" 
Presented by: Representative Landry 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
Hearing Date: Monday, January 30th, 2023 at 10:00 AM in Room 436, State House 
Good morning Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. 
My name is Richard McCarthy and I am the Assistant State Fire Marshal for the 
Inspections and Prevention Division for The Office of the State Fire Marshal. I am here today 
representing the Department of Public Safety and the Office of State Fire Marshal to testify 
neither for nor against this bill. 
The Department of Public Safety includes the Maine State Police and the Maine Drug 
Enforcement Agency who are working to protect the public by disrupting drug trafficking 
networks. The Department of Public Safety supports recovery as a critical aspect of the State's 
comprehensive approach to confronting the opioid crisis that has gripped our state and our 
nation. The Department of Public Safety also includes the Office of the State Fire Marshal. The 
mission of the Office of State Fire Marshal is to prevent loss of life and property for those that 
live, work and visit in the State of Maine. Our goal is to protect against the devastation of fire, 
explosions and life safety hazards with integrity and fairness through fire prevention, public 
education, planning, research, investigation and enforcement of enacted laws and rules. 
To that end, the State of Maine has adopted the NFPA (National fire Protection 
Association) Life Safety Code 101, 2018 edition. A single-family home is defined within that asa 
"dwelling unit that is occupied by members of a single family with not more than three 
outsiders if any in rented rooms" . This is the occupancy type that many of us live in and are 
familiar with. Since there is no definition of family within the Code it is left up to the ”Authority
Having Jurisdiction" (AHJ) to interpret whether the occupants of a home are to be considered a 
single family. If a building is a single-family dwelling, there are safety requirements within the 
code for that occupancy type. However, if it does not qualify as single family the next level 
would be rooming and lodging where up to 16 people in rented rooms may reside. lfthere are 
more than 16 people in rented rooms the building would be considered a dormitory. Any 
dwelling in this category would require more comprehensive Fire Safety measures to be added 
to the building such as sprinklers and fire alarms. 
There are currently two kinds of substance use recovery residences in the view of my 
Office. First, there are those that choose to be licensed by the Department of Health and 
Human Services as a "Private Non-Medical lnstitution" (PNMI). There is no statutory 
requirement that recovery residences be licensed by DHHS. Our office inspects the substance 
abuse recovery facilities that are licensed by DHHS. These facilities by statute are considered 
small residential care facilities if housing under 16 residents, or large facilities if over 16. 
Current law requires this kind of facility to meet certain requirements of the Life Safety Code, 
including that they have sprinklers and fire alarm systems. 
Second is the kind of recovery residence that we do not have any oversight over 
because they are defined as a single~family dwelling and therefore fall under local jurisdiction, 
they do not have to meet any specific alarm or sprinkler requirements outside that of a single 
family home. Under current law these kinds of residences are not included in the definition ofa 
rooming or lodging facility that would require sprinklers and alarm systems, even though they 
otherwise may meet the definition because it may not be a "dwelling unit that is occupied by 
members ofa single family with not more than three outsiders if any in rented rooms" . lfa 
dwelling is considered a recovery residence, they are exempt from the more comprehensive 
Life Safety Code requirements because they are defined as a single family dwelling no matter if 
they house 3 or 30 individuals. 
Recovery Houses and their residents have protection under the Americans with 
Disabilities as to not prohibit or restrict where these recovery houses are located or impose 
unreasonably burdensome requirements on them. It is less clear whether this protection 
extends to the Fire and Building Codes. This issue was reviewed by a member of the Maine 
State Attorney General’s Office and the decision, in part, was as follows. "A failure on the part 
of the State of Maine to make reasonable accommodation, namely non-enforcement of the 
sprinkler rules, would likely be found to violate the Fair-Housing Act and the Americans with 
Disabilities Act." Our office wasl advised to allow these substance recovery homes to operate 
without the sprinklers that would be otherwise be required by law. The Attorney General’s 
Office has recently reviewed its earlier opinion of February 2019 and confirmed that it 
represents the current state of the law. 
l would be happy to answer any questions you may have at this time or during the work 
session.
