142 Center Street %} s,’ Mg,V 
Brewer, Maine 04412 BARN 
bangorrecoverg@gmail.com ye" 1"" 
(207) 561 9444 4, @§g/ 
&0GOR p,$€§éQQ' 
VERY NE" 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 109 
January 30"‘ , 2023 
Dear Senator Bee-Bee Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, 
My name is Robert Fickett, I am the Executive Director of the Bangor Area Recovery Network, 
a person in long-term recovery from substance use disorder, and a resident of Brewer, Maine. I am here 
before you today to give testimony in opposition to LDIO9. 
As a person in long-term recovery, supportive and affordable recovery housing has playeda 
crucial role in my ability to engage in and sustain my journey to health and wellness. Today, I am still 
engaged in that process through managing a recovery residence. The young men I live and wor"k with 
there are, in large part, able to be successful in their recovery because this affordable and accessible 
housing was available to them when they needed it the most. 
As the Director of the Bangor Area Recovery Network, I am also here with the honor and 
privilege of being an advocate and voice for our recovering community. My staff and I engage with 
hundreds of individuals each month to engage them in their recovery, offer them support, and connect 
them with resources they need to sustain their recovery. Recovery housing is an essential ingredient for 
a vast number of the individuals we serve. We cannot afford to diminish or hamper the expansion of this 
valuable resource in any way. 
LDI 09 could place an insurmountable financial and logistical burden upon the owners and 
operators of these recovery residences and as a result would make this valuable recovery support less 
accessible and affordable for those who need it most. Therefore, on behalfof myself, the Bangor Area 
Recovery Network staff and Board of Directors, and our recovering community, I urge you to vote that 
LDIO9 ought not pass. 
Thank you for your time. 
Respectfully, 
/(pt 21. ztuetv" 
Robert Fickett 
Executive Director 
Bangor Area Recovery Network 
(207) 945-8090 
robert@bango1recovery.org
