844 Stevens Ave. 1st floor REAR, Portland ME 04103 
www.mainerecoveryresidences.com
Testimony of Ronald D. Springel, MD - Executive Director
Maine Association of Recovery Residences
Testimony: Ought NOT to Pass
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Ron 
Springel, a resident of Scarborough. I am a retired addiction medicine physician and 
currently the executive director of MARR, the Maine Association of Recovery 
Residences. I am a person in long-term recovery, representing the organization. 
MARR is a 501 c-3 Maine non-profit organized in 2016. 
We serve the entire state and currently inspect and certify 67 recovery 
residences with 700 beds in 11 counties. 
Our certification criteria are national, evidence-based standards of the 
National Alliance of Recovery Residences. These standards include 
numerous fire safety standards. 
We have a staff of 3 FT employees, 11 volunteer board members, and several 
consultants and other volunteers. 
We are funded by the Maine Office of Behavioral Health and via grants from the 
Pew Charitable Trusts, and others. 
When I first heard of Representative Landry’s Bill, LD 109, I was eager to review its 
contents as any effort to improve safety in a RR gets my attention. However, my heart 
sank when I realized it was just a misnamed effort to undo the hard wok MARR and 
many others put into passing LD 353 in 2019. It was at this very committee the bill was 
heard, passed unanimously, went under the gavel and was signed by Gov. Mills.
Why did MARR and other recovery advocates need the protections of LD 353?  
Beginning in 2016, the year MARR was founded by six dedicated recovery residence 
operators who wanted to see Maine adopt the national standards developed in 2011 by 
NARR, we repeatedly saw roadblocks put in front of would-be operators when they tried 
to open a recovery residence in their town or city. Such efforts, by town officials, 
occurred in Sanford, Biddeford, Brewer and several others. Anyone familiar with 
recovery residences knows the Housing operators took the opportunity to educate local 
officials that recovery house residents are people in early recovery from substance use 
disorder, and therefore a protected class under the ADA and Fair Housing Act. 
Anyone who researched theC caselaw knows and federal rulings have clearly 
reinforced theat requirement that ingRRs be treated as anything other than the same as 
844 Stevens Ave. 1st floor REAR, Portland ME 04103 
www.mainerecoveryresidences.com
a family home. Any other treatment of these houses breaches anti-discrimination 
safeguards. That is why, in 2019, AG Aaron Frey submitted his opinion that. “Our office 
was advised to allow these substance recovery homes to operate without the sprinklers 
that would be otherwise be required by law." Assistant Fire Marshall Richard McCarthy 
put in writing his department’s position saying essentially the same thing.
This bill would repeal the Maine law (Sec. 1. 25 MRSA §2452, sub-§4) that considers RRs 
as single-family homes for purposes of fire safety. To put this in perspective, RRs would 
again face local officials that have put up roadblocks and required sprinkler systems in 
recovery residences. In a survey taken last week of our membership, … we 
estimate we would lose in excess of 300 beds if sprinkler systems were required. 
Of the 67 RR in operation today, 40 % of the operators without sprinklers would 
have to close. 
One could look at LD 109 as an effort, albeit uninformed, to genuinely improve recovery 
residence safety. Or, one could make a different interpretation. Is it a coincidence that 
this bill was submitted the day after a constituent of Mr. Landy notified her town she was 
planning to open a RR? 
3 minutes………………
In 2021, the most recent year for which data is available, there were over 6000 structure 
fires in Maine with 27 fatalities. (State Fire Marshall’s Office) In that same year, Maine 
suffered well over 600 drug overdose deaths. And 2022 may will be even higher. 
Recovery residences serve as safe places for people in recovery. Losing over 300 beds 
means that many fewer safe places for people in the very early days, weeks, and 
months of recovery, and perhaps more overdose deaths.
If LD 109 were passed, and LD 353 were repealed, RR would once again be at the 
mercy of local officials, and we would experience the same roadblocks as in the past. In 
a survey taken last week of our membership, … we estimate we would lose in excess of 
300 beds. Of the 67 RR in operation today, XX % of the operators would have to close 
with a loss of 300-356 beds.
If the sponsors of this bill are serious about improving RR safety, I urge them to 
withdraw this bill and join us in meaningful legislative efforts to provide funding to a RR 
Safety Improvement initiative that could fund advanced fire protection systems to 
operators. As one RR operator, who happened to be an engineer told me recently, 
smoke alarms save lives, sprinklers save buildings. Would it not be a tragedy to pass a 
measure that might save a few buildings at the sacrifice of many many lives?
844 Stevens Ave. 1st floor REAR, Portland ME 04103 
www.mainerecoveryresidences.com
In the following testimonies, you will hear from Amanda Ricci of Farmington, who has 
fought for months to open a RR, from Scott Pardy, an operator working miracles in 
Bangor who will share his experience with the state fire marshal’s office in 2019, From 
Brittany Reichman and Madison Weymouth, MARR inspectors who will detail their 
stringent fire safety guidelines, and via ZOOM, MARR board president Alison Webb, 
author of Recovery Allies, who will share more details about the organization’s mission.
I urge the committee to vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 109.
Respectfully Submitted,
Ronald D. Springel, MD
Scarborough, ME
01-30-2023What organizations are opposing LD 109?

