Hello, my name is Scott Pardy. lam lifelong resident of Bangor and a man in long term recovery. lam 
the founder, owner and operator of Fresh Start Sober Living in Bangor as well as a director on the board 
of MARR. Fresh Start was founded in October of 2018 as a sober home for men getting out ofjail or 
prison, wanting recovery with no safe and affordable place to go. This started with some hoops to jump 
through with the city including meeting with the city planner, code enforcement officer and the appeals 
board in order to allow for more than 5 unrelated people living under one roof. Because this was new 
to me and was new to the city of Bangor, we were asked to obtain some sort of variance from the state 
fire marshaI’s office. 
This is from an email sent to me on August 22, 2018. 
Scott, 
After reading your rules and applications l believe you fall under the Sober house protection provided by the federal 
Americans with disabilities standard. With this being said there is case law that prohibits State and local authorities 
from imposing fire safety requirements on your facility. We would view your facility as a single family home and as such 
would defer all permitting and inspections to the City of Bangor. 
Richard McCarthy 
Assistant State Fire Marshal 
Prevention & Inspection Division 
Office of State Fire Marshal 
A month later we received the "all go" from the city of Bangor. 
Today we have 12 homes and 89 beds. All our homes are l\/IARR certified and inspected. Our mission 
statement reads ”safe and affordable housing for men and women seeking recovery. Fresh Start works 
with DOC, Maine pre—trial services, Penobscot county drug court, Penobscot county jail, the city of 
Bangor, Bangor Area Recovery Network and many others. 
Putting any additional financial burden on Fresh Start could result in (A) closing homes which would 
definitely add to the homeless population as well as add to the overdose count. (B) Fresh Start is fully 
self-supporting and would have to raise rates. The cost of sprinkling all the homes could be in excess of 
$500,000.00. Raising rates is not an option to our members and defeats the mission. 
LD 109 could mandate the closing of many recovery residences and the result would be catastrophic. 
I ask that you leave LD 353 as it was designed to do. It allows for ”Safe and Affordable housing for men 
and women seeking recovery. ” 
Thank you, 
Scott Pardy
