LB ‘£09: An Act to IHtQ_!“€)y_£_gitfQ§};;i;Q§ “ 7_§t1§§i ’i{§€itt21iS tiivittg in Recovery Residences 
Sponsor: Rep. Laundry of Farmington (D) 
Co-sponsors: Representative LaJoie of Lewiston 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Steve Danzig, I am the executive director of 
ENSO Recovery. I am also a person in long term recovery, recently celebrating 25 years of 
continuous sobriety. 
We operate 2 substance use and mental health outpatient offices, 4 MARR certified recovery 
residences in Augusta and Sanford totaling 46 beds, we also provide intensive substance use 
disorder treatment programs in Kennebec and Two Bridges Regional jail. 
The population we serve come from incarceration, hospitals, homeless shelters or off the 
streets. Most arrive with the clothes they have on and not much else. N0 family support, no 
healthy social supports. Living in a recovery residence affords men and women the opportunity 
to start piecing together a life worth living, a life full of firsts, a life full of promise and hope in 
recovery. 
My journey of recovery began in a house very much like the ones we now operate. I arrived all 
those years ago as a 120 lb high school dropout, living in a train station with a several hundred 
dollar per day addiction. I stayed at the house for over a year, making sure I was building a 
supportive, sustainable network of recovery. I now have multiple degrees and licenses. I not 
only work locally but also assist families nationwide with navigating treatment for their loved 
ones. I say this not to put myself on a pedestal. I say this to emphasize that recovery is possible 
and the goals are limitless. I have witnessed this over and over through sober living programs. 
Sober homes provide a very unique component to recovery in that the time limits can vary 
greatly; we have had folks in our houses for over 2 years. Traditional treatment centers cannot 
provide that length of time to reintegrate back into society. I spent 15 years in active substance 
abuse and addiction, it was going to take time to solidify recovery. 
LD 109 would have a significant impact on recovery residences in Maine. Many beds, possibly 
100's, would be lost including the 46 beds at Enso Recovery. 
In my 25 years of working in the field of recovery I have witnessed great strides towards making 
treatment in all of its forms more accessible to everyone. LD 109 if passed will havea 
catastrophic impact on the progress made. 
Thank you. 
Steve Danzig 
LCSW, LADC, CCS, CIP 
Executive Director 
ENSO Recovery
