Good morning, Senator BB Carter, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal and Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Todd Wilson a person in recovery, a Certified Recovery coach, and 
manager at A Hand Up in Lewiston Maine. I am coming to you to oppose LD 109. 
I became a member of the hand up family on October 13th of last year. Prior to that 
I spent 42 days at the St Francis Recovery Center where I received a strong Foundation 
and Recovery. Along with dreams and aspirations. 
While being at the recovery center I met a gentleman named Johnny Clark. WhenI 
met this man, he was willing to give me a safe place to come to after rehab. This place 
was called A Hand Up and he told me it was family there and that he would love for me 
to be a part of it. 
Since being A hand Up, l’ve made some dear friends I'm proud to call my family. 
With the help of my Recovery Family, I was encouraged to do the things I never 
dreamed possible. In my time being here I became a Certified Recovery coach anda 
Manager at A Hand Up. My dreams are coming true. 
So, I'm asking you guys to please keep my family together. “As long as The 
ties bind us together are stronger than those that would tear us apart, All will be well. 
“Without my family, I would be alone. I would not be well, I cannot do it 
alone.Cause,failure would certainly come an death only a breath away without my 
strongest support system, my family at A Hand Up recovery house. It's nice to havea 
safe place that's warm with love, people to come home to, a place called home. People 
need family. 
Also, it would be a disservice to the community. Since A Hand Up was 
established, we have had socials were people in the community show up enjoy their 
time an eat, and we also have donated our time to churches and other organizations in 
the community. 
I am opposed to bill LD109.Not only would ruin people’s lives, displace, and do 
nothing good for the opioid epidemic, also again it would be a disservice for the greater 
good of the community. Thank you for your time and patience. 
Sincerely, 
Todd Wilson
