Chairperson Beebe-Center, Chairperson Salisbury, Members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee and Staff 
My name is William McKenzie from Augusta, and I am a member of the board of 
directors of Tucker’s House, a recovery residence for women in Bridgton. ButI 
come here today to testify in opposition to LD 109 as a private citizen and 
treatment professional who has worked almost 4 decades in the ﬁeld of substance 
use disorder. I have a master’s degree in counseling psychology witha 
concentration in addictions treatment and am a licensed alcohol and drug counselor 
in the State of Maine. I have worked in detox units, inpatient facilities, outpatient 
programs. IOPs, residential facilities, in hospital settings and correctional centers. I 
have been a line counselor, a clinical supervisor, program director, and board 
member of a number of organizations. I was also an adjunct faculty member in the 
behavioral health department at Southern Maine Community College for twenty 
years. I am in long term recovery as well. 
I have loved my jobs. I have felt privileged to be able to participate in people’s 
recovery. What I have hated is the work required to overcome the obstacles put in 
the way of that recovery: inadequate funding, lack of transportation, a dearth of 
treatment programs offering appropriate levels of intervention, but mostly I have 
been frustrated by the bias, the stigma, and the fear surrounding this terrible brain 
disorder. It has been said that the opposite of addiction is not sobriety, the opposite 
of addiction is connection. I have spent most of my professional life trying to 
create a safe space for people to heal. And that means connection. That is 
fundamental to recovery. That is what recovery residences do. That is why they 
were designated single-family homes. That was done on purpose. Because we are 
family. We are all family. 
LD 109 will result in a signiﬁcant loss of residential beds at a time when death by 
overdose is continuing to impact the state, when housing shortages force too many 
people into too few shelters and when funding sources are increasingly challenged 
by an uncertain economy. This is not the time to place more barriers in the road to 
recovery. We connect best when we laugh together and when we cry together. 
That’s What recovery residences provide. We are family. Do not deny us that. 
I urge you to vote “Ought Not To Pass” on LD 109. Thank you. 
William McKenzie, M.Ed., LADC
