      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 14, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1310, An Act to Establish a State Emergency Rental Assistance Program  
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my 
name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine ( CHOM ).  
CHOM  aims to house  Maine’s most vulnerable people and advocates on their behalf. .  I also chair 
the Maine Homeless Policy Committee, the Maine Continuum of Care Board of Directors, as well as the ESAC Long Term Stayers Committee.   
 
I am testifying in support of LD 1310, An Act to Establish a State Emergency Rental Assistance 
Program .   
 
Maine has a shortage of Section 8 and other forms of rental assistance.  There are some 12,000 
vouchers and our waiting lists have been as high as 26,000 people, with some waiting for up to 10 
years.  One of the missing links is 2 -year rental assistance.  We have very little of that in Maine.  
This bill would provide more.  Two years is often enough to pull someone out of homelessness and 
allow a lengthy period of stability after which people remain in housing.  I would not recommend 
Maine attempt to solve the shortfall of Section 8 by creating a state program for permanent rental assistance.  We really need federal programs to help Maine with that.   
 
But Maine can create a 2 -year rental assis tance program and stabilize a lot of people , and that is 
what this bill does.  A 2 -year rental assistance program would provide a heavy lift to move many 
people out of homelessness and into stability.  No one does better in homelessness. Everyone does 
better with housing.  
 General Assistance is now serving as a default housing program, and it is a very inefficient and 
cumbersome approach.  Having an ERA tool would simplify the path for people to exit 
homelessness and ultimately poverty.   
 
Homelessness eme rged as a national issue in the mid -1980s after HUD’s budget was significantly 
cut.  There  was a direct correlation.  Prior to the pandemic there was a 25 -year steady pattern that 
whenever the supply of Section 8 was frozen, all the state’s family shelters filled up within 6 months.  Once each freeze ended, family shelters across the state would empty right back out.  
Again, the correlation was evident.  Mos t families are circumstantially homeless; they fall behind 
on rent because of housing affordability issues.  Rental assistance solves that very effectively .   
 
The number of encampments in the Portland area is at historically high numbers.  The Portland 
Parks and Recreation Department is reporting 102 encampments just on city parks land as of 4/1.  
The PATH Program in Cumberland County is working with 130 people reporting to be unsheltered 
and around 20 people sleeping in their vehicles.  Based on PATH’s re ferral list there could be 50 -
60 more people unsheltered not on their caseload.  This is just in the greater Portland area.  Bangor 
is down to 43 people outside from a high of 170, and this is still unprecedented. Communities 
throughout Maine are experienc ing the same drastic increase in unsheltered homelessness and 
encampments.  And the situation is only likely to get worse as weather improves and hotel and 
warming shelter funding ends at the end of April. 
 
Establishing a State ERA Program could assist Mai ne in addressing this current crisis  as there is 
not enough rental assistance or affordable housing for those who need it.  This legislation would be 
a huge step in filling that gap if it is done well.  
 
 
Let’s work to create sound solutions, rooted in best  practices, to end and prevent homelessness in 
Maine . 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.    
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
