   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Barbara Burt, Vice -chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lucy Van Hook  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Testimony in support  of LD 462, “An Act to Assist Persons Experiencing Homelessness 
in Areas of High Rent by Seeking a Waiver from the Federal Government ,” and LD 1310 , 
“An Act to Establish a State Emergency Rental Assistance Program .” 
Josie Phillips , Policy Fellow  
4/14/2023  
 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Gere and Pierce, and all members of the Housing Committee. My 
name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am testifying 
in favor of LD s 462 and 1310  because they provide much -needed relief to Maine renters who 
are struggling to  stay stably housed in the midst of an affordable housing crisis that has been  
decades in the making.  By providing this relief, the bills would also make our economy more 
stable,  as people with stable housing are more productive and better able to provide for 
themselves and their families.  
 
As mentioned in my other testimony today on LDs 226 and 724, the costs of owning or renting 
housing in Maine have been rising faster than the state’s median household income  since the 
turn of the century . The reasons for the affordable housing crisis are varied — with various 
groups identifying stagnating wages,i plummeting construction in the wake of the Great 
Recession ,ii restrictive zoning policies favoring single family housing,iii and more recently, 
elevated construction c osts as factors.iv A commonality among all these factors is that they are 
largely out of the control of individual Mainers. Mainers, particularly those with low incomes, are 
bearing the brunt of a crisis for which they have little responsibility and little power t o address.  
For this reason, extending rental assistance to familie s at risk of losing their housing makes 
sense from an equity perspective.  
 
Increasing access to rental assistance also makes sense from an economic perspective. Also 
mentioned in my other testimony today is the link between housing security, personal mental 
and physical health, and broader economic prosperity. When people are healthier, they are 
more productive, and our entire economy benefits as a result. Losing housing represents a 
significant threat to people’s mental and physical health, but receiving rental assistance can 
help avoid these outcomes.  Housing subsidies have been shown to improve mental health 
outcomes  and access to health care .vvi The pandemic Emergency Rental Assistance Program 
specifically was found to have improved food security and mental health .vii Providing people 
with the support they need to remain in their homes has been shown to be an effective 
safeguard for the health of M aine communities and, by extension, the prosperity of Maine’s 
economy.  
 
LDs 462 and 1310 would each provide a more effective safeguard for families in need of stable 
housing. LD 462 would instruct Maine Housing to request a waiver from the federal governme nt, 
allowing the maximum amount of assistance received through Section 8 housing vouchers to 
accurately reflect the fair market rents of the areas where recipients are located.  LD 1310  would 
create an emergency rental assistance program similar to the now -expired federal Emergency 
Rental Assistance Program, which provided  critical relief to more than 33,000 Maine 
households.viii It is unlikely that rental assistance in Maine will be able to meet the actual 
demand for assistance  — only one in four households eligible for Section 8 vouchers actually 
receive them,ix and the federal Emergency Rental Assistance Program spen t approximately 
$500,00 0 per day.x Any funding that can be dedicated to rental assistance, while inevitably 
 
   
 unable to meet the full scale of the crisis, will provide necessary stability to Maine families and 
the state economy.  
 
Because of the critical economic stability that LDs 462 and 1310 would provide to Maine renters  
— renters who are struggling to make do under a statewide affordable housing crisis far beyond 
their responsibility or control  — I urge this committee to vote yes on these bills.  
 
 
 
i Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis , “The Affordable Housing Shortage: Considering the Problem, Causes and 
Solutions .” https://www.minneapolisfed.org/article/2002/the -affordable -housing -shortage -considering -the-
problem -causes -and-solutions  
ii Center for American Progress, “ The Rental Housing Crisis Is a Supply Problem That Needs Supply Solutions .” 
https://www.americanprogress.org/article/the -rental -housing -crisis -is-a-supply -problem -that-needs -supply -
solutions/  
iii The White House, “ President Biden Announce s New Actions to Ease the Burden of Housing Costs .” 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing -room/statements -releases/2022/05/16/president -biden -announces -new -
actions -to-ease -the-burden -of-housing -costs/  
iv Fannie Mae, “ U.S. Housing Shortage: Everything, Everywh ere, All at Once .” 
https://www.fanniemae.com/research -and-insights/perspectives/us -housing -shortage  
v National Low Income Housing Coalition. “ Follow -Up Family Options Study: Long -Term Housing Subsidies are Most 
Effective Intervention for Homeless Families .” https://nlihc.org/resource/follow -family -options -study -long -term -
housing -subsidies -are-most -effective -intervention  
vi Health Affairs, “ HUD Housing Assistance Associated With Lower Uninsurance Rates And Unmet Medical Need .” 
https://www.healthaffai rs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2016.1152  
vii Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University, “Short -Term Benefits of Emergency Rental Assistance 
Extend Beyond Housing.” https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/blog/short -term -benefits -emergency -rental -assistance -
extend-beyond -housing  
viii MaineHousing, “MaineHousing Pauses Emergency Rental Assistance Program.” 
https://www.mainehousing.org/news/news -detail/2022/09/30/mainehousing -pauses -emergency -rental -
assistance -program  
ix Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, “ More H ousing Vouchers: Most Important Step to Help More People 
Afford Stable Homes .” https://www.cbpp.org/research/housing/more -housing -vouchers -most -important -step -to-
help -more -people -afford -stable -homes  
x Maine Public, “ Municipalities warn of impending crisis for 8,500 Maine households, with rent relief nearing an 
end.” https://www.mainepublic.org/maine/2022 -10-31/municipalities -warn -of-impending -crisis -for-8-500-maine -
households -with -rent -relief -nearing -an-end 
