 
1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
   
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.org 
April 14, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D. 1310 An Act to Establish a State Emergency Rental 
Assistance Program before the Joint Standing Committee on Housing 
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Housing, 
 
Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal services organization that 
was established in Maine following the passage of the Older American’s Act 
in 1974. Since then, we have provided free legal assistance to our 
disadvantaged older adults when their basic human needs are at stake. This 
bill recognizes the housing crisis that is undeniably present in our State and 
proposes a concrete solution. We are here today to state our support.  
 
There is plenty of data that describes the challenges of living in Maine if 
your income is low or moderate and you rent your home. You have heard 
and read some of the statistics about our rental market from Maine Housing. 
They are a familiar and reliable source and the numbers are worth repeating.  
Here are some of the numbers. We present them with the hope that everyone 
remembers that each statistic represents a fact of daily life for real human 
beings living in every Maine city and town.   
   
“HUD’s Fair Market Rent for a 2-bedroom is unaffordable for the average 
renter household in all areas of Maine. 
 
 41.5% of renters are cost-burdened, paying more than 30% of their 
income on housing. Low- income renters are of course hit hardest by 
cost burden. 
 Approximately 39,716 renter households are extremely low-income 
(at or below 30% Area Median Income). 
 
2 
  Extremely low-income renters paying over 50% of their income on 
housing comprise 16% of all renters. 
 45% of all renter households are below 50% Area Median Income. 
 Small family renter households comprise the largest share of 
extremely low-income households. 
 54% of extremely low-income renters have substandard housing 
(defined as lacking complete plumbing or kitchen facilities).” 
 Single parent and older adult renters face the greatest housing 
challenges and greatest need. Nearly 15% of households with at least 
one person over 75 have extremely low incomes. 36% of households 
with one or more children aged 6 or under have extremely low 
incomes or low incomes. 
Report of the Commission to Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by 
Studying Land Use Regulations and Short-term Rentals (Appendix E) . 
https://legislature.maine.gov/opla/completed-study-reports/9289 ) 
 
Maine Housing’s Federal Emergency Rental Assistance Program Data 
Dashboard Report dated December 7, 2022 is also instructive. During the  
time that it operated (March of 2021 through November 2022), the program 
disbursed $137,098,735 for rent, $87,493,956 for rent arrearages, and over 
$58,000,000 for other housing related costs. Those funds supported over 
34,000 households and provided 248,357 months of rental assistance.  
 
The costs for other basic necessitates of life are also pressuring the same 
population experiencing housing challenges. As energy costs have risen, fuel 
for heating and transportation has become more expensive to buy. Food 
prices continue to rise but, exactly at the wrong time, the increased Federal 
SNAP benefits a/k/a “food stamps” have returned to much lower pre-
pandemic levels. MaineCare members whose eligibility was frozen by 
pandemic rules will begin to have their eligibility redetermined over the next 
twelve months. Over sixty thousand to ninety thousand will no longer be 
eligible and will lose their medical benefits.  
 
On the housing front, recent Maine Judicial Branch data shows that over 
4900 evictions actions were filed in 2022. That’s 25 percent more than the 
year before. Last year at LSE we experienced a 30 percent increase in cases 
involving evictions and in most of those cases the risk of homelessness was 
real. In our work, we expect that we will see even more evictions of our 
retired adults this year.  
 
 
3 
  
Given the perfect storm of high housing costs, the low stock of rental 
housing and the impending disappearance of programs keeping the most 
disadvantaged among us fed, housed and healthy, we believe creating an 
emergency rental program is a necessary public policy decision. This bill 
intends to do just that and we are in strong support of the idea. We hope that 
every member of this Committee will agree and vote ought to pass.  
 
Thank you for letting us share our thoughts with you today.  
 
