Alex Schild
Soltage, LLC
LD 1986
Dear members of the Energy, Utilities and Telecommunications Committee:
Soltage has been developing solar projects since 2005, and in the developing in the 
state of Maine since 2018. 
Soltage supports Maine’s net energy billing program because it provides critical 
electric bill savings while supporting the development of local, clean energy. We also 
have deep concerns with the OPA legislative effort to effectively kill the current 
program.
Community solar is a powerful solution to provide access to solar energy for all 
Mainers. The Maine Net Energy Billing program has jump started Maine into the 
future of clean and locally produced electricity, with actually built and operating solar
projects in Maine. While the Net Energy Billing program has faced challenges and 
has been modified, the momentum it produced should not be killed. 
So, we are highly concerned with calls to change the net energy billing rates for 
existing projects and those about to become operational. We signed agreements with 
customers that are counting on receiving the promised bill savings, which make a 
meaningful difference in their monthly budgets. We strongly urge the Legislature to 
avoid adopting any policies that would impact those savings and our ability to 
participate in the program. Further, we encourage the Legislature to take action to 
ensure community solar can continue to serve more customers, especially low-income
and disadvantaged customers, well into the future. 
Please vote YES on LD 1986.
The OPA’s proposed legislation would effectively shut down solar development in 
Maine, throwing millions of dollars of investment into disarray. The proposal would 
harm the 23,000 existing community solar consumers with no plan to address the 
costs they may incur, and eliminate the opportunity for Mainers of all income levels 
to use clean, affordable renewable energy.
We invested millions of dollars based on the legislation that was passed enabling the 
NEB program and specific project contracts. These retroactive changes to signed 
contracts are a major red flag for our institution. What other anti-business bills will 
Maine legislators pass, making it less attractive to us and other financial institutions to
do business here?
We need economic stability and to be forward-thinking about how we maximize 
energy and other investments in Maine.
Please vote NO on LD 1347.
We thank you kindly for your consideration.

