STATE  JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, UTILITIES, AND 
TECHNOLOGY 
Testimony of Brianna Cunliffe 
May 24th, 2023 
Testimony in Support 
 LD 1986: An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage 
Systems. 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and honorable members of the Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology Committee. My name is Brianna Cunliffe, and I am an Island Institute Fellow on 
Mount Desert Island with A Climate to Thrive (testifying on my own behalf). Through my 
community-centered work on energy justice and as a young person who has already lived 
through climate impacts from worsening storms, I am deeply concerned with how Maine’s 
policy on solar rates will impact our work toward a just transition. I strongly support LD 1986, 
An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems. 
 
As a Maine ratepayer, I am advocating for the innovative policy solutions contained within LD 1986, 
which will create a new distributed generation program for solar that is based on expert 
recommendations and allows Maine to leverage key federal funds. This bill offers a strategic 
pathway to protect ratepayers and accelerate the strategic deployment of distributed energy 
resources in Maine, aligned with The Maine Climate Council and Maine legislature’s ambitious 
clean energy goals.   
  
This stands in sharp contrast to the OPA’s amendment in LD 1347, which will be reviewed by 
this Committee during a working session tomorrow. LD 1347 would effectively repeal critical 
aspects of net-energy billing in the name of distorted figures which blame net-energy billing 
instead of natural gas for skyrocketing electricity prices. This repeal would make solar ownership 
inaccessible for most low and moderate-income households, leaving Mainers unable to access 
the significant federal funding for solar allocated by the Inflation Reduction Act. In effect, it will 
prioritize wealthy individuals and entities that can afford to purchase distributed generation 
projects outright.  
 
As a renter and a young person whose income remains low, my only pathway to solar ownership or any 
benefit from the renewable energy transition is contingent on the viability of the community-benefitting 
solar projects that LD 1347 would make next to impossible.  In light of this, I urge the legislature to 
adopt this bill, LD 1986, which provides a pathway to advance Maine’s climate action goals (which 
will protect the most vulnerable among us) while protecting low-income ratepayers.  
 
LD 1986 applies the expertise of diverse stakeholders and proposes a framework that will protect 
the viability of solar ownership for low and moderate-income households. If LD 1347 were to 
pass instead, members of our low and moderate-income communities would not be protected– 
their ability to access the benefits of solar ownership would only suffer.   
 
Thank you for your time and dedication to the people of Maine.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Brianna Cunliffe 
 
 
