 
 
101 Summer Street, 2nd Floor  
Boston, MA 02110  
Nexamp.com  
 Revolutionizing the Future  of Clean Energy  
 Testimony in support of LD 1986 filed by Sen. Lawrence  
An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy and 
Storage Systems  
May 24, 2023 
Chair Lawrence, Chair Zeigler and members of the Energy, Utilities and 
Technology Committee,  
My name is Carolyn Dykema and I am the Director of Northeast Policy for 
Nexamp. I appreciate this opportunity to offer testimony on LD 1986 filed by Sen. 
Lawrence  and Rep. Zeigler and to support testimony offered by our trade partners 
CCSA and MREA .    
Nexamp is a veteran -founded, vertically integrated clean energy company and the 
largest community solar provider in the country with offices in Portland, ME and 
head quartered in Boston, MA. As owner -operators of our projects, Nexamp is 
invested in Maine for the long term and committed to forging strong partnerships 
with state policymakers, landowners, and our many  Maine  customers which 
include municipalities, non -prof its, small businesses as well as residents of all 
income levels.  
We strongly support this legislation, which builds on Maine’s progress since 2019, 
adding renewable energy to the electric grid  while  provid ing clean energy  benefits 
 
 
 
 
to Mainers  across the sta te. We appreciate that the bill is founded on the 
extensive and collaborative work of the Distributed Generation Stakeholder group 
convened by the Governor’s Energy Office , and its recommendations for a cost -
effective successor program allowing for continu ed development of renewable 
energy projects and continued progress toward Maine’s clean energy goals .   
Specifically, Nexamp supports empowering the GEO with creating a program that 
allows continued development of projects that are between  1-5MW , with a 
requirement for projects to be co-located with energy storage.  Calculations from 
the GEO stakeholder group  showed that a well designed storage requirement will 
significantly boost the benefits from installed projects  and maximiz e energy and 
resiliency benefi ts of solar projects to the state .  
Importantly, the bill will also ensure that Maine is able to leverag e new federal 
dollars, including federal Greenhouse Gas Reduction funds, to bring savings and 
clean energy benefits to Mainers of limited means .  This measure will not only 
bring new funding into the state in support of renewable energy projects but 
most importantly, has the potential to make a real impact in the lives of resident s 
who are in greatest need.  
LD1986  will also give the GEO the flexibility to design a program that continues to  
encourage  direct participation of municipal ities and non -profits who have been 
 
 
 
 
active participants in the current NEB program, many of whom are Nexamp 
customers, and who to date have been on the front lines  driving Maine’s clean 
energy transition.  
Finally, the legislation proposes meaningful changes in the methodology that is 
transparent and fully accounts for the costs and many, varied benefits of the NEB 
program  to Mainers and ratepayers.  
Nexamp is  particularly appreciative that the legislation respects  existing NEB 
contracts  and doesn’t propose any retroactive changes that would impact these 
contracts .  
We than k Sen. Lawrence for his leadershi p in putting forward this thoughtful 
proposal and for the opportunity to  offer this testimony. We  respectfully request 
that the committee give this legislation  a favorable report.  
Sincerely,  
 
Carolyn Dykema  
Northeast Policy Director  
Nexamp  

 
 
 
 
 
