SUNDOCE S O LA IQ- 
Sundog Solar LLC 
P.O. Box 465 
222 East Main St. 
Searsport, ME 04974 May 24, 2023 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Representative Stanley Paige Zeigler, House Chair 
Committee Members on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
LD 1986, An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy 
Storage Systems 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the EUT committee, 
This statement provides written comments from Sundog Solar LLC in support of LD 1986. 
Sundog Solar and our hard working company of 32 employees has been operating out of 
Midcoast Maine since 2009. We offer photovoltaic, energy storage, heat pump and EV charging 
technologies, turnkey developments and installations to residential and commercial customers. 
We share the goal of our customers and ratepayers in reducing their energy costs and offer real 
solutions to this problem on a daily basis. 
We’re testifying in support of LD 1986 as this is a clear and simple bill that evolves the existing 
net energy billing program into a successor program that fosters the foundational intent of net 
energy billing. As we know, net energy billing is a critical and working instrument in bringing 
distributed generation and renewable energy projects onto the grid meeting the market demand 
for clean, reliable and affordable energy to all Maine ratepayers. LD 1986 largely focuses on 
surfacing the “Benefits ” of net energy billing and notjust the “costs” . Through multiple studies 
conducted specifically for Maine on the the benefits and costs of Net Energy Billing, it has been 
shown consistently in that the benefits include reduced supply and transmission costs as well as 
positive grid upgrades. What we don’t know here in Maine is what the net benefits and costs to 
the NEB program look like together, likely resulting in net benefits over costs. This concept of 
“Benefit” over “Cost" is why this industry exists worldwide. 
Being in the trenches of the renewable energy transition on a daily basis, provides a very real 
experience of the need for stability and regularity within the regulatory environment. The past 
several years have been the most difficult years of operation for our company in the state of 
Maine within the current regulatory environment. What's missing is consistency, durability and 
reliability to the process. Ratepayers need certainty that their investments made today will be 
realized in future years and protected. The NEB program at large has to evolve and not
SUNDOG S C! LA RN 
is mi dgrees. The need for a smart and evolved NEB program is clear, and the solution is only to 
move forwards and not backwards. 
We have real solutions at our fingertips that this bill points to as guidance, such as the report 
generated by the solar industry DG 2.0 working group. The smart report that the group released 
gave recommendations for a future program providing regulatory certainty to developers and 
ongoing clear benefits to ratepayers. Our company is behind this as we experience the real 
need for this type of program evolution. 
Thank you for providing this forward thinking solution that provides industry clarity and certainty 
for past and future projects. We urge you to please support the passage of LD 1986. Thank 
you. 
Danny Piper 
Owner 
Sundog Solar LLC
