STATE OF MAINE 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
’ 
sf-:\_:;;;_?;:" »’ ,.;-5... 
9;’ . .. :._t,-../ 
Philip L. Bartlett, II Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATNE DIRECTOR 
Patrick Scully 
Carolyn C. Gilbert 
COMMISSIONERS 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1986, An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and 
Energy Storage Systems 
May 24, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for 
nor against LD 1986, An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and 
Energy Storage Systems, on behalf of the Public Utilities Commission (Commission). 
Like LR 25 79, LD 1986 establishes a program to foster the continued growth of cost-effective 
distributed solar facilities and energy storage systems in the State. Unlike LR 2579, this program is to 
be developed and administered by the GEO in consultation with the Commission. The program is 
required to be consistent with the recommendations in the ﬁnal report of the Distributed Generation 
Stakeholder Group pursuant to Public Law 2021, chapter 390; however, no details on this process are 
in statute, which could be problematic, especially if there is a procurement involved. The Commission 
suggests perhaps directing the GEO in consultation with the Commission to develop a program and 
report back to the Committee next session with the details and any statutory language that may be 
necessary to implement the program. 
The other part of this bill is related to net energy billing cost recovery. lt requires the Commission to 
ensure that net energy billing beneﬁts and net energy billing costs are allocated to investor-owned 
transmission and distribution utilities in a speciﬁc manner annually and report annually to the 
Committee regarding these costs and beneﬁts. While the Commission recognizes that there are beneﬁts 
associated with net energy billing, the allocation method contemplated in this bill is not workable as the 
beneﬁts accrue to ratepayers in different places. For example, having an increased energy supply may 
reduce prices overtime, but that beneﬁt would show -up in lower bills to customer, rather than in 
something allocated to the utility to presumably offset the costs. 
With that said it would be important to understand what those beneﬁts are and have this information 
available to ratepayers. The Commission would need to hire a consultant to assist with the analysis of 
the beneﬁts of NEB but believes the reporting this information is a worthwhile exercise. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session. 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TFY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-1039
