Geoffrey Sparrow
WINDHAM
LD 1986
My name is Geoff Sparrow and I live in Windham, Maine. I am a life-long Mainer 
and started my career in solar in 2006. It has been a wild and tumultuous ride over the
past 17 years!
I strongly support LD 1986 as a forward looking solutions bill that prospectively 
alters the Distributed Generation solar program in Maine. This bill embraces and 
implements the hard work of the DG 2.0 stakeholder group. The most important 
aspect of this bill is that it is prospective and is not retroactive. 
We cannot and should not support any legislation that retroactively alters our existing 
NEB program. You will see this harmful legislation in the recently amended bill LD 
1347 for which there will be no opportunity for public testimony. This legislation is 
based on incorrect data and assumptions and tears apart all of the hard work and 
millions of dollars invested by renewable energy developers in the state over the past 
five years. Most projects in the DG queue are hung up in interconnection studies and 
will never see the light of day. 
The fact that retroactive changes are being discussed is already hampering investment
in our state. The consequences of a retroactive scenario would be devastating, 
resulting in the loss of hundreds of millions of dollars in investment for the people of 
Maine. This would have a ripple effect on jobs, tax revenue, landowner lease 
payments, construction spending, and overall community stability. Approving 
retroactive changes would essentially regress Maine's renewable energy policy by five
years to a time when MW-scale project development was nearly non-existent.
A note on a previous question regarding the “cost” of the existing operational projects
and projects in the queue. The 20+ cent rates are temporary as they are tied to the cost
of Standard Offer electricity supply. The standard offer supply rates are predicted to 
drop significantly in 2024 because the cost of generation has normalized. To assume 
that the entire NEB rate is a cost is inaccurate. A kWh delivered by a solar project is a
kWh that does not have to be sourced and paid for through traditional generation 
sources.
The proposed legislation of LD 1347 is actually worse than what we had before 2019 
as it requires a significant portion of load “behind the meter” and also limits the 
number of offtakers to 10 or less. Practically speaking, this program would be useless 
and would not be utilized.
Thank you for your consideration.
Geoff Sparrow
VP of Development
Green Lantern Solar

