STATE  JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, UTILITIES, AND 
TECHNOLOGY 
Testimony of Gregory Cary of Mount Desert, ME 
May 24th, 2023 
Testimony in Support 
 LD 1986: An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage 
Systems. 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and honorable members of the Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology Committee. My name is Gregory Cary, and I am a resident of Mount Desert. As a citizen 
who supports bold action towards the Maine Climate Council’s 2030 goals, I strongly support LD 1986 
An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems. 
 
LD 1986 would advance Maine’s climate action goals while protecting low-income ratepayers. By 
establishing a new distributed generation program for solar that is based on expert recommendations, LD 
1986 would allow Maine to leverage substantial federal funds and fairly allocate net energy billing costs 
and benefits, a pivotal step to ensure that net energy billing benefits accrue to all ratepayers.  
 
I urge you to pass LD 1986 and to oppose LD 1347, which will be reviewed by this Committee during a 
working session tomorrow. While LD 1986 supports the continued growth of distributed energy in a way 
that is beneficial to low and moderate-income ratepayers, LD 1347 would remove important components 
of net energy billing that make community-benefitting projects viable. LD 1347 has serious equity 
concerns, making solar ownership inaccessible for most low and moderate-income households and 
leaving Mainers unable to access significant federal funding for solar. Rather than acknowledging high 
natural gas prices as the true driver of high electricity rates, LD 1347 falsely blames net energy billing. If 
LD 1347 were to pass instead of LD 1986, members of our low and moderate-income communities would 
not be protected– their ability to access the benefits of solar ownership would only suffer.  
 
I urge you to pass LD 1986, a bill which is based on the expertise of diverse stakeholders. LD 1986 would 
improve net energy billing, benefit Maine ratepayers, allow Maine to leverage significant federal funds, 
and protect the viability of community-benefitting solar projects that expand low and middle-income 
households’ access to solar ownership. Maine needs LD 1986 to provide a strategic pathway for 
vulnerable communities to benefit from distributed energy resources.  
  
Thank you for your time and dedication to the people of Maine.  
 
Sincerely, 
Gregory Cary 
 
 
