Greg C. Robie 95 Mineral Springs Road 
Highland Mills, NY 10930  
May 24, 2023  
 
Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee 
State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Maine State Legislature, Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
LR 2579/LR 1986: The latest 131st Legislature’s #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine*  
 
Re: LR 2579/LR 1986: ONTP 
Chairpersons Lawrence and Zeigler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology 
I am Greg Robie. I am a 9th generation titleholder of a family farm in Winslow, and a 3rd 
generation one for our family camp on China Lake. I am a 2nd generation descendant of 
a Secretary of State; a 4th generation descendant of our 39th Governor; a 7th generation 
descendant of Maine’s first Congresspersons from Winslow (1 of 7 in 1820!). At the turn 
of the Millennium I was privileged to teach environmental science at the secondary level. 
Based on what I both taught and learned as a science teacher regarding the lag in our 
climate systems response to the perturbations of the current levels of greenhouse gas 
emissions, and subsequently, what Inuit observations of seasonally increased and 
increasing solar refraction in the Arctic represent as un-modeled heat gain, it is reasoned 
to consider that today is our trusted models’ 2050.  
The 131st Legislature is continuing to be barraged by a #BeltwayOfBills that feed into an 
ongoing snookering of Maine. The exceptional nature of how this bill is receiving its 
Public Hearing is another example. Much of what these bills indirectly and directly feed 
into is integral the roll out of a hydrogen economy. Our 2022 IRA returns this economy 
to control of the fossil carbon oil and gas fuel companies and their financiers when it is 
matured. This is by an allowed exploiting – and this when they choose to – to elect to be 
called energy companies. (see annotated pages of the text of the applicable six pages of 
that law . 
The text of 2579 conflates defined terms under MPUC law for distributed energy 
generation  and energy storage system to render them functionally the same as this new 
section of Chapter 32 structures things. 2019’s amendment to §3209-A was not signed by 
the Governor because it exempted too much under the moratorium relative to the grids 
capacity. If connected to the grid, the queue of permitted projects that qualified for the 
moratorium is related to the goal of 750 MW, such is an understatement. The last figure I 
know, from CMP (perhaps May of 2021), was 1820 MW of projects had died for 
connection.  
This bill exempts projects in excess of the [former] “goal” of 750 MW, from the program 
by Definition F. Perhaps as much as 1070 MW of permitted and queued projects are 
structured by this bill to become “fire sale” bargains for this program’s qualifying 
projects. LD 496 builds on the loophole structured into the Solar Energy Development 
Decommissioning Act for permitted stacks of LLCs to more quickly monopolize solar in 
Maine. Not only are they structured to abandon their projects ostensibly permitted to 
effect decommissioning they are engaged in (at best extra-legal) securitizing and 
monetizing of Maine sunshine separately from distributed energy generation equipment 
as different classes of appurtenances, and both on leased property with two classes of 
leased appurtenances. Snookering like this can fund a lot of additional snookering. The 
wording in this bill allows for hydrogen (as a chemical storage, to be a fuel). Further 
complicating and/or complicit in the snookering, a fuel cell is defined as a renewable 
energy source irrespective of the source of the hydrogen. The hydrogen hub being 
structured into a grid-like network  will, due to the snookering enacted into the IRA, 
allow oil and gas companies to take over the production of the hydrogen supply for the 
grid-like interstate pipeline network. The electrolysis generated hydrogen will only be 
competitive when priced about the same as what it costs to make it from fossil carbon 
fuels. I Have to stop here because of the shortness of time. 
LD  2579/LR 1986 is utilizing rules to effect regulations (a significant flaw and concern 
regarding our MAPA and Legislative branch power. Clawing back a bit of the 
sovereignty (the right be responsible), which is lost to the too-BIG-to-fail financial 
entities through the outcomes of an unconstitutional Federal Reserve Act of 1913. No 
opportunity to do so should be wasted. Until hydrogen is recognizes as both a greenhouse 
gas and regulated, LD 2579/LR 1986 is an ONTP. 
Thank you for considering this framing regarding voting on LD 1986. I am a happy to 
answer any questions this written warning and recommendation may engender.  
 
(845) 534-7291  
robie@hvc.rr.com  
 
or at the above address.  
=)  
Greg  
 
*  The #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“The 131st Legislature’s #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine” 
(5/2/23 V. 2.3.5 
 (as the “.3”, 1st to play with formatting and include the graphic … & in RTF, links) 
…the initial 4/19/23 version of this evolving document now includes LD 1775. 
 
“When the situation [of our abruptly changing climate] was manageable it was 
neglected, and now that it is thoroughly out of hand we apply too late the remedies 
[i.e., a hydrogen economy] which then might have effected a cure*. There is 
nothing new in the story. It is as old as the sibylline books. Want of foresight, 
unwillingness to act when action would be simple and effective, lack of clear 
thinking, confusion of counsel until the emergency comes, until self-preservation 
strikes its jarring gong–these are the features which constitute the endless repetition 
of history.”  
Winston Churchill, 1935  
* [because hydrogen leaks and currently has a CO2e of at least 11, it is simply 
a greenwashed bio-sociopathic snookering.] 
 
 
LD 9 : This bill (& now –5/1/23 – 2023 Public Law, ch. 45., §1 ), cannot relate to relate to its 
referenced “Permit by Rule” and apply to the Commissioner. How this got past our 
legislative analyst is likely instructive. What is enacted is current practice, but our 
current practice is not authorized in law. 
 
 The Public Law title relates it to Site Law. The section it amends ( §344)  does not 
differentiate. The subsection it amends was enacted in 1989  (§2., which is integral to a 
repeal and replace of this Public Law that is not so noted in §344’s section history). 
Furthermore, the “exception in the new law references a subsection that has existed 
since 1983 and, similarly, is not limited to Site Law (if for no other reason than the 
NRPA only became Article 5-A under Title 38 law in 1987). Unless I’ve missed 
something, it is likely that rules have effected a ‘standing-of-law’ for which law does 
not exist.  
 
 When a PBR involves an ILF ‘contribution’/compensation, this applies to matters 
defined and covered under NRPA ( §480-Z  – particularly (3)), more so than Site Law. 
Regardless, the amendment’s reference to subsection 7 of  §344 to only applies to a 
hidden-from-public-view pre-application meeting/hearing and our NRPA. This is 
where a permit for a “Permit by Rule” (as currently practiced, not as what is in law) 
may be qualified for. It is the commissioner’s decision regarding qualifying for this 
permit which the timeframe in LD 9 – in a strict application of law – applies. LD 9,  as 
amended , extends the timeframe for the commissioner/DEP staff to qualify a project 
for this permit/‘PBR notification’(?) for a “Permit byRule” from 20 working days to 90 
calendar days.  
 
 What the amendment appears to helpfully give our commissioner in the Permit by Rule 
process is – and has been – a Board function (i.e., not the commissioner’s), since 1983 
(new), through 1991 ( amended ),  through 2011 ( amended ). To repeat, the Rule by 
Permit has not been redefined in law since 1983. Permit by Rule has been defined in 
rules.  
 
Permit by Rule. "Permit by Rule" means a license that is issued by rule as 
authorized by 38 M.R.S.§344(7) for a class of activities that would 
otherwise require the issuance of an individual permit or approval. ( 06-
096 C.M.R. ch. 2 (1)(O)). 
 
 However, the history of subsection 7 and public law references is incomplete. It only 
includes the 2011 public law linked above (section 2.). 
 
7. Permit by rule. The Board of Environmental Protection may permit, by 
rule, any class of activities that would otherwise require the individual 
issuance of a permit or approval by the board, if the board determines that 
activities within the class will have no significant impact upon the 
environment. Any such rule must describe with specificity the class of 
activities covered by the rule and may establish standards of design, 
construction or use as may be considered necessary to avoid adverse 
environmental impacts. Any such rule must require notification to the 
commissioner prior to the undertaking of the regulated activity.  
 
 The Board (in 1983) is not what our restored to authority version of it is today (i.e., 
since 2019). Neither is the commissioner of 1983 similar to what that Office is today.  
 
This unamended 1983 subsection 7 concerning a Permit by Rule allowed the 
Board of Environmental Protection of 1983 – to permit any class of activities 
that would otherwise require the individual issuance of a permit or approval by 
the board, and to do so – by rule. Back in 1983, the Board – functionally what is 
now the DEP – had 60 days to process a permit. The 1983 concept of a permit 
by rule was efficiency due to the statutory time constraints. Therefore it was 
judicious for the board to determine classes of activities that had no significant 
impact upon the environment and permit them by rule. The oversight caveat was 
that “any such rule must describe with specificity the class of activities covered 
by the rule and may establish standards of design, construction or use as may be 
considered necessary to avoid adverse environmental impacts. Any such rule 
must require notification to the commissioner, (then more of a chair of the 
board) prior to the undertaking of the regulated activity.” 
What the 2011 amendment deleted what was what was amended in 1991. It 
requires the commissioner to advise the board about additional classes for a 
PBR, and oversee the board prior to the board engaging in a permit by rule. The 
roles of the Board of Environmental Protection and the commissioner/DEP are 
now reversed. The board [ostensibly] oversees the commissioner. 
 The continued reference to section 7 of the law in LD 9 – and this is likely by tradition 
– is problematic regarding MAPA rights stuff; further effects structural imbalance 
contrary to the basis statement of the Department’s administrative rule chapter (that 
“Basis Statement ” is integral to 06-096 CMR ch. 2 since this Rule Chapter’s inception 
in 1994, and as filed with our Secretary of State (available for the asking as a file titled 
“096c002-94-176-complete.pdf”).  
 
 But the current practice regarding a “Permit by Rule” is core to what the 1991 concept 
of a preapplication meeting* (an undefined term, in rule, but an adjudicatory process 
under our MAPA because rights are being established). In practice regarding the 
preapplication meetings, such are integral and essential to the in lieu fee program ( ILF 
info page ; authorizing law ). The ILU application, (now, in practice called a Permit-by-
Rule – and this when such an application is filed based on the pre-permit permit 
version; become unlisted and uncoded permits regarding an unrecorded application 
(this information webpage , and/or this form , and when received, has a two year 
lifetime). A preapplication meeting, where this all occurs, is effected under the auspices 
of our Commissioner , and is not a “ public proceeding ” (see (3., C.) – and another term 
for which Rule Chapter 2 is silent. A preapplication meeting is, by rule, between the 
applicant and the Department. Under both Land Resources – Natural Resources 
Protection Act, and Land Resources – Stormwater Management Law sections of the 
commissioner annual report  regarding timeliness and Department reviews, these listed 
Permit by Rules are not coded. This effects an ILF program which, in terms of all rights 
being determined is not happening under our MAPA. This is hidden in plain sight.  
 
 Why this qualifies as a #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine bill is that it is integral to a 
functionally confidential hearing where a project will be adjudged to qualify for the 
ILF Program, file a pre-permit-by-rule application, and have a timeframe established 
by which the DEP wraps up its review processes for reviewed applications. Licenses 
are review under the law and rules that exist at the time of the application. The 
adjudicatory process of a public hearing cannot redial be applied to a confidential 
hearing, and this as intended in law. LD 9 (as of this version of this #BeltwayOfBills 
document, law) 
 
 Originally, and still – in law – the Rule by Permit was a Board action under section 7. It 
relates to a project that is a single permitting class. Such a “Rule by Permit” is a final 
action (which in 1983 was consistent with the law), and only requires our Board to 
notify our Commissioner of its action. Because, in practice this Pre-Rule by Permit 
permit and the Rule by Permit is happening differently than is otherwise in law, 
balancing citizen involvement is structured out of the process … and consequences 
happen. 
 
 That this practice seems to have became and remains a common, and at best, an 
extralegal process, this could be how stacked LLCs became, and remain, a practice. If 
this confidential practice stopped – became a public one – the could effect significant 
cuts to our State coffers that is derived from the in lieu fees. About 10% of Sate 
revenues are identified in the Legislators Handbook as “other”. Or, a ‘perfect”NOT! 
storm of traditionally accepted practice that is not justified in law; that has embolden 
the solar industry that relies on stacked LLCs to snooker Maine to: 
 
1. effect the 2019 solar gold rush,” and 
2. lay the regulatory ground work for the next phase of the snookering. 
   
* The term “meeting” is utilized irregularly by the Department ( 06-096 C.M.R. 
ch. 2 ; particularly section 8.. 3rd sentence.). In that section a public meeting 
explicitly is not a public hearing under our MAPA regarding rulemaking, while 
our MAPA explicitly states that these are one and the same ( 5 MRS §8052 (1)(¶ 
2). In this Rule Chapter “meeting” can apply to at least three distinct things. This 
contradicts our MAPA. Furthermore, in its generic usage in the Rule Chapter is 
enabled by “meeting” being an undefined term. The weeds this effects, 
particularly on appeal, is beyond the intent of the #BeltwayOf Bills summary, but 
none-the-less, pertinent to the In Lieu Fee Program of the DEP; the revenue this 
Program generates for the budget. 
 
LD 43 : Proposed removing the 100 MW cap on distributed generation projects and includes 
solar. This primarily accommodates an increase in the size and scope of solar 
projects, and as is increasingly required by economics and grid capacity issues for the 
immediate and mid-term timeframes to be solar/battery projects. 
 The maturation of this distributive energy generation industry will, over time, trend 
toward larger projects and the economies of scale and monopolistic aspirations of the 
stacked LLC solar development business model. The removal of this cap on solar 
without first redressing the lack of rulemaking regarding our solar decommissioning 
law by the Board of Environmental Protection renders the lifting of this cap for solar 
a matter of functional complicity in the snookering/(eventually will be – as of April 
19, LD 43 was voted ONTP).  
 With LD 496 solar/batteries will be ‘review’ for ‘decommission’ under wind turbine 
decommissioning trigger rules. The content of the ongoing MPUC workshopping on 
the grid already outlines that local and/or regional distributed generation is where the 
changes to our grid will likely be required. Any significant benefit from removing the 
100 MW cap accrues to grid operators and the transmission of electricity out of state 
via the equipment gateways that currently have the capacity to do so. LD 1775 adds 
hydrogen as an “energy storage system” relative to how the existing grid can be 
utilized to maximize the value of interstate transmission of expansive networks of 
solar energy development projects. As interstate financially vertical integrated 
distributed power generation entities, the profitably of this accrues primarily to these 
financial entities and the grid owners. (See LD 1775, below, regarding the other 
systemic snookering that is being rolled out during the 131st Legislature. Keep in 
mind that energy storage systems, including hyped hydrogen as a chemical storage 
medium, are not regulated distributed electricity generation systems.) 
LD 399 : This seems to relate to what might be best thought of in terms of RECs (renewable 
energy credits). Particularly as these can and have been applied to defense contractors 
utilizing them to gaining points in the bidding process for military contracts, and 
enhanced placement value. (If anyone reading this knows how the REC scheme 
‘works’, please share (see email address at the end of this evolving document. I am 
challenged to see how RECs – as a mechanism – produces anything other than a delay 
in any reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.)  
 This bill seems to constrain competition from distributed energy generation from 
dumps regarding other such distributive energy generation systems, including solar. at 
the work session concerns that the removal of the 300% multiplier could encourage 
less recycling of combustible waste. Since no data was offered to backup this 
concern/argument is it speculative; is it strategic relative to stacked LLCs long range 
strategy for monopolizing as much of this market as it can to effect the lucrative sales 
of solar RECs to defense contractors, etc, and federal government contracts? 
LD 496 : Lumps batteries (defined as an “energy storage system”), with solar panels (defined 
as a “distributed energy resource”), and thereby makes different things with different 
regulatory concerns and different decommissioning issues commonly treated as 
though they are wind turbines (under current DEP practice and it Wind Rule 
Chapter). Wind turbine decommissioning triggers – another “distributed energy 
resource”, not an energy storage system as these are defined in MPUC law – merit 
different, not a common triggering mechanism.  
 
 Solar/battery projects are integral to the next phase of the stacked LLC business 
model’s expansion/maturation. When stacked LLCs are treated as the single “person” 
in law (which they are explicitly not), this enables such stacked LLCs to exploit the 
exempt member transfer language in this bill and our Solar Energy Development 
Decommissioning law (FWIW, this exemption arrived by amendment in 2021). 
Regardless, snookering was thereby allowed that facilitates abandonment under the 
guise of ’successful’ decommission plans. 
 
 What the link to LD 496 links to, and as an ‘amendment’ offered by the sponsoring 
representative dated 3/27/23, was also referenced at the work session on LD 496 as 
problematic, but could be worked out, and this by the Legislative Analyst at the 
March 29, 2023 work session. Whatever that work around was may explain why the 
“Concept Draft ” version remains the [otherwise misleading] public face of this bill. 
 
 
LD 1134 : Amends subdivision statue under the DEP law that both conflict with subdivision law 
under land use law (Title 30-A, Chapter 187), and, regardless of that regulatory 
nightmare, does so to facilitate a phased leasing/development of land that conforms to 
the business model of solar projects on large tracts of land without this also triggering 
a subdivision review [by the DEP]. 
 
LD 1135: As the “ Concept Draft ” text of LD 1135, this sets the stage for tree growth classified 
land of the large tracts the solar industry will be able to exploit under LD 1134; to be 
similarly exploited to be incorporated into the unfolding and maturing global carbon 
offset credit markets. As noted at the end of the sponsoring Representative’s pubic 
hearing testimony, it is now a “ resolve .” That text, like LD 496 above, is not yet 
updated in the Legislature’s databases and this bill. However, what is in the 
sponsoring Representative’s testimony  is worded to lead to an affirmative framing 
regarding the referenced study relative to the snookering – and this snookering is as 
far as physics is concerned. Carbon offset markets that relates to property in a 
qualified tree growth plan happen with or without the offset markets being involved:  
 
 • First, tree growth classification is a State subsidized tax program that does it 
carbon sequestering as a consequence of the silviculture practices of 
qualifying tree growth plans. If such a carbon credit product, physics aside, is 
a thing to be ‘harvested’, this would logically accrue to the State and the 
subsidizing citizens of our State.  
 • Second, carbon credit markets – by their nature – delay keeping fossil carbon 
in the ground. This means they are another iteration of the snookering that 
obfuscates rational action for actually reducing carbon emissions 
commensurate within the emergency introductory text  of our current Maine 
Climate Council with its “Maine Won’t Wait” report’s policy goals. 
 
  At the work session on April 25, 2023, LD 1135 was voted ONTP, and, as was 
reflected by the Chair (after the unanimous vote for the study by those present), as a 
“positive outcome.” Such is reasoned only if physics does not matter and … this as 
detailed in this ONTP public hearing testimony . 
 
LD 1232 : Indirectly regulates land use law (Title 30-A, Chapter 187), but this through Title 25, 
to build a growing inventory commercial roof area for the stacked LLC solar business 
model to exploit. 
 
LD 1648 : Sets the stage for open space and farmland classified land, and whether in large tracts 
or not in the large tracts, to be similarly be exploited to be incorporated into the 
unfolding and maturing global carbon offset credit markets.  
 
 By inserting into what is an alphebetical listing of definitions in the Farm and Open 
Space Tax Law subchapter (Title 36 MRS., Chapter 105., subchapter 10.), such that 
as a “c” – this ‘carbon conservation management plan’ – has preemptive statutory 
standing as an ‘a” under a repealed definition of an “Assessor” in the definitions for a 
subchapter and explicitly qualifying for additional reductions in assessment valuation. 
 
 Transforms a definition of a term “wildlife habitat” that, and as regulated in the 
definition, is significantly used two additional times in subchapter 10, three more 
under chapter 105 but one of those as a “wildlife plan” under tree growth law. The 
Department of Inland Fisheries ad Wildlife (38 MRS §480-BB) treats  the term with 
the adjective significant added to it, and this as would become a matter of review at a 
minimum of every 10 years. A much less regulated version of such oversight is 
subjugated to second ranking in law to the proposed carbon conservation management 
plan while increasing a purposed subsidized tax abatement benefit program to a flax 
and significanly increased one in a  
 
 Like the ONTP testimony linked to LD 1135 above, the question of who this bill’s 
concept and framing benefits needs both asking and answers.  
 
LD 1591 : Creates a/[an exceptional?] subsection-specific regulation within MPUC law (Title 
35-A) for the stacked LLC solar business model to twice snooker snookered Maine 
farmers. First by the application of perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl, and now, with 
the DEP permitting stacks of LLCs as a single person, and this in direct contradiction 
to the definition of a person in both rule and law, sets up good-hearted Maine farmers 
who find themselves in the desperate situation that they are in, to enter into the 
snookering of the stacked LLC business model’s contractual and memorandum 
morass. Consider: 
 
-1. 1. Through an option and lease framework, their snookering starts with 
agreeing to an option that commits them to a lease, and 
-1. 2. That lease of their recorded titled land will strip the leased (or sold) part of 
the farm of its solar rights (and in violation of Maine law regarding the leasing 
of solar rights on recorded title in real property), and 
-1. 3. The, also stripped, such solar rights, and treated as an uncommon 
appurtenant to the solar equipment, and 
-1. 4. This as a recorded, but uncommonly so due to at the lease effecting of 
subclasses what is in law, appurtenant to the titled real property (extralegal-at-
best), and 
-1. 5. These subclasses-in-leases being transferred via the duplicitous mechanism of 
stacked LLC business (i.e., is nature – think Title 38, MRS §481 and the 
duplicity of the stacked LLC business model) to entities other than the LLC that 
will hold the DEP’s permits, and 
-1. 6. This will apply regarding any municipal permit as well(!), and  
-1. 7. Due to securitization allowed, both in the stack LLC business model 
leases, AND exempted in the Solar Energy Development Decommissioning, 
upon the implementation of the structured abandonment which the 
decommission law enables significantly colors of the recoded title and effects 
the second snookering, and 
-1. 8. This is, at least what is currently the case since the BEP/DEP did not do its 
requisite rulemaking, AND  
-1. 9. In lieu of the DEP rectifying its misapplying its “Wind Energy Act 
Standards” rule chapter’s decommission triggers (06-096 CRM c. 382), and  
-1. 10. Doing this misapplying contrary to the judgment of the Department’s 
rulemaking liaison, and  
-1. 11. With LD 496 both exacerbating this snookering by lumping in batteries – 
separately defined in MPUC law as an “energy storage system” – with solar 
(defined in MPUC law as a “distributed energy resource”), and 
-1. 12. With both of these having distinct regulator and decommission trigger 
issues that reason demands require separate rulmaking processes, and 
-1. 13. Until rulemaking is done, render LD 1591 twice ‘exceptional’: 
-1. A. the proposed placement of the LD 1591 in Maine Statues, and  
-1. B. an exacerbation of the structural flaw of the DEP permitting 
regime (if it not malfeasance) and our/the MPUC’s Solar Energy 
Development Decommissioning law. 
 
LD 1775 : This bill "An Act to Establish a Clean Hydrogen Pilot Program" is an 
unqualified homegrown snookering of Mainers. Here is a one minute clip  that 
summarizes the why of this that is best grasped as “the colors of euphemism” 
and the lack of a word in English for “blacker than black.” It is excerpted 
from an hour and 20 minute interview  that is part of “The Great 
Simplification” interview series and expands on the foolishness of the concept 
of ‘clean’ hydrogen.  
 
 LD 1775 adopts the language in the 6 pages of ‘clean’NOT! hydrogen in the 
IRA (Inflation Reduction Act). The language in those six pages is structured 
to exempt fossil carbon oil companies emissions, as enacted under the 1964 
Clean Air Act. The exemption regarding theses emissions is retained in law 
whether that 1964 law authorizing them is amended or not.  
 
 Hydrogen is not a fuel, but rather a transportable battery-like energy storage 
system. Perhaps this feels counterintuitive, but more electricity will go into 
the hydrogen made in these subsidized pilot plants than is available in the 
hydrogen. Energy is inefficiently stored in the produced hydrogen. This 
inefficiency relates to both a power and emission perspective.  
 
 While in the proposed piloted plants in LD 1775 utilize electricity for the 
conversion, the IRA also allows for the fuel converted into hydrogen to be oil 
and/or natural gas. The snookering perpetuated in the IRA is national, but the 
consequences are global. With LD 1775 (& the hydrogen loop pipeline) a 
snookered Maine to become complicit in this global snookering in two distinct 
ways: 
 
 The existence of these “clean hydrogen facilities” can be leveraged to 
justify the northeast hydrogen pipeline concept, which, in terms of 
physics and mitigating climate change, is duplicitous.  
 The likely utility for hydrogen facility projects is that of a “battery” 
for the scaling of installations of solar developments in northern 
Maine, and functioning as a “distributed battery” for ineffieienty 
using up to 60 MW of solar distributed generation electricity (among 
the three authorized plants), and this is either with or without the cap 
removal in LD 43 that  
 enhances the enabling that already exists in law due to the 
malfeasance executed by the DEP by licensing of stacks of LLCs as 
person (in direct violation the definition of that term in law), and  
 this under the auspices of decommissioning-as-abandonment under 
our Solar Energy Development Decommissioning law with its 
member interest transfer exemptions loophole for such stacked LLCs, 
and 
 this to be further utilized regarding actual batteries under LD 496. 
   
 As specified in LD 1775’s two month window for a “competitive” solicitation 
under this bill is current technology, this very likely the electrolysis of water. 
In the unfolding phase of the stacked LLC business model and solar, the lag in 
the rollout of a taxpayer enabled smart grid requires batters (again, see LD 
496). LD 1775 authorizes for up to 60 MW of electricity, likely when current 
demand and the interstate gateways for grid will make the solar electricity to 
be excess (without value) to become hydrogen. Hydrogen has a CO2e of 11  
(& the above interview). 
 
 LD 1775 would make the transmission of this electricity a cost a twice 
uncompensated burden that the rate payers of Maine subsidize. 
 
First: 
 
• The produced hydrogen is privately owned, and 
• Nothing in the law regulates what this subsidized hydrogen is 
used for.  
 
Current industrial uses of hydrogen could be a market for this 
hydrogen. The northeast hydrogen loop pipeline is the more likely 
anticipated market for the hydrogen/transportable energy.  
 
Second: 
 
 Hydrogen leaks (and has a CO2e of 11 – above). This is because  
 
• Hydrogen is the smallest molecule and leaks (in storage the 
leakage is calculated to be between 0.12% to 0.24%/day), and 
• This leakage is modeled to effect a 1.5 ppm (300% increase) 
above the current background mixing ratio of about 0.5 ppm, 
and 
• This renders LD 1775 problematic regarding our “Maine Won’t 
Wait” goals, and 
• LD 1775’s dependency on the IRA is its fatal flaw, and 
• The ballyhooed hydrogen economy is a physics defined 
boondoggle-via-snookering when it is rolled out, and 
• Hydrogen constitutes a blacker than black thing; a snookering of 
Maine and Mainers. 
 
 AND there is nothing in the law that would regulate the releases of 
the ratepayer subsidized hydrogen by venting it into the atmosphere 
(as is a common practice today in oil refineries where hydrogen is a 
byproduct of fractional distillation of oil). Incidentally that vented 
hydrogen happens because it is too cheep to economically utilize. 
Industries that commercially use hydrogen, to the best of my 
knowledge, are not located in northern Maine. 
 
 Recall, that more energy goes into making the hydrogen than will be realized 
when it is transformed back into electrical energy utilizing hydrogen fuel cell 
technology (revisit wording of LD 496 to see if its wording implicitly might 
cover hydrogen as a MPUC law defined “ energy storage system ”-as-battery). 
There are no findings in LD 1775 supporting that hydrogen derived from 
electrolysis is economical (and this would likely be above the 60 MW 
production level)… and this would be without the northeast part of a 
[national?]  hydrogen loop pipeline (New York’s Governor’s climate 
destroying boondoggle and snookering for Wall Street; the IRA’s tax credits 
effecting its financing). The language in the IRA is explicitly about how 
making hydrogen is an “energy” business – and this regarding any 
process/system. with the oil/natural gas process qualifying for the tax credits 
due to exempted emissions and the use of the “CO@e” metric, and green 
house gas limited to what is listed in the IRA test. When oil companies claim 
themselves to be ‘energy’ companies, with exempted “incidental” emissions, 
these fossil carbon companies qualify as energy businesses for the tax credits 
for hydrogen in the IRA (as referenced in LD 1775.  
 
 To the degree the sponsors are complicit, they are representing the interests of 
Wall Street’s perpetual snookering of Mainers by, is not similarly snookered, 
Mainers:  
 
The IRA is current law. Once the hydrogen infrastructure is permitted and built 
(leveraging the tax credit which oil companies already qualify for when processing 
natural gas into hydrogen to secure the financing) fossil carbon companies will 
become “energy” companies with exempted petroleum by products/production and 
their emissions. With CO2 capture equipment the resulting slurry can be reinjected 
into wells to produce more fossil carbon. New York’s Governor initiated a process a 
year ago March and it is announced in this press release  . Maine’s Governor signed 
on just days after the ink dried on the President’s signature  on the IRA. Vermont was 
the last to capitulate  to Wall Street’s snookering. 
 
CO2e is the metric used in the IRA that is a climate modeling work-around regarding 
the processing power limitations of computers relative to the complexity of our 
climate system. Greenhouse gases are defined in the IRA. Carbon monoxide is not 
included. The Department of Energy website  defines recognized hydrogen producing 
process that apply to the IRA. One is included that mathematically only produces CO 
(carbon monoxide), and this via the bogus idea that half on oxygen molecule is a 
thing – it isn’t (& for chemistry geeks: CH4 + ½O2  CO + 2H2 (+ heat)). The 
various tax credits that can be claimed can both be sold and securitized. The 
equipment can be securitized as well. At least two futures markets are effected. 
 
The structured share of any benefit for and of this for Mainers: zero. 
 
SUMMARY: the northeast hydrogen pipeline loop, is retrograde regarding 
emissions AND economics.  
 
• Hydrogen is definable under Maine law as an “ energy storage 
system ” (35-A MRS §3481(6)), and  
• Hydrogen is not a traditional fuel in any plausible economic sense, 
and  
• As the periodic table’s smallest molecule, it leaks out of any and 
everything, and 
• Leaked hydrogen out competes methane for the hydroxyl radical, 
and 
• The hydroxyl radical (OH) is critical to the measurement of 
methane’s CO2e, and 
• This is because methane (CH4) is broken down through a six step 
set of atmospheric chemical reactions to become carbon dioxide 
(CO2). 
 
Therefore, as the hydrogen piping is conceptualized and built, and this under 
the IRA, and ‘piloting’ is effected – such as under LD 1775 (AND the 
opposite of the independence this number commemorates as a year and is 
memorialized in Longfellow’s poem “ On the 18th of April in Seventy-five”) 
will become integral to a political boondoggle of an imagined-but-physics-
denied ‘clean’NOT! hydrogen economy. Any CO2 captured from the 
fractional distillation of fossil carbon fuels within this ‘economy” for the 
production of a transportable “energy” (and as noted above at the Department 
of Energy’s website), such becomes a slurry that will be injected into gas and 
oil production wells to produce even more fossil carbon. (FYI, in New York 
we have not rescinded our fracking enabling laws. These law remain on the 
books to be executed at the whim of any governor/Wall Street.) 
 
Physics, and for our grandchildren’s sake, dictates that fossil carbon must be 
kept in the ground … or, and in spite of Maine not waiting, ‘few will left alive 
to remember this infamous day and year.’ 
 
LD 1850 : Hydrogen, as noted under LD 1775 (above) is an evolving technology as a 
transportable chemical “energy storage system” under Maine Public Utility 
Commission law (MPUC). Hydrogen’s emissions are not yet regulated under Maine 
law, and the inherent leakage that comes with it, both now, and with the roll out of the 
enabling infrastructure. More so, the IRA’s hydrogen paradigm for the oil compnaies’ 
BAU. It is counter productive to Maine’s Climate Council’s “Maine Wont’t Wait” 
policy goals. Current oil and gas companies fuel are enabled by the IRA’s six pages 
of its [claimed] “Clean Hydrogen” section (§13204 of the Inflation Reduction Act) to 
elect – at a time of their choosing - to become qualifying energy companies. This is 
due to statutory exemptions of emission that occur from the wellhead to the 
distribution pipeline gate. The exercise of the exemptions will then make fossil fuel 
companies qualifying energy companies due to the exempted emissions of their fuel 
byproducts and incendital. 
 
 An annotated version of the six page uploaded during the public hearing on LD 1775 
are uploaded there – and linked here . The almost impossible indentation effect in H.R 
5376, and given the snookering, may be intentional. (A link to a version that is 
cleanly formatted is requested of any reader who has such a link.)  
 
 
 
This evolving document is intended to be an inclusive effort. 
Welcome are the contributions of others for the purposes of  
expanding and/or enhancing its contents’ warning regarding 
our unfolding snookering … & this within the context of a civic duty and honor  
to be eternally vigilant. 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact: BeltwayOfBills@opento.info 

