 
 
 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209 
 Testimony In Opposition to Section 3 of LD 1986 
 An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems 
May 24, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and I 
am here today on behalf of Versant Power in opposition to Section 3 of LD 1986.  
 
Section 3 of the legislation contemplates a process whereby the Public Utilities Commission would 
determine the monetary value of “net energy billing benefits” and “net energy billing costs” and allocate 
those amounts to customers and transmission and distribution utilities respectively.  
 
First, it is imperative that the committee understand that “net energy billing” is a financial arrangement 
designed to incentivize the deployment of certain distributed generation resources; NEB only benefits 
those customers enrolled in one of these financial arrangements and it should not be conflated with 
benefits that may be attributed to renewable generation. Put differently, the benefit of participation in 
NEB accrues to the individual whereas the benefits of renewable energy arguably accrue to all. The grid 
and market benefits identified in Section 3 cannot be—and are not—derived from NEB; rather, they are 
tied to renewable generation resources, including distributed generation projects in certain cases, so long 
as projects are well designed, sized, and sited to meet actual system needs. This proposed legislation, if 
enacted, would direct the Commission to identify and then monetize benefits solely attributable to 
renewable generation and then inappropriately utilize these benefits to offset rising NEB costs.  
 
In the future, through advanced system planning and the ongoing Integrated Grid Planning process at the 
PUC, stakeholders, regulators and utilities anticipate being able to help identify system locations at 
which distributed generation resources could provide real value. We would note, however, that under the 
current approach to project development and siting, we have identified exceedingly few existing projects 
that are providing these types of public benefits. Moreover, this committee is considering LR 2579, 
which contemplates establishing a different compensation approach for NEB. Section 3 of this proposed 
legislation and LR 2579, taken together, are incoherent.  
 
Notwithstanding that Section 3 improperly attempts to assign benefits to NEB, requiring the 
Commission to value said benefits is extremely difficult to quantify and measure reliably. There is 
considerable disagreement among relevant experts about the appropriate way in which to evaluate these 
benefits and whether these benefits, if they do indeed accrue to all citizens in Maine, should be captured 
more holistically, e.g. through the state tax system rather than via the rate mechanism.  
 
Additionally, it would be unfair and likely impossible to accurately allocate costs in the simple pro-rata 
manner described in Section 3 amongst customers of both investor-owned utilities in a fair and equitable 
manner. The legislature and Commission have been clear that NEB is a financial incentive being utilized 
to accomplish state policy goals. If the benefits of distributed generation accrue to the people of Maine 
generally, rather than to the customers of a particular utility, should these benefits and costs not be 
allocated equally across all ratepayers, including those in the territories of municipal- and consumer-
 
 
 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209 
owned utilities? If one utility or one service territory experiences significantly greater amounts of 
distributed generation development per capita than others, should the customers of that utility or 
territory be asked to shoulder greater costs than their neighbors in other areas? Significant concern 
should be assigned to the possibility that under this directive, customers of Versant Power or Central 
Maine Power, respectively, could end up paying more in costs or receiving less discount, based on their 
service territory rather than based on the actual benefits or costs accrued in that service territory.  
 
Further, we believe significant additional clarity is necessary to understand how the calculations 
required under Section 3 would impact ratepayers, utilities, and developers alike. For example, in 
circumstances where more benefits are identified than costs, who would realize these benefits and where 
would the compensation be found to apply to rates or utilities? In the opposite scenario, would utilities 
themselves potentially be held responsible for what would otherwise be considered stranded-costs given 
the utilities, in administering the NEB program, are acting as agents of the state?  
 
Given Maine’s electricity sector has been restructured to separate generation from delivery, and given 
NEB is a duly enacted state policy that utilities are charged with implementing, utilities should not incur 
costs associated with the generation of electricity and the implementation of this program. Section 3 
would manipulate the electric bills of Maine customers based on subjective values and not the core 
delivery of electricity service as required by law. We would also note that should the Pine Tree Power 
ballot initiative pass in November, the utility shareholder would cease to exist at some point in the 
future, meaning Maine electric customers would assume the fully costs of this program themselves.  
 
Section 3 of LD 1986 represents a fundamental restructuring of Maine’s distributed generation policy 
and deserves robust debate and consideration by all stakeholders to more fully understand its 
implications. We urge the Committee to strike Section 3 and instead consider a more holistic approach 
to realigning Maine’s NEB program so that the benefits of distributed generation are maximized at the 
least possible cost to ratepayers.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
