conmansromr gm AN EM PLOYEEeO\/\/l\l ED COR/lF’AN“ ‘,»=’ (M 
May 24,2023 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Chair 
Representative Paige Ziegler, Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in support of LD 1986, “An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and 
Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems” 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee: 
My name is Jeremy Payne and I am a principal with Cornerstone Government Affairs Group 
here to testify in support of LD 1986 on behalf of our client the Maine Renewable Energy 
Association (“MREA”). 
We applaud the sponsor for his efforts to continue moving forward with efforts to design a cost- 
effective, successor program to Net Energy Billing (“NEB”). LD 1986 instructs the Govemor’s 
Energy Office (“GEO”) in consultation with the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) to designa 
program consistent with the recommendations of the so-called “DG 2.0 working group.” As this 
committee heard earlier this session, those recommendations envision a program design 
involving a competitive procurement process which provides $2.77 of ratepayer value for every 
$1 spent, according to Synapse Energy Economics and Sustainable Energy Advantage (the 
GEO’s consultants). This is a clear WlI111€I‘ for consumers and provides clarity to companies 
whose companies are currently stuck in purgatory, a.k.a. the cluster study process. Further, as 
this committee knows, the existing NEB law requires projects to have achieved commercial 
operation by the end of 2024 — this effort would at the very least create an opportimity for any of 
those projects unable to meet the 2024 deadline to be able to bid for contracts through this 
successor. 
The legislation also prioritizes a program design that will capture any and all federal funds, 
including, but not limited to, the EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund‘ -- the EPA program is 
designed to provide competitive grants to states, tribal governments, municipalities and non- 
proﬁts to help build community solar projects to serve low-income and disadvantaged 
communities. This fund totals $7 billion — without the passage of LD I986, Maine would be 
leaving money on the table and ignoring tremendous consumer beneﬁt. 
We also support Section 3’s aims to better capture the costs Qrg beneﬁts of the NEB program 
during the PUC’s cost recovery calculation dockets. 
1ghttps:[/www.epagovfgreephouse-gaswreductionqfuno%;fabout;greenhouse-gasyrrgduction-fund 
VVVVVV.CGAGROUP.COM I %;;§;#@CGAGROl_Il ’
There is one area of concern/question — speciﬁcally, we are not sure what is meant by Section 2. 
We would be very concerned if this language may somehow lead to disqualifying the existing 
NEB contracts and output of resources built before November 25, 2019. We suggest the 
committee either delete this section entirely, or provide certainty of its intent and ensuring it does 
not interfere with the ongoing beneﬁts these projects are providing to their offtakers. 
We applaud Senator Lawrence ’s leadership on this effort and with the one clariﬁcation (or 
deletion) believe it is worthy of this committee ’s support. 
We respectfully urge you to vote ought to pass. 
Thank you. 
V\’\'VVV.CGz\GROUPCOM I §;_}?@CGAGROU P
