r 
CENTRAL MASNE 
POWER 
Kathleen Newman, Director of Government Affairs and Community Relations 
LD 1986, An Act Relating to Net Energy billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage 
Systems 
May 24, 2023 
Testifying: Ought Not To Pass 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Jim Mitchell presenting testimony 
on behalf of Central Maine Power company in opposition of LD 1986, An Act Relating to Net 
Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems. 
First and foremost, CMP supports the continued expansion of renewables providing cost 
effective energy for our customers. Nevertheless, all of us — policymakers, developers, 
utilities, customers —~ are confronted with finding the right path forward amidst the current 
landscape. Maine’s Net Energy Billing (NEB) program has fostered very substantial investment 
in solar. Combined with other programs including PUC procurement of renewables, 
approximately three-fourths of Maine’s net generation is now from renewables. Only 4 states 
have a higher share of renewables in net generation. Furthermore, if you tallied up renewables 
under contract with CMP, non-contracted renewables, plus NEB projects operating or proposed, 
there are more than 3,000 MW s of renewables on the horizon. So, if the goal is just more 
renewables, Maine’s policies are working. 
But, of course, allocation of scarce resources matters. And, in this case that scarce resource is 
the burden Maine electric consumers can bear. Many renewables are competitive. They help 
mitigate price swings caused by the volatility of fuels such as natural gas and help lower our 
demand for fossil fuel ﬁred generation. But not all renewable programs are created equally. For 
example, we know there are signiﬁcant cost consequences for the nearly 95 percent of customers 
not participating in net energy billing projects. Indeed, in 2021 and again in 2022, the Legislature 
recognized those impending customer cost increases and sought to rein them in through passage 
of NEB refomis in LD 936 and LD 634. 
The bill before you does not appear to build on those efforts to moderate future costs in the 
current NEB programs but instead establishes a new initiative, the Distributed Solar and Energy 
Storage Program. The focus appears to be building out more small scale solar with associated 
storage and funded in part by securing federal dollars. We support leveraging non-ratepayer
funding, but note that the legislation also says “the office may receive funds from the Public 
Utilities Commission ” which, of course, receives its funding from ratepayers. 
Turning to the bill section by section: 
Section 1. Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Program. The section establishes what appears 
to be a new and distinct program for solar DG co-located with an energy storage system within 
the Governor ’s Energy Office. Note that the MPUC has already developed the existing Chapter 
313 Net Energy Billing Rules that govern the NEB program. The GEO is not an administrative 
agency of the state and therefore does not have rulemaking authority under the Maine 
Administrative Procedures Act. Therefore, it is unclear to CMPif the intention is for the GEO to 
start a new regulatory program, how rules would be established to govern the program. 
Additionally, it appears the new program will be funded by leveraged Federal dollars. However, 
as noted above, Section C states that the office may receive funds from the MPUC. Whether this 
be a new program, or a fund to support projects perhaps through grants, it is not clear how the 
entity will be governed nor how it would utilize MPUC funding. In addition, if a distinct NEB 
program is contemplated here, CMP will need time and resources to develop, test and implement 
a new billing system to support the program. 
Section 2. Establishes that a “distributed generation resource ” must not have a nameplate 
capacity greater than 660 kilowatts that was placed into service prior to November 25, 2019. In 
CMP’s estimation, because LD 1711 was passed in 2019 and most projects were smaller than 
660 KWs, the program in LD 1986 appears to be a supplement or additional option to the 
existing program, rather than a replacement for it. The result, while maybe unintended, is that 
existing projects could assess which program is most lucrative and swap out or in. CMP 
questions whether this is the direction the State should go with solar incentives considering the 
current costs being projected for the already existing program. Additionally, administration of 
multiple NEB programs will require additional resources which CMP will need to address if 
these legislative changes are made. 
Section 3. NEB Cost Recovery. While the apparent intention of this section appears valid, i.e., 
to highlight and demarcate the beneﬁts of the solar program in addition to the costs, doing so 
does not result in lower costs for CMP customers. If there are actual avoided energy costs, those 
will be realized in the supply-side costs and the wholesale energy markets will see reductions in 
fossil fuel production. The point being, cost savings resulting from the beneﬁts will not lower 
T&D costs, but will show up in lower energy or capacity costs passed onto customers through 
those charges. 
Furthermore, the amount of measurable avoided transmission and distribution costs are not 
anticipated to be signiﬁcant. Recent studies have shown that transmission and distribution 
upgrades are necessary as a direct result of new interconnecting DER and CMP seeks to keep 
these upgrades to the minimum required to reliably connect the generator(s) to support the 
generator-customers. And where CMP identiﬁes that network upgrade needs are pre-existing,
that is, not driven by a new interconnecting generator, these project costs are passed to rate 
payers. 
The majority of DER proposing to interconnect to the CMP system is solar, which is an 
intermittent resource only available during the day. CMP system load proﬁles show that while 
solar can provide some midday peak load shaving, solar will not be available during Winter 
peaks and Summer Evening peaks. Reliability projects once driven by midday Summer peak 
needs that may have been offset by the solar will still be required at the expense of rate payers to 
meet system reliability needs after sunset. 
With the expectation of solar “pricing out” traditional fossil fuels with its incentive payment 
structure, CMP anticipates high energy and capacity prices to keep fossil fuel units in service 
during winter and summer evening peaks, traditionally through expensive must-runs rates. 
Insigniﬁcant avoided costs and losses will be lost among the double-hit of high stranded costs 
passed on to rate payers along with higher energy and capacity costs and traditional network or 
non-wires alternative solutions still needed during Winter and Summer Evening peaks. 
Regarding the allocation of costs and beneﬁts contemplated in the section, the MPUC already 
allocates NEB costs, in the annual stranded cost ﬁling, on a pro-rata share between CMP and 
Versant. Additionally, regarding reporting of costs, CMP annually publicly ﬁles its costs. 
However, ﬁnal costs are not known by March 315* and so if this section is to proceed, CMP 
recommends moving the report submittal date back to later in the year. 
We urge the committee to vote Ought Not to Pass on this legislation and appreciate your 
consideration of our position.
