May 24, 2023 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Chair 
Representative S. Paige Zeigler, Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1986 
To Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Energy, Utilities and 
Technology Committee: 
Please consider this testimony in support of LD 1986. The Coalition for Community 
Solar Access (CCSA) is a national Coalition of businesses and non-profits working to expand 
customer choice and access to solar for all American households and businesses through 
community solar. Our mission is to build the electric grid of the future where every customer has 
the freedom to support the generation of clean, local solar energy to power their lives. Through 
legislative and regulatory advocacy, and the support of a diverse coalition -~ including 
advocates for competition, clean energy, ratepayers, landowners, farmers, and environmental 
justice — we enable policies that unlock the potential of distributed energy resources, starting 
with community solar. 
There are competing views on what should be done with Maine’s solar programs, but the one 
piece that both sides agree on is that we should not leave hundreds of millions of dollars of 
federal funding on the table. LD 1986 appropriately makes obtaining that federal funding as the 
top priority and centerpiece of a new program going fon/vard. The EPA Greenhouse Gas 
Reduction Fund §GGRF) established a new $7 bitlion Solar for All program, a competitive grant 
program open to states to catalyze long-term scalable and sustainable rooftop and community 
solar programs in low-income and disadvantaged communities across the country. Our estimate 
is that Maine could be eligible for up to $300 million dollars of funding through this program. 
Combined with the Low-income Communities Bonus investment Tax Credit (ITC), Maine has an 
unprecedented opportunity to expand distributed solar in low-income communities in a cost 
effective manner. 
lt is critical that Maine establishes the basic parameters of a program structure that is 
compatible with an application for federal funds. To provide a clear and compelling application 
and maximize the funds awarded, the state needs to show that it will have a clear legal and 
regulatory path to put the dollars to work. LD 1986 strikes the appropriate balance of providing 
enough certainty to submit a successful application with enough flexibility to ensure that the 
program structure meets the needs of the EPA funding application as well as the broader needs 
of Maine's electric system. 
The DG Stakeholder Working Group was established by LD 936 to be the forum to consider 
necessary reforms to Maine’s solar programs, and it is appropriate to utilize the progress that 
1380 Monroe Street NW, #721 info@communitysoloroccessorg 
Washington, DC 20010 www.communitysolaraccessnrg 
720-334-8045
group has already made on tackling those tough issues. The Working Group was inclusive of 
important stakeholders on the issue, including the renewable energy industry, the PUC, the 
OPA, IECG, the utilities, and environmental groups. With that stakeholder input, the GEO put 
forward a plan to continue solar development at maximum benefit to ratepayers. An analysis of 
the program design recommended by the working group report showed that the successor 
program would return up to $2.77 for every $1 invested. While we think there are a few 
important considerations left out of the working group recommendations, CCSA finds that the 
basic framework of the recommended program is a good solution for continuing distributed solar 
development in a cost-efficient manner. 
Further, the DG Stakeholder Working Group report has been a signal to the solar industry on 
potential future program design. CCSA believes it is critical to enact an NEB successor program 
based on a framework that is already familiar to industry stakeholders because it will provide 
much needed guidance for project developers that are concerned about meeting impending 
deadlines to qualify for the existing NEB program. The reality is that the vast majority of projects 
in the pipeline will not be completed by the end of 2024 deadline instituted under LD 936. The 
sponsors of these projects will have to make decisions on whether to proceed with their, 
development efforts, including whether to make significant payments for interconnection 
upgrades, purchasing long lead time equipment, and investment in local communities, and for 
many developers, these decisions need to be made in the coming months. Passing LD 1986 will 
provide these projects with an alternative to walking away from their investments altogether. 
Finally, we think it is absolutely critical to review the manner in which NEB costs are analyzed 
and recovered from ratepayers. This Committee has had many conversations around the costs 
of the program, but the lack of complete and transparent information about the costs and 
benefits to ratepayers has been a disservice to legitimate attempts to address cost concerns. 
LD 1986 would make a few key logical improvements to solar program cost recovery. it would 
remove NEB cost recovery from "stranded costs” , which are intended for an entirely different 
purpose, but have been the home for NEB cost recovery simply because there was no other 
apparent way to address them. It would require an annual accounting of notjust the costs (i.e., 
lost revenues) the utilities incur, but also the costs the utilities are able to avoid because of the 
presence of solar on the distribution grid. And importantly, it would require the recovery of NEB costs on a retrospective basis for the previous year. CCSA views this last element as critical to 
ensure that ratepayers do not overpay for speculative costs that may ultimately vary significantly 
from initial projections. 
For the reasons above, we urge the Committee to support LD 1986. Thank you for your time 
and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Kate Daniel 
Northeast Regional Director 
Coalition for Community Solar Access 
1380 Monroe Street NW, #721 info@communitysoloroccessorg 
Washington, DC 20010 www.communifysolaraccessorg 
720-354-8045
