Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology May 24, 2023 
BlueWave Testimony in Support of LD 1986 — An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and 
Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems 
Good afternoon Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and members of the Committee. My 
name is Liz Curran and I am testifying today on behalf of BlueWave in support of LD 1986, 
which would direct the Governor ’s Energy Office to apply for federal funds to support the 
Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Program and would make important reforms to the way 
Net Energy Billing (NEB) costs are calculated and recovered. Thank you for your consideration 
of this important piece of legislation. 
BlueWave is a solar and energy storage developer and a leading innovator of dual-use, or 
agrivoltaic, projects in the Northeast. We have over 70 MW of community solar projects under 
development in Maine, which will provide savings to hundreds of residents and small and 
medium business across the state. BlueWave is also proud to have developed the ﬁrst dual-use 
project in Maine on a wild blueberry farm in Rockport, which was completed in 2021 and 
provides connnunity solar bill credits to customers through the NEB program. We are currently 
partnering with the University of Maine to study the impact of differing construction techniques 
on the blueberry crop and are committed to ﬁnding innovative ways to bring the beneﬁts of solar 
to farmers and landowners. 
With the passage of the federal Inflation Reduction Act, Maine has the opportunity to access 
federal funds to support distributed solar and energy storage projects and help the state reach its 
clean energy goals. LD 1986 directs the Governor ’s Energy Office to leverage these federal 
funds to create a program for solar plus storage projects that is consistent with the 
recommendations of the Distributed Generation (DG) Stakeholder Group’s Report. The DG 
Stakeholder Group was convened by the Governor ’s Energy Ofﬁce and included members of the 
solar industry, the Public Utilities Commission, the Office of the Public Advocate, and the 
Industrial Energy Consumers Group, among others. The DG Stakeholder Group’s 
recommendations, which would be implemented by this bill, are the result of months of 
discussions and were carefully designed to ensure the program is cost-effective. We urge the 
Committee to pass LD 1986 to ensure that Maine can take advantage of federal funds to 
implement the recommendations of this robust stakeholder process. 
LD 1986 would also make important changes to how NEB costs are calculated and recovered by 
the utilities. The bill would remove NEB from the utilities ’ Stranded Costs proceedings and 
require the PUC to calculate and allocate NEB costs and benefits annually based on actual costs 
or avoided costs over the previous year. This is an important change from the current structure, 
under which the utilities ’ NEB cost calculations are speculative and based on three-year forecasts 
of the number of MWs that will be online, the amount of energy those projects will produce, 
future electric rates, and future wholesale market costs. ,
E 
Thank you for your consideration and the opportunity to testify in support of LD 1986. We look 
forward to continuing to work with the legislature to help Maine meet its clean energy goals. 
Sincerely, 
Liz Curran 
Senior Director of Policy and Regulatory Affairs 
BlueWave 
eeurran@bluewave.energy
