State JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, UTILITIES, AND 
TECHNOLOGY 
Testimony of Tribal Ambassador, Penobscot Indian Nation 
May 24th, 2023 
Testimony in Support 
 LD 1986: An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage 
Systems. 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and honorable members of the Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology Committee. My name is Maulian Dana and I am Tribal Ambassador for the 
Penobscot Nation. I am writing in support of LD 1986 An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing 
and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems. 
 
Our community is currently exploring a community-owned, cooperative solar project that would 
expand the benefits of solar ownership to low and moderate-income homeowners and renters. 
LD 1986 would be supportive of community-benefitting projects like ours, because it would 
provide a structure to fairly allocate net energy billing costs and benefits, accounting for avoided 
transmission, distribution, and fossil fuel costs. Importantly, the legislation would also ensure 
that net energy billing benefits accrue to ratepayers. 
 
I urge you to pass LD 1986 rather than LD 1347. While LD 1986 would support the continued 
growth of distributed energy in a way that is beneficial to low and moderate-income ratepayers, 
LD 1347 would revoke important components of net energy billing that make community-
benefitting projects, such as ours, viable. In effect, LD 1347 would pose a significant barrier to 
low and moderate-income solar ownership in Maine and in doing so, prevent Maine communities 
from accessing federal funding for solar. 
 
In closing, please pass LD 1986, legislation which will improve net energy billing, benefit Maine 
ratepayers, allow Maine to leverage significant federal funds, and protect the viability of 
community-benefitting solar projects, such as ours. Thank you for your service to the people of 
Maine.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Maulian Dana, Tribal Ambassador  
Penobscot Nation  
