 
 
   
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1986 ,  
 An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems  
 
By Rebecca Schultz,  
Senior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy  
May 24, 2023  
 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Rebecca Schultz. I am a Senior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). NRCM  is Main e’s leading  environmental advocacy  
organization  with  more  than  25,000 members  and supporters,  on behalf  of whom  I am testifying in 
support of LD 1986.  
 This bill puts in place a cost -effective successor program for distributed generation, directs the 
Gove rnor’s Energy Office (GEO) to pursue federal funding to focus the benefits of solar on low - and 
moderate -income Mainers, and directs the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) to properly account for 
both costs and benefits of these small - and medium -sized sola r projects.  
 Putting in place a successor program is critical for transitioning the existing Net Energy Billing program while maintaining support for Maine’s clean energy economy.  Going backward on clean energy is not 
a solution to high electricity rates  and will not buffer Maine families and businesses from the impacts 
of volatile natural gas prices.  
 
LD 1986 takes important steps to implement the recommendations of the Distributed Generation 
working group, which were developed over the course of 16 months  of thoughtful  deliberation  by 
diverse parties and informed by expert research and analysis, an effort that was convened under the 
auspices of the GEO at the direction of the Legislature, to build a better, smarter successor program for 
small-  and medium -sized solar projects  in Maine . This was a thoughtful, thorough, and inclusive 
process.   
 
An independ ent analysis as part of that work found that a well -designed program  can pay back $1.67 to 
ratepayers for every dollar invested. If the program were designed to support projects that combine 
solar with energy storage —as this bill proposes —the benefits incr ease to an impressive $2.77 returned 
on every dollar invested.  
 The stakeholder recommendations also highlighted the incredible value of leveraging federal funds 
available for solar through the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022. Application details for one program, 
EPA’s $7 billion Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund, will be made available as early as this summer, so the 
time is now to seize this opportunity for Maine . The solar industry has es timated that a $300 million 
grant from the federal government could su pport an es timated 20% bill discount for more than  100, 000 
low- to moderate-  income customers in Maine, at no additional cost to Maine ratepayers.  
 
By directing GEO to seek federal funds and design a program that can target the benefits of solar to low-  
and moderate -income Mainers, LD 1986 would smartly position Maine to capture these once -in-a-
 
  
2 
 century national investments to underwrite our clean ener gy transition.  The exact eligibility details are 
not available yet, so we should be careful to  allow flexibility for the time being, as the framework in LD 
1986 does.  That  is one concern we have with regard to the Committee’s related bill (LR 2579); we don ’t 
want elements of program design set in statute to have an unintended effect of tying our hands in 
securing federal funding.    
 The benefits of these small - and medium -sized solar projects are manifold —energy, capacity, avoided 
transmission and distribution, price depression effects, Renewable Energy Credit (REC) revenue, pollution reductions, the list goes on. That there are so many benefits, that they accrue to different entities, and that some benefits can be more readily monetized than others —this is partly what makes a 
program that supports these kinds of projects so complex and why it tests the limits of our outdated 
regulatory approaches.    
 On this issue, LD 1986 would help us take an enormous step forward by  requiring the PUC  to do an 
honest accounting of costs and benefits, outside of the “stranded costs” mechanism that considers the 
program only through a lens of lost utility revenue.  
 
NRCM supports th is bill, and we urge you to vote Ought to Pass.   
 
Thank you for  this opportunity.  
   
 
