Scott Vlaun
Center for an Ecology-Based Economy
LD 1986
STATE  JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, UTILITIES, AND 
TECHNOLOGY
Testimony of Scott Vlaun, Executive Director, Center for an Ecology-Based 
Economy, May 24th, 2023
Testimony in Support
 LD 1986: An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy 
Storage Systems.
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and honorable members of the Energy, 
Utilities, and Technology Committee. My name is Scott Vlaun, and I am the 
Executive Director of the Center for an Ecology-Based Economy. For over a decade 
our organization has worked with communities throughout rural Maine to implement 
climate solutions that benefit local communities. I strongly support LD 1986: An Act 
Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems.
The Center for an Ecology-Based Economy is currently to create a 
community-owned, solar cooperative that would expand the benefits of solar 
ownership to low and moderate-income homeowners and renters. LD 1986 would 
support innovative community-benefitting projects like ours by fairly allocating net 
energy billing costs and benefits and accounting for avoided transmission, 
distribution, and fossil fuel costs. It would take important steps to ensure that net 
energy billing benefits accrue to ratepayers and address concerns about regressive 
rates without retroactive changes.
I urge you to pass LD 1986 rather than LD 1347. While LD 1986 would support the 
continued growth of distributed energy in a way that is beneficial to low and 
moderate-income ratepayers, LD 1347 would revoke important components of net 
energy billing that make community-based projects, such as ours, viable. LD 1347 
attempts to do this relying on distorted and unproven accounting which blames 
net-energy billing instead of natural gas for skyrocketing electricity prices. This 
repeal would make solar ownership inaccessible for most low and moderate-income 
households, leaving many Mainers without  access to the significant federal funding 
for solar allocated by the Inflation Reduction Act. In effect, it will prioritize wealthy 
individuals and entities that can afford to purchase distributed generation projects 
outright. If LD 1347 were to pass, members of our low and moderate-income 
communities would not be protected– our ability to access the benefits of solar 
ownership would only suffer. LD 1986, in contrast, will improve net energy billing 
and benefit Maine ratepayers, allow Maine to leverage significant federal funds, 
support Maine’s renewable energy goals, and protect the viability of 
community-benefitting solar projects, such as ours.  
I urge you to pass LD 1986 to provide Maine with a strategic pathway for vulnerable 
communities to benefit from distributed energy resources.  
Thank you for your careful consideration of this important matter for Maine’s energy 
future,
Scott Vlaun
Center for an Ecology-Based Economy, Norway, Maine.

