 
 
 
 
Supplemental Testimony  in Support of LD 1986 and LR 2579   
   An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar                                
and Energy Storage Systems (LD 1986)  
An Act to Implement Recommendations of the Distributed Generation 
Stakeholder Group (LR 2579)  
Steven L. Weems, Board Member , Solar Energy Association of Maine  
President, Dirigo Community Solar Group  
To the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
May 28, 2023  
  
Senator Lawrence,  Representative Zeigle r, and other distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology: 
my name is Steve Weems, Board Member of the Solar Energy Association of 
Maine  (SEAM) ; also founder and P resident of Dirigo Community Solar Group  
(Dirig o CSG) , a nonprofit association of 14 small, member -owned  community solar 
farms.  We have submitted testimony supporting LD 1986 , and support LR 2579 as 
an adjunct to LD 1986, since both are intended to implement the 
recommendations of the DG Stakeholder G roup.  
 Many people have submitted testimony on these positive bills and related 
bills to curtail or eliminate distributed generation (DG), including net energy              
billing (NEB) – e.g., LD 1347 and the Sponsor’s Amendment to this bill – the Office  
of Public Advocate (OPA)  proposal.  Our purpose with this submission is simply to 
list the ingredients (our vision) of a beneficial outcome.  We are trying to be 
specific without getting into the weeds.  We apologize if this seems self-evident.  
 
2 
 1. Set aside the destructive and backward -looking content of the OPA -drafted 
amendment to LD 1347.  
2. Implement the recommendations of the DG Stakeholder Group for all 
distributed generation (DG) projects in the 1 -5 MW range.  This includes 70% 
of the volume via a competi tive procurement and 30% via open enrollment for 
a defined group of community entities (see LR 2579).  The 30% would be 
priced at the median bid price of projects awarded contract s by the PUC under 
the competitive procurement. This is the total program the economic 
consultants  to the DG Stakeholder Group determined would have a positive 
benefit/cost ratio of 1.67 -2.77 and depress costs for all ratepayers.  It also 
accounts for 93% of the total DG pipeline (November, 2022).  
3. Modify the definition of “Community” in LR 2579 by addin g federally -
designated charitable nonprofits with a public purpose , and allow third -party 
investors who can utilize federal tax credits to  be the owners of record of such 
projects, for the benefit of the defined community entities.  
4. Define the re sulting  NEB program as limited to projects of 1 MW or less, 
without an additional limit on the number of participants.  Retain the existing 
customer NEB bill credit provisions for an interim period.   
5. Assign the Governor’s Energy Office (GEO), in consultation with the PUC, the 
task o f developing a recommended successor NEB program  credit structure , 
with the following structural elements:  
a) Ensure all NEB projects (1 MW or less) would be classified as load reduction 
projects by utilities (increases benefits to all ratepayers);  
b) Standardiz e the energy portion  of the bill credit across all participants to be 
a kWh credit (should help get these projects classified as load reducers), 
facilitating simple pass -through of the energy produced  to the partiipants  
(analogous to energy from the Standa rd Offer provider  or competitive 
energy suppliers );  
c) Conduct an evaluation of all utility and ratepayer benefits and costs as the 
basis on which to restructure the NEB delivery credit  to create a positive 
overall benefit/cost ratio for all Maine people and minimize any  
 
 
3 
 residual  nonparticipant ratepayer impact.  Require an initial report about 
this to the 2024 legislature and annual reports thereafter, with a goal of 
continuous improvement in the NEB program to maximize the system 
benefits of small -scale d istributed generation and make NEB beneficial to 
all ratepayers.  
6. Require the GEO, working in collaboration with the PUC, to conduct a rigorous 
benefit/cost analysis and separate ratepayer impact analysis of the projects 
that actually become operational  under the existing NEB program (with the 5 
MW cap ), within the deadlines already established, with a report to the 
legislature in 2025 about any mitigating measures that could be justified to 
reduce nonparticipant r atepayer  impact.      
Supporting charts and o ther backup materials have been submitted 
previously.  We just wanted to write these key ingredients down in one place.  
Thank you for considering them if you think these points would result in a 
beneficial distributed generation future.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
SEAM LD 1986 and LR 2579 EUT Committee Supplemental Testimony  5-28-23  
Steven Weems
Solar Energy Association of Maine and Dirigo Community Solar Group
LD 1986
Supplemental Testimony in support of LD 1986 and LR 2579 from the Solar Energy 
Association of Maine and Dirigo Community Solar Group.
