Testimony of Anthony Buxton, Preti Flaherty, Beliveau & Pachios 
On Behalf of Industrial Energy and Consumer Group In Opposition to LD 1986, An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
May 24, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, I am Tony Buxton of Preti F laherty, here to testify for IECG in opposition to LD 1986, An Act Relating to Net Energy Billing and Distributed Solar and Energy Storage Systems. 
There was no report to EUT from the DG 2.0 Stakeholder Group. The report is only from GEO and its consultant. There was no vote allowed in which the appointed Stakeholder Group could approve or reject the report. Stakeholders expected there would be. 
Many appointed Stakeholders and others expressed grave concerns about the draft and ﬁnal report. Those included MPUC, OPA, CMP, Versant, IECG and NEB developer Bob Cleaves. Most submitted written comments. of which IECG's comments are attached to my testimony here today. 
The DG 2.0 report was prepared by the GEO and staff and consultant. The consultant was the same one that advised GEO in 2019 on the adoption of NEB and predicted a rate increase of 1%. The consultant met only with Democratic committee members and NEB supporters in 2019. 
During the Stakeholder process the “regional “report advocated by the consultant and now included in 1986 as a mandate to MPUC was severely criticized as having no connection to the cost of developing NEB but instead only to the prices paid for NEB in other New England states. Thus, if the NEB industry succeeded in other states in establishing rates unrelated to cost or value, as they did in Maine, the data is unrelated to cost, fairness or equity. 
, The bill’s concept of pushing costs onto electric utilities and thus having ratepayers avoid them is inconsistent with all regulatory law, accounting and 
205028802
procedure. If costs are found, which they will be in small amounts, they will be 
Transmission and Distribution costs recoverable in rates with standard utility 
return on equity. We might wish it were different; it isn’t. 
The acceptance of federal funds is ﬁne; the Committee might want to decide 
whether it agrees with GEO that storage is the highest priority, or whether actual 
rate reduction or heat pumps might be more important. IECG regrets to note the 
striking similarities of this circumstance to the surprise birth of NEB in 2019. 
The Committee, as it was in 2019, apparently is in its waning days with little 
time for deliberation. The Committee is asked to rely on the work of the same 
consultant to GEO, once again with no opportunity to question the consultant. This 
time, the bill requires use of the regional report on which the consultant relied, 
with no opportunity to test or hear critiques of the report. Relying on that report 
and the consultant, the bill strongly implies that the PUC can and will materially 
reduce the cost of NEB. 
This, unfortunately, is no more true than was the 2019 prediction of a 1% rate 
increase. Unfortunately, all NEB costs Will be paid by ratepayers. It is not prudent 
or productive to hope otherwise. 
I will take any questions, Thank you. 
205028802
Industrial Energy Consumer Group (IECG) Initial Comments on LD 936 Proposed 
Framework for Distributed Generation “Successor Program” (Successor Program) 
IECG welcomes the opportunity to offer initial comments on the Successor 
Program proposal created in partial response to LD 936. IECG’s comments will also address the 
command of LD 936 that the Distributed Generation Stakeholder Group (Group) report 
summarize the lessons learned from the existing Net Energy Billing (NEB) program. IECG 
combines these topics because prudence dictates understanding the failures of existing NEB 
before creating another NEB program. That has not been attempted by the Group, so true to 
ancient wisdom, we risk repeating, in part, the most destructive climate and energy mistake in 
Maine history. 
IECG understands and respects that the Successor Program is a good faith attempt to 
fulﬁll the Legislature ’s request in LD 936 for design of an NEB program more limited in project 
size and nature than the existing NEB program. As The Successor Program states the Proposal is 
not any entity’s current recommendation, and clearly is not IECG’s. The Successor Program 
allows the basic concepts underlying NEB to be further tested for usefulness. Without the test 
proposal, some would contend that the ﬂaws in existing NEB would be corrected by certain 
constraining limitations, such as “smaller” projects. 
The dynamics of the Successor Program, however, clearly reveal that the very same ﬂaws 
that impair existing NEB lie at the heart of NEB itself. The only possible material difference isa 
—~possible — reduction in the total cost of the mistake to ratepayers. 
The public interest in more effective climate mitigation and lower electricity costs is not 
advanced by another NEB mistake, even if it possibly will be a smaller mistake than the mistake 
of existing NEB. Instead, the public interest is best served by rigorously pursuing cost-effective 
beneﬁcial electriﬁcation and promoting the cost-effective “greening ” of the entire grid though 
renewable energy projects at scale the “biggest bang for the buck” . Many cost-superior 
opportunities are available to Maine. While Maine is making progress in climate mitigation, 
Maine cannot waste energy investment; Maine has far more mitigation miles yet to travel. 
The ﬂaws of greatest signiﬁcance in existing NEB deserve brief explication: 
1. Existing NEB was created entirely by the Legislature with no material input by MPUC or the 
OPA, and after minimal explanation and public hearing discussion. This dynamic minimized 
consideration of ratepayer impacts and ratepayer perspectives. 
2. The Legislature set the compensation mechanism, or payment rate, based on the current rate 
that small commercial ratepayers pay for utility delivery service, a cost unrelated to the cost 
of building and operating NEB of 5 MW or smaller, added to 75% of the current standard 
offer retail rate, another cost unrelated to the cost of building and operating NEB. As those 
costs escalate, so does the NEB payment rate. For example, NEB payment rates that began at 
l2 cents/kVVh and l5 cents/kWh for CMP and Versant, in 2021 will be as much as 25 
cents/kVVh in 2023. These increases also are unrelated to the cost of building and operating 
NEB.
1 
197926121
The Legislature also set no binding limitation on the total number of NEB projects or the 
total MW of the program, thereby setting no limit on the total cost to be borne by 
ratepayers. In effect , The Legislature created an “entitlement program” for solar developers 
and ﬁnanciers at the expense of Maine ratepayers. 
The Legislature gave MPUC no authority to limit the payment rate for NEB, the total number 
of projects or contracted MW, or the total cost to ratepayers. No other energy purchase 
program ever created by the Legislature has failed to give MPUC such essential powers. 
Despite multiple subsequent opportunities to limit the amount of NEB and the payment rates 
for NEB, the Legislature did not act to impose binding limits on NEB MW purchases or to 
freeze or reduce the original payment rates for NEB. Today, the payment rate continues to 
escalate without regard to the cost of building and operating NEB and the total MW of NEB 
projects 2 MW or smaller remains entirely unlimited. Further, the Legislature ’s “goal “ofa 
750 MW limit on projects up to 5 MW in size, based on NEB advocate assertions, appears to 
likely to be at least doubled to 1500 MW for NEB in service by 2025. 
The Legislature required no competitive bidding in any form to obtain an NEB contract. The 
nearly simultaneous competitive bidding conducted by MPUC pursuant to other renewables 
legislation produced solar projects with greater societal beneﬁts (environmental, 
employment, and grid-supporting) than NEB, but at only at 3-5 cents/kVVh for twenty years. 
This represents payment rates at 25% of the cost of NEB, or even less. 
The consequences of existing NEB to ratepayers appear increasingly certain. Based on 
monthly updated reports of NEB activity from CMP and Versant, if all currently active NEB 
projects come on-line as required by 2025, Cl\/LP ratepayers will shoulder additional costs 
above current rates of $243 million per year, or a total of $5 billion over the twenty- year 
NEB contracts (See Attachment A). Versant ratepayers will shoulder additional costs of $100 
million annually and a total of $2 billion over the twenty- year contracts (See Attachment B). 
These amounts in only one of many state energy programs approximately equal the entire 
present cost of delivering service to the ratepayers of each utility. 
The signiﬁcant difference between the cost of NEB and solar projects competitively bid by 
MPUC consumes money ratepayers might prefer to keep to pay their bills, or which could be 
used to greatly increase the speed of Maine’s pursuit of beneﬁcial electriﬁcation and thus 
climate mitigation. For example, the Efficiency Maine Trust has invested in the installation 
of more than 80,000 heat pumps. Every heat pump frees a Maine family of material reliance 
on heating oil, propane, or kerosene — all price-volatile, expensive and carbon-rich fuels. 
Maine’s reliance on oil for heat remains at near 60% of all households, the highest in the 
nation after Alaska. The human and climate toll of this reliance puts in full context the moral 
error of unnecessary expenditures on NEB.
2 
197926122
Examination of the Proposed Successor Program reveals cost-increasing factors similar or 
identical to certain of those which have made existing NEB exorbitantly expensive: 
The Successor Program would be designed once again entirely by the Legislature, with no 
ability of MPUC to determine the size or total number of proj ects, rates to be paid, total 
ratepayer cost or to ﬁx discovered malfunctions. 
The Successor Program would allow only narrowly limited competition, with bidding among 
those smaller eligible projects meeting only 70% of the target acquisition. The other 30% 
would receive a ﬁxed price without any competition to further lower the cost. This absence 
of a rigorous competition mechanism ignores the fact that in a similarly limited previous DG 
competition, the Commission voided the results because of possible anticompetitive bidder 
behavior. This is always a risk, and especially in artiﬁcially limited competitions. 
Most importantly, by creating another unjustiﬁed size limitation on competition, the 
Successor Program will cost ratepayers at least twice as much for project output as would be 
paid by allowing competition without regard to size. There will be no societal beneﬁts that 
could not be obtained from larger, less expensive projects. In other words, there is no need 
for, and no public policy justiﬁcation for, the increased costs. In the altemative, MPUC has 
existing authority to acquire solar through full competition, which would acquire at least 
twice as much solar energy for the same total cost as would the Successor Program, also with 
twice as much delivered societal non-cost beneﬁts. 
The Successor Program contains untested complexities to achieve societal goals of aiding 
low-income persons and rewarding locations on brownﬁeld sites, without any MPUC 
authority to modify the goals, the cost-increasing mechanisms, or otherwise protect 
ratepayers. Moreover, as the proposal draft acknowledges, these incentives are redundant of 
large new federal tax incentives enacted in the Inflation Reduction Act to achieve exactly the 
same objectives. Thus, the only purpose of these incentives is to increase the ratepayer cost 
by around 10% as a reward for the developer receiving large federal tax beneﬁts of some 
20%. This is a classic example of an industry camouﬂaging its ﬁnancial beneﬁts. Ratepayer 
costs would increase by 10% because the developer has received a 10-20% or more in 
federally subsidized reduction in its costs. This makes no sense. The federal incentives are 
both efﬁcient and adequate. 
The Successor Program acknowledges that it is not integrated with existing NEB, including 
the ongoing and quantitatively unconstrained 2 MW and smaller project NEB incentives. 
Careful, intelligent integration of any new program is ignored at ratepayer peril and to the 
glee of developers. For example, some developers are pursuing fuel cell NEB under the 
existing program for projects of 2MW or less—with the fuel cells powered by natural gas. 
(Yes, natural gas; read the deﬁnitions of Title 35 -A carefully). Fuel cells operate above 90% 
capacity, meaning that a 2 MW fuel cell produces six times the output of a 2 MW solar 
project, resulting in six times the total cost to ratepayers, while actually increasing Maine’s 
GHG emissions. There is no limit in the number of proj ects or total ratepayer cost of NEB of
3 
I 197926122
this size. This is the risk to ratepayers created by the Legislature supplanting the MPUC’s 
judgement and fulsome consideration of complex matters. 
6. The Successor Program does nothing to change the inequities imposed on the vast majority 
of ratepayers created by existing cost allocation mechanisms. Currently, as well as under the 
Successor Program, the cost of energy purchased at above market rates would becomes 
stranded costs and, apparently, be allocated among all ratepayers. This continues the existing 
imbalance between project participants, who are subsidized to engage in NEB and thus who 
save money and all other ratepayers who share equally in the cost. This failure in energy 
equity becomes glaringly apparent when the proposed program, for example, is compared to 
solar, purchased at less than half the cost through full competition with no limits on size. This 
cost-efﬁcient alternative produces little or no stranded costs, and perhaps actually offsets 
high market costs, and delivers at least twice the societal beneﬁts at such lower cost. 
7. Similarly, the Successor Program makes no change to the additional inequity of forcing other 
ratepayers to pay higher rates to make up for the decreased revenue contributions to the 
electric utility of the NEB participants. As IECG analysis shows in Attachments A and B, 
based on MPUC reports, this speciﬁc inequity will raise the rates of remaining utility 
ratepayers by $125 million annually for existing NEB. The Successor Program increases the 
injustice. No estimate of these ratepayer hanns from the Successor Program has apparently 
been attempted. 
Once again, IECG respects that GEO is obligated to prepare the report requested by LD 936 
and has done so with highly signiﬁcant effort and consultant assistance. GEO’s administration 
has been thorough, efﬁcient and diplomatic. 
IECG observes, however, the striking continuation of limited interest, at best, in the ﬁnancial 
consequences to ratepayers and to Maine’s critical climate initiatives of existing NEB at all 
moments of legislative and governmental consideration. Perhaps the harm is so huge, so awful 
that we cannot bear to discuss it, much as we look away from a horrible accident. 
IECG warned at the creation of NEB of the consequences, but IECG gets no comfort in 
having predicted the result. Instead, IECG regrets that the monies which will be spent 
involuntarily by all ratepayers on NEB renewables( that should have cost 25% of the estimated 7 
billion NEB will cost) will not be available to be spent where needed most: to take 300,000 
Maine households off heating oil and propane with heat pumps, to weatherize the nation’s oldest 
housing stock, to incentivize electric vehicles in the state with the most signiﬁcant commutes by 
vehicle and to otherwise aggressively pursue beneﬁcial electriﬁcation. Time is not on Maine’s 
side, or the planet’s.
4 
197926122
Existing NEB is by far the largest climate mistake in Maine history. It demonstrates the cost 
of politics and fear triumphing over critical thought. Understanding the causes and scope of the 
mistake is essential to mitigating the mistake and avoiding its repetition. Here, due to LD 936, 
the DG Stakeholder Group and GEO are obligated to present the framework of a successor 
program. Ethan Tremblay and GEO and its consultants have done their best; the DG Stakeholder 
Group will offer useful comment, as IECG attempts here. But there is a reality that time has 
taught and that we must acknowledge. 
NEB was and remains a terrible mistake. The proposed Successor Program implicitly 
acknowledges this reality by offering a program with smaller projects, some limited competition 
and other constraints. Yet the truth is the proposed Successor Program also is a mistake, one 
whose only virtue is that it is a smaller mistake. 
Maine cannot afford any further climate mistakes. If Maine needs more DG, MPUC has 
existing authority to acquire it on a fully competitive basis, and therefore at lowest cost and most 
efﬁciently acquired social beneﬁts. 
IECG recommends that the only Successor Program which should be enacted would be to 
vest in MPUC authority to acquire the resources and cause the funding necessary to accomplish 
beneﬁcial electriﬁcation at the lowest cost to Maine ratepayers. This would be consistent with 
the recent legislative addition of climate mitigation to the Commission ’s virtual charter. The 
Legislature in 1913 created the Commission to oversee the complex world of utility development 
and regulation. A century and more later, history teaches another timely lesson. 
Respectfully submitted, 
61/ 
Anthony W. Buxton 
Preti Flaherty 
Counsel to Industrial Energy Consumer Group
5 
191926122
