 
 
May 9, 202 3 
 
The Hon. Mark Lawrence, Co-chair  
The Hon. Stanley Paige Zeigler , Jr., Co-chair  
Joint Standing  Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
State House  
Augusta, Maine 04330  
 
Re: Testimony in Support of  L.D. 1830 , “An Act to Advance Maine's Clean Energy Goals ”  
 
Dear Sen. Lawrence, Rep. Zeigler , and members of the EUT Committee:  
 
On behalf of Longroad Energy  (Longroad) , I am writing in support of  L.D. 1830 , “An Act to 
Advance Maine's Clean Energy Goals ,” sponsored by Senat or Vitelli .   
 
Longroad develops and operates wind and solar energy projects in markets across  the United 
States .  In Maine , we employ a dozen people including  Maine Maritime Academy graduates and 
U.S. military veterans who operat e hundreds of renewable energ y power plants across the 
country  from our Scarborough office .  The Long road team has been developing renewable 
energy projects in Maine for over 15 years, and during that time, we have invested over a 
billion dollars in developing  approximately 700 megawatts (MW)  of clean energy  here in the 
state . 
 
Competitive procurements are a proven and effective means of diversifying the energy mix, 
reducing pollution and climate gases, and driving investment in renewable power.  In fact, over 
the past twenty years  competitive procurement s have almost certainly  been the most 
successful public policy mechanism in bringing large amounts of carbon -free clean energy into 
northeastern electricity markets.   And importantly, competitive procurements ver y similar to 
that proposed in L.D. 1830 have been beneficial for ratepayers.   
 
The most recent procurements done by the Maine Public Utilities Commission  (PUC ) resulted in 
pricing that was significantly lower than wholesale market prices.   In 2020, the PU C selected 17 
projects ranging in initial price between 2.9  and 4.2 cents per k ilowatt hour (kWh).1  For the 
seven projects selected in  the second tranche in 2021, initial pricing was in the 2.8 to 3.9 cent 
 
1 Commission Selects Renewable Energy Projects to Help Achieve Maine’s Renewable Portfolio Standard 
Goals , September  22, 202 0. 
Longroad Testimony on L.D. 1830  
May 9, 202 3 
 
 2 per kWh range.2  For comparison, the average wh olesale energy price in Maine over the past 
year was 8.4 cents per kWh (March 2022 -Feb. 2023) , according to the Office of Public Advocate .   
 
Looking back f urther, a PUC report3 issued to this committee in  January shows clean energy 
procurement has been  providing meaningful savings to Maine customers.  Between December 
2021 and November 2022, existing long -term contracts for renewable power from operating 
projects saved Maine ratepayers nearly $14 million.  
 
Longroad has two suggestions  to further strengthen L.D. 1830 .  The concept of developing solar 
projects on lands contaminated by PFAS or other such substances has merit and is worthy of 
exploration .  However, the approach  in the legislation to encouraging  development of 
renewables on contaminated lands is potentially complicated for the PUC to administer and for 
bidders to interpret .  It may also be challenging for project s on affected  lands to compete on 
price.  Accordingly, Longroad suggests the committe e consider  alternatives like  setting aside a 
modest percentage of the overall procurement target as a pilot program for projects to be 
deployed on contaminated lands , or creating a bonus mechanism for such projects within the 
PUC bid review process.  
 
Secon dly, Longroad believes that financial security requirements should be strengthened for 
projects selected through competitive procurement processes to increase the likelihood that 
they will be completed and deliver the benefits promised to Maine ratepayers and the state as 
a whole.   The termination of a number of projects selected in recent solicitations underscores 
the need for additional measures to encourage the completion of projects.  Thus, we  suggest 
that language be added to L.D. 1830 to require selec ted projects to  post at least $40/kW in 
financial security within 30 days of contract execution, with higher amounts due at the PUC ’s 
discretion based on the particular risks of a winning bid.   
 
Thank  you for the opportunity  to share our views on this bill.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Chad Allen  
Director, Development  
Longroad Energy Holdings, LLC  
 
2 Maine Public Utilities Commission Selects Renewable Energy Projects in Second Competitive 
Procurement , June 29 , 2021.  
3 Annual Report on Long -term Contracts , January 3, 2023.  

