Page 1 of 3 
   
 
 
TESTIMONY OF CLEARWAY ENERGY GROUP  ON LD 1830   
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHOLOGY  
May 1 9, 202 3 
  
Dear Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler  and members of the Committee:  
My name is Dan Hendrick, and I am head of External Affairs  – East Region,  for Clearway Energy Group 
(“Clearway”). I’d like to thank the Committee  for the opportunity to offer Clearway’s perspective on LD 1830, An 
Act To  Advance Maine’s Clean Energy Goals.  
Clearway supports the intent of LD 1830 to continue Maine’s effor ts to fight climate change and grow 
its clean energy economy. We are grateful for the bill sponsor’s longtime leadership in these areas. Our 
main point of concern is the scoring methodology . As drafted, this bill will heavily favor grid -scale solar 
project s to the exclusion of other technologies that would otherwise allow the state to enhance grid 
reliability and reduce its dependence on expensive natural gas during the winter peak.  
About Clearway  
Clearway is one of the largest developers and operators of clean energy in the United States with nearly  6 
gigawatts of wind, solar, and energy storage in operation operating in 28 states. Clearway differs from other 
renewable energy providers because our company is the long -term owne r/operator of our assets; therefore, 
our focus is on markets , projects  and product offerings that are stable and sustainable for the long term.  
Clearway has a well -established presence in the Northeast, with large solar fleets  in Massachusetts and New 
York. Here in Maine, Clearway  also owns County Wind , a proposed wind energy facility with a n operating 
capacity located in southern  Aroostook County . Now in the advanced stages of project development, County 
Wind  has been identified as one of the most attractive sites in  north ern Maine for its combination of scale and 
quality of wind resource.  
As drafted, LD 1830  will heavily favor grid -scale solar proje cts 
Clearway is concerned that, absent several edits to the bill , the emphasis on “benefits to ratepayers” will in 
practice effectively bar most technologies from participating – even if those technologies would otherwise  
address reliability and fuel dive rsity, reduce the state’s winter dependence on costly natural gas during the 
winter or provide opportunities to advance regional cooperation.  
 

Page 2 of 3 
 The U.S. Energy Information Administration’s most recent report on levelized costs of new generation 
resources1 indicates that a solicitation that strongly prioritizes cost will lead to an overabundance of grid -scale 
solar awards. The results of other recent procurements in the state that prioritized cost in scoring criteria 
demonstrate this likely outcome. For exam ple, in Maine’s 2020 -2021 3210 -G renewables procurement , solar 
bidders won 19 out of 20 awards for new facilities, and the one wind project that was selected was already 
under contract for energy with another party, and so the Maine PUC procured only the w ind project’s RECs.2 
 
An influx of additional large grid -scale solar projects may not be what Maine wants or needs, particularly when 
it comes to combating high winter heating bills that disproportionately harm low - and moderate -income 
residential ratepayers. The capacity factor of grid -scale solar diminishes during the winter, when natural gas use 
and prices are at their highest. Onshore wind in Northern New England, to provide a contrasting example, 
provides a higher capacity factor du ring the winter, thereby shaving winter peak costs. Such winter peak 
benefits are even greater when the expected increase in electric vehicle penetration and beneficial 
electrification of heat pumps are factored into planning for future years.   
 
The rising cost of natural gas is the key driver behind the dramatic increase in Maine’s 2023 high standard -offer 
service rates by Versant and CMP. It would be a tremendous missed opportunity to not align this procurement  
with Maine’s  goal of a less natura l-gas dependent electricity system.  
 
To that end , Clearway recommends : 
• The bill  be modified to create  technology -specific lanes to provide opportunities for each resource 
type.  Solar farms would compete against solar farms, wind power plants against wind power plants, 
instead of pitting technologies with dramatically different cost and benefit profiles against one another.  
• If specific lanes are not feasible, cap the  aggregate awards made to any single resource type to no 
greater than 50 percent of the total megawatt -hours awarded .  
• Directing  the PUC to weigh a more comprehensive suite of “benefits to ratepayers ,” such as fuel 
diversity, reliability, winter peak -shaving benefits, the likelihood of displacing natural gas generation, 
and the ability to demonstrate regional cooperation in tackling transmission challenges as prioritized 
by Gov. Mills and the other New England G overnors.3 
• Allow bidders to evidence project maturity by requiring them to have filed an application for a  System 
Impact Study or a cluster -enabled Large Generator Interconnection Request  with ISO -NE (the latter  is 
not currently included and will ensure developers have skin in the game ). 
• Delete subsection  2(C)2, which conflicts with an open PUC docket.  On March 3, 2023, several  parties 
filed a petition that asks the PUC to examine the impact of congestion and curtailment on state 
contracts.4 The P UC is actively examining the matter, having issued a list of questions to stakeholders 
 
1 https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/electricity_generation.pdf  
2 https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9957  
3 https://www.coneg.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/03/New -England -Governors -Statement -of-Cooperation -on-Regional -
Energy -3-15-19.pdf  
4 https://mpuc -
cms.maine.gov/CQM.Public.WebUI/MatterManagement/MatterFilingItem.aspx?FilingSeq=118252&CaseNumber=2023 -
00054 
 
Page 3 of 3 
 on May 1. Clearway strongly recommends allowing the PUC to complete its review and weigh the full 
ecosystem of stakeholder viewpoints on this complex issue before includ ing this language.  
 
 
Clearway appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments .  Please feel free to contact me with any 
additional questions.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
/s/ Dan Hendrick  
Head  of External Affairs  - East 
Clearway Energy Group  
dan.hendrick@clearwayenergy.com  
(917) 207 -8715  
