T' 
. ,2 - Th@Nature 
M MAI RL 
‘ Conservancy 
FARMLAND TRUST AU l)l§ (Q) l\ l‘""“l’"‘@ 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
% Legislative Information Ofﬁce 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
May 9, 2023 
RE: LD 1830, An Act to Advance Maine's Clean Energy Goals 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 1830, An Act to 
Advance Maine's Clean Energy Goals, on behalf of Maine Audubon, Maine Farmland Trust, and 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine. We would like to thank Senator Vitelli for her policy 
leadership, and for fostering an enviromnent in Maine that strives for the rapid deployment of 
critical renewable energy infrastructure while preserving key values around siting and mitigation 
Our testimony includes a suggested, friendly amendment to that end. 
LD 1830, in addition to requiring that the Governor ’s Energy Ofﬁce (GEO), in 
consultation with Maine’s Public Utilities Commission (PUC), review and report on the impact 
of the State’s renewable resources portfolio requirement, would authorize the PUC to conduct a 
competitive solicitation for contracts to procure new renewable energy sources, including solar 
and terrestrial wind. The amount of energy procured would equal 5% of retail electricity sales in 
the state during calendar 2021, a meaningful step toward Maine’s mandatory target of 80% of 
retail electricity sales ﬁom renewable resources by 2030 and 100% by 2050. Maine Audubon, 
Maine Farmland Trust, and The Nature Conservancy in Maine support this legislation asa 
critical strategy to protect wildlife and Maine’s natural resources, including agricultural 
resources, from the worst impacts of climate change. 
The bill would also require the PUC, in conducting their solicitation and selection of 
resources, to give special consideration to projects located on lands that have been contaminated 
with perfluoroalkyl and polyﬂuoroalkyl (“PFAS”) substances (in addition to beneﬁts to 
ratepayers, project viability, and effects on other Class 1A resources). Our organizations are 
particularly pleased with this element of the bill. 
Locating renewable energy development on PFAS-contaminated lands would create an 
economic opportunity for farmers. Currently, there is no way to remediate PFAS contamination
in soils. As the Maine Department of Environmental Protection and Maine Department of 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry investigate the more than 700 sites suspected to have 
contamination based on the State-permitted application of residuals (which include industrial 
waste products and biosolids ﬁom municipal sewage), some properties have been found to have 
concentrations of PFAS contamination that are high enough to prevent fanning in the near-term. 
Farmers across Maine are being forced to face the fact that their land may be no longer usable for 
agricultural purposes. This has enonnous implications for the ﬁnancial stability of fanners and 
their families. Locating renewable energy projects on these lands would provide a revenue 
stream from otherwise unusable land. 
Incentivizing renewable energy development on PF AS-contaminated lands is alsoa 
leading example of thoughtful renewable energy siting that balances clean energy and natural 
resource conservation goals. New renewable energy development — like any new development — 
if not thoughtfully sited, can displace wildlife habitat and otherwise negatively impact Maine’s 
natural resources, including agricultural resources. The natural resource value of PFAS- 
contaminated lands, however, is minimal. 
The attached friendly amendment expands on the concept of incentivizing renewable 
energy development on land with little to no natural resource value or away from lands with 
exceptionally high natural resource value. Speciﬁcally, the amendment would favor projects 
located on PFAS-contaminated lands, impervious surfaces, capped landﬁlls, brownﬁelds, or 
away from areas of high ecological signiﬁcance including, but not limited to, undeveloped 
habitat blocks and important wildlife corridors or prime agricultural soils or soils of statewide 
signiﬁcance. 
The impacted lands and natural resources included in the amendment were chosen 
deliberately. Of course, the bill already includes PFAS-contaminated lands. The amendment 
imbeds an existing statutory deﬁnition for contaminated lands, which includes impervious 
surfaces, capped landﬁlls, and brownﬁelds, as well as a deﬁnition for PFAS-contaminated lands. 
See 35-A MRSA §3484(6) (2019); 38 MRSA §1614 (2021). Utilizing existing statutory 
deﬁnitions supports consistent application of Maine law. Furthermore, incentivizing renewable 
energy development on “disturbed lands” is consistent with the Inﬂation Reduction Act‘ , under 
which projects located on certain disturbed lands are eligible to receive an incremental 10% 
investment tax credit. Analysis by Synapse demonstrates that the incentive may make projects 
located on disturbed lands cost-competitive with projects located on “greenﬁeld” or non- 
disturbed lands, like agricultural ﬁelds or forestland.2 
1 
in August 2022, Congress passed the inflation Reduction Act, which directs spending to climate change 
related programs aimed at accelerating the deployment of clean energy technology, among other climate- 
related goals. 
2 See Fina! Report of the Distributed Generation Stakeholder Group, submitted to the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology on January 6, 2023, pg. 33.
“Areas of high ecological signiﬁcance including, but not limited to, undeveloped habitat 
blocks and important wildlife corridors . . . [and] . . . prime agricultural soils or soils of statewide 
signiﬁcance” is synergistic with another legislative initiative that seeks to avoid — as well as 
compensate for — impacts to high value agricultural lands and other natural resources from 
renewable energy development. Representative Scott Landry’s LD 1881, An Act Regarding 
Compensation Fees and Related Conservation Eﬂorts to Protect Soils and Wildlife and Fisheries 
Habitat ﬁom Solar and Wind Energy Development and High-impact Electric Transmission Lines 
Under the Site Location of Development Laws, would create a compensation fee program that 
would both incentivize locating renewable energy projects away from high value natural 
resources and account for projects that can not reasonably avoid those areas. LD 1881 would 
compel the Departments of Environmental Protection and Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry to deﬁne those areas. Our organization ’s proposed amendment to LD 1830 directs the 
PUC to consult with those Departments in their rulemaking; the Department rules (directed by 
LD 1881) could inform and be aligned by the PUC’s rules (directed by this bill). 
Encouraging renewable energy development away from high value natural resources is 
consistent with Maine’s Climate Action Plan, which calls for the “[development] of policies by 
2022 to ensure renewable energy project siting is streamlined and transparent while seeking to 
minimize impacts on natural and working lands. . .” . Our organizations encourage the Committee 
to support this legislation, with our ﬁiendly amendment, to help achieve Maine’s climate and 
clean energy goals, while conserving Maine’s highest value natural resources. 
Sincerely, 
Eliza Donoghue, Esq. Kaitlyn Nuzzo Shelley Megquier 
Director of Advocacy Director of Govermnent Relations Policy & Research Director 
Maine Audubon The Nature Conservancy in Maine Maine Farmland Trust
Proposed Amendment to LD 1830, An Act to Advance Maine's Clean Energy 
Goals 
Sec. 1. 35-A MRSA §3209-C is enacted to read: 
§3209-C. Distributed renewable generation 
1. Definitions. As used in this section. unless the context otherwise indicates. the following 
terms have the following meanings. 
A. "Combined proiect" means a Class IA resource that is paired with an energy storage 
gystem in accordance with rules adopted bv the commission. 
B. "Contaminated land" means: 
..--..-----.. , 
- .- --.. .- .--.. -.. - 
. . 
1- -- ------ ' 
- - ll 4 - ﬁll 1 --I - - - - - -- .---- - -----.-- --- 
- .---.- 
(1) Previously developed or lillp€; _iC’[€-}*_(Tl __l __ 8_l"l(Zi azsdefinedotin section 3484. subsection 
6; or 
{2} Agricultural landcontaminated ppbv perjiluoroalkyl andpzpolyfluoroalkyl 
substances asdefined in Title 38, section. ’l6l-4. "that mav no longer be used for 
agricultural purposes as determoineod b\/the Departmentwof Agriculture. 
Conseryation and Forestry in acgordaoncepwlth applicable state and federal food 
safety standards. 
C. "Eligib|e Class IA resource" means a Class IA resource, as defined in section 3210. 
subsection 2,_paragraph A-3. that is located on contaminated land. 
D. "Energy storage system" has the same meaning as in section 3481. subsection 6. 
2. Competitive procurement. The commission shall direct investor-owned transmission and 
distribution utilities to enter into one or more contracts for energy or renewable energy credits 
from eligible Class lA resources or combined proiects in accordance with this section. 
Customers who have made an election pursuant to section 
A. 
B. 
C. In conducting a solicitation and selecting Class IA resources or combined proiects for 
contracts under this section, the commission shall: 
( 1) Consider proiect viability. The commission shall reiect a bid if the commission 
finds that the system impact study required by the New England independent 
system operator for the Class IA resource has not been filed; 
(2) Consider the expected effect of selected Class lA resources on other 
renewable resources, as defined in section 3210, subsection 2,J>aragraph C, due 
to congestion and curtailment; and 
(3) Weigh the benefits to ratepayers and the benefits to the State's economy as 
follows: 
fa) A weight of 70% must be given to the benefits to ratepayers; and 
(b) A weight of 30% must be given to resources located on contaminated 
land; that avoid areas of high ecological significance including, but not 
limited to, undeveloped habitat blocks and important wildlife corridors; or 
that avoid prime agricultural soils or soilswof r statewide significance -the 
, as determined by the commission by 
rule. The commission shall consult the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestryandthe Department of Environmental 
Protection in rulemaking. 
The commission may only select Class lA resources or combined proiects for contracts 
under this section if the commission finds the contract will benefit ratepayers and the bid 
price is less than the standard-offer service rate established pursuant to section 3212 
that applies to residential customers in the territory of the transmission and distribution 
utility at the time the contract is executed. 
