 
 
 
 
 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209 
Testimony In Support of LD 1830 
An Act to Advance Maine's Clean Energy Goals 
May 9, 2023 
 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and I 
am here on behalf of Versant Power in support of LD 1830.  
 
As we collectively plan the necessary steps to accomplish our State’s ambitious climate and clean 
energy objectives, it is important that we do so in a way that maximizes benefits to customers while 
minimizing costs. Versant Power supports the procurement of additional grid-scale renewable 
generation and believes strongly that procurements such as these are a cost-effective way to decarbonize 
our energy mix while maintaining affordability.  
 
Specifically, as we have discussed previously with this Committee, we know that significant energy 
storage deployment will be necessary to integrate these renewable resources efficiently and in a manner 
that provides additional benefits to the grid and our customers. For these reasons we applaud Senator 
Vitelli’s focus on “combined projects” paired with energy storage.  
 
Lastly, Versant Power supports structuring these procurements in a way that allows the Public Utilities 
Commission the discretion necessary to maximizes project benefits while minimizing costs in selecting 
bids. As proposed, LD 1830 would only allow for the PUC to select projects that the agency deems will 
benefit ratepayers and at a price that is less than standard offer. We believe that this strong safeguard 
provides an appropriate level of protection for ratepayers.   
 
As with any major procurement, there will always be longer-term considerations about contracting 
provisions and technical issues associated with large-scale renewable energy deployment. Versant 
Power looks forward to being a collaborative, productive and trusted partner during those discussions. 
 
We would be happy to provide additional information at the work session. Thank you for your 
consideration.  
 
