 
 
   
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1830 ,  
 An Act to Advance Maine’s Clean Energy Goals    
 
By Rebecca Schultz,  
Senior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy  
May  9, 2023 
  
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology, my name is Rebecca Schultz. I am a Senior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy at the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). NRCM  is Main e’s leading  environmental advocacy  
organization  with  more  than  25,000 members  and supporters.  I am testify ing in support of LD 1830.  
 LD 1830  builds on the Public Utility Commission’s (PUC) tried and true approach  of using competitive 
solicitation to advance  Maine’s  clean energy commitments.  
 We urgently  need new renewable energy resources to meet our climate and clean energy goals. 
Analysis by consultant E3 on behalf of the Governor’s Energy Office (GEO) in 2021 concluded that Maine 
had enough resources under development to meet its renewable portfolio standard  (RPS)  through  2026, 
but that n ew investments would be needed  to keep the state on track thereafter (see attached Figure 
1). The year 2026 is  now  within  a project development horizon . The deficit  is even more pressing given 
that many of the contracts awarded  through two tranches  of procurements  in 2020 and 2021  totaling 
968 megawatts ( MW ), faced with unforeseen pandemic -era circumstances , are unlikely to get  built.  This 
bill smartly addresses that setback  by authorizing the PUC to work with GEO to assess those projects  and 
re-procure  the output of contracts that  have not made  demonstrable  progress toward commercial 
viability.   
 Competitive procurement is a common -sense, low-risk strategy for getting renewable energy built in 
Maine. Maine’s Public Utilities Commission has a successful track record administering  competitive 
solicitations  to contract for  cost-effective renewable ene rgy. This is a long -standing and  core component  
of Maine’s  effort to diversify and decarbonize its energy sector. W e should  continue to rely on this 
proven  approach in the near -term  to maintain momentum and keep pace with our renewable energy 
requirements  as we move forward in  electrifying building s and transportation.   
 Renewable energy is good for Maine’s economy  and puts downward pressure on rates . Wind and solar 
are home -grown ene rgy resources that directly substitute fossil fuel- dominated energy from the 
regional grid. With no fuel costs and virtually no operating costs, these renewable energy contracts have a downward and stabilizing effect on electricity rates across the state. We saw this last summer when 
the PUC approved decreases in delivery rates due  to renewable energy procurements.
1 
 
 
1 The Commission announced a decrease in delivery prices for Central Maine Power (CMP) residential customers of 5.5 percent, 
a decrease in delivery prices for Versant Power -Bangor Hydro District residential customers of 3.8 percent, and a decrease in 
delivery prices for Versant Power -Maine Public District residential customers of 3.5 percent effective July 1, 2022. Maine Public 
Utilities Commission, June 14, 2022, Press Release, available at https://www.maine.gov/tools/whatsnew/index.php?topic=puc -
pressreleases&id=8025065&v=article088 .  
 
  
2 
 Wind and solar are the least -cost energy resources available today. Even accounting for variable output 
and anticipating near- term declines in natural gas prices, solar and onshore wind continue to be the 
cheapest energy resource options available (see  attached  Figures 2 and 3). The Energy Information 
Administration estimates that the cost to build and operate a photovoltaic (PV) facility in th e U.S. today 
is $23 per megawatt -hour  (MWh) . For PV coupled with a four -hour battery storage system to achieve 
roughly equivalent reliability to conventional d ispatchable generation resources , the cost increases to 
$36 per MWh —still well below the cost of a combined -cycle natural gas unit at $43. The economic 
advantage is clear and is driving a transformation in the power sector around the country.   
 
The bill shrewdly aligns pressing public policy goals . By restricting eligibility to projects sited on 
contaminated lands or combined renewable -storage projects,  the bill advances important public policy 
objectives  in tandem  with our renewable energy commitments . With a current installed capacity of 50 
MW,  Maine is falling behind on its statutory  energy sto rage targets: 300 MW of installed capacity by 
2025 and 400 MW by 2030 . The bill directs  the Commission  to adopt rules to define combined 
renewable -storage projects , providing an opportunity to clarify the value propositions that best suit the 
needs of the grid and  enhance ratepayer benefits . Additionally requiring the Commission to favor in its 
bid selection projects sited on contaminated lands, the procurement can help optimize land -use and 
create a valuable economic lifeline to impacted landowners seeking  to repurpose contaminated lands.  
 NRCM strongly supports this bill, and w e urge you to vote Ought t o Pass.   
 Thank you for  this opportunity to provide testimony .  
  
 
 
     
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
3 
 Figure 1. An analysis undertaken by the Governor’s Energy Office found that Maine needs new 
resources online and generating Renewable Energy Credits (RECs) starting in 2026 to comply with its 
RPS commitment.  The analysis a ssumed projects procured in 2020 and 2021 totaling 968 M W would 
get bui lt.2 
 
 
 
  Figure 2. Estimated levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) and levelized cost of storage (LCOS) for new 
resources entering service in 2028 . Levelized costs reflect the cost to build and operate a facility. 
3 
 
 
 
 
2 Energy & Environmental Economics (E3) on behalf of the Governor’s Energy Office, Maine Renewable Energy Goals Market 
Assessment, February 17, 2021, available at https://www1.maine.gov/energy/sites/maine.gov.energy/files/inline -
files/GEO_Maine_Renewable_Energy_Goals_Market_Assessment_February_Webinar_Slides.pdf .  
3 U.S. Department of Energy, Levelized Costs of New Generation Resources in the Annual  Energy Outlook 2023, 
https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/electricity_generation /pdf/AEO2023_LCOE_report.pdf .  
 
  
4 
  
Figure 3. Example of i ndustry forecasts of renewable energy economics , including storage adders for 
wind and solar to achieve roughly equivalent reliability  for comparison to dispatchable generation 
resources.4  
 
 
 
4 Nextera Energy Partners, May Investor Presentation, May 8, 2023, available at 
https://www.investor.nexteraenergy.com/~/media/Files/N/NEE-IR/news -and-events/events -and-presentations/2023/05-08 -
23/May_Investor_Presentation_vFinal.pdf .  
