 
 
Testimony in Favor of L.D. 1830 
 
Dirigo Solar LLC - May 9, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and distinguished members of the Energy, Utilities, 
and Technology Committee. My name is Robert Cleaves and I am a Cofounder of Maine-based Dirigo 
Solar. We strongly support L.D. 1830. 
Maine is at an important inflection point in de-carbonizing its grid. Through NEB, it has 
unleashed distributed scale solar, utilizing existing distribution infrastructure and delivering power 
locally. But because of the size of these projects, costs are often higher and this “build out” is not without 
a cost. At the same time, we have started to meaningfully promote “utility scale” solar, which tends to 
be lower in cost. My company knows something about both markets.  
Dirigo, along with our partners at BNRG Renewables, have developed and financed energy 
projects worth over $150 million in our State. Seven projects (in Milo, Oxford, Fairfield, Augusta, 
Hancock, Palmyra, and Winslow) are operational and delivering power to CMP and Versant at 3.4 cents 
per kWh. In 2021 alone, these projects saved Maine ratepayers more than $3.9M, according to utility 
filings with the PUC. These savings will no doubt be greater in 2022 and 2023 due to higher standard 
offer power prices and additional projects coming online. Additionally, Dirigo has a large pipeline of 
projects under development, including projects on contaminated sites and community scale NEB 
projects. 
What is exciting about this legislation is that it offers significant ratepayer savings that will 
counter the higher cost of community scale solar. And given its focus on contaminated lands, it will also 
make an important contribution to a vexing environmental problem facing our state.  
First, we support the proposal that the additional procurement of 5% of Maine’s 2021 load favors 
contaminated sites, including PFAS-contaminated land. PFAS contamination represents an existential 
threat to Maine and farmers in PFAS-contaminated areas urgently need relief. An important part of the 
solution involves redeveloping PFAS-contaminated land for energy generation, such as solar, so that 
farmers can realize value from land that is restricted from farming for years to come. The prioritization 
of renewable development on contaminated lands will align state policy with the federal opportunities 
included in the Inflation Reduction Act, namely the 10% Investment Tax Credit (ITC) adder for 
brownfield projects. We are also encouraged to see language in this proposal guaranteeing ratepayer 
savings.  
 The second critical piece of this legislation is that it ensures that all the economic and 
environmental benefits of the previous rounds of procurement are realized by requiring the PUC to void 
contracts for projects from the previous solicitations that are no longer moving forward, and re-bid that 
output amount in this new solicitation. This is important for several reasons. 
1. Even though the cost of utility-scale solar has increased, the cost of other forms of energy are 
dramatically higher. 

 
20MW Solar Project Savings… …in 2020 …in 2023 
Standard Offer Supply (CMP) $0.073/kWh $0.176/kWh 
Solar Project Bid (with inflation) $0.03/kWh $0.05/kWh 
Ratepayer Savings (per kWh) ($0.043/kWh) ($0.126/kWh) 
Ratepayer Savings (percentage) 59% 72% 
Ratepayer Savings (10-yr total) $16 million $49 million 
2. The combined ratepayer savings from ensuring that previously-awarded projects come online plus 
the additional 5% would make a dramatic contribution in addressing stranded costs resulting from 
the NEB program. PUC filings by CMP and Versant for Dirigo’s 67 MW of operational assets show 
annual ratepayer savings of $3.9 million, or about $58,000/MW. If we extrapolate these savings 
across past and proposed solicitations, we get a conservative estimate of ratepayer savings of 
$75M/year. 
 
Ratepayer Benefits based on 
Operational Dirigo Projects MWac Ratepayer 
Savings/MWac/Year Ratepayer 
Savings/Year 
Operational Dirigo projects (7) 67 MWac  
 
$58,384 $3,911,740 
Dirigo projects under development (2) 40 MWac  $2,335,360 
Other projects with PUC contracts (18) 773 MWac $45,130,832 
Additional 5% procurement (TBD) 400 MWac $23,353,600 
Totals 1280 MWac  $74,731,532 
 
We need this legislation now. It guarantees ratepayer savings, whether measured by the standard 
offer, the wholesale price, or the results that CMP and Versant have acheieved by selling Dirigo’s 
power.  
 The entire energy landscape has shifted since the 3210-G Tranche 1 and Tranche 2 contracts 
were awarded. And during this time, the relative ratepayer benefit of these projects has grown: Yes, costs 
have increased for solar and wind projects, but not as significantly as the cost of natural gas. Maine 
would be foolish to not do everything it can to promote as many new projects as possible. By structuring 
the procurement to free up previously awarded capacity but place an emphasis on contaminated land, we 
can strike a balance between reusing contaminated lands for beneficial use and capitalizing on the most 
promising grid-scale projects in the pipeline. 
It’s not often that a policy solution brought forward in the Legislature helps meet so many goals. 
By passing this legislation, you will be saving ratepayers money and helping the State meet our clean 
energy goals. It’s a win-win, and for that reason we urge you to pass L.D. 1830. Thank you. 
