Testimony of Vanessa Corson, Public Information Officer 
Maine Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
LD #95 "An Act Concerning the Membership of the State Emergency Response Commission and 
Fees for Registering Facilities Required to Report to That Commission" 
Position - Support 
Date: February 15, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee, good morning. 
My name is Vanessa Corson. I am the Public Information Officer for the Maine Emergency 
Management Agency, and I am here to provide testimony in support of LD #95 "An Act 
Concerning the Membership of the State Emergency Response Commission and Fees for 
Registering Facilities Required to Report to That Commission" . 
This proposed rule would authorize the Director of the Maine Emergency Management Agency, 
with the advice ofthe State Emergency Response Commission (SERC), to change the current fee 
from $50 per year to $100 for the more than 2,500 facilities that the staff monitors on an 
annual basis. About 20 percent of these facilities possess a category of hazardous materials 
known as Extremely Hazardous Substances (EHS). These are facilities that store 10,000 pounds 
or more of chemicals except in the case of EHS's, which may be anywhere from 1 to 500 pounds 
based on the hazard level ofthe chemical. 
The fees set by the Commission have not been changed since they were implemented in 
2002. Due to cost of inflation, the Commission struggles to maintain an adequate level of 
funding for our County Emergency Management Agencies, State-funded Hazardous Materials 
Response Teams, and local trainings for first responders. The proposed increase in the current 
fee schedule would allow the SERC to fund local first responder trainings, equipment, planning 
activities and outreach in order to help facilities prepare for and respond to hazardous material 
incidents. Without the increase in fees, the Commission may have to cut back on funding these 
critical hazardous materials response teams and first responders, potentially reducing the 
state's ability to prepare for and respond to hazardous materials incidents. 
SERC provides training to approximately 2,000 first responders annually. This includes normal 
hazmat response courses along with specialized areas such as ammonia response, tanker truck
rollover response, and other trainings that allow first responders to be better educated and 
operate safely. 
The SERC recently instituted a proactive outreach program to those facilities that have 
chemicals that if released in large quantities would have consequences to off-site residents, 
business, and the environment. it is a volunteer program where MEMA staff will go to the 
facility and review safety plans, safety equipment, and assist in ensuring there is positive 
coordination between the facility and local public safety. 
This is one of the most expensive programs that MEMA administers. We use approximately 
$300K from facility storage fees ($500K with the department's proposed increase to 
registration fees), $132K from the Federal DOT in the form of Hazardous Materials Emergency 
Preparedness (HMEP) Grants, and $50K from the Homeland Security Grant Program (HSGP) to 
cover staff, training, team stipends, equipment recapitalization, and consumable costs. N0 State 
General Funds are used to support the program. 
This program exists to protect human health and the environment, to protect emergency 
responders during hazardous materials incidents, and to ensure the state is prepared to handle 
serious hazardous materials incidents. As you can see with the information I've provided, 
maintaining our capabilities and services are essential to Maine's safety and l ask you to please 
support LD #95. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak. At this time, l, along with MEMA's Technological 
Hazards Program Manager, Faith Staples, would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have. Thank you,
