M a l n € C 6 n r Street: 1 WES:\§i:i|(i:?)%tJ:fZ(§ltZi%4g§g 
Economic Policy “”.;.‘Lii.Z?’f.Z 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 643, An Act to Promote Research and Development in the State 
by increasing the Research Expense Tax Credit 
l\/larch 28, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
l\/laura Pillsbury and I am an analyst at the ivlaine Center for Economic Policy. I am here today 
to testify in opposition to LD 643, An Act to Promote Research and Development in the State 
by increasing the Research Expense Tax Credit. MECEP agrees that supporting research and 
development in iviaine is important, as is growing sectors that will lead to innovation and 
economic development in our state. However, we also believe there are more effective ways to 
increase investment in research and development than business tax subsidies. 
LD 643 would make changes to the existing state R&D credit, which is based on the federal 
credit. it would: 
0 double the state’s existing R&D Tax Credit from 5 percent to l0 percent of qualified 
research expenses over a base amount, and from 7.5 percent to 15 percent of basic 
research payments ‘ 
o double the allowable credit from 100 percent of the first $25,000 to 100 percent of the 
first $50,000 of tax liability 
~ provide a credit of up to 75 percent of the corporation's remaining tax over $50,000 
(rather than over $25,000) 
o lower the base amount (the amount over which a business must invest to receive the 
credit) from 100 percent of average expenditures over the past three years to 50 
percent of expenditures over the past three years, which increases the tax credit even 
more. 
The current R&D tax credit is estimated to cost the state of ivlaine a total of $6.3 million in 
FY24-FY25 (Maine State Tax Expenditure Report, 2024-2025). lt stands to reason this bill would 
at least double that. The current credit also requires investment above and beyond existing 
R&D investment, so businesses must invest more in the current year than the prior year to 
receive the credit. This bill would cut that in half, so ifa business makes over half of the 
investment they did in the years prior, they would receive this credit. 
In a review last year, the Legislature's Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) found there was inadequate program data to judge the effectiveness of 
the R&D credit, and that research points to other factors that may be more important in 
attracting R&D to Maine. (Evaluation of the Research Expense Tax Credit, 2022) 
OPEGA noted that factors /inked to strong state R&D performance include: academic, 
industry, and federal government R&D funding in states; National Science Foundation 
.. . . . .. . . . . . 
of birégt.b.. rS.._,. .. - -. . . ...__.,s-.. .. 
é5{B§5é£i}£,"EE5fé 2 
iléélidrafétiliiéf 2’ E 2 C 
sia;m:ta;;* |r *2 W 2 ”P 
lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair i\/laulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica Maurer
activity," measures of venture capital as well as patents, business formation, and initial public 
offerings; human capital in sciences with adequate skills and training; broadband 
infrastructure; and availability of researchers and university collaborative research settings 
(p. 25). 
R&D credits are generally most lucrative for big pharmaceutical and high-tech companies. 
However, we don't know the amount individual businesses receive in R&D credits or who 
receives them because Maine is among the worst states in terms of transparency on business 
tax credits." A review of the federal credit found that large corporations account for a small 
share of the number of credit claims but the vast share of the total value of those claims?“ 
This report also found: 
Businesses generally seek the highest possible return on their investments. Therefore, in 
selecting R&D investments, they are likely to assign a higher priority to investments that might 
earn substantial short-term profits than to projects that expand or clari/j/ basic knowledge in 
engineering and scientific fields, which are unlikely to produce substantial proﬁts anytime 
soon, if ever. (p.22) 
We believe if the Legislature would like to continue or expand this credit, it is important to 
understand what public beneﬁts this credit is providing, and what impacts the Legislature 
hopes it will have. We believe increasing the R&D tax credit will not address the most pressing 
issues facing Maine businesses today and would not be a wise investment of public dollars that 
would be better directed elsewhere. 
Thank you for your time. l would be happy to answer any questions. 
Contact information: maura@mecep.org 
‘According to OPEGA: "Qualified research expenses" include both in-house research expenses and 
contract research expenses as deﬁned in IRC 41 (b)(1 ). "Basic research payments" are amounts that 
exceed a base amount and are paid to qualified organizations (such as educational institutions or 
certain scientific research organizations) per a written agreement for the performance of basic research 
(IRC 41 (e)(1 )(A) and (e)(2)(A)). 
ll 
Tarczynska, Kasia, Christine Wen, Katie Furtado. Financial Exposure: Rating the States on Economic 
Development Transparency. Goodlobs First, April 2022. 
"l 
Congressional Research Service. Federal Research Tax Credit: Current Law and Policy Issues. 27 July 2022.
