HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
Q Z STATE HOUSE STATIQN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Maureen Fitzgerald Terry TTY: Mame Relay 711 
9 Lombard Street 
Gorham, ME 04038 
Cell Phone: 712-9735 
Maureen.Terrv@legis1ature.maine.gov 
March 28, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Maureen Terry presenting 
LD 643, An Act to Promote Research and Development in the State by Increasing the 
Research Expense Tax Credit 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Taxation Committee, I am 
Maureen Terry, representing part of Gorham in House District 108. I am proud to be here to 
present LD 643, An Act to Promote Research and Development in the State by Increasing 
the Research Expense Tax Credit. 
Research and development (R&D) spending has been used as an indicator of the level of 
innovation in an economy and an important driver of economic growth. According to Maine 
Development Foundation ’s 2021 report, in 2019, Maine’s total R&D spending was $685 million, 
a 30% increase from $527 million in 2018. Yet Maine ranks 44th of the 50 states in R&D 
spending, lagging behind other states particularly in private sector and university R&D 
investments relative to GDP, while our non-proﬁt sector contributes a relatively high proportion 
of spending. R&D is a critical component of a healthy economy, and ours is growing, but we can 
do more to support this growth and strike a better balance between public and private investment 
in this industry. 
Maine established an R&D tax credit in 1995 to help foster innovation in Maine. That credit has 
not been updated since 2007. To give you some perspective, a cup of coffee in 2007 cost $1.80. 
Today, that same cup is $2.65. The prices of everything have gone up since then, yet we are still 
operating under a tax credit that is outdated and insufﬁcient for meeting our state’s goals 
established in Maine’s 10-year Economic and Development Strategy ‘ . If Maine wants to remain 
competitive and attract more cutting-edge businesses who, when looking for a location to set up 
shop, will look for the most optimal environment possible, comparing states with a ﬁne tooth 
comb, we need to make some changes. My bill, LD 643, which would update the R&D credit, is 
a great opportunity to do so. 
1 https://www.maine.gov/decd/sites/maine.gov.decd/files/inline~ ﬁles/DECDWI20919_sm.pdf 
District 108: Gorham (part)
LD 643 would increase the amount of qualiﬁed research expenses for which a credit can be 
taken, in part, by doubling the credit from 5% of qualiﬁed research expenses to 10%. This will 
ultimately mean that qualifying businesses will be able to receive a greater credit, which is more 
of an incentive to conduct imiovative and groundbreaking work right here in Maine. 
Currently, Maine is leading in a number of sectors in new and exciting ways including 
sustainable aquaculture and agriculture and regenerative food systems. We are also just 
beginning to build out a robust life sciences industry. Some sectors that fall within the life 
sciences industry include pharmaceutical manufacturing, scientiﬁc research and development 
services, medical diagnostic laboratories and medical equipment and supplies manufacturing, 
among others. According to BioME’s 2022 report on life sciences} job growth within this 
industry has outpaced job growth in all other industries in Maine over the last ﬁve years at a 42% 
rate of growth. There is momentum in this direction, but our investments have not effectively 
leveraged the private sector up until this point. 
Over the past several years, we, as a state, have worked hard to attract new talent and create the 
learning environments necessary to help train and retain a strong workforce that is able to 
creatively and responsibly capitalize on the changing physical and economic climate. The 
establishment of the Roux Institute in Portland is a great example of the ways that these efforts 
are paying off. In the public sector, the University of Maine at Orono has also demonstrated 
signiﬁcant growth and innovation as evidenced by its recent designation as an R1 university by 
the prestigious Carnegie Classiﬁcation of Institutions of Higher Education. 
But in order to keep the skills and talent in Maine that we’ve helped to foster and incentivize in 
terms of both public AND private development, we must recognize that the current R&D credit 
is simply too small in today’s economy to provide a realistic incentive for continued industry 
growth in Maine. Let’s improve this credit so that when those students reach graduation, they’ll 
have the right business incentives to set up shop right here in Maine. 
The time to invest in our future is now. 
I look forward to working with the committee and the department on this bill in the coming 
weeks. I believe that raising this credit is necessary for all of the reasons previously stated, butI 
welcome friendly amendments to this proposal that include a provision for robust data collection 
to more clearly demonstrate the impact that the credit has on those R&D industries in Maine. 
Thank you, and I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
2 
https://biomaine.org/industry-impact/
