TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 28, 2023 
LD 643 — “An Act to Promote Research and Development in the State by 
Increasing the Research Expense Tax Credit” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 643, 
“An Act to Promote Research and Development in the State by Increasing the 
Research Expense Tax Credit” 
The research expense tax credit is a nonrefundable credit that applies to 
qualiﬁed amounts spent on research conducted in Maine. The bill increases the 
research expense tax credit — by doubling the rate by which the credit is calculated, 
increasing the amount of expenditures eligible for the credit, and increasing the 
maximum amount of the credit that may be claimed. As is the case under current 
statute, unused credit amounts may be carried forward for up to l5 years. 
The research expense tax credit was enacted in 1995 and applies to tax years 
beginning on or after January 1, 1996. No increases or decreases have been made 
to the credit’s allowable expenditures or maximum amount since the credit was 
enacted. 
Additionally, the changes proposed in this bill should be coordinated with 
proposed technical changes affecting the research expense tax credit included in an
1
upcoming DAFS agency bill, LD 283, An Act to Make Technical Changes to the 
Maine Tax Laws.' 
The Administration would also like to note the following concerns: 
0 The bill does not contain an application date. Maine Revenue 
Services suggests that the bill apply to tax years beginning on or after 
January 1, 2023; andV 
Q The credit beneﬁts a.re highly concentrated in a small number of large 
corporations. 
v The Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability 
(OPEGA) recently reviewed this tax expenditure and released a report 
on March ll, 2022, which is available on the Legislature ’s web site: 
https://legislature.maine. gov/doc/83 79. We encourage the Committee 
to consider the recommendations of that report in conjunction with 
this bill. 
The estimated preliminary ﬁscal impact of the bill is a revenue loss of $7.5 
million annually. 
Estimated administrative costs of the bill are nominal and can be absorbed 
by the Bureau. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
2
