STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
JANET T. MILLS                                        HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                GOVERNOR                                                                               COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION•AUGUSTA•MAINE•04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800•FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
Testimony of Phoenix McLaughlin  
On LD 643 An Act to Promote Research and Development in the State by Increasing the 
Research Expense Tax Credit  
March 28, 2023  
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee on Taxation, my name is 
Phoenix McLaughlin, and I am the Tax Incentive Policy Manager for the Department of Economic 
and Community Development. I am here to testify on LD 643, An Act to P romote Research and 
Development in the State by Increasing the Research Expense Tax Credit . 
The Research Expense Tax Credit, or R&D credit, was enacted in 1995 and aims to lower the cost 
of research and development for companies conducting such work in Mai ne. The credit builds on 
the similar federal credit, which taxpayers are required to utilize to take advantage of Maine’s 
credit.  
Maine’s level of investment in research and development has historically been  far from what it 
needs to be. That’s why our 10 -Year Economic Development Strategy prioritized efforts to 
strengthen R&D investment as a part of its call to spur innovation. To increase the investment, the 
plan called for a combination of public subsidies, tax incentives, and higher education investment s 
to incentivize private sector investment.  Maine’s technology -based companies —the businesses 
most likely to engage in research, development, and innovation —account  for around 20% of our 
gross regional product. The R&D credit  is one valuable tool in the toolbox of federal, state, and 
local programs aimed at boosting research and development in Maine.  
In March of last year, the Office of Program Evaluation and Governme nt Accountability published 
a report on the R&D credit . One of their recommendations was to “Amend the design of the R&D 
credit as needed to ensure that intended beneficiaries can  access the credit ”. One part of that 
recommendation was to consider the fact  that the credit currently only applies to incremental new 
R&D investment, meaning a business that invests in R&D at a constant level receives no benefit.  
LD 643 addresses part of this restriction by reducing the base level a business’s R&D spending is 
measured against.  
We are seeing substantial momentum in Maine’s innovation economy : the University of Maine’s 
R1 status achievement, the start of the Roux Institute, and growing business investment in 
advances in our heritage industries and new sectors like life sciences.  The Department looks 
forward to  contin uing to  work  with this Legislature  to build on this momentum  through improved 
policy tools . 
Thank you for your time , and I am happy to answer any questions.  
