 
339 Water Street ✦ Gardiner, ME  04345  ✦ (207) 622- 0136 ✦ www.maineaqua.org  
 
March 28, 2023  
 
The Honorable Nicole Grohoski, Senate Chair  
The Honorable Joseph C. Perry, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
State House, Room 127  
Augusta, ME  04333  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, Honorable members of the Joint Committee on Taxation:  
 
My name is Sebastian Belle and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Aquaculture Association (MAA). 
The MAA is the oldest state aquaculture association in the country. We represent Maine’s aquatic farmers that raise finfish, shellfish and sea vegetables . Our farmers annually produce over 100 million dollars in 
farm gate revenue and directly employ roughly 700 Maine citizens year -round. We purchase goods and 
services from over 400 Maine businesses and our total economic impact is roughly 150 million dolla rs 
annually. I wish to testify in 
strong support  for LD 643 “ An Act to Promote Research and Development in 
the State by Increasing the Research Expense Tax Credit”  
 
Aquaculture, the growing of animals and plants in water, has been occurring in Maine for o ver 100 years. 
In the 1880’s state and federal fish hatcheries raised juvenile trout, salmon and cod to restore wild 
populations that had been over fished. In the 1970’s commercial aquaculture began to grow oysters, 
mussels, and salmon for human food. More  recently the aquaculture sector has diversified and we now 
grow 24 different species using 15 different production methods. Oysters, mussels and salmon are still the bulk of our production but Maine has one of the most diverse aquaculture sectors of any  state.  
 
As we develop new farming methods and begin to domesticate new species, research is critical to the 
development of an ecologically sustainable and economically viable aquaculture sector. Our farmers are 
constantly experimenting to develop new production techniques that reduce their environmental footprint 
and increase their efficiency. That research is expensive and requires investment in specialized facilities and equipment unique to farming in water. For small, new companies that type of capital i nvestment is 
challenging.  
 LD 643  increases the research expense tax credit by increasing the amount of expenditures eligible for the 
credit, doubling the rate by which the credit is calculated, doubling the maximum amount of the credit that 
may be claimed  and halving the base amount used to determine the credit. While the total amount of the 
potential credit is relatively small it, will make a big difference to the economic success of our start up 
entrepreneurs. These new companies form the basis for the f uture growth of our sector. I ask that you 
vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 643.  
  
Sincerely,  
 
Sebastian Belle  
Executive Director  

