. STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES /ﬁnr _ __; 
‘Z1 HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
QTATE REPRESE;\,TAT|\.' E O {iii Ce: (IO F) I S 7 -14-10 
Cell‘ (I07) -100-6967 
BlLL\ BOB FAULKINGHAM Fa.\':4 (~57, 7S7_l44Q 
H‘ K RE REPUBLICAN LEADER E-Mail: \\iilIia ﬁi.F;u|lki1ig1wnm]iegislmn: mum: =o\ 
May 25, 2023 
- 
Testimony of Representative Billy Bob Faulkingham 
In Support of LD 1951 
“An Act Regarding Marine Finﬁsh Aquaculture ” 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Marine Resources, I am Representative Billy Bob Faulkingham, and I am testifying before 
you today as a co-sponsor in support of L.D. 1951, An Act Regarding Marine Finﬁsh 
Aquaculture. 
In addition to serving in the Legislature, I am a commercial lobsterman in Winter Harbor. 
American Aquafarms ’ proposal to build a massive salmon farm in Frenchman Bay was located 
in my district. The project was strongly opposed by lobster ﬁshermen, local municipalities, and 
my constituents. The proj ect’s massive scale would have rendered it dead-on-arrival in the 
company’s home country of Norway, and it should have been here too. It took nearly three years 
to defeat American Aquafarms and I do not want to have that ﬁght again. 
As you have heard me say before, the Maine lobster industry is under attack. We are ﬁghting 
against crippling regulations, industry collapsing lawsuits, and offshore energy development. 
The possibility of oversized sahnon farms in our waters should not be another concem we need 
to worry about. Massive ocean-pen ﬁnﬁsh farms would have a signiﬁcant impact on existing 
users such as lobstermen like myself. 
I don’t Want to throw the baby out with the bathwater and negatively affect existing salmon 
operations or other responsible aquaculturists. I will only support a density ratio that the 
Department of Marine Resources fmds acceptable and _doesn’t put current aquaculture operations
out of business. This bill is intended to screen out future proposals. It applies to ocean-pen 
ﬁnﬁsh aquaculture only-—and will not affect shellﬁsh or kelp farms or land-based aquaculture 
operations. This legislation makes changes to Maine’s leasing criteria to set expectations for 
future applicants. The time to act is now, while there are no pending applications. 
Thank you for your time and consideration and I urge you to pass LD 1951. 
Respectfully, 
Billy Bob Faulkingham 
State Representative
