Good afternoon Members of the Committee on Marine Resources. I 
would like to thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 1951, which 
would enact stocking densities not to exceed 25 kg/m3. 
I am here today to strongly ask that you vote that LD1951 OUGHT NOT 
TO PASS. 
My name is Frank Lank, I am a resident of Perry Maine and have been 
dedicated to the finfish aquaculture industry since 1987. I have been 
raising Atlantic Salmon for Cooke Aquaculture USA here in Maine since 
2006 and hold the position of Saltwater Production Manager for our 
operations in Maine. 
In Finfish Aquaculture Industry in Maine has provided my wife & I an 
opportunity to live in one the many beautiful places in Maine and raise 
our family in a quiet and peaceful community. We have recently been 
blessed to be able to enjoy our 1“ grandchild living nearby. I believe 
that this is made possible by the sustainability that the finfish 
aquaculture industry has been able to achieve throughout the years. 
Throughout my 35yrs of experience in the finfish aquaculture industry I 
have been part of the evolution of aquaculture in Maine. My 
experience in raising Atlantic Salmon has shown me that there are 
many factors that provide guidance for optimal stocking densities. 
Our #1 priority has always been raising and keeping our fish healthy. 
I need to ask why is a stocking density not exceeding 25kg/m3 a 
determination of a healthy fish? 
Fish health isn't based off a number to determine a healthy fish. Fish 
Health has always been based on numerous factors. 
o The Species of fish that we are raising. 
0 The Life Stage of these fish at any given time.
0 And of course, the most important factor in raising healthy fish 
has always been the Water Quality in which we raise these fish. 
All these variables are monitored every day to ensure we are raising the 
healthiest fish possible. 
Rearing densities for Maine should not be based on a stocking density 
number that other parts of the world have determined to be suitable 
for their environmental conditions. 
Maine is a very special place to raise healthy fish with all its combined 
natural features that cannot be found in very many places in this world. 
I would urge this committee to vote that LD1951 OUGHT NOT T0 PASS 
and allow finfish aquaculture to continue raising healthy fish under the 
regulations that the Maine Department of Environmental Protection is 
currently regulating and enforcing. 
Thank You for allowing me to speak with you today. 
Frank Lank
