Testimony of Maine Finﬁsh Alliance 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
In FAVOR of LD 1951 
An Act Regarding Marine Finfish Aquaculture 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Marine Resources, I am Genevieve McDonald of Stonington. I am a Senior Policy 
Advisor with Preti Strategies, and I am testifying before you today on behalf of the Maine 
Finﬁsh Alliance in support of L.D. 1951, An Act Regarding Marine Finﬁsh Aquaculture. 
Maine is exceedingly vulnerable to oversized marine ﬁnﬁsh aquaculture proposals. American 
Aquafarms ’ application to build a massive salmon farm in Frenchman Bay was the proverbial 
canary in a coal mine, demonstrating that the waters next to Acadia National Park, one of our 
country’s greatest natural assets, and all along the coast of Maine are vulnerable to massive-scale 
ﬁsh farms and the controversy that surrounds them. Setting stocking density limits for marine 
ﬁnﬁsh farms reﬂects Maine’s commitment to protecting fish health, water quality, and existing 
users such as commercial ﬁshermen and aquaculturists. 
As other nations strengthen their regulations, there is ongoing pressure from corporations 
looking to take advantage of Maine’s clean waters and limited regulatory protections. Maine 
currently has no limit on the stocking density of marine ﬁnﬁsh farms. This can have signiﬁcant 
environmental impacts and the lack of regulatory oversight in this area is a weakness that puts 
our coastal communities at risk. It is important we establish responsible limits before the next 
proposal is submitted or We risk undergoing the same grueling process as we have with 
American Aquafarms. 
To provide you with a sense of scale, American Aquafarms ’ proposal would have yielded more 
annual production than all~24'of Maine’s existing salmon farms combined and wouldn’t have 
been considered in any other U.S. state nor most countries. Washington State recently joined 
with Alaska, Oregon, and California in banning ocean pen ﬁsh farming. Maine is the only state 
left with marine salmon farms. Norway and Chile, which produce two-thirds of the world’s 
farmed salmon, have tightened regulations in response to the well documented risks associated
< 
with ﬁnﬁsh farming including pollution, escapes, disease, feed sourcing, and ﬁsh health. It is 
important for Maine to do the same. 
Establishing a stocking density limit would set clear expectations for future applicants about the 
scale of development that could be considered in Maine waters. We recognize Maine’s 
aquaculture permitting process is robust and may prevent proposals for oversized ﬁnﬁsh farms 
from ultimately reaching fruition. We are requesting a change to Maine’s leasing criteria to 
prevent applications for these projects from being submitted in the first place. Current 
regulations do not have adequate safeguards in place to prevent lease applications for massive- 
scale projects from being submitted and needlessly wasting taxpayer money and agency 
resources._ 
Last session in the l3()“‘ Maine Legislature, the Department of Marine Resources sought the 
authority to subject certain lease applications to “special fees” to offset the costs associated with 
the consideration of large, complicated, or unique applications that consume tremendous staff 
resources, to ensure those applications could not consume Department resources to the detriment 
of all other lease applicants; This request was denied. There is a multi-year backlog at the 
Department of Marine Resources. The consideration of unreasonable proposals causes other 
applicants to wait, and the controversy that surrounds these massive projects causes damage to 
our responsible aquaculture growers, wreaks havoc in our coastal communities, and erodes trust 
in our aquaculture permitting process. 
It is out of great concern for future proposals of ocean pen finﬁsh farms that could be considered 
under Maine’s existing regulations, we are in support of this legislation to establish stocking 
density limits for marine ﬁnﬁsh aquaculture. We thank Senator Grohoski and the co-sponsors for 
bringing this bill forward and urge you to pass L.D. 1951." 
Thank you for your time and consideration and I am happy to answer questions from the 
committee. ._'
Atlantic Salmon Federation 
Downeast Chapter of Trout Unlimited 
Downeast Salmon Federation 
Environment Maine 
Friends of Acadia 
Kennebec Valley Chapter of Trout Unlimited 
Natural Resources Council of Maine 
Maine Council of the Atlantic Salmon Federation 
Midcoast Conservancy 
Oceana 
Penobscot Salmon Club 
Union Salmon Association
