</\ 
nude/Ii... 
AQUZ§C/ULTURE 
"Refusing to go with the flow" 
LD 1951 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, Members of the Marine Resources 
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss LD 1951, An Act 
Regarding Marine Finfish Aquaculture with you. 
I am here today to ask you to vote Ought Not to pass. My name is Greg 
Lambert, I am the Fresh Water Production Manager for Cooke Aquaculture 
USA and a resident of Fairfield. I grew up in Caribou and am a UMaine 
alum. Cooke employs approximately 200 people in 4 Maine counties, 
Washington, Hancock, Somerset and Franklin. I have been working in 
aquaculture for 25 years with a couple of different species in 2 different 
states. In the end aquaculture allowed me to come back to Maine a state 
which my family and I are proud to call home. 
You may be wondering why a Fresh Water Manager is here to testify ona 
Bill clearly marked as having to do with Marine Aquaculture. Lest we all 
forget, in aquaculture, fish begin life and are stocked into the marine 
environment from onshore facilities. In our case, Cooke maintains and 
operates 3 separate fresh water hatcheries located in East Machias, 
Bingham and Oquossoc. From those 3 sites I work with 20 dedicated 
Mainers who do their best to produce the highest quality smolts we 
possibly can. That is why I am here, to speak on their behalf as people who 
often get forgotten when we discuss marine aquaculture. Any bill that' 
affects Aquaculture in the marine environment also affects inland facilities. 
As I reviewed LD 1951, it became very clear the dangers this bill has for 
aquaculture down the road. LD 1951 would set a seemingly arbitrary 
density limit of 25kg/cubic meter. This proposed metric seems to look only 
P.O. Box 528 
Bingham, Maine 04920 USA
at current production methodology of a single species that is currently 
raised in Maine. l suspect the authors of this bill looked at Salmon Culture 
in Maine at present and decided this is something ”we could live with" 
rather than looking at aquaculture through a wider lens as they should. 
True, Atlantic Salmon in Maine are reared in densities of about 25kg/cubic 
meter at their peak which is consistent with this proposed legislation. They 
are grown at this density specifically due to the way the species deals with 
their environment and current available technologies. A species like Arctic 
Charr on the other hand (not something Cooke raises) is routinely grown at 
densities exceeding 100kg/cubic meter on land and marine densities would 
need to be much higher than the proposed 25kg limit as well. Charr do not 
grow as well at lower densities. The point is different species have different 
requirements. Are we attempting to discourage the rearing of different 
species like Charr or trout or cod? Sounds like an unintended consequence. 
When technologies evolve in the short or long term, this bill would 
discourage farmers from becoming more efficient with their existing 
acreage. lt would force them to seek additional acreage to realize growth 
as opposed to increasing efficiencies of their current leases. So, in reality 
this bill is encouraging farmers to seek new leases rather than becoming 
more efficient with the acreage they already have. l highly doubt the 
authors of this bill intentionally mean for aquaculture producers to apply 
for increased acreage as opposed to becoming more efficient with their 
existing leases. Sounds like an unintended consequence. 
Finfish Aquaculture is already the most efficient form of animal protein 
production there is. This is so mainly due to our use of the entire water 
column as opposed to a 2-dimensional area like terrestrial animals use. As 
we become even more efficient as technology allows, it would be a shame if 
an unintended consequence from this bill forced companies to acquire 
additional acreage as opposed to increasing their existing efficiencies by 
better utilizing current leases. _ 
lam also happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Greg Lambert 
Fresh Water Production Manager 
Cooke Aquaculture USA 
P.O. Box 528 
Bingham, Maine 04920 USA
