</\ 
we”) Ao;1£§uLTUR ‘E 
"Refusing to go with the flow” 
LD 1951 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler and Members of the Committee on 
Marine Resources, thank you for the opportunity to discuss with you LD 
1951, ”An Act Regarding Marine Finfish Aquaculture" , which would enact 
stocking densities not to exceed 25 kilograms per cubic meter. 
l am writing to you today to strongly ask you to vote Ought Not to pass. My 
name is Jennifer Robinson and I am the Compliance Officer for Cooke 
Aquaculture USA and a resident of Pembroke, Maine. Our company has 
operations in Franklin, Somerset, Hancock and Washington Counties and we 
employ over 200 people in those 4 Maine counties. I have been in the 
aquaculture industry since 1998 and have been employed by Cooke 
Aquaculture since 2005. 
First I would like to ask why, why 25kg/m3? What is the significance of that 
number? From my experience of being in the industry and seeing the 
evolution of aquaculture in Maine over the last 25 years, there are many 
factors within a site that help provide guidance for optimal fish stocking 
density. A variety of parameters including water quality, species, and life 
stage can affect stocking density capacity. The key factor impacting density 
in a marine environment is water quality. It is important to recognize that 
the true measure of adequate stocking density is reflected in the health of 
the fish. There is no magic number, optimal stocking densities are based on 
years of experience in specific marine environments, what is appropriate for 
other areas of the world may not be ideal for our farming conditions. 
PO Box 263, Estes Head Road 
Eastpolt, Maine 04631 USA
Haphazardly applying results from studies or taking a regulations for 
another jurisdiction and trying to apply it to another without understanding 
them or the implications could be devastating to our healthy operations in 
Maine. 
Maine is globally recognized for its tough regulations on the industry. 
There's no coincidence that other jurisdictions look to our regulatory 
framework when forming or updating theirs. The leasing and permitting 
process for a marine facility in the State of Maine is by far one of the most 
stringent with numerous regulators and stakeholders involved throughout 
the entire process. One of those regulators is the Maine Department of 
Environmental Protection, who already regulates and enforces our stocking 
densities through our Maine Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit. 
LD 1951 would become a duplication of efforts between DMR and DEP and 
create more work for an already overburdened staff at DMR. 
Based on the fact that our industry is in fact already being regulated on 
densities and that there is no real basis for the 25 kg/m3, I urge you to vote 
ought not to pass. 
Thank you for your time, 
Jennifer Robinson 
PO Box 263, Estes Head Road 
Eastport, Maine 04631 USA
