 
Fort Andross, Suite 202 A  14 Maine Street  Brunswick, ME 04011- 2030  
(207) 725- 2833 │ www.asf.ca /maine   
 
Testimony of the Atlantic Salmon Federation on  
LD 1951, An Act Regarding Marine Finfish Aquaculture  
May 25, 2023 
 
Senator Reny , Representative Hepler , and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Marine Resources : 
 
My name is John Burrows, and I am the Executive Director of U.S. Operations for the Atlantic Salmon Federation (ASF) . ASF is  an international , science- based  non-profit organization dedicated to the 
conservation and restoration of wild Atlantic salmon and their ecosystems. I represent more than 25,000 
members and volunteers across eastern North America, including a dozen local organizations  that are 
part of our Maine Council that work on river and fisheries conservation and restoration across Maine . 
ASF is a global leader in Atlantic salmon science,  and we are a national leader here in Maine in our 
work to restore access to our rivers, streams, and lakes for At lantic salmon, alewives , American eel, 
American shad, and other native sea -run fish species. Our restoration work over the last 25 years has led 
directly to the restoration of  more than 10 million river herring returning to our rivers each spring.  
 ASF is testifying in support of  LD 1951. We believe that this legislation would set a very  reasonable 
stocking density limit on the existing open net -pen salmon farming industry that decreases some of the 
risks to wild Atlantic salmon  and the environment . The proposed stocking density limit of 22 kg/m3 is 
based on solid science and would put Maine in- line with other jurisdictions. In addition, it looks like a 
limit of 22 kg/m3 would be easily achievable by industry with little  impact on production. 
 On the issue of biomass, we recognize that the 780 metric ton limit proposed in the legislation is a 
fraction of what the State currently allows and  is a complete non- starter for industry, the Department of 
Marine Resources , and likely for  this Committee.  We hope that this can be a starting point for discussion 
about what the State has allowed in the past and what is reasonable to allow in the future . Maine has 
permitted a lot of relatively large salmon farms over the last two decades and h as concentrated them in a 
few areas along the coast, allowing for the potential of having incredibly high biomass levels of  farmed 
salmon in some places, particularly Cobscook and Machias Bays. We need to ask ourselves if the impacts and risks  from extreme ly high numbers  of fish in these and other areas are acceptable.  In 
addition, like with stocking dens ity, all  the publicly available information regarding actual biomass 
levels at  Maine’s salmon farms indicates that the industry is opera ting at levels far  lower than has been 
permitted . 
 Impacts o f Salmo n Aquaculture o n Wild Salmon  
As practiced for the last 50 years, salmon farming has caused massive devastation to wild Atlantic 
salmon across North America and Europe . The main impacts stem from escaped domesticated salmon 
(leading to genetic introgression and competition with wild salmon), sea lice, and various diseases. The 
widespread impacts on water quality , coastal ecosystems , and traditional fisheries – particularly lobster – 

 
Fort Andross, Suite 202 A  14 Maine Street  Brunswick, ME 04011- 2030  
(207) 725- 2833 │ www.asf.ca /maine  are also well documented. The limits proposed in LD 1951 would decrease risks associated with sea lice 
and disease.  
 
Sea lice are a type of parasite that attaches to salmonids and feeds on tissue and blood, and they are one 
of the most significant threats to wild salmon  from farmed salmon across the globe. Sea lice cause deep 
erosions in salmon, which create chronic stress in salmon and makes them highly susceptible to bacteria, 
viruses, and fungi. Sea lice can also cause direct mortality of salmon, particularly in the s molt life stage 
where salmon are leaving freshwater and migrating to the ocean.  
 
There are many common infectious diseases found in the salmon farming industry here in eastern North America caused by bacteria (e.g., bacterial kidney disease, salmon ulcerative tenacibaculosis) and viruses (e.g., infectious salmon anemia, infectious hema topoietic necrosis virus). These diseases, like sea 
lice, are more likely to develop and spread between farmed salmon within and between pens – and then spread to wild fish – when farmed fish are kept at high densities in pens.  There is simply no way to m ake open net -pen salmon farming safe for wild salmon or the environment. 
We find the risks and impacts of open net -pen salmon farming completely unacceptable,  and we 
continue to advocate that the industry move completely  to closed containment systems – be it on land or 
on the water . Having limits on stocking density and total biomass are ways that can reduce the impacts 
of salmon farming on wild fish and the environment . 
 The U.S. has made international commitments to reduc e the impacts of open net -pen s almon farms on 
wild Atlantic salmon through the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization (NASCO) , an 
international organization established by the Convention for the Conservation of Salmon in the North 
Atlantic Ocean . Establishing  limits on stocking  density and total biomass  will help the U.S. to meet its 
international obligations to NASCO  since these parameters relate directly to minimizing  the risk of 
outbreaks of disease  and parasites  in farmed that can significantly impact wild salmon . 
 
Stocking Density  
The stocking density limit of 22 kg/m3 proposed by this legislation is not radical. It is in line with the 
upper limits required or recommended by other governments, as well as industr y association best 
practices, third party certification programs, and even  some of the world’s largest salmon aquaculture 
companies  (e.g., MOWI and Cermaq) . Below is a table showing recommend and/or required stocking 
densities for salmon farms in several countries. Maine’s default stocking density of  30 kg/m3 is the 
highest in the world for open net -pen salmon farms.  
 
Stocking Densities for Atlantic Salmon Farms  
 
Jurisdiction  Stocking Density (kg/m3)  Description  
 
Canada*  10 to 25    Industry standard -  Code of Practice, Canadian  
Aquaculture Industry Association  
 
 
Fort Andross, Suite 202 A  14 Maine Street  Brunswick, ME 04011- 2030  
(207) 725- 2833 │ www.asf.ca /maine  Maine*   30    Maine DMR Standard Lease 
 
Scotland*  15 to 20    Regulatory limit and Industry standard -  Code of Good  
Practice for Scottish Finfish Aquaculture  
 
Chile*   17    Regulatory limit 
 
Norway   25    Regulatory limit 
 
Australia  25    Industry standard  
 
New Zealand  25    Industry standard  
 
*Cooke Aquaculture operates Atlantic salmon farms in these jurisdictions  
 
Based on information available for 13 lease sites  from Janua ry 2018 through March 2023, Cooke 
Aquaculture maintained an average stocking density of  9.85 kg/m3 across  all their pens . They 
maintained  a stocking density of 22 kg/m3 or less  95.07% of the time  and a stocking density of 25 
kg/m3 or less  98.73% of the time.  
 
In Canada, where Cooke Aquaculture is headquartered, the Canadian Aquaculture Industry Alliance has developed an (industry- led) code of practice for salmon farms, which recommends that the maximum 
stocking density (referred to as biodensity) range between approximately 10 –25 kg/m3 in net pens. 
 Cermaq, a large global salmon producer with operations in Norway, Chile,  and Canada, maintains a 
normal stocking density of 20 kg/m3 at  all of  its sites in Canada. Meanwhile, Mowi,  which is  far and 
away the world’s largest  producer of farmed Atlantic salmon , has a universal salmon welfare policy that 
covers  all their salmon farm  sites in every country they operate in (Norway, Scotland, Canada, Chile, 
Ireland,  and the Faroe Islands) : 
 
Our stoc king densities, throughout production, are well below the regulated maximum  
permitted stocking density at sea of 25 kg/m3. This ensures fish have ample space to  swim and express natural behaviour, as our net pens contain minimum 97.5% water and  
only 2.5% fish as a maximum. Our actual stocking densities across our seawater sites  
are consistently and significantly lower, with an average monthly standing stocking  
density of approximately 8kg/m3 in Mowi Group. 
 
Finally, the  Global Seafood Alliance (GSA), an international nongovernmental organization dedicated to 
advancing responsible seafood practices through education, advocacy, and third- party assurances, has a 
Best Aquaculture Practices (BAP) certification program for sal mon farms. GSA’s BAP certification for 
salmon farms requires a stocking density of no more than 25 kilograms per cubic meter, except in 
situations where there are indications of “good welfare, such as low mortality, and if water quality is considered good, which would normally mean water temperature below 12 degrees C (or 53.6 degrees F), dissolved oxygen above 80 percent saturation, and little or no harmful algae present,” in which case densities can be 5% higher.  
 
 
Fort Andross, Suite 202 A  14 Maine Street  Brunswick, ME 04011- 2030  
(207) 725- 2833 │ www.asf.ca /maine  Clearly, Maine’s standard stocking densit y limit of  30 kg/m3 is a significant  outlier . 
 
Biomass  
The issue of maximum allowable biomass is  certainly  less straightforward than stocking density. Various  
jurisdictions have taken different approaches when it comes to biomass. The best way to determine  this 
is to look at a specific geographic area – an individual bay  – and assess specific environmental and 
physical characteristics of that area and set a total biomass for the entire region with ease lease site 
getting a portion of the total biomass.  The biomass limit proposed in this bill is indeed much lower than what the State  has permitted in the 
past. The question is how big is too big when it comes to impacts to water quality, traditional fisheries, and our coastal ecosystems? The American Aquafarms propos al for two massive farms  in Frenchman 
Bay with a combined 18,200 metric ton biomass  has almost universally been viewed as  way too big for 
Maine. We agree. We believe strongly that some  parts of our coast, like Frenchman Bay and Penobscot 
Bay, should be completely free of salmon and other finfish farms. And in those areas where the salmon 
farming industry is currently concentrated, we need to ask whether the size of those existing farms is appropriate given the changing environmental conditions ass ociated with rapid warming of water 
temperatures in the Gulf of Maine and ongoing impacts to coastal ecosystems and traditional fisheries.  As water  temperature increases , there is  less oxygen in the water and l arge concentrations of farmed 
salmon  will be increasingly susceptible to mass die -offs. This has happened with increasing frequency in 
North America in recent years and is only going to increase in likelihood in the future, particularly in the Gulf of Maine. This exact scenario occurred in Maine at a  Cooke salmon farm  near  Black Island in 
August 2021 when more than 100,000 salmon died after experiencing  "uncommonly low oxygen levels 
in the cages"  according to the company.  
 And in September 2019, there was a massive die- off of more than 2.6 million salmon at several sites  
owned by Northern Harvest off  the southwestern coast of Newfoundland. The company blamed a n 
extended period of ocean temperatures that reached  70 degrees F  as the cause of the mass mortality 
event , but it was also determined that the  of pesticides to fight parasites had stressed the salmon  before 
the arrival of the warm water  and that algae blooms in the bays had further depleted oxygen levels. 
Clean -up of the dead salmon took weeks and many of the salmon carcasses  “liquified,” turning into an 
oily pink sludge that covered the seafloor and fouled miles of shoreline for months . Northern Harvest  
may seem like an extreme, but Maine allows  for similarly large numbers of farmed salmo n in some of 
our bays  and our  waters are rapidly warming.  
 There are currently  25 salmon far ms that have been permitted in Maine  waters.  Detailed information  
about biomass is available for 13 of these sites and it range s from 2,862 metric tons to 5,724 metric tons, 
with an average of 4,017 metric tons. That average biomass places  a typical open net -pen salmon farm in 
Maine at the high -end of what is allowed in many places around the world. This in and of itself may or 
may not be concerning, but Maine has  permitted multiple sites in our bays and the cumulative size – and 
cumulative impacts – of all these sites in any given area of the coast needs to  be consider ed. 
 
Fort Andross, Suite 202 A  14 Maine Street  Brunswick, ME 04011- 2030  
(207) 725- 2833 │ www.asf.ca /maine   
For example, there are currently 13 lease sites in Cobscook  Bay. For the 3 lease sites where information 
is available, the total combined biomass is 9,922 metric tons. Even if all the other sites are licensed at just 2,000 metric tons – 862 metric tons less than the lowest limit for sites where information is available – the State of Maine is allowing up to 30,000 metric tons of farmed salmon in Cobscook. In Machias Bay, the 4 lease sites  (out of 6  total) where information is available have a total combined maximum 
biomass of 18,675 metric tons. Add in the  other sites, and the  State is over 20,000 metric tons in 
Machias Bay. These levels of biomass equate to  many millions of fish permitted to be in some of our 
bays at any one time.  
 If 18,200 metric tons  of salmon in the water was  unacceptable for Frenchman Bay, are 20,000 or 30,000 
metric tons OK for Cobscook or Machias Bays?   
 In practice, actual biomass levels – like stocking densities – appear to be far lower than the limits permitted by the State in these places. But the reality is that the State has said that it is acceptable to have millions upon millions of farmed salmon – and the associated amounts of untreated fish waste  – in 
some of our  bays . It is reasonable for us to reconsider this .  
 In practice, our existing salmon farms rarely surpass  having more than 2,500 metric tons of fish in the 
water at any time . Between January 2018 and March 2023, Cooke Aquaculture had an average biomass 
of just over 1,000 metric tons at  their farms in Maine. They only exceeded 2,500 metric tons  5.7% of the 
time and only exceeded 3,000 metric tons 1.9% of the time. 
 In addition, nearly half  of the salmon lease sites  in Maine  have been vacant for the last 5 years. I cannot 
speak as to the reasons for this, but when you take this into account along with the actual  biomass levels, 
it becomes clear that the  salmon farming  industry can exist with a biomass level that’s far less than what 
is currently allowed  with little impact on production and substantially less negative impact on  wild 
fisheries, water quality, and the environment.  
 A specific biomass number per salmon farm may indeed be higher than the 780 metric tons proposed in 
this bill, but it is certainly far less than the 4,000 metric tons allowed on average today per farm.  As 
such, the  argument that establishing reasonable limits on stocking density and biomass will have sever e 
economic consequences for the industry simply does not  hold water. 
 Cooke Aquaculture has 56 licensed saltwater salmon farms in Scotland. The averag e maximum allowed 
biomass for these sites is 1,253 metric tons. Cooke has one site license for 3,850 metric tons, but all other sites are at or below 2,500 metric tons. 55% (31 of 56) of these licensed farms are at or below 
1,000 metric tons. Scotland is l argely viewed as having a weak regulatory system, yet stocking densities 
there do not exceed 20 kg/m3 and salmon farms are typically one -quarter to one -half the size of Maine 
farms in terms of biomass.  
 
 
Fort Andross, Suite 202 A  14 Maine Street  Brunswick, ME 04011- 2030  
(207) 725- 2833 │ www.asf.ca /maine  In conclusion, ASF believes that establishing limits on stocking density and total biomass within State 
law is prudent and reasonable. Numerous other jurisdictions, as well as other salmon farming companies and industry association groups, have set or recommended limits  that are lower than what Maine 
current ly allows.  
 
We strongly encourage the Committee to adopt the stocking density limit of 22 kg/m3 that is proposed 
within this legislation . We also hope  that the information we have  provided on total biomass will begin a 
conversation about the appropriate size of salmon farms in Maine waters . Reasonable limits on biomass, 
comparable to those in other places, can be readily  achieved by industry in Maine with negligible impact 
on production  and a real reduction in the risk and impacts on wild fish, traditional fisheries,  and the 
environment. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on this legislation.  
 Sincerely , 
   
John R.J. Burrows  
Executive Director, U.S. Operations  
Atlantic Salmon Federation  

