TESTIMONY OF 
Patrick Keliher 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
In Opposition to 
LD 1951 An Act Regarding Marine Finfish Aquaculture 
Before the Committee on Marine Resources 
Sponsored by Senator Grohoski 
Date of Hearing: May 25, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine 
Resources, my name is Patrick Keliher, Commissioner of the Department of Marine Resources, andl 
am testifying on behalf of the Department in opposition to LD 1951. 
As recently amended, LD 1951 now prohibits the Commissioner from issuing a lease for ﬁnfish 
operation if stocking density is greater than 25 kilograms per cubic meter. Any lease currently above 
these limits must abide by this constraint upon their renewal. 
Like many of the bills that you have heard this session, this proposed legislation was motivated by the 
now defunct American Aquafarms project proposed for Frenchman's Bay. As has been previously 
explained, that proposal was terminated by DMR prior to the application being deemed complete by 
the Department. This was NOT due to a technicality, as some would have you believe. It was denied 
due to many failures of the applicant, including failing to demonstrate a qualified genetic source, and 
because the hatchery could not meet our standards in law or rule, and because samples sent to DMR 
were improperly cared for (frozen not fresh) thus eliminating the ability to detect viral or bacterial 
pathogens. Because this application did not proceed to a public hearing or the development of an 
agency decision, this project was never officially evaluated against the decision criteria specified in law 
Now, so it is clear to this committee and to the public, l can tell you in no uncertain terms that even if 
American Aquafarms application had been deemed complete, these leases never would have been 
issued. if nothing else, the standard of ”not unreasonably impacting commercial fishing uses" would 
not have been achieved by leases of that nature and that size, in that area. Let me state this again for 
the record: I would never have approved this application._ 
I say this to emphasize that the outcome of the existing process would certainly have been what the 
project opponents were seeking, however they wanted it done sooner, andto do that would have 
violated the applicant's right to due process. In this case, LD 1951 is not aimed at denying lease 
applications, but at preventing operations of a certain scale from ever coming forward for 
consideration. Conceptually, this is something the Department could potentially support, and is 
something to which we have given some internal consideration. Again, we are not opposed toa 
discussion about appropriate scale or Maine's willingness to consider certain technologies, such as the 
type of system that was proposed by American Aquafarms. However, LD 1951 goes beyond whatis
necessary to prevent new large-scale and untested technology, and would negatively impact already 
existing finfish operations. 
The proposed stocking density of 25 kilograms per cubic meter is less than what the State's only 
existing finfish operations (those leases currently held by Cooke) are currently allowed by the 
Department of Environmental Protection (presently authorized for 30 kilograms per cubic meter). 
Density limits can positively impact water quality and fish health, but companies have the same 
incentives to manage the densities on a given lease site for optimal outcomes related to yield and 
quality of the fish, thus avoiding loss and to prevent negative impacts to the fish. If there is a need to 
establish a statutory limit on biomass densities, it should be the same as the limits currently 
authorized, as there is no evidence that this limitation has been problematic, and as has been 
acknowledged, in practice the sites are often operated below that level. 
The statutory construction of this proposed limitation is unusual, because it is the issuance of the lease 
that is impacted - by a stocking density that does not actually exist, before a lease is issued. Further, 
the current stocking density is not a component ofthe general permit, but is provided by the applicant 
to DEP in their Notice of Intent. Then, the holder reports their actual stocking density monthly, and 
that information is compared by DEP against what they said they would do. 
Given the current operations within the State, DMR would support the following change to the 
proposed amendment: 
G. A lease may not be issued for marine ﬁnﬁsh aquaculture if the prop osed stocking density 
exceeds 25 Q kilograms per cubic meter 
In closing, DMR agrees that it is worth considering appropriate limitations that would prevent new 
proposals of untested technologies at a scale that is very likely to conflict with the State's decision 
criteria from coming forward. By doing so, it would prevent considerable controversy ofthe type that 
we observed from American Aquafarms, and prevent such projects from consuming the Department's 
limited resources. However, that objective could be achieved by putting the stocking density that has 
been historically used (30 kg) into statute. Using a lower density standard goes beyond providing a 
deterrent for new, large applications, and negatively impacts an existing business with no basis to do 
so. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have.
m
