Sarah  Perry
Falmouth
LD 1951
Hello, my name is Sarah Perry, and I live in Falmouth, Maine. While I am not a 
resident of Hancock County, or an individual who makes my living from the sea, I am
someone with deep roots in this state and have spent a lifetime honoring its 
waterways. I was born and raised on a small lake in Winthrop and have spent my life 
between those shores, and along the edges of the Carrabassett River where my 
family’s camp has stood since 1959. 
As a child it seemed I couldn’t begin to count the endless scope of life alongside me 
as I floated through these waters. Turtles, frogs, salamanders, brookies – too many to 
total. Now, my children erupt in excitement to relay that they’ve spotted a singular 
orange streaked head bobbing obscurely along an otherwise placid surface. 
As I’m relating this story you may be wondering what my experience in the 
freshwaters, and in the decline of their health, has to do with offshore aquaculture and
large-scale fin farms. A natural response to struggle to grasp the interconnectivity of 
our one earth, although most indigenous peoples have no other way of experiencing 
this planet, and all of its related organisms. 
I urge you, consider the endless implications that will almost certainly occur if these 
operations are left unchecked.
Around the world, time after horrific time, countries are learning the hard way that 
these facilities cause nothing but disaster, and are not the solution to world hunger, 
long-term economic stability, or even sustainable job creation. 
Consider the mussel farmer in Tanzania, who because of loosely regulated fin farms 
watched his crop deplete to nearly nothing overnight, as dissolved oxygen levels 
dropped in such dramatic fashion that wild and farmed species began to suffocate and 
die in a catastrophic failure of regulation and oversight. 
Consider in the same region off the coast of Australia only a short time later it was 
confirmed that almost all marine life for at least 500 meters around Tassal’s Franklin 
lease, was indeed a dead zone. Consider what you would tell our lobster fisheries if 
that happened here. 
Consider that stocking density limits will reduce the risks of releasing deadly 
parasites and disease, like sea lice which have found an unwittingly willing partner in 
the aquaculture industry. Sea lice evolved in the open ocean with natural barriers to 
outbreak. Fish forced into highly dense confined spaces with these organisms cause 
calamitous die-offs. In the wild finding a host is a difficult part of their cycle, but in 
aquaculture, the parasites can exploit the fish kept at unnaturally high densities.
Consider that high-density farm infestations of sea lice are next to impossible to 
contain, as demonstrated in pen breaches like the one in Scotland last year, and in 
countless others around the world, putting wild species directly in the line of fire. 
Consider that even without a catastrophic failure, wild salmon travel between salt 
water and freshwater to breed, and some have to migrate past farms to do so. This 
gives the infective larvae an opportunity to transfer from the captive salmon's nets to 
the wild fish swimming by.
Consider the regulators in the coastal communities of the Pacific Northwest – in a 
position not unlike yourselves only a few years ago – who are now excruciatingly 
having to back-pedal their permitting of these operations after suffering first-hand the 
ecological genocide that comes hand in hand with industrial aquaculture. 
Limiting stocking density is truly the baseline step that needs to be taken, and in my 
opinion it doesn’t go far enough to begin to touch the breadth of regulation necessary 
to manage these monstrosities. 
Maine has a long list of unique natural wonders. Don’t let us add a catastrophic 
ecological disaster to that list.

