o 
. MAINE 
AQUACULTURE 
/ ASSOCIATION 
The Honorable Cameron Reny, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Allison Hepler, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
State House, Room 206 
Augusta, ME. 04333 May 25, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, Honorable members of the Joint Committee on Marine 
Resources: 
My name is Sebastian Belle and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Aquaculture 
Association (MAA) and the current president of the National Aquaculture Association (NAA). The 
MAA is the oldest state aquaculture association in the countiy. We represent Maine's aquatic 
farmers that raise finfish, shellfish and sea vegetables. Our farmers annually produce over 100 
million dollars in farm gate revenue and directly employ roughly 700 Maine citizens year-round. We 
purchase goods and sen/ices from over 400 Maine businesses and our total economic impact is 
roughly 150 million dollars annually. l stand before you today to testify in strong opposition to LD1951 
"An Act Regarding Marine Finfish Aquaculture." 
LD1951 is yet another response to the ill—conceived and unsuccessful lease application in 
Frenchman's Bay by American Aquafarms. There is no biological justification for the density 
numbers in LD1951. Instead, they are chosen in order to make the type of technology proposed 
by American Aquafarms uneconomical and therefore discourage any similar projects ora 
resubmission of that same project. Let's be very clear: lt is highly unlikely that the American 
Aquafarms proposal would have made it through the permitting process because it would not have 
met a number of criteria in Maine's strict leasing system. LD1951 is a solution looking fora 
nonexistent problem. 
LD1951 seeks to establish maximum rearing densities at 25kg/m3. Proponents of.LD1951 will 
cite studies from other countries such as Chile, Norway or Scotland that indicate densities over 
22-25 KG/ M3 may impact fish health. Many of those studies are old and focus on outdated production 
methods. All of those studies were conducted under very different environmental conditions than in 
Maine and are not relevant to Maine. Maine has much higher tides, currents and water exchange 
rates, leading to higher carrying capacities on farm sites and better water quality and fish health. 
Current density and maximum biomass decisions are driven by the unique environmental 
conditions at each farm site and the sites’ ability to process the nutrients coming out of the farm, its 
"carrying capacity." Each site is different and Maine's environmental monitoring regime is designed 
to help the farmer, in close cooperation with state and federal regulators, determine the 
appropriate biomass that will not exceed the site's carrying capacity or harm the environment. 
Imposing a mandatory, maximum stocking density will destroy that system. It may also force 
farmers to apply for more lease sites in order to remain economically viable. One size does not fit 
all in Maine. 
339 WaterStreet I Gardiner, ME 04345 | (207)622-0136 | www.maineaqua.org
LD1951 has two other problems. lt creates regulatory instability and business uncertainty by 
imposing an arbitrary density cap retroactively on exiting leases at their renewal. Existing farmers 
who have already made investment decisions and market commitments will have to recalculate 
their business and production plans and maybe forced to reexamine their commitment to Maine. 
Finally, LD1951 takes away a very important operational flexibility that allows farmers to adapt to 
rapidly changing market conditions. Seafood markets can be highly volatile with market demand 
and prices shifting very rapidly in often unpredictable manners. The extreme of this type of 
situation was what happened when COVID shut down most restaurants. At the time, 80% of all 
seafood consumed in the United States was consumed in restaurants. Seafood markets collapsed 
and fish farmers were left holding live fish that continued to grow. With a mandatory density cap, 
those farms would have likely been in violation of their lease contracts and possibly NPDES 
permits resulting in fines and violations on their records. While Covid was unusual, Maine salmon 
farmers compete in an international seafood marketplace that is often impacted by events in other 
countries that are out of their control. Density caps severely limit the options farmers have to 
respond to those situations. This is not just an inconvenience. For example, if a farmer has to 
harvest fish early to keep the farms densities under the cap it may cost literally millions of dollars 
because they have to sell fish at a smaller size or lower price. Maine's existing leasing and 
environmental regulations protect the environment, allow farmers some operational flexibility and 
ensure the public trust is protected. LD1951 adds nothing useful to that system and does not 
increase environmental protection over and above the existing stringent monitoring and leasing 
system. 
By now your committee must have realized that there is a small, well-funded group of paid anti- 
aquaculture campaigners that have targeted our sector. Over the last couple of years, this group 
has attempted many different methods to shut down the state's aquaculture sector and take away 
an important option that coastal working waterfront communities can use to adapt to our changing 
world. They have tried rules petitions, municipal moratoriums with little legal basis, and pushing for 
intentionally inefficient and uneconomical lease sizes. They have resorted to scaring local fishing 
and shellfish harvesters by asserting negative environmental consequences and theoretical user 
conflicts even though they know full well the existing regulations preclude those from happening. 
Finally, as you have seen in this session, they have engineered multiple bills taking different 
angles of attack on the aquaculture sector. Their campaign is a textbook example of the death bya 
thousand cuts strategy. 
Maine has a long tradition of producing high quality, healthy seafood and of working waterfront 
communities working together to ensure vibrant coastal communities. This committee and the 
Maine State Legislature also has a long tradition of practical solutions to real problems. LD1951 is 
not one of those solutions, nor does it address a real problem. Maine seafood is an iconic part of 
the Maine brand and Maine aquaculture products have earned their place as part of that brand. 
Please help us continue to build the Maine brand and defend Maine's working waterfronts. Vote 
"OUGHT NOT TO PASS" on LD1951. I thank you for your attention and patience and would be 
glad to answer any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
‘l
1 
Sebastian M. Belle 
Executive Director
2 
2 0 
MAINE 
AQUACULTURE 
ASSOCIATION 
May 25, 2023 
The Honorable Cameron Reny, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Allison Hepler, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
State House, Room 206 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, Honorable members of the Joint Committee on Marine 
Resources: 
I know you have many issues before you and you are all very busy, so I apologize for the length of 
this submission. Based on testimony we saw submitted in support of LD 508 in the Environment 
and Natural Resources committee, I expect that the same type of misleading information will be 
orchestrated by the paid anti~aquaculture campaigners in support of LD 1951. Due to the extent of 
the misinformation being used to support the anti—aquaculture bills in this session, I thought it would 
be helpful to give you some background information prior to the public hearing on LD 1951. Please 
take a moment to read through the attached information sheets that address some of the common 
assertions made. 
There is no doubt that ﬁnfish aquaculture can be controversial, but here in Maine we should all be 
proud of the fact that we have found a way to protect the environment and grow healthy and 
sustainable local seafood for over 45 years. 
Thank you for your attention and patience. 
Sincerely,
2 
if ‘I
, 
IvM 
P »’V' 
at ‘t7 
J’ 
Sebastian M. Belle 
Executive Director 
339 Water Street I Gardiner, ME 04345 I (207)622-0136 I www.maineaqua.org
Maine Aquaculture Association Rebuttal to Points That Will 
Likely Be Raised in Support of LD1951 
lntroduction: 
Finfish aquaculture in Maine is directly regulated by BOTH DEP and DMR. These agencies in turn 
consult with ME inland Fish and Wildlife, ME Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, US Environmental 
Protection Agency, US Fish and Wildlife Service, US National Marine Fisheries Service, US Coast Guard, 
US Department of Agriculture, US Department of Defense, and US Department of Interior BOEM. ln 
addition, all operations need a US Army Corps of Engineers permit which under the endangered species 
act triggers a section 7 consultation with US Fish and Wildlife and National Marine Fisheries Service. In 
all of those consultations, if a sister agency has concerns, the permitting agency imposes specific 
conditions to address those concerns in the permit they issue. Both DEP and DMR statutes prevent 
them from issuing a permit or lease for an operation that would cause any downgrading of the water 
classification on the site. Additionally, both DEP and DMR are precluded by law from issuing a permit 
that would result in the naturally occurring ecosystem at the proposed site from being unable to 
maintain itself. Finally, any lease issued in Maine must also comply with an additional series of criteria 
that are designed to protect the environment, minimize potential conflicts with other user groups, 
protect the rights of riparian landowners, prevent navigational hazards, prevent potential conflicts with 
publicly held beaches, parks or docking facilities, and will not result in unreasonable impact from noise 
or light at the boundaries of the lease site.' 
Common Assertions: 
1. “DEP and DMR do not consider the combined effect of multiple permit applications and/or other 
nutrient sources in the same bay." 
False: Both DMR and DEP have broad authority to take into account the "cumulative" impacts of 
multiple projects in the same area when considering a permit and lease application for an individual 
project. Under the so called "anti-backsliding" provision of both state and federal law, DEP cannot issue 
a NPDES permit that would result in a downgrading of the classification of a specific water body. In 
addition, DEP considers the “assimilative capacity" of the ecosystem that the aquaculture project would 
discharge any nutrients into. Under state statutes, DMR must consider the "density" of other 
aquaculture operations in an area before they issue a lease. 
2. "Salmon farms create “dead zones." 
True/False: A poorly managed salmon farm can put too many nutrients into the marine ecosystem 
and exceed the carrying capacity in a local "footprint" around the farm. ln the early days of salmon 
farming in Maine, when the farmers were learning how to farm, that did happen. Even then, it did not 
create "dead zones;" it caused the ecosystem to shift to one that was processing very heavy nutrient 
loads through anoxic degradation. There was still plenty of life under and around the farm, but it wasa 
fundamentally altered ecosystem. As Maine salmon farmers and state regulators learned how local 
ecosystems reacted to the excess nutrient loading from those early farming efforts, we cooperated to 
conduct a series of environmental studies and develop new farming methods and stricter monitoring 
regimes. Once Maine became a "delegated" state under the Clean Water Act, environmental monitoring 
was shifted from the DMR to the DEP because they were the agency responsible for oversight of 
NPDES permits. When the program was shifted to DEP, they moved away from video monitoring
because the interpretation of videos was often very subjective. DEP moved to hard quantitative metrics 
that were designed to ensure that farms were not exceeding the local carrying capacity of the local 
ecosystem and that there was NO detectable impact beyond the "mixing zone" . If a farm exceeds the 
hard metrics or has ANY detectable impact beyond the mixing zone, DEP can pull their NPDES permit 
and the farm would have to cease to operate. That would occur LONG before any “dead 2one" was 
created. Both DEP and DMR statutes prevent them from issuing a permit or lease for an operation that 
would cause any downgrading of the water classification on the site. Finally, both DEP and DMR are 
precluded by law from issuing a permit that would result in the naturally occurring ecosystem at the 
proposed site from being unable to maintain itself. 
3. "The state's aquaculture regulations have not changed in twenty years." 
False: The states aquaculture regulations have changed and evolved multiple times during that period 
based on DEP and DMR recommendations and concerns brought forward by the legislature. In addition, 
there have been 24 studies in the last thirty years that have made specific policy and regulatory 
recommendations to the agencies and the legislature. In fact, there has not been a single legislative 
session in the last 10 years that has not made changes to the aquaculture statutes or during which an 
agency has not made changes to the aquaculture regulations. 
4. "Anything east of Bar Harbor does not require a permit." 
False: It is illegal in Maine to conduct aquaculture without a series of permits and a lease. Aﬂ aquaculture operations in the state of Maine, regardless of their location, require multiple permits and 
must also comply with multiple state and federal laws. ln addition to those permits and leases, the 
issuing agencies consult with multiple state and federal agencies and add conditions to those permits 
to address those other agency concerns. Currently, there is no other marine resource use that has as 
broad an interagency consultation and review as aquaculture. 
5. "Area over by Sorrento where there was a salmon farm is just dead mud now." 
True/False: lt is true that site is a mud bottom. It is not true it is "dead bottom." It is just like any 
other mud bottom marine ecosystem in Maine; few if any lobster and not a lot of other larger benthic 
fauna occur there precisely because it is mud bottom and there is very little "structure" to provide 
habitat for those types of animals. The reason salmon farms in Maine are located over mud bottom is 
because it is illegal to locate any aquaculture operation where there is a significant commercial fishery 
or special habitat. The bottom is not mud because of the presence of a farm, by law, it is the only place 
the farms are allowed to be located. It was mud before the farm and will be mud long after any farm 
goes away. 
6. "There is currently a “gold rush" in aquaculture with 80 applications in the application line." 
False: No one is thinking "gold rush" if it takes, on average, 3-4 years for the various permits and leases 
to be processed and then another 2-3 years before your first crop is ready. The reason there isa 
backlog in applications is because DMR has had a series of retirements in their aquaculture division
and lease application processing ground to a virtual halt 3 years ago. None of those applications are for 
finfish operations. 
7. "The entire west coast, Norway and Argentina have "banned" "industrial "fish farms.” 
True/False: Norway has over 950 fish farms all of which would be called "industrial" by LD 1951 
proponents. Washington state and Argentina have banned the farming of Atlantic salmon because it is 
a nonnative species and they are concerned about the potential impacts of farm escapees on native 
species. There are many studies indicating there have been no documented effect on Pacific salmon, 
even though Atlantic salmon have been cultured on the west coast for over 47 years. British Columbia, 
Canada is mandating the movement of ocean-based farms to land based tank farms due to concerns 
about potential for interactions with native Pacific salmon. California and Oregon have never had any 
salmon farms. Alaska has the largest hatchery based "wild" salmon fishery in the world. Those 
hatcheries often use net pens to raise juvenile pacific salmon that are then released into the ocean to 
"enhance" wild harvests. All of those hatcheries would be classified as "industrial" by LD 1951 
proponents. 
All salmon farms in Maine Raise native Atlantic Salmon that are tested genetically by DMR and USFWS 
to confirm they are Native North American strain. 
8. "Move from 100 acre maximum to 1000 acre maximum was to allow "corporatization" of the 
aquaculture sector." 
False: There is still a 100-acre cap on any individual lease. The largest lease in Maine currently is an 
80-acre mussel site. A single lessee can lease up to 1000 acres total over multiple lease sites, but if 
they want to go above 500 acres, they must file a site rotation and fallowing plan that is reviewed and 
approved by both DEP and DMR. That plan must show that no more than 750 acres will be used at any 
one time and that all farms in a single bay must be fallowed at the same time. The development of the 
site rotation and fallowing salmon farming system originated here in Maine and is similar to what 
organic cattle and sheep farmers do with pasture rotation or potato farmers do with crop rotation. 
Since its inception, the site rotation and fallowing system has virtually eliminated the use of antibiotics 
on Maine salmon farms. Whether a lessee uses a site or not they have to pay annual rent on that site to 
the state.
9. "There is no "independent" review of environmental monitoring results from Maine salmon 
farms". 
False: it is true that salmon farms in Maine employ consultants who are certified by DEP to collect the 
actual environmental monitoring samples. That is true of all Maine NPDES permit holders, whether they 
are a public wastewater treatment plant, a paper mill, a salmon farm or a shellfish hatchery. Those 
samples must be collected using EPA and DEP approved sampling methods. The samples themselves 
are then sent to independent labs that are reviewed and approved by DEP. Their analysis and laboratory 
methods are regularly reviewed by DEP. If they do not adhere to approved methods and adequate 
quality assurance and control procedures, DEP can revoke their certification and they would not be able 
to do business. The same is true for the consultants that collect the samples themselves. DEP reviews 
the results of the samples taken at all Maine finfish farms and considers whether the farm is in 
compliance with its permit conditions. If the farm is out of compliance, DEP has full authority to revoke 
the farm's NPDES permit. ln addition, eveiy finfish farm NPDES permit issued is reviewed by the 
regional EPA office to ensure it has appropriate requirements and conditions. The regional EPA office 
will also consult with US fish and Wildlife Service and NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service to 
ensure they have no concerns about the granting of, or require additional conditions for, the granting of 
that NPDES permit. Ultimately, if the regional EPA office does not agree with the ME DEP proposed 
permit, they can revoke the state's NPDES delegation and require ALL Maine NPDES permits be 
reviewed and rejected or approved by EPA. That is to say, EPA can revoke the entire Maine state clean 
water act delegation because they disagree with the state's granting of an individual NPDES permit for 
an aquaculture operation. 
10. "Many antibiotics are used in fish farms and that leads to antibiotic resistance and endocrine 
disruption" . 
True/False: Antibiotics are used in some fish farms in other states and countries. If antibiotics are 
misused, they may lead to antimicrobial resistance whether they are used in agriculture, human 
medicine or aquaculture. Antibiotic use in fish farms is NOT the main cause of antibiotic resistance in 
humans; main culprits are over prescription in human medicine and use of antibiotics in land-based 
agriculture as a growth promoter. Antibiotics may be used as growth promoters inl id agriculture but 
in the United States that use in water-based farming, aquaculture, is illegal and would not work because 
unlike humans, fish are cold blooded animals and antibiotics do not in any way promote or accelerate 
growth in cold blooded animals. In fact, if you feed fish with antibiotic treated feed, they typically don't 
like its taste and "go off” their feed. 
As farmers, we have a stewardship responsibility for the animals we raise. They depend on us to take 
care of them and ensure they have the best growing conditions and that their health and welfare is the 
highest it can possibly be. If animals get sick, their growth and survival rates go down and it is a direct 
financial hit to the farm. Antibiotic use on fish farms in Maine is incredibly rare. There are only two 
antibiotics approved for use in Maine fish farms. Over the last 17 years, only 7 salmon farms have 
used antibiotics for a total of 12 treatments. The majority of Maine salmon farms have not used ANY 
antibiotics at all during the same period. If we have to use antibiotics, there are very strict regulations 
around their use. Those regulations and the Veterinary Code of Practice ensure that human health and 
the environment are strictly protected. Antibiotics can only be used under the direct supervision of, and 
after a prescription is written, by a licensed veterinarian. lf that veterinarian misuses or overprescribes
antibiotics, they risk losing their license. Before any antibiotic is used, samples must be taken from 
clinically sick fish and the antibiotic proposed to be used must pass a sensitivity test to demonstrate 
that the pathogen of concern is susceptible to that antibiotic. That is more stringent than what a doctor 
has to do before they administer an antibiotic to your child who has a sore throat. if a farm uses an 
antibiotic, they may be required to take environmental samples to determine if there are any antibiotic 
residues detectable around the farm. Those results are submitted to DEP and DMR. In addition, the FDA 
randomly samples fish farmed in Maine for antibiotic residues as part of their Market Basket food 
contamination survey. FDA has never detected any antibiotic residues in Maine farmed fish, and in the 
entire history of salmon farming in Maine, DMR has only had one positive detection in a bottom 
sediment sample directly below a farm the week after it administered the antibiotic in feed. That 
sample appeared to actually be a sample that included a feed pellet itself and occurred in the early 90's, 
long before our site rotation and fallowing system and the NPDES permitting system was put in place. 
11. "DMR is the only regulatory agency that regulates Aquaculture" . 
False: All aquaculture operations must at a minimum get a lease from DMR and a federal Rivers and 
Harbors Act permit from the Army Corps of Engineers. Both those agencies consult with their sister 
state and federal agencies to determine if they have concerns about the proposal and whether they 
would like specific conditions added to the lease or permit to address those concerns. The consulted 
agencies include: ME Inland Fish and Wildlife, ME Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, US 
Environmental Protection Agency, US Fish and Wildlife, US Department of Commerce National Marine 
Fisheries Sen/ice, US Coast Guard, US Department of Agriculture, US Department of Defense, and US 
Department of Interior BOEM. lf the proposed aquaculture operation is a finfish operation, ME DEP is 
also consulted. In a separate process, if the proposal is a finfish operation, the ME DEP consults all of 
the above state and federal agencies and they also consult with ME DMR and US Environmental 
Protection Agency. in addition, Maine aquaculture operations have to comply with multiple state and 
federal acts designed to protect the environment and human health that are too numerous to list here. 
MAA would be glad to provide a comprehensive list of those acts if it would be helpful. 
12. “DEP and DMR do not communicate with the fishing community" . 
False: No agencies communicate more with Maine's commercial fishing community than DEP and 
DMR during the application for, and consideration of, the multiple permits and a lease necessary to 
start an aquaculture farm in Maine. Fishermen have multiple opportunities to communicate any 
concerns they have to those departments and to the aquaculture applicant. The applicant is required by 
law to hold meetings with municipal officials, many of whom are fishermen or related to fishermen, and 
the harbormaster who knows all the fisherman in a town. The applicant is required by law to holda 
public scoping session to explain what they are proposing to do, where they are interested in doing it, 
and to listen to all concerns raised by the public, including but not limited to commercial fishermen. The 
applicant is required by law to participate in a public hearing conducted by the DMR and typically 
attended by DEP. The US Fish and Wildlife, ME IFW, US Army Corps of Engineers, local municipal 
officials and any member of the public, including fishermen, typically attend these hearings. Most 
importantly, if there is a commercial fishery in the location of the proposed aquaculture project, it is 
illegal for DMR to issue a lease.
13. "DEP and DMR don't work with the towns." 
False: Both DEP and DMR have extensive public input as part of their permit and lease application and 
review process. In the DMR process, towns have an elevated legal status. Lease applicants must meet 
with town officials to discuss their proposal before submitting it to DMR. DMR is present during that 
meeting. In addition, towns are automatically granted lntervenor status that gives them an increased 
ability to engage in the leasing process. Town officials can and do attend the municipal meeting, the 
scoping session and the formal hearing. They also routinely enter evidence into the record and cross 
examine either the applicant or other witnesses at the public hearing. To my knowledge, if a town 
objects to the granting of a permit or lease based on the criteria used to consider an application by 
either agency, a lease or permit has never been granted in the face of those objections. 
14. "Farmed fish do not contain the same "micronutrients" as wild fish." 
False: Farmed salmon are always Atlantic salmon. “Wild" salmon are always Pacific salmon. They are 
different species, and as such, may have slightly different chemical makeups and taste different. That 
is NOT because one is farmed and one is "wild," it is because they are different species. They are 
actually not all that closely related species. Atlantic salmon are more closely related to rainbow trout 
than Pacific salmon. Farmed Atlantic salmon do typically have a higher fat content that Pacific salmon 
That is a good thing, because that is where the Omega-3s that are so beneficial to heart and brain 
health are found.
