Testimony in Support 
LD 1951 - An Act Regarding Marine Finfish Aquaculture 
As amended by the sponsor 
Todd Martin 
Northeast Senior Program Manager 
National Parks Conservation Association 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Marine Resources, my name is Todd Martin. I live in Winslow and serve as the Northeast 
Senior Program Manager for the National Parks Conservation Association. NPCA was 
founded in 1919 to advocate for our nation's national parks, national monuments, and 
historic sites. In my role, I advocate for National Park Service sites here in Maine 
including Acadia National Park, Katahdin Woods and Waters National Monument, 
Roosevelt-Campobello international Park, St. Croix island International Historic Park, 
and the Appalachian National Scenic Trail. On behalf of our 5,500 members and 
supporters in Maine, I am here today to testify in support of LD 1951 as amended by the 
sponsor. 
Aquaculture is an important growing industry herein Maine and our state has a long 
history of small-scale, local, sustainable aquaculture such as ciamming, muscle farming, 
and seaweed farming. However, in recent years, we've seen a dramatic increase in 
finfish aquaculture proposals for Maine's coast. 
NPCA was deeply concerned with the American Aquafarms proposal to develop an 
ocean pen finfish operation in Frenchman's Bay off Acadia National Park. If approved, 
the project would have built 30 floating deep-water fish pens with a stocking density of 
40 kg per cubic meter that would discharge more than 4 billion gallons of untreated 
wastewater into Frenchman Bay every day. The excess nitrogen, phosphorous, 
ammonium and other chemicals from this untreated effluent would have degraded 
water quality, killed native eelgrass, and increased the risk of harmful algae blooms. The 
facility would have operated 24 hours a day, seven days a week, with diesel—powered
pumps and generators, just 2,000 feet from Acadia, in a space used for commercial and 
recreational fishing and boating and small-scale sustainable aquaculture.' 
In 2021, Acadia National Park welcomed approximately 4.1 million visitors which 
generated an estimated $486 million in visitor spending. These expenditures had a total 
economic output of about S702 million that supported more than 6,800 jobs in the local 
region. Acadia is a critical part of the l\/laine economy.rAmerican Aquafarm ’s proposal 
was a direct threat to Acadia's Class 1 area clean air, clean water, wildlife, dark skies, 
quiet solitude, and the jobs and economic output the Park supports. Though the 
project's application has been rejected by i\/laine DIVIR due to an unapproved source of 
salmon eggs, the company's CEO has vowed they will return. In the meantime, it is 
critical to ensure Maine has guardrails in place to ensure proposals of this size and scale 
do not threaten the existing, sustainable ocean aquaculture that so many families 
depend on for their livelihood.s 
l\/laine currently has no stocking density limits for ocean pen finfish operations. A high 
concentration of fish in a limited area leads to depleted oxygen levels and fish kills. In 
2019, the state ordered Cooke Aquaculture to pay $156,000 for multiple violations, 
including breaching its permitted stocking density limits. In August of 2021, 
approximately 100,000 Atlantic salmon died at Cooke Aquaculture ’s operation off Black 
Island in Frenchboro, just three miles from the shores of Acadia National Park. My 
understanding is Cooke operates with a stocking density of 30 kilograms per cubic 
meter. 
A statewide, 25 kg per cubic meter limit, as this bill proposes, is an important step 
towards avoiding disasters like this in the future. 
Washington state recently joined with Alaska, Oregon, and California in banning ocean 
pen fish farming. Norway and Chile produce approximately 2/3rds of the worlds farmed 
salmon. Both countries have implemented stocking density limits. Norway's is 25kg 
while Chile's limit is 17kg. 
Before we see new ocean pen finfish proposals, we must ensure the state is positioned 
to protect its coastal waters and the people who live, work, and recreate there. Please 
support LD 1951 to implement stocking density limits on marine finfish aquaculture to 
protect our bays, our fishermen and women, recreational boaters, and Maine's tourism 
economy. Thank you and lam happy to answer any questions.
