Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Committee on Marine Resources, 
thank you for the opportunity to speak today.  
 
I’m Tom Sorby, Operations Manager for Kingfish Maine and I am writing in opposition to LD 
1951. I’ve been raising multiple species of fish in several countries over the last 15 years, and I 
have my Master of Science in Sustainable Aquaculture from the University of Stirling. 
 
It’s simply ill-conceived to impose a limit on the stocking density for finfish aquaculture lease 
sites. Stocking density is an important parameter in fish culture operations, since it has direct 
effects on the growth, survival and production. Ultimately, the species of fish grown, and the 
life stage, dictates the stocking density and different fish species prefer to be grown at different 
stocking densities. If the stocking density of the fish being grown is too high or too low the fish 
will not grow at an optimal rate. It is in the farmers’ best interest to maintain the appropriate 
stocking density to maximize production and maintain high welfare standards. If the stocking 
density is too high or low then the fish may become stressed and not eat, if the fish don’t eat, 
they don’t grow. It’s illogical to culture fish in an environment that would be stressful to the 
fish. 
 
LD 1951 would mandate that Maine salmon farms are inefficient and uneconomical. Maine 
farms would be unable to compete with foreign producers and would likely go out of business 
affecting hundreds of jobs in Washington, Hancock and Somerset counties. In order to Maintain 
production LD 1951 will force Maine salmon farmers to utilize all farms sites at all times. It will 
destroy Maines site rotation and fallowing system. That system was pioneered here in Maine 
and has virtually eliminated the use of chemical treatments for pathogens and parasites. 
 
This bill is just another attempt by the opposition to aquaculture in Maine to stifle the growth 
of the industry in the state. Maine is one of the leading states in aquaculture production and it 
provides many benefits to both the environment and to the economy. I urge the committee to 
vote “OUGHT NOT TO PASS” on LD 1951. 
