Maine Sporting Camp Association (MSCA) 
126 Western Avenue, Box 153 * Augusta, l\/laine 04330 * 207-888-3931 
info@mainesportingcampscom 
Testimony ln Support of 
L.D. 1219 
"An Act to Establish Rights for Holders of 
Certain Leases and Easements on Land Managed by the Bureau of Parks and Lands" 
_Before the 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry (ACF) 
Wednesday, April 5, 2023, at 1:00 PM 
Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry (ACF), my name is Dana Valleau, and lam Director of 
Associate Memberships for the I\/laine Sporting Camp Association (MSCA), a wildlife biologist 
and l\/laine Guide. Established in 1986, l\/lSCA represents commercial sporting lodges from 
Rangeley Lakes Region to Lubec and from Belgrade to Allagash, and camp lot leaseholders can 
join as associate members. 
According to information provided by the Bureau, there are 281 residential / recreational 
leases and 8 commercial leases on public land. Most leases originated in the last century and 
were transferred to the state during public land consolidation in the 1970's. Some have been 
passed down through multiple family generations. 
Leases are at risk from Administration staff biases and special interest groups hard at work to 
influence how Maine's forests are managed. Some are funded by out-of-state donors who may 
not value Maine's traditions. MSCA is talking with numerous leaseholders frustrated by lease 
administration and lack of input on lease terms. The Bill would put in Statute standard rights of 
leaseholders thus mitigating arbitrary demands by Bureau personnel. 
Furthermore, much has changed in the forests of I\/laine in the last 100 years. Some 
leaseholders need to modernize their properties for health, safety, and accessibility reasons. 
Clarifying the Statute with language authorizing such modernization will stimulate investment, 
improve the aesthetics of the forests, and enhance tax revenues.
X 
l’ ,1 
If improvements are already being authorized, then there should be no argument about listing 
those in the Statute. In contrast, MSCA has talked with many who are being discouraged from 
considering expansion or improvements based on unwritten Bureau policy. MSCA believes it is 
time to modernize the Statute to eliminate arbitrary decisions. 
Although many things could be considered, if something is allowed by LUPC or the local 
planning board, it should be allowed by the Bureau. Moreover, the Bureau should cooperate 
to adjust lease size when needed for wells, septic, utility buildings, and if improved access are 
part of a camp lot modernization. 
A significant concern to a leaseholder is a land swap with a private landowner if the new 
landowner has more stringent leasing programs or none. To preserve a leaseh0lder's property 
investment, provision should be made to sell the leased land or guarantee long term leases 
acceptable to current leaseholders prior to committing to a land swap. 
The MSCA hopes you can support lodges and lease holders by addressing these concerns. 
Thank you. 
Dana Valleau, Director of Associate Memberships 
Maine Sporting Camp Association 
Cell Phone: 207-888-3931 x4 
Email: info@mainesportingcamps.com 
The Maine Sporting Camp Association (MS CA) was founded in I 98 7 by a group of camp owners to preserve the 
sporting camp ’s uniqueness in the State of Maine. By working closely with other groups and exchanging ideas 
and information, the members of MS CA continue the tradition of providing high quality recreational 
experiences to individuals and their families, a quality experience that visitors will remember long after they 
return home. The MSCA is a 501C (6) non-proﬁt organization that is led by a board of directors. 
Maine Sporting Camp Association 126 Western Avenue, Box 153, Augusta, Maine 04330, 
info@mainesportingcamps. com, Phone: (207) 888-3931
2 
|\/laine Sporting Camp Association, 126 Western Avenue, Box 153, Augusta, Maine 04330
