MaineHousing MAINE STATE HOUSING AUTHORITY 
Testimony of 
Erik C. Jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
Before 
The Committee on Health and Human Services 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
LD 70‘) An Act to Support Home Share Programming for Seniors 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, I am Erikjorgensen, Senior Director of Government Relations and Communications 
at the Maine State Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am submitting this testimony regarding LD 
709 An Act to Support Home Share Programming for Seniors. 
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 1969. We 
are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to address the problems of unsafe, 
unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. We are authorized to issue bonds to finance single 
family mortgages for first time homebuyers and for affordable multi-family housing. 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, including rental 
subsidies, Weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-income housing tax 
credit program, and homeless grant programs. We receive state general fund revenue for homeless 
programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing 
Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund. 
This is an intriguing concept and it certainly appears to meet a need. I know that home sharing for 
older homeowners is a practice that has been endorsed by AARP, and when Rep. O’Neil suggested 
we look at the Nesterly website, it was clear to me that such a service has a great deal of potential. It 
would seem that by automating the home-sharing “matchmaking ” process, it could do a lot to 
alleviate potential worries of the homeowner around liability and screening, while helping the home- 
seeker find a place to stay. 
We understand based on an early draft sponsor amendment that the bill calls on MaineHousing to 
convene an advisory and stakeholder group. We would be happy to do that in order to study this issue, 
though the specific goals of such a group may well have changed since the initial bill draft we saw.
1
We would, however, respectfully request that the HOME Fund be removed from this bill as a speciﬁed 
funding source, as that resource is currently over-allocated to a myriad of other existing housing 
programs. To add additional on-going expectations of funding to a new program in its early conceptual 
phase (this one or any other) using the HOME Fund is something we are not be able to support. 
That said, MaineHousing is willing to coordinate the planning process, and we would certainly consider 
providing initial funding needed to establish such a program, though we have not seen a precise estimate 
of cost at this point, and so can’t commit right now. It is not clear to us that MaineHousing is the 
correct long-term home for such a program should it move beyond a pilot phase, but given our 
understanding that this is likely to result in a program based on a third-party online platform, the 
program may not necessarily need to reside within our organization or, for that matter, within state 
government after the initial startup period. 
We look forward to working with the sponsor and the committee in ironing out details. From personal 
experience, I can say that intergenerational home sharing opportunities can be very successful, and that 
this practice might offer another incremental, practical, and socially beneficial step toward overcoming 
Maine’s housing shortage.
2
