 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee  on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
 
in support  
LD 547, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Working Waterfront  Covenants  
 
Amy Winston  
Amy.Winston@ceimaine.org  
13 March  2023 
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pleucker , and Honorable M embers of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry:  
 My name is Amy Winston, and I live in Edgecomb. I am the Senior Director of State Policy at Coastal 
Enterprises, Inc. (CEI)  and submitting this  testimony , in support of LD 547 , An Act to Amend the Laws 
Governing Working Waterfront Covenants , on behalf of CEI.  
  
CEI is a statewide, non -profit, mission -driven community development financial development institution 
(or CDFI). We work to build a just, vibrant,  and climate -resilient future for people and communities in 
Maine and rural regions. We do this by integratin g finance, business expertise and policy solutions to 
make the economy more equitable. Established in 1977 with an investment in cold fish storage, CEI has 
a 46 -year track record of supporting Maine’s commercial fishing and aquaculture businesses. We 
provi de business services including free business counseling and technical assistance, and by making 
loans and investments in those marine businesses wishing to start or expand. Since the 1970’s our total 
portfolio of loans to this sector has grown to over $18 million and these loans have sustained or created 
over 2,200 jobs in Maine.  
The economic imp ortance of Maine’s working waterfronts  cannot be overstated.  The so-called “ blue 
economy ” in Maine generates significant economic activity  for the state and  are critical to livelihoods in 
coastal and island communities.  Marine activity -  from the lobsterman to the kelp farmer –  depends on 
access points : wharfs, boatyards, and other working waterfront infrastructure.  Only 20  of Maine’s  5000  
mile s of coastline are “ working ,” with  development pressures continuously  threatening what remains.  
More tools are needed to preserve working waterfronts to protect Maine’s predominantly owner -
operated marine and maritime related businesses,  to ensure  a secure future for Maine’s coastal 
communities that preserves and innovates traditional economic pursuits and livelihoods.  
 
Thank you for this opportunity to support this bill, which adds highly recommend the committees vote 
to pass this section of the biennial budget.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Amy Winston  
Senior Director  
State Policy   

