March 10, 2023   From: Jessica Gribbon Joyce, Freeport, Maine To: Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Re: Public Hearing for LD #574 “An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Working Waterfront Covenants” on March 13, 2023  Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Jessica Gribbon Joyce, and I live in Freeport, Maine. I am a small business owner (Tidal Bay Consulting) and I serve as the public member of the Department of Marine Resources’ Shellfish Advisory Council and co-facilitator of the Casco Bay Regional Shellfish Working Group. I also had the privilege to serve on the Land for Maine’s Future Working Waterfront Access Protection Program review committee in 2022, and previously served a member of Cumberland’s Shellfish Conservation Committee. My comments today are solely based on being a Maine resident and business owner, and not in any other capacity or role that I serve. I would like to testify in support of LD 574.  For over 12 years, I dedicated significant time to supporting the wild-harvest shellfish fisheries in Maine, focusing on municipal co-management of soft-shell clams and quahogs (hard clams). The Casco Bay Regional Shellfish Working Group convenes 14 municipalities in the Casco Bay Region to share information, resources, and collaboratively address shared issues. In the last two years, the focus of the Working Group has been around preserving traditional access to the mudflats where clams are harvested. Last year, we convened a meeting with nine land trusts that operate in the Casco Bay region to discuss the importance of access to the mudflats, including parking, paths, and boat ramps; and the role that land trusts can play to maintain access for the shellfish fishery, which is consistently one of the top three revenue earners in the State.   Through this work, I learned that land trusts have a tremendously valuable role in supporting working waterfront and the businesses that rely on conservation easements, coastal properties, and shore-side infrastructure. LD 574 will provide one more tool for land trusts to support both wild-harvest fisheries and aquaculture businesses that are critical to the Maine’s maritime heritage and the marine economy, locally and statewide.  In addition, I recently worked with the Maine Coast Fishermen’s Association to develop a tool for municipalities to inventory and monitor changes in their working waterfront. The Working Waterfront Inventory Template is a resource for towns to identify and prioritize shore access points, and develop partnerships and policies to preserve and expand access to the coast. LD 574 will diversify options for towns and property owners to continue this important work.  Thank you for your time and consideration of my testimony. Jessica Gribbon Joyce 
