Testimony in Support of LD 574
“An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Working Waterfront Covenants”
March 09, 2023
Dear Members of the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry,
My name is Morganne Price and I am speaking on behalf of Midcoast Conservancy, an innovative land trust andconservation organization that works to protect and restore vital lands and waters on a scale that matters. We represent1,700 members in the watersheds of the Sheepscot River, Medomak River, and Damariscotta Lake. Today I am grateful forthe opportunity to add our voicesin support of LD574.
Midcoast Conservancy stewards over 14,500 acres of land, nearly half of which are conserved through conservationeasements on private land. These easements function in much the same way as working waterfront covenants–in effect,a codified legal partnership that protects vital conservation values while supporting landowners on working landscapes.This framework for conservation has been tremendously successful. It has grown the conserved lands in Maine whileallowing private landowners to live, work on, and remain connected to their treasured landscapes.
The existingWorking Waterfront Access ProtectionProgram (WWAPP)allows for protection of working waterfrontsthatare the backbone of the Maine coast, but excludes land trusts such as ours from supporting and expanding this vitalwork. Although the current regulations do allow for some protection, allowing land trusts to hold working waterfrontcovenants will dramatically increase the amount that can be protected. The coast of Maine is in desperate need of thisprotection. There aremore than 5,000 miles of coastlinein Maine, but the working waterfront only makes up 20 miles,and this number is dwindling.
While much of the state has seen demographic shifts in the past several years, the coastal region has seen some of themost substantial changes. Coastal Maine properties are in greater demand than ever before and are subject to strongdevelopmental pressures. When coastal towns like Waldoboro, Friendship, or Bremen, lose access to workingwaterfronts, they also lose access to feed their families and the world.
Land trusts, like Midcoast Conservancy, have the experience and infrastructure to quickly and effectively protect vitallands and waters on a scale that matters, and that includes the working waterfront. For these reasons wesupport LD574. Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,
Morganne PriceMedomak River Watershed ManagerMidcoast Conservancy

