tat. 
insrrrirra 
Testimony of the Island Institute in Support of LD 574, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing 
Working Waterfront Covenants 
March 13, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation, and Forestry, my name is Nick Battista and I am offering this testimony on behalf 
of the Island institute in strong suppoit of LD 574 and protecting Maine’s working waterfronts. 
This legislation breathes new life into efforts to support working watertronts by making the 
working waterfront covenant a more effective tool. By broadening the deﬁnition of entities 
allowed to hold a working waterti"on.t covenant to include land trusts, the pool of potential 
partners who can hold a covenan.t is signiﬁcantly expanded. 
The Island Institute is a 40-year-old nonproﬁt organization based in Rockland, Maine. We work 
to sustain Maine’s island and coastal communities. We work with communities where l in5 
residents hold a lobster l.icense. Our work focuses on building economic, climate, and 
community resilience. Much of this work is tied back to the marine economy. 
According to the Maine Departrn.e;n.t of l\/iarine Resources, commercial ﬁshermen received $900 
million for their catch in 2021, directly supporting over 8,000 commercial harvesters. In 
addition, after lobsters leave the boat, they support more than 4,000 jobs across the State._§___l___j_ All 
of this economic activity depends on multiple interactions with at least one working waterfront. 
Public and private working waterfronts provide critical access to the water and support activities 
like storing, launching, building and repairing boats and loading and unloading gear and catch. 
With only 20 miles of working waterfront remaining along Maine’s 3,500-mile coastline, the 
marine industry rel.ies heavily on a small part of the coast. The Maine Coast Fisl1er.man ’s 
Association described the threats to these places in their 2020 report, The Stare Qfil/Iairze ’s 
W or/ting Wulezfﬁwnl. Q1 Development pressures, accelerated during the pandemic, have only 
increased the vulnerability of Maine’s working waterfront. As properties change hands, 
f1shermen ’s access to the water can be lost forever. 
A 2021 report commissioned by the Island Institute, The Critical Nature of Maine’ 
s Working 
VV(1l€lfﬁ‘O71lS and Access to the i§i10re,,[;§__;i_ further underscored the pressures facing working 
waterfronts and highlighted the role escalating property values, the cost of living, and the inﬂux 
of people less familiar with l\/laine ’s coastal economy compound the stresses the working 
waterfronts face from the uncertain and unpredictable business that is commercial ﬁshing. 
To help support these places, Maine statute includes an existing “Working Waterfront Covenant 
that functions like other easements providing long—term protection for crucial parcels of land. 
Like a conservation easement, the covenant is a recorded instrument that transfers some of the 
rights from the original property owner to the entity holding the covenant, ensuring that the 
386 Main Street P.O.Bo>< 648 Rockland, Maine 04841-0648 207-594-9209 E 
is¥amiinsti"tute.erg77
r 
i’c{{;<zr 2l
L 
property remains used for its intended purposes. For working waterfronts, the covenant is tied to 
the long-term protection of commercial ﬁshing businesses and encompasses working waterfronts 
that support wild caught ﬁsheries and aquaculture. The covenant is meant to be a ﬂexible tool 
that can meet the needs of property owners and others involved in the transaction. 
Despite being allowed by statute since 2005, this covenant has not been well. utilized outside of 
the State’s Land for Maine’s Future (LMF) program, where the working waterfront covenant 
forms the basis for the transactions involving LMF-’s Working Waterfront Access Protection 
Program. ‘Like other LMF programs, the State’s leadership on protecting working waterfronts :is 
critical. As helpful and important as the LMF program has been, it is not positioned to respond 
quickly to urgent land transfer situations in a fast-paced real estate market and it might not be the 
right tit for the parties involved in the transaction. 
A signiﬁcant barrier to utilizing this covenant outside of the LMF program is the very speciﬁc 
language that deﬁnes the entities qualified to hold the covenant. This proposed legislation would 
broaden the podl of potential entities that can hold a working waterfront covenant to include 
entities like local land trusts. Additional information on different kinds of language that land 
trusts have lI1llTl6l1 ‘ mission is inclu.ded with this testimony.4 
Land trusts are natural partners in this work. They often have particular expertise in pulling 
private sector partners together, ;mobi.lizing resources, and acting quickly to secure essential 
pieces of land. Land trusts also often have strong ties to their communities, understand land 
transfer activities, and have experience holding and managing property easements. 
The wo:rking waterfront covenant clearly indicates that entities outside of state or local 
governments should be allowed to hold these covenants. However, given its minimal utilization 
by these kinds of holders, a slight expansion of the entities who could hold this sort of covenant 
would help this ‘tool. be more effective at achieving its purposes. 
With limited tools are available to secure the future of working waterfront infrastructure being 
able to use the ones we have in place easily is vital for ensuring a strong future for Maine’s 
marine economy. I strongly encourage you to support this legislation. 
[Ll Lobsters to l§)ollars - W'\/‘\,~"\>%< ’.t3() _l.lT§§¢ ’Aititi/i(Pi>STt3t ‘Sl’tlOliE"§¥'S 
4{__ ?_ .“1 State of Maine’s Working Waterfront, 2020 
hllps://www. mainecoast ﬁshermen. org/Mﬁles/zvigd/ ’()1 b480 ___e0402 73 a8b64 4cc-8rSfLL;fbbc88 6224 8412.
1 
Critical Nature ot‘l\/lain.e ’s Working Waterfronts, 2021 §1f¥g_I7§§5iI./!' \’\v'\’\v’\1\_,/'.liélii ﬁti§.t}§&ilI§lit2it3.(1§g/X/\fQ:A
I
\ 
LD 574 Supplemental Information - Land Trust Mission Language 
Provided by the Island Institute, March 13, 2023 
The Island Institute reviewed the mission language from a variety of coastal land tmsts in an 
effort to develop alternative language for 574 that is more speciﬁc than referencing the 
section of statute that allows land trusts to hold conservation easements. 
The language included below is modiﬁed slightly to remove speciﬁc references to a particular 
community and is not meant to indicate that these land trusts support this legislation or that 
would intend to hold a working waterfront covenant, or even that holding a working waterfront 
covenant would be seen as included within their mission rather it is to help identify the language 
that might be helpful if the Committee determined that narrowing the scope of qualiﬁed holders 
was appropriate.' 
All of these are from land trusts in areas Where there could_be an opportunity to protect a 
working waterfront, none of them would likely be a qualiﬁed holder under the current statute. 
- Protect and restore vital lands and waters on a scale that matters 
- Permanently conserve land to beneﬁt the human and natural communities of 
- Conserve for the public beneﬁt the natural habitat, scenic beauty and working land of the 
region _ 
- Preserve and protect natural resources, cultural heritage, and access to the outdoors now 
and forever through conservation, stewardship, and education. 
- Contributes to the well-being of the community by conserving its distinctive landscapes 
and natural resources 
- Conserve the ecosystems and traditional heritage of the region through permanent land 
protection‘ 
- Permanently conserves and stewards natural resources across our communities for 
the beneﬁt of current and future generations. 
- Conserves and stewards our important natural, recreational, and agricultural resources, 
including scenic and other traditionally valued places, for the beneﬁt and enjoyment of 
the entire community.'
