 
To: Maine Legislature - Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services 
Date: Hearing Date May 16, 2023 
Re: LD 1267 Workshop Requested Items  
 
To the Chairs and Members of the committee and to the Legislative Staff my gratitude for 
allowing my testimony on the bill you are now reviewing. Based on our original testimony I am 
providing this guidance in response to questions raised at the public hearing.  
Those who testified in opposition of the bill were correct in bringing attention to federal laws 
which already address this concern, however the federal laws do not specify who would 
enforce the laws, and at the federal level there is no one to report violations to and in state, the 
Maine Bureau of Insurance has testified on other bills that without a Maine law or rule they 
cannot enforce any such laws.  
The committee asked, “which carriers are doing this” and after checking with multiple doctors 
we are finding it to be a few health insurance carriers and Medicare replacement plans 
however upon request they most often comply with federal law and will issue another means 
of payment. Payment by virtual credit card, however, is not limited to health insurance carriers 
as we now see worker compensation carriers, auto accident claims and other liability type 
programs beginning to pay by this method. While federal law under the ACA does address this 
the problem, the provisions of the ACA are limited to health insurance only and are not 
applicable to other forms of insurance that may require payment to a health care provider. 
In summary the bill seeks to correct two issues. First, giving authority to the Bureau of 
Insurance to enforce violations and secondly to ensure that other carrier types are bound to the 
same standard as health insurers. the state. My understanding is any outcome of that 
examination will not be known for several more months. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Robert Reed, Executive Director  
Maine Chiropractic Association 

