IVIAJNE ASSOCIATION 
or 
HEALTH PLANS 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt — 4/24/23 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
In Opposition to LD 1267 
An Act to Provide Altemative Methods of Payment to Health Care Providers 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private 
and non-profit insurance carriers provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 
600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people 
by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
The members of the Maine Association of Health Plans oppose LD 1267 because it is duplicative 
of federal law. Providers already have the right to receive payments that are not Virtual Credit 
Card (V CC) payments that may be subject to transaction fees. 
Carriers provide payment options for providers that include no fees. These payments can include 
electronic transfers that provide providers with the full claim amount and traditional paper 
checks. 
The Heath Insurance Portability and Accountability Act standard payor-to-provider Automated 
Clearing House (ACH) electronic funds transfer (EFT) is designed to reduce the cost and 
administrative burden of the claims payment process. Health plans must conduct these 
transactions when asked to do so under HIPAA’s administrative simplification ‘rules!’-‘-1* 
I am including an American Medical Association fact sheet with my testimony that outlines a 
provider's rights to make ACH and EFT payments work for their practicelll AMA suggests the 
banking network fee of just $0.34 per ACH EFT transaction reduces provider transaction costs 
from $250.10 to just $0.34 on a $5,000 claimlll 
A screenshot of the savings calculation is included with my testimony. 
Given that carriers already offer no -fee payment options, as required by federal law, there is no 
need for a state mandate regarding transaction alternatives. We urge a vote of ought not to pass. 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087 -
Virtual Credit Card vs. Federally Mandated Healthcare Standard ACH EFT 
' 
Processing Costs $0.34 $258419‘ 
T0281 Payment $4,999.65 $4,’?4$9.95 
‘ fakulalcaj using; 5% inwrvhnngr Err ¥ 50.19 iramsaﬂiun Rw- 
iii httpsz;’;’www.cms.gaui' €i!es1d0cumentfeiecU9_mc-§unds-transfe wand-eIectronic-remittance~advice- 
transactéonsgdf, accessed 4/21/23 
iittns:!/www.ama~assn.Qrgisétesfama-assn ﬁoraffélesjcemfmedia-browserimsmiumfosafknow-vouwach-eift~ 
ﬁghts O.Qdf 
hmasz;-’/www.ama~assn.or2is§_te5/amaassn.erg; ’ﬁiesfcernfmedla-br0wser; ’;2¥em§L§:7}i' n safvirtual-cards Gpglf 
From AMA website updated 1/20/23 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
The Automated Clearing House (ACH) electronic funds transfer (EFT) is a Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) standard payer-to-provider payment method designed to reduce the 
cost and administrative burden of the claims payment process. The standard, which utilizes the NACHA — The Electronic Payments Association Cash Concentration and Disbursement Plus Addenda (CCD+) 
format to process payments, is available to all physicians that request its usage from health plans. lt 
has been estimated that physicians and hospitals that use this new standard will save billions 
of dollars over the next decade. In order to receive the greatest benefit from ACH EFT enrollment, 
the AMA encourages physicians to make note of the following: 
All EFT forms are not created equal 
The term “EFT” encompasses any transfer of funds using an electronic terminal (rather than paper). 
This includes credit cards, wire transfers, virtual credit card programs, and bank account~t0-bank 
account payments. ln order to promote greater efficiency, HIPAA mandated that health plans offer ACH 
EFT, a specific form of electronic payment using the ACH network. Many health plans offer various EFT 
payment models, but only the ACH EFT method is regulated under HIPAA. Physician practices wishing 
to receive efficient payment under the HIPAA standard should be sure to request ACH EFT in the 
CCD+ format from their health plans. Remember, health plans must provide ACH EFT payments 
upon request. 
ACH EFT is not subject to percentage-based payment fees 
ln order to achieve compliance with the HIPAA mandate requiring all health plans to offer ACH EFT 
upon request, some health plans use payment vendors to process ACH EFT payments. Many of these 
vendors offer ACH EFT payment options that charge physicians processing fees of up to 1.9% of the 
claims payment. HIPAA regulations require health plans to offer physicians an ACH EFT payment 
option that does not charge such percentage-based fees. Although vendors may be allowed to 
charge for value-added services designed to supplement the standard ACH EFT payments, a health 
plan must make available to physicians the ACH EFT standard payment at no additional cost beyond 
nominal, per-transaction processing fees of the banking network (approximately $0.34). This fee is 
usually assessed by the physician ’s bank. 
ACH EFT enrollment does not grant health plans the authority to process unauthorized debits 
ln order to facilitate ACH EFT payments, health plans will collect the relevant bank account information 
from physicians. While this information will provide health plans with the ability to directly credita 
physician's account, the ACH EFT standard does not specifically permit health plans to process debits 
to those accounts, unless otherwise agreed to between the parties. Physicians are encouraged to 
carefully read their EFT enrollment and registration information to determine whether it allows 
the health insurer to debit funds from their bank account. 
To ensure protection from unauthorized debits, practices should contact their bank. Most banks offera 
variety of options to prevent unauthorized debits to accounts, such as identifying specific parties that 
can only make credits to one’s account. 
For more information on ACH EFT, please see the AMA ’s EFT Toolkit. 
Copyright 2014 American Medical Association. All rights resen/ed.
