' 
Mailing: PO Box 437 
M a i n e Q 6 n r fOf Street: 1 Weston Court Suite 103 
. - Augusta ME 04332 
y mecep org Economic Polic 
Testimony in support of LD 1096, “An Act to Help Retired Teachers and State 
Employees Keep Pace with Inflation by Matching the Cost-of-living Adjustment for 
Social Security Benefits" 
Arthur Phillips, Analyst, Maine Center for Economic Policy 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of thejoint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Arthur Phillips and lam an analyst at the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. lam here to testify in support of LD 1096, “An Act to Help Retired 
Teachers and State Employees Keep Pace with Inflation by Matching the Cost-of-living 
Adjustment for Social Security Benefits. ” 
At a time of rising prices, our state's 3 percent cap on MainePERS cost-of-living adjustments 
is penalizing our former public sen/ants. After dedicating their lives to educating our 
children and providing critical public services, they are struggling to afford the basic 
necessities in a time of volatile prices. 
Over the past 15 years, Maine's state government significantly rolled back its commitment 
to state retirees by freezing and later capping their cost-of~living adjustments. Only recently 
has this trend begun to reverse. The 130"‘ Legislature took some promising steps, including 
a one-time 4 percent increase in their benefits along with a modest increase to the base to 
which these benefit adjustments apply. But retires have not come close to making up for 
lost ground. 
By comparison, between December 2020 and December 2022, prices for goods and 
services in the Northeast US increased by more than ‘I2 percent on average, according to 
the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Food prices increased by more than 15 percent, housing 
costs have gone up by 11 percent, and — most strikingly — the cost of household energy 
has skyrocketed by more than 40 percent. Put simply: the cost of core essentials has risen 
much faster than state retirees ’ ability to pay for them. 
This year, Social Security recipients saw a full 8.7 percent cost-of-living increase. But as you 
know, many of our MainePERS recipients do not qualify for Social Security due to offsets 
including the Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP). Until those offsets are dealt with at the 
federal level, the ability of our public sector retirees to keep up with the rising cost of living 
depends on state action. 
Board Br anew; W 7” 
*7 
Barbara Burt, Chair V “MW Sandra Butler K’ »0 
Stacy Mitchell 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair l\/laulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica l\/laurer
Our failure to reform to the COLA cap will not only hurt the tens of thousands of current 
retirees, but will exacerbate our challenges to attract talented workers into teaching and 
other public services. For all of these reasons, we believe the pension system's current 
design poorly serves our state, and we urge you to support LD 1096.
