Christopher Babbidge
Kennebunk
LD 1096
Chairs Tipping and Roeder and distinguished members of the Committee on Labor 
and Housing:
My name is Christopher Babbidge, I live in Kennebunk, and I am expressing support 
for passage of LD1096 sponsored by Rep. Dodge.
The cap on COLA has hurt teacher pensioners for a dozen years by losing ground to 
inflation, unlike Social Security.  That money is forever gone, and for old retirees in 
need during those years, forever lost.   But teachers who retire today and in the future 
can be treated more fairly through the passage of this bill.
Financial health is scary when your paycheck stops at retirement.  Housing and 
transportation costs, plus rising food and energy costs, worry retirees.  Even before 
the harmful measures of 2011, health insurance has plagued retirees.
When I began teaching in 1973, my district (Greenville and Shirley) paid 100% of a 
teacher's family health insurance, which was the standard.  Over time, that has been 
eroded to more like 80-82%.  But if a teacher retires, MPERS pays about half of that, 
making retirement even more costly.
Before the devastating cuts of 2011, I spoke on the floor of the House in support of 
raising the retirement percentage paid by the state from 40 to 45%.  I explained that 
teachers, who had given their all over many years but now were physically and 
mentally tired, deserved the dignity of being able to retire, rather than to hang on in 
the classroom for the health insurance.  Even more importantly, the kids deserved an 
excited, enthusiastic teacher instead of a burned-out professional worried about 
retirement costs.  It passed in bipartisan fashion, and many colleagues from across the
aisle came to me and said they knew that teacher I had spoken of.  
We need to keep MPERS viable, yes.  But we need to keep promises, right wrongs, 
and be fair to those people who dedicated their lives to the children of Maine.  
Continuing to have retirees lose ground by squeezing teachers' retirement income 
with a cap not only is inequitable with social security, but is contrary to our 
responsibility to Maine education, teachers and spouses, and, in the end, to Maine 
students.  Please vote OTP on 1096.  
Thank you.  

