Retirement in Maine P !P 
H Yes No Maybe 
Good Afternoon, All, 
You may remember me, I am John Whitten , a retired public School teacher who just 
recently spoke to you regarding LD 70 and the reduced C.O.L.A. paid to retirees , as well as 
the capped amount of our pension that it may be applied. 
I am glad that you are exploring LD 1096 and the CPU’s C.O.L.A. as a direct 
reﬂection of the inﬂation percentage, for our pension system. 
(I feel that you folks and our state legislature, can not in good conscience, ‘kick this 
can . down the road” any longer.)A 
I wish you to realize ( and I did not mention this in my previous ‘testimony ’ to you 
on LD70), that most of our retirees are on the short side of life, and that we all have fewer 
years to ‘recover’ from these limitations on our finances that we worked a career building. 
It would be indeed sorrowful, if anyone should die waiting while our state government failed 
to correct this ﬁnancial ‘stressor ’ in our lives. TI-HS ISSUE, in this way, IS ATIME 
SENSITIVE MATTER. and everyone ’s clock is ticking.' 
I am pleased (and I thank you) for entertaining this issue at this level of governance. 
I would ask you to convince everyone concerned ( Gov. Mills, other Commission chairs 
and our entire legislature) that before funding anything ‘new’ in our state’s budget, that 
prior commitments need to be corrected (and paid for), FIRST! And, tmless 
something is pending that’s ‘older’ than 12 years, than ‘this’ issue Quit take priority. 
Also, 
Our legislators and Governor, need to realize, that Maine is creating a history of treating 
their retirees poorly, concerning pension restrictions. And quite possibly, this item and this 
‘reputation ’ could very Well limit new teachers from choosing education as a ‘career’ - thus 
stressing, more, the teacher shortage going on across Maine right now. (I personnally 
would not advise my grand children to consider working for the state of Maine for their 
careers, based upon the current retirement situation(s).) So, I am pleased and hopeful 
that today’s testimony(s) can give you ideas and the energy to eliminate this negative 
‘reputation ’ legislative members. Maine currently has the money, but does it have the ‘Will’ 
to make it right. 
Thank you for listening to my thoughts on this. I hope you agree with me. 
Most Sincerely, _6[,,£5‘
Iust so you know... Teachers (the successful ones) are long range ‘thinkers ’! 
They know where they are ( in the classroom lessons) and where the are going ( their 
future) as well as how they will move forward with each. And they also know 
when they have ‘arrived’. 
With this in mind, our state government needs to realize that by curtailing an 
educator ’s retirement plan ( already in place) they are affecting the teacher’s 
morale, thus, their classroom performance and probably pupil accomplishment and 
very possibly the number of teachers in our Maine schools. ® 
[ Diminished numbers of teachers in schools currently, could very well be the result of 
these past 12 years of retirement curtailments catching up with the present situation(s) 
and our legislators need to realize the consequences of their “changing the rules in 
the middle of the game” . UGH.c] 
P P S. Additionally, I have heard that the state’s Unfunded Liability is set to be completed 
in ﬁve more years (2028); If this is true, VVhat happens then (2). Can/Will Maine lift 
these ‘caps’ and retirement curtailments without such current worries of affordability? 
Should this be a strong ‘suggestion ’ to each and every legislator - that any short- 
comings created by Maine correcting the present C.O.L.A /beneﬁt ‘cap’ now, will not 
be ‘postponed ’ for too long (P) but, no matter what they do now, that the reasoning 
for ‘these’ restrictions ends shortly . Please think on this!
