Judith Feinstein
Hallowell
LD 1096
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Committee on Labor 
and Housing:
My name is Judith Feinstein.  I am a retired Maine State employee, and I live in 
Hallowell.  I am writing in support of LD 1096, “An Act to Help Retired Teachers 
and State Employees Keep Pace with Inflation by Matching the Cost-of-living 
Adjustment for Social Security Benefits.”
I retired from state government almost eight years ago, after 30 years of service. My 
position was in DHHS, as a program manager, would be considered 
middle-management, and was also considered to be fairly well-paid.  As the 
possibility of retirement neared, I looked at my options. I realized that because of my 
start date with the state to be eligible for Medicare, I would need more time working 
in a job that contributed to Social Security. I did multiple calculations to estimate my 
pension benefit.  Because of my classification and where I started, step increases were
limited and many of the increases in my salary were due only to cost-of-living 
adjustments, which were usually small, and off and on suspended. I was looking at a 
pension based on 60% of my salary – a salary that had not kept up with inflation. 
Then there was the 3% cap on the cost-of-living adjustment for state employee 
retirement benefits, and of course the “windfall profits” offset.  My conclusion was 
that these limitations were effectively a prescription for poverty – and my salary was 
a good one for state government and for where I live. It was a very bitter prospect to 
consider after many years of public service. 
Many state employees made less than I did. I see them everywhere, still working – in 
retail jobs, mostly, and many of them long past the age when they’d hoped to retire. 
They are working to make ends meet. But in many ways, I am one of the lucky ones.  
Since my retirement from the state, I have worked part-time, in a professional 
capacity, on a contract that pays me well – well enough to maintain the standard of 
living I enjoyed while working in state government – managing my resources 
carefully, mind you – and to continue to save for extras as well as to cover necessities.
But without that job, I would be in a precarious situation financially. The small 
adjustments to my pension do not, and would not, cover much and I certainly would 
not be able to save. 
Changing the index used to calculate the cost-of-living adjustment for state employee 
and teacher retirement benefits to the same index that is used to calculate the 
cost-of-living adjustment for benefits under Social Security and removing the 3% cap 
on the cost-of-living adjustment for state employee and teacher retirement benefits 
will make an appreciable, and appreciated, difference in many lives. Please give LD 
1096 your very serious consideration.  Thank you. 

