March 28, 2023 
To Whom It May Concern, 
I am writing in reference to LD 1096. My name is June Burtt and I retired from teaching 
in 2015 at the age of sixty-seven after teaching for thirty years. Currently, I am in my 
sixth year of being an Ed. Tech. in the Brewer School Department. I enjoy working with 
students at this age, but to be honest with you, I am working to keep up with the rising 
cost of living and care for my chronically ill husband. 
When I turned sixty-ﬁve, and was still teaching, I began to receive one thousand dollars 
a month from Social Security. I had worked outside in the private sector and had earned 
a benefit. This certainly helped out as my husband needed to retire at age sixty-two. 
Upon retirement as a Maine teacher that beneﬁt went away and I was required to pay 
for my medicare out of pocket. When I turned seventy, I called Social Security and asked 
them to recalculate my benefit. I now get my medicare paid with sixty—one dollars put 
into my checking account. If my husband should pass before me I will lose out on most, 
if not all, of his social security benefit. I realize this is a federal issue and not related to 
LLD 1096, but when you think about it, money coming in or not is all related to my 
pocketbook. 
In preparation for the future, my husband and I decided to sell our home and 
move into an apartment several years ago. As you know, the rents are rising as well as 
food costs. The current COLA rate for retired teachers is not enough to keep up with 
rising costs of housing and other essential expenses. Many Maine retired teachers, not 
just me, are struggling to make ends meet. Raising the COLA rate to match what Social 
Security provides will help myself and other retired teachers live more comfortably and 
with dignity. 
Thank you in advance for your thoughtful consideration of this increase. I realize 
there is only so much money in the state budget. It is only fair that Maine retired 
teachers, who have dedicated their lives to educating and shaping our youth, retire with 
the same COLA increase as others. 
Sincerely, 
June Burtt
