March 28, 2023 
To: Senator Michael Tipping Representative Amy Roeder Members, Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing 
FROM: Linda Jariz, Maine State retiree“ 
SUBJECT: LD 1096: An Act to Help Retired Teachers and State Employees Keep Pace with inflation by 
Matching the Cost-of—living Adjustment for Social Security benefits 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing. My name is Linda Jariz. I live in Bowdoinham and I am a retired State Employee. I am here to 
testify in favor of LD 1096. 
I worked for the State of Maine for 25 years. In all my years of work, which included working with the 
legislature, it never occurred to me that I would one day be here to advocate for fairness in the 
retirement system. During my time working for Maine within social services and when I retired, I was 
promised several retirement benefits, including 
0 full health insurance paid for by the State of Maine, and 
0 a retirement pension that would increase by a COLA applied to my full benefit amount 
I planned my retirement based on those promises. As I speak today, neither of those things are 
happening because in 2011 the retirement situation changed. 
LD 1096 proposes addressing one of those promises — by providing for a pension that, in part, keeps up 
with inflation. 
As each year passes, I, like everyone else, pay much more for basic living requirements -— such as food, 
heat, and housing to name just a few. And while LD 1096 is helpful, it only addresses part of the COLA 
problem because back in 2011 when the State COLA was capped at 3%, the pension amount it could be 
applied to was also capped at $20,000 instead of the retiree’s entire pension amount. It's like saying to 
an employee - sure you can have a cost-of-living increase but only up to 3% and only on part of your 
wages. And while it did provide for some growth in the capped pension amount - which is somewhere 
around $24,000 now, it is still a big step back from what was promised. As the result I become further 
behind in my ability to keep up with inflation with each passing year. 
It's important that state employees can trust and rely on the retirement system in place when they 
retire. The promises that were made as part of the benefit of working for State Government (and 
incentivizing people to stay rather than seek better wages in the private sector) can be partially 
addressed by the enactment of LD 1096 — which would be helpful in years where the COLA is above 3%- 
like this year and last year. There is still more work to do to address the fairness in how Maine State 
retirees have been treated. LD 1096 is a beginning to that work. I ask that you support this bill. 
I thank you for the opportunity to testify and for your efforts to address the negative impacts instituted 
in 2011.
