Rob Peale 2023 Tes.mony on LD 1096  (An Act to Help Re.red Teachers and State Employees Keep Pace with Inﬂa.on by Matching the Cost-of-living Adjustment for Social Security Beneﬁts)  Senator Michael Tipping, Representa.ve Roeder and members of the CommiSee on Labor and Housing:   My name is Rob Peale and I am a Readﬁeld resident. I am also a re.red State of Maine employee.  I am asking for your support to pass and fully fund this act to provide the equivalent of the Social Security cost of living adjustment (COLA) to our Maine teacher and state reAree pensions. For most re.red Maine teachers and state employees our state pensions play the same role in re.rement as does social security to private sector workers and business owners. Because we did not pay into Social Security when employed by the state or Maine school systems, many of us receive no social security beneﬁts. For those like myself that do receive social security beneﬁts due to having more than 40 quarters of employment in the private sector, our small social security beneﬁts are further diminished by federal Windfall Elimina.on Provision.  Under this provision my social security beneﬁt is cut to half what it would be if I received the full beneﬁt based on the contribu.ons made by myself and my employers in the private sector. MainePERS re.rees certainly need relief from the damage commiSed in 2011 by the then legislature and governor against public employees and our pensions. I am sure you know about these cuts already. It is my understanding that the average pension received by state employee and teacher re.rees, and the average social security beneﬁt received by private sector workers are roughly similar. Because of the 2011 cuts and caps the average state pension will con.nue to decline in real terms rela.ve to the average social security beneﬁt. 
The state of Maine received substan.al savings by having its own pension system rather than paying into the social security system. The original goals were that the pension system would be more reliable and provide beSer beneﬁts than social security. It is .me to move in a direc.on to make those goals the reality. Thank you.  Robert Peale Readﬁeld, ME
