 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 1096  
 
AN ACT TO HELP RETIRED TEACHERS AND STATE EMPLOYEES KEEP PACE WITH INFLATION 
BY MATCHING THE COST -OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENT FOR SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Committe e on Labor and Housing, I am Victoria 
Wallack , direct or of communications and government r elations for  Maine School Management Association, 
testifying on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Associat ion and Maine School 
Superinte ndents Association in support of L.D.  1096.  
 
In 2011 , the Legislature  passed a law  that froze cost -of-living adjustments for three years and reduced the 
maximum cost-of-living adjustment from 4 to 3 percent. The adjustment also was limited  initially  to the first 
$20,000 in benefits – a cap th at has risen  under current law  to just under $25,000.  
 
This bill would tie cost -of-living increases to the same index as Social Security and that is only fair.  
 
The cap on retirement benefits  was voted in during the 201 1 recession, which certainly affec ted many people 
at the time. It  was not fair  then, and it certainly is not fair that the cap continues today.  
 
We need to be encouraging more people to become teachers and school administrators and to assure that when 
they retire  they have supplementary incom e to maintain reasonable standards of living. They should not be 
penalized for choosing to work in a school system  by forgoing adequate pensions . 
 
This legislation also should help with teach er recruitment – an issue w e are facing now given the number of 
teachers who have retired.  
