M/um; Assocumon OF RETIREES 
TO: Senator Michael Tipping 
Representative Amy Roeder 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing March 28, 2023 
FROM: William H. Laubenstein, III 
President, Maine Association of Retirees 
SUBJECT: LD 1096: An Act to Help Retired Teachers and State Employees Keep Pace with 
Inﬂation by Matching the Cost-of-Living Adjustment for Social Security Beneﬁts 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing. My name is William H. Laubenstein, III. I am President of the Maine Association 
of Retirees (MAR) whose membership includes retired State employees, retired teachers and 
other public service retirees. 
MAR supports LD 1096, an Act to Help Retired Teachers and State Employees Keep Pace with 
Inﬂation by Matching the Cost-of Living Adjustment for Social Security. It accomplishes this 
by changing the cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) for state and teacher retirees ’ retirement 
beneﬁts to the same index used to calculate the COLA under the Social Security Act. In 
addition, and more signiﬁcantly, LD 1096 would eliminate the cap on the maximum of 
adjustment, which is now 3%. 
The ﬁnancial stress on retirees of the 3% cap cannot be overstated. As is well known, the COLA 
adjustment for recipients of Social Security beneﬁts in 2022 was 5.9% and the adjustment for 
2023 was 8.7%. MAR recognizes that the Legislature took steps in 2022 to align the 2022 
adjustment with Social Security. However, there is much more work to be done to help retirees 
in 2023 where the disparity between the State 3% and the federal 8.7% is signiﬁcant, a disparity 
that imposes a hardship on retirees living on a ﬁxed income. 
LD 1096 is good step toward bringing state and teacher retirees much needed ﬁnancial relief. 
Nevertheless, it does not go far enough since it does not eliminate the limitation on the portion of 
the retirement beneﬁt to which the COLA adjustment is applied. LD 70, which is already before 
this Committee, would eliminate the limitation. Accordingly, by favorably reporting out LD 
1096 and LD 70, the Committee would put state and teacher retirees on the same footing as 
recipients of Social Security beneﬁts. Said another way, the state would be equitably treating 
state and teacher retirees and recipients of Social Security beneﬁts, a position the administration 
took regarding payment of Medicare PartB.
MAR is aware that many proposals are being made to help state and teacher retirees keep up 
with increases in the COLA. These include changes in how the COLA is calculated anda 
requirement that the state pay all or a portion of the Medicare Part B premium retirees covered 
by a Medicare Advantage Plan must pay. If MAR had to choose between COLA adjustment and 
Medicare Part B premium payments, it would select the latter because, as has been pointed out 
repeatedly, changes to the COLA adversely impacts the unfunded actuarial liability of the Maine 
Public Employees Retirement System trust fund and raises state constitutional issues. Paying all 
or a portion of the Medicate Part B premium avoids those issues. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. I would be happy to answer your questions 
and MAR will be available for your work session. 
Leading the Way for Maine Retirees 
280 Maine Avenue, Farmingdale, ME 04344 William H. Laubenstein III — President 
Telephone Number: (207) 582-1960 Diane M. Bailey — Executive Director 
1-800-535~6555 email: MAR@MaineRetirees.org 
(207) 707-1722 FAX www.maineretirees.org
