Janet T. Mills Maine l)epartment of Health and Human St3l"\"lL ‘CS 
Governor Commissioncr ’s ()l'llce 
3“. l l State House Station 
Jeanne M . l.-an1ln ‘cw, Ph.l). 
\‘ m 1 fii! ‘1))Lii}( ‘:;l.£‘\:)l;)e1c i[ 
C )_ i .1 
ih is a, 1 z* 
_ . _ =- 
‘"““"“'°"“ ‘igﬁggf rt-1; (207) 28'/-3707; rm: (207) 2s”/-3005 
'F'l‘\’: Dial 7ll (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of the Office of Child and Family Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD 495, An Act Regarding Investigations of Om‘-of-home Child Abuse and Neglect 
Hearing Date: May 2, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am Dr. Todd Landry, Director of the Office of Child and Family 
Services. I am here today to testify in support of LD 495, An Act Regarding Investigations of Out-0f- 
home Child Abuse and Neglect and would like to offer the following information for your 
consideration. We are grateful to Rep. Meyer for sponsoring this Department bill. 
LD 495 would relocate provisions of the law regarding out-of-home abuse to OCFS’ chapter of Title 
22, the Child and Family Services and Child Protection Act. The bill would clarify the authority for 
the out-of-home team to investigate individuals authorized to work in schools and make explicit the 
authority of the team to investigate alleged abuse and/or neglect occurring in transitional living 
programs. The bill would also repeal a statutory requirement regarding training for the out-of-home 
investigation team staff which will allow the Department freedom to provide training based on the 
speciﬁc needs of the team and current factors impacting their work. 
In 2019, the team that handles children ’s licensing and out-of-home investigations was returned to 
OCFS but the statutes governing investigations into alleged out-of-home child abuse and neglect have 
remained in the Subtitle regarding facilities for children and adults where it was relocated by PL 2015, 
c. 283. OCFS proposed this bill to return these statutes to the Child and Family Services and Child 
Protection Act. 
OCFS is also seeking to clarify the role of the out-of-home investigation team in investigating 
individuals who are licensed or otherwise authorized to work in schools through the Department of 
Education. This is accomplished through an updated definition for the term “licensed. ” This new 
deﬁnition encompasses not just teachers but other individuals who interact with children in a school 
setting, such as bus drivers. Similarly, the bill makes explicit the authority of the out-of-home 
investigation team to investigate alleged abuse and/or neglect that occurs in a transitional living 
program. 
The other signiﬁcant change this bill makes is to remove requirements regarding training for the out- 
of-home investigation team. I want to be clear that this team will still be required to engage in training, 
and that this change is intended to allow OCFS leadership ﬂexibility in tailoring trainings to the 
specific needs of the team and current and evolving factors that impact their work. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and 
to make myself available for questions at the work session.
