0v *' 101 Western Ave. 
The Maine Coalition P'O' BOX 5188 
to End Domestic Violence AUgUSt-3, ME 04332-5188 
207.430.8334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
In Support of LD 1632: An Act to Require Proper Storage of Forensic Exam Evidence 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Thursday, May 4, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I am writing on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (lVlCEDV) ’ in support of LD 1632, “An Act to Require 
Proper Storage of Forensic Exam Evidence. ” 
Strangulation is a significant public health concern and criminal justice issue due both 
to its prevalence and the serious medical and social impacts? This bill reflects ongoing efforts 
to continue to advance the State's response to strangulation. As far back as eleven years ago, 
the Maine Commission on Domestic and Sexual Abuse recommended that medical 
professionals and health care facilities review and address appropriate responses to both 
medical management of strangulation, as well as supporting forensic practices.3 And Maine’s 
Sexual Assault Forensic Examiners (SAFE) Program has respondent accordingly. 
Scientific advancement has created new ways for us to collect evidence in 
strangulation cases that will help the State hold a person who has used strangulation 
accountable for that crime. It is called “touch-DNA, ” where a trained professional swabsa 
strangulation victim’s neck and potentially collects DNA evidence of the person who 
perpetrated the strangulation. in cases immediately reported to law enforcement, that 
evidence is often collected by trained law enforcement officers. In these cases, after 
‘MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across Maine as well 
as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more than 12,000 
survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children in our state. 
1 
See 13* Biennial Report of the Maine Domestic Abuse Homicide Review Panel (2021), available at: 
https:,f,fwww.maine.gov/agjdocs/DAHRP-Report-f0r~P0sting-ACCESSlBLE.pdf. 
3 See Maine Commission on Domestic And Sexual Abuse “Report to the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety, Pursuant to Resolve 2011, Chapter 76 (LD 1027), Resolve, To Coordinate Stakeholders 
to Review Best Practices in the Management of Strangulation and Determine Methods to Address the Issue in 
Maine (February 2012). 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.0rg
MCEDV Page 2 of4 
collection, it is sent to the crime lab for processing. However, where a person's first point of 
contact after a strangulation involved assault is a health care facility, trained medical 
personnel can collect this evidence. In these cases, what is done with the evidence, how it is 
handed off to law enforcement, depends on whether or not the strangulation victim wants 
to immediately make a report to law enforcement or is not yet ready to do so. 
LD1632 helps to support this practice by codifying a requirement for law enforcement 
to pick up, transport, and store this forensic evidence of a strangulation, in situations where 
the strangulation victim: (1) was not also a victim of a sexual assault; (2) sought medical care; 
and (3) has not reported that strangulation to law enforcement. This process is exactly the 
same as the process that has been used for many years in Maine for the transport and storage 
of a sexual assault forensic examination kit that has been completed fora sexual assault victim 
who has not yet reported the assault to law enforcement. These are often referred to as 
“anonymous kits” - which are identified only by a number. This transport and storage process 
works very well for anonymous sexual assault forensic examination kits. LD 1632 very simply 
would mirror the current process for anonymous forensic examination kits for strangulation- 
only cases. Law enforcement agencies have already started to do this for strangulation-only 
touch-DNA kits, starting in 2022, after a new coordinated process for health facilities to start 
collecting this anonymous touch-DNA evidence from strangulation victims was rolled out. LD 
1632 would merely provide clarity in our statutes, aligning the statues with current practice. 
Has Been Reported to Law 
Enforcement Has NOT Been Reported to Law 
Enforcement (non-report cases) but 
Victim is Seen in Health Care Facility 
SAFE Kit is completed by a trained 
medical professional in a health 
care facility, provided to law 
enforcement, and law 
enforcement sends to the crime 
lab for processing as part of the 
1 
normal course of the investigation. Sexual Assault (could 
also include 
strangulation) SAFE Kit is completed by a trained 
medical professional in a health care 
facility, identified only by a number. 
Pursuant to statute, law enforcement 
picks it up from the health care facility, 
transports to their facility, and stores 
for a period of 8 years. 
Forensic Examination Kit for Touch 
DNA is completed, usually by a law 
enforcement officer, and sent to 
the crime lab for processing as part 
of the normal course of the 
investigation. Strangulation (no 
sexual assault) Forensic Examination Kit for Touch 
DNA is completed by a trained medical 
professional in a health care facility. 
PROPOSED (LD 1632): A modification to 
the statute that, similar to anonymous 
sexual assault kits, directs law 
enforcement to pick up, transport, and 
store the Forensic Examination Kit for 
Touch DNA for a period of 6 years.
J ' . 101 Western Ave. 
The Maine Coalition P'O' BOX 5188 
to End Domestic Violence. Augusta, ME 04332-5138 
207.430-8334 
Why Not Just Use the Touch DNA Swabs that are in the SAFE Kits for Strangulation Cases? 
When OCFS and the SAFE program started to collect touch-DNA evidence in cases 
involving only strangulation (and not sexual assault) where there had not yet been a report 
to law enforcement, their practice was to open a SAFE Kit and use just the tools that are 
needed to collect the touch-DNA evidence from that kit. This caused confusion for law 
enforcement agencies who were called to pick up the evidence for storage because it was not 
the whole SAFE Kit that they are used to collecting. _ 
Cost is also an important factor. The cost for an individual a SAFE Kit is around $25. The 
cost of the Forensic Evidence Kit for Touch DNA is less than $2. It would be fiscally 
irresponsible of the SAFE program to open a $25 kit forjust the tools that are needed to collect 
the touch-DNA evidence in a strangulation case that does not also involve a sexual assault. 
OCFS and the SAFE program responded to the confusion and cost concerns by creating a 
much less expensive kit, designed exclusively to collect touch-DNA evidence in these cases 
where the assault has not yet been reported to law enforcement and does not also involve 
allegations of sexual assault. These were distributed to health care facilities in Spring of 2022. 
Why Store Strangulation-Only evidence for Only 6 Years? 
The storage requirement proposed for these strangulation-only forensic kits aligns 
with the statute of limitations for Class A, B, and C assault crimes that do not involve sexual 
assault. See Title 17-A, Section 8. 
These strangulation-only touch-DNA kits for use by health care facilities were provided 
to the health care facilities in 2022. Approximately a year later, we are aware of fewer of five 
of these anonymous strangulation-only kits being completed and handed off to law 
enforcement agencies for transport and storage. it is not expected that there will be a high 
volume of these cases. However, we understand from our criminal justice system colleagues 
that this type of evidence can be immensely beneficial to a prosecution in those circumstances 
where a strangulation victim might later report the assault to police and seek prosecution of 
the crime. Given the serious medical and social impacts of strangulation, it is essential that our 
public policy and practices support taking this crime seriously and responding to it with best 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
IVICEDV Page 4 of4 
practices. That's what’s happening here through the development of this new practice, and 
we urge you to support this minor modification to statute to ensure our statutes align. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our support for LD 1632. MCEDV and our 
member programs are happy to serve as a resource to this Committee as you continue to 
discuss these important issues. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph= (207) 430-8334 
Email: é.D,dF6a@mC €§i_.\’,.QTg
