131st Legislature 
Senator Donna Bailey 
Se 3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
0fMaing Oﬂice (207) 287-1515 
Senate District 31 
Testimony of Senator Donna Bailey introducing 
LD 1632, An Act to Require Proper Storage of Forensic Exam Evidence 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
May 4, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Donna Bailey, and I proudly 
represent Senate District 31, which includes Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco. Today I am 
pleased to introduce LD 1632, “An Act to Require Proper Storage of Forensic Exam Evidence. ” 
In the last few years, Maine statutes have expanded the statute of limitations for reporting and 
prosecuting sexual assaults. This bill proposes a modest increase to the number of years that law 
enforcement agencies will store those anonymous sexual assault forensic examination kits to 
better align that storage timeframe with the new, expanded statute of limitations to extend the 
timeframe for law enforcement agencies to store sexual assault forensic examination kits from8 
years to 12 years. 
In addition, LD 1632 would codify a requirement for law enforcement to pick up, transport, and 
store forensic evidence of a strangulation, in situations where the strangulation victim: (1) was 
not also a victim of a sexual assault; (2) sought medical care; and (3) did not, and does not, 
currently intend to report that strangulation to law enforcement. 
For many years, Maine has had a process for sexual assault nurse examiners, specially trained 
medical professionals, to collect evidence through a sexual assault forensic examination kit after 
a person has been sexually assaulted. This can be done whether or not the person has reported or 
intends to report the sexual assault to law enforcement. When a person has a sexual assault 
forensic examination kit performed and has not and does not intend to report their sexual assault 
to law enforcement, the statutes direct our law enforcement agencies to pick up the kit from the 
health care facility and store it, identiﬁed only by a number so that it will be available for 
processing if the sexual assault survivor decides to report their assault to law enforcement. 
Because science has evolved, we can now collect touch-DNA evidence from an assault 
survivor ’s neck when they have been strangled. For a case involving sexual assaults, that touch- 
DNA evidence from the neck is collected as part of the sexual assault forensic examination kit. 
But this evidence can also be collected for assaults not involving sexual assaults.
l
For cases not involving sexual assaults, it does not make sense to open a much more expensive 
sexual assault forensic examination kit in order to just access the evidence collection tools 
necessary for collecting the touch-DNA evidence. That’s why separate, much smaller, evidence 
collection kits exist for the collection of touch-DNA evidence when there is no allegation of 
sexual assault. There is a kit that law enforcement uses as part of their investigation when the 
strangulation assault has been reported to law enforcement. There is also a kit that health care 
providers use when a person has been strangled but has not and does not intend to report the 
strangulation to law enforcement, but wants the evidence collected and stored anonymously. This 
evidence can be critically important to supporting a prosecution for strangulation if that person 
ultimately decides in the following days, weeks, or months to report their strangulation to law 
enforcement. Our statutes need a simple update to direct law enforcement to similarly pick up, 
transport, and store this important evidence. 
Thank you for your time, I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Donna Bailey 
State Senator, Senate District 31 
Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco
2
