STATE OF MAINE 
KATHRYN SLATTERY 
DISTRICT I ,- 
Ii‘ 
JACQUELINE SARTORIS0 
DISTRICT II _, .‘. 
1*» '-1‘I 
NEIL MCLEAN g- 
DISTRICT III 
*4 .13- R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY 
DISTRICT V 
NATASHA IRVING 
DISTRICT VI 
ROBERT GRANGER 
DISTRICT VII 
TODD R. COLLINS MAEGHAN MALONEY _. _; ,-1 .»-1. 
DISTRICT IV I» DISTRICT VIII 
.1-*1-z-$1 ’? ff; 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION 
SHIRA BURNS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
“An Act to Require Proper Storage of Forensic Exam Evidence ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Public Hearing Date: May 4, 2024 
Testimony in Support of LD 1632 
Senator Beebe~Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Shira Burns and I represent the Maine Prosecutors 
Association. I am here to testify in support of LD 1632. 
This bill has two main components. First, it establishes a requirement for the collection, storage, 
and transportation of strangulation forensic exam kits by law enforcement akin to the requirements 
of a sexual assault forensic exam. Second, it establishes a time period a strangulation forensic exam 
kit must be stored and extends the time a sexual assault forensic exam kit must be stored. 
Non-fatal strangulation is now recognized as one of the top risk factors for homicide in cases of domestic 
violence. It is also used by sex offenders to increase the terror and thus compliance of their victims. 
Offenders strangle their victims not necessarily to kill them, but to let them know that they can kill them. It 
is only in the last decade that the awareness of the serious nature of the long and short-term consequences 
of non-fatal strangulation has become clear. 
Since that time, training efforts have resulted in many presentations across Maine on non-fatal 
strangulation for health care providers, particularly forensic nurses, advocates, law enforcement officers, 
emergency medical services, and prosecutors. More and more cases are being charged and prosecuted. As 
in all prosecutions, evidence is key. This may be from victim and witness statements, police reports, 
medical ﬁndings and DNA. With DNA technology becoming more and more sensitive, swabbing the neck 
of a survivor can be essential to a case. Toward that end, forensic nurses have been collecting potential 
evidence for several years in appropriate cases. To do this they use 3 swabs from the state sex crimes kit— 
one for a ‘known DNA’ sample from the survivor, and two swabs of the neck. However, a sex crimes kit 
costs approximately $25. Strangulation kits were created that cost $1.41. This bill will codify the process 
law enforcement is already asked to do in securing all potential evidence. Further, storage of the 
strangulation forensic kit for 6 years would align with the statute of limitations for the crime. 
The statute of limitations for most gross sexual assaults or unlawful sexual contact is 20 years. This bill 
starts to move the pendulum to better align with the statute of limitations for the sexual assault crimes 
regarding storage from 8 to 12 years. This gives survivors with anonymous kits a longer window of time to 
decide if they want to report their sexual assault without the risk of their sexual assault forensic exam kit 
being destroyed. 
For these reasons, the Maine Prosecutors Association is in support of LD 1632.
