131st Legislature 
Senator Donna Bailey 
S 3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
0fMaing Oﬂice (207) 287-1515 
Senate District 31 
Testimony of Senator Donna Bailey introducing 
LD 773, An Act to Ensure Access by Parties and Attorneys to Records in 
Child and Adult Protection Proceedings 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Esteemed Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Donna Bailey, and I proudly 
represent Senate District 31, which includes Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and 
Saco. Today I am pleased to introduce my bill LD 773, “An Act to Ensure Access 
by Parties and Attorneys to Records in Child and Adult Protection Proceedings ” 
A basic tenet of our jurisprudence is that when the State is seeking to take awaya 
fundamental liberty or constitutionally protected right, the person who may lose 
their rights should have the right to see the evidence the State has against them. As 
currently enacted, that is not the case for parents in child protective proceedings 
when the State is seeking to remove their child, or for adults in adult protective 
proceedings when the State (or others) are seeking to obtain guardianship or 
conservatorship over them. 
By way of background: 
The genesis for this bill originated from my recent representation of an adult who 
was seeking to terminate the State’s guardianship over them. In particular, my 
client was opposed to the State’s plans to move her out of state, away from her 
family and friends. During the course of my representation, I requested that the 
Department permit me to come and view the ﬁle the State had accumulated on my 
client over the years, as I had done for other clients in the past. I was informed that 
the State would not allow me to see their ﬁle on my client, citing the statute on
conﬁdentiality of the records. I was astonished, to say the least. How wasI 
supposed to adequately represent my client against the State if I was not permitted 
to see the evidence they had against her? I made a vow that I would put a bill to 
address this inequity. 
When I went to draft my bill to allow a party in an adult protective proceeding and 
their attorney to access the State’s ﬁle on them, I thought that I should tailor the 
language to correspond to the statute for mandatory disclosure of the State’s ﬁle to 
parents and their attorneys in child protective proceedings for consistency. WhenI 
looked at the statute for disclosure of records in child protective proceedings, I 
discovered that a party to a child protective proceeding is only permitted disclosure 
of the State’s ﬁle at the State’s discretion. In other words, the State is not required 
to disclose any information contained in its ﬁle that may be used against a parent in 
a child protective proceeding. (Interestingly enough, the State is required to 
disclose its ﬁle to a relative or other person whom the State is investigating for 
possible custody or placement of the child. In other words, a possible placement 
for the child has more rights to see the State’s ﬁle than the parents of the child or 
their attorney.) 
This bill seeks to address the inequity of the disclosure statutes to ensure that 
persons who the State is seeking to divest of their constitutionally protected liberty 
interests has the right to see the evidence the State will use against them. 
Thank you for your time, I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Donna Bailey 
State Senator, Senate District 31 
Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco
2
