1LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle
  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)
www.mainelse.org
March 22, 2023
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D. 773 An Act to Ensure Access by Parties and Attorneys to 
Records in Child and Adult Protection Proceedings before the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary
Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal services organization that 
was established in Maine following the passage of the Older American’s Act 
in 1974. Since then, we have provided free legal assistance to our 
disadvantaged older adults age sixty or older when their basic human needs 
are at stake. 
This bill concerns the confidentiality of DHHS records gathered in adult and 
child protection matters. These records may include medical records, 
financial records, interviews or other items involved in their investigation. 
Currently both Acts keep all that information confidential. They also  have 
provisions for the optional or mandatory disclosure of that information to 
certain parties under certain conditions. Because the bill before you amends 
the mandatory disclosure parts of those Acts, this testimony does not focus 
on the optional parts.   
Our testimony will first describe the existing mandatory confidential 
requirements in the Adult Protective Services Act (APS) and the Child and 
Family Services and Child Protection Act (CPA) to provide context for the 
amendment. For your convenience the links to those pages here:
APS Act Title 22 Section 3474   
https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/statutes/22/title22sec3474.html
CPA Title 22 Section 4800 
https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/statutes/22/title22sec4008.html
2The mandatory disclosure requirements in the Adult Protective Services Act 
are found in Title 22 §3474 sub-section 3. It lists five entities to whom it 
must give access to confidential information. The last two are printed in this 
bill (an advocacy agency for “developmentally disabled person or mentally 
ill person” and “The Maine Developmental Services Oversight and Advisory 
Board”). The first three are set out in the statute as follows:  
“The department shall disclose relevant information in the records to the 
following persons:
 A. The guardian ad litem of an incapacitated or dependent adult named in a 
record who is reported to be abused, neglected or exploited;
B. A court on its finding that access to those records may be necessary for 
the determination of any issue before the court. Access must be limited to in 
camera inspection unless the court determines that disclosure of the 
information is necessary for the resolution of an issue pending before it;   
C. A grand jury on its determination that access to those records is necessary 
in the conduct of its official business;”
The Child and Family Services and Child Protection Act also has provisions 
listing those who must receive access to confidential records.  Title 22 
Section 4008 (Records; confidentiality; disclosure) includes language in sub-
section 3 that requires mandatory disclosure to fourteen entities. They are 
listed alphabetically and the last two appear in Section 5 and 6 of this bill. 
The two that are pertinent are found in the Section 2 and 3 and are listed as 
A-1 and B:
“ A-1. The court-appointed guardian ad litem or attorney of a child who is 
the subject of a court proceeding involving parental rights and 
responsibilities, grandparent visitation, custody, guardianship or involuntary 
commitment. The access of the guardian ad litem or attorney to the records 
or information under this paragraph is limited to reviewing the records in the 
offices of the department. Any other use of the information or records during 
the proceeding in which the guardian ad litem or attorney is appointed is 
governed by paragraph B; 
B. A court on its finding that access to those records may be necessary for 
the determination of any issue before the court or a court requesting a home 
3study from the department pursuant to Title 18-C, section 9-304 or Title 
19-A, section 905. Access to such a report or record is limited to counsel of 
record unless otherwise ordered by the court. Access to actual reports or 
records is limited to in camera inspection, unless the court determines that 
public disclosure of the information is necessary for the resolution of an 
issue pending before the court;   
The absence in the APS of mandatory access to confidential information for 
parties or attorneys representing parties in an adult protection proceeding is 
puzzling. A competent attorney has a duty to investigate the facts in any 
proceeding in which the attorney is involved. The obligation becomes 
especially important in cases involving the loss of liberty. Criminal matters 
may be reversed based on ineffective assistance of counsel and professional 
malpractice may result from lack of due diligence in ascertaining relevant 
facts in a guardianship matter. In addition, the failure to diligently pursue a 
matter may lead to adverse consequences to one’s license to practice law.  
All of the matters which involve adult protection require investigation and 
the inability to access confidential records puts attorneys at risk, their clients 
at a distinct disadvantage and diminishes the probability that due process of 
law will result.  
 
Another puzzling feature of this Act is that mandatory access is afforded a 
guardian ad litem. A person functioning as a guardian ad litem is usually but 
not always an attorney who is appointed by the court to represent the “best 
interests” of the person who is the subject of the protective proceeding. It 
seems like an arbitrary choice at best to allow an attorney functioning as a 
guardian ad litem mandatory access to confidential information and not do 
the same for an attorney in a protective proceeding acting according to 
“informed decisions” made by a client that truly reflect the client’s own 
wishes and values. It is difficult to distinguish why a guardian ad litem 
would have a greater need for the confidential information. 
Unlike the APS Act’s lack of mandatory disclosure language for attorneys, 
an attorney for the child is specifically entitled to mandatory disclosure of 
confidential information in sub-section A-1 of the Child and Family Services 
and Child Protection Act. However, no other attorney for any other party is 
mentioned. Actual viewing of the records is limited to the DHHS offices. 
Sub-section B contains language like that found in the APS requiring 
disclosure to the court under the same “in camera” viewing conditions. 
However, the CPA language specifically allows the “counsel of record” to 
4review the information screened by the judge and found “necessary for the 
determination of any issue before the court” unless otherwise ordered by the 
court.  
To recap: Adult Protective Services Act does not require mandatory 
disclosure of DHHS records to attorneys or parties to proceedings under the 
Act. It requires mandatory disclosure to attorneys acting as guardian ad 
litem. It also requires mandatory disclosure to Judges who may allow “in 
camera” access after they screen the confidential records.
The Child and Family Services and Child Protection Act requires mandatory 
disclosure of DHHS records to attorneys and guardians ad litem but no other 
attorneys or parties. It also requires mandatory disclosure to Judges who 
may allow the “counsel of record” to review the information screened by the 
judge and found “necessary for the determination of any issue before the 
court” .    
 
The proposed amendment contained in this bill amends the mandatory 
disclosure provisions of the Adult Protective Services Act the Child and 
Family Services and Child Protection Act. Those provisions are introduced 
with the following sentence : “The department shall disclose relevant 
information in the records to the following persons”.  In sub-sections 
subsequent to that language, the amendment adds: “A party to an adult 
protection proceeding and the attorney representing the party in the 
proceeding, with protection for identity of reporters and other persons when 
appropriate.” 
We believe that the proposed amendment attempts to strike a reasonable 
balance between the access to sensitive information required by principles of 
due process of law and professional responsibility and a policy of 
confidentiality developed to protect the safety, privacy and dignity of 
vulnerable children and adults. 
It does so by recognizing that the existing language introducing the 
mandatory section establishes a baseline limit for access to confidential 
information. That language makes clear that the information must be 
“relevant”. The amendment then further limits the granted measure of access 
by providing that it will occur “with protection for identity of reporters and 
other persons when appropriate”. 
5It leaves it to the Department of Health and Human Services as the holder of 
the confidential information to fashion a protocol that will define those 
bounds. The Department may choose to follow the established process in the 
CPA and require review at the Department offices or allow access 
electronically with encrypted files or passcodes or some other method that it 
finds suitable. The amendment does not bind the Department’s discretion in 
any way. 
We think that this is a sensible proposal and hope that you agree and that 
you will vote ought to pass. Thank you for giving us the opportunity to share 
our thoughts with you.    
