Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
March 22 , 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney , Chair  
Representative Matthew Moonen , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 773 – An Act to Ensure Access by Parties and Attorneys to Records in Child and Adult 
Protection Proceedings  
 
Senator Carney,  Representative Moonen , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on on 
the Judiciary : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 773, An Act to Ensure Access by Parties and 
Attorneys to Records in Child and Adult Protection Proceedings . The Department of Health and 
Human Services (DHHS) is opposed to this bill.  
 
This bill requires t he Department of Health and Human Services to disclose information in the 
records in adult proceedings and child protection proceedings to parties in those proceedings and 
the parties’ attorneys.  
 
From the OCFS perspective, 22 MRSA §4008(2) currently allows for optional disclosure of 
records to “A party to a child protection proceeding, when the records or information is relevant 
to the proceeding, with protection for identity of reporters and other persons when appropriate ”. 
This bill would move the langu age permitting disclosure of this information from the optional to 
the mandatory disclosure section of 4008. OCFS has no concerns with this change as OCFS 
already provides relevant discovery to parties in child protective proceedings and their attorneys 
on a regular basis.  
 
With respect to the Adult Protective Services (APS) records  provision of the bill , mandating 
record disclosure to “a party to an Adult Protection proceeding and the attorney representing the 
party” may result in unintended, negative consequences  for the following reasons:  
 
1) As written, the language,  could be considered ambiguous and result in questions on what 
qualifies as an Adult Protection proceeding or who qualifies as a “party to”  (e.g., does 
this include adult guardians hip cases, where the determination on relevancy and 
admissibility is currently driven by a court’s determination ; and d oes someone who 
reported concerns to APS automatically qualify as a “party to” a proceeding? ). 
 
 
2) The proposed language does not tailor acc ess based on the relevance of the records, and, 
as a result, could result in disclosure of APS clients’ financial information or medical 
information that is inappropriate to disclose to outside parties.  
 
3) Including this language in the mandatory disclosure provision of the APS confidentiality 
statute removes the opportunity for discretion in circumstances where the timing may not 
be appropriate for disclosure to a party (e.g., before the investigation has been closed  or 
while a corresponding crimi nal investigation is underway), which could result in an 
alleged perpetrator accessing APS’s communication with law enforcement during an 
investigation.  
 
For these reasons, with respect to the APS provisions of the bill, the Department opposes the bill. 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
      
Paul Saucier       Dr. Todd A. Landry  
Director       Director  
Office of Aging and Disability Services   Office of Child and Family Services  

