 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1561  (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1561, An Act to Restore Firearms Rights and Hunting Privileges  
 
DA: May 8, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1561 as drafted . CLAC is not expressing a policy position on the 
general concept of restoring firearms rights.      
 
 LD 1561  would create an incongruous approach to  restoring firearms rights.   Under current 
15 M.R.S. § 393(2) -(4), a prohibited person can apply for a permit t o carry a black powder firearm.  
This process requires notification of agencies and officials  that/who likely hav e knowledge of the 
applicant, and an opportunity to object to the application.    No such notice and opportunity to 
object is included in this proposal.    Although LD 1561 would give  public safety and court officials 
less notice and no discretion with re spect to such applications, it restores more firearms rights  (any 
firearm)  than the current 15 M.R.S. § 393, which only applies to black powder firearms  and does 
not restore federal firearms rights.    
 
 The language of the bill is internally inconsistent, as well as inconsistent with the 
termino logy of the Maine Criminal Code  and 15 M.R.S. § 393.   It introduces a definition of 
“felony ,” which was replaced in 1976 with Maine’s classification of crimes (Class A -E; murder), 
and then references crimes both by using the current classifications and by the use of the term 
“felony.”    It does not describe crimes in other jurisdictions using the  same language as in 15 
M.R.S. § 393, which would require courts to reconcile the statutes in order to apply the new law.    
It is not clear why it uses the term “adjudication,” which is generally reserved for civil violations 
and juvenile offenses.  
 
  It is not apparent how this proposal would be implemented proc edurally, for example, 
whether an order is to be issued in a previously closed criminal case or a new civil matter, or 
whether some type of petition must  be filed in court.   There is no mechanism for alerting the court 
or Dept. of Public Safety when a person i s subsequently convicted of a disqualifying offense , 
especially if that conviction occurs in another jurisdiction .    
 
 Under this proposal, c rimes in 15 M.R.S. § 393 and Title 17 -A M.R.S., Chapter 43 (crimes 
related to firearms and other weapons) do not disqualify a person fr om restoration and/or are not 
excluded from eligible convictions.  This may be an inadvertent  omission, as it is  logical for a 
person to be required  to demonstrate continued compliance with  laws related to  firearms in order to 
have rights to firearms restored.   
 
  
  
 
 The proposal is not needed for hunting privileges, as individuals convicted of disqualifying 
crimes  can apply for permits  pursuant to 15 M .R.S. § 393(2) -(4), which would allow use and 
possession of muzzle -loadi ng weapons or “antique firearms” that are not within the definition of 
“firearm” under 18 U.S.C. § 921. 
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
