II 
126 Sewall Street 
August?’ ME 04330_6822 L1 Andre>:‘i': St/es?/roazzg 
FY/\@‘§e;é22(;7?316Z§'7o58 pee |e par 5 | t- (2o7)s2e3;'o5s X236 
a><= 7 - 0 u 0 5'
. 
www.maineequaljustice.or9 P Icy I n aSteward@meJp'°rg 
Testimony on behalf of Maine Equal Justice in Support of LD 1710, An Act to Establish the 
Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants 
and the Municipal General Assistance Program 
May 12, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, distinguished members of the Special 
Committee on Housing. This testimony is submitted by Andrea Steward,(She/Her?Hers) a 
policy advocate at Maine Equal Justice and Frank D’Alessandro (He/Him/His) the Director of 
Legal Services at Maine Equal Justice. We are a civil legal services organization, and we work 
with and for people with low incomes seeking solutions to poverty through policy, education, 
and legal representation to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in 
Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of LD 1710. 
What This Bill Does 
1. Section 1 through 4 amends the Maine Human Rights Act to prohibit discrimination 
against a tenant - based on their participation in rental assistance programs 
2. Section 5 through 18 amends the Maine Fair Debt Collection Practices Act to prohibit 
the collection of unaffordable rent. 
3. Section 17 creates a State Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program 
4. Section 19-24 establishes a graduated real estate transfer tax for homes sold at and 
above the median sales price within their county 
Homelessness is an Inevitable Result of Inequality and a Housing System that Leaves 
Many Struggling to Make Rent 
Maine’s housing landscape leaves many Mainers behind. Even before the pandemic, 
thousands of Mainers struggled month in and month out to afford rent and stay housed. In 
Maine, Wages are not high enough for everyone to keep a roof over their heads.‘ On average, 
Mainers need an annual income of $47,194 to pay for a two-bedroom home, but a typical 
low-income renter makes only $3 7,966 (and many make far less)? Today, Maine continues to 
compare unfavorably on median household income with our New England neighbors. We 
have the lowest median household income of any New England state and are lower than the 
‘ National Low Income Housing Coalition,Maine Housing Proﬁle (2023). https://n!ihc.org/oor/state/me 
2 Id.
US average? As a result, nearly 72% of extremely low-income households pay more than 
30% of their monthly income towards rent, and 52% pay more than 50% of their monthly income towards rent; a threshold which HUD deems severely rent burdened. “ With so many households living on a razor thin edge to make rent, it is no surprise that in the 5 years before 
the pandemic, Maine Courts handled between 5,300 and 6,200 eviction cases every year. Most of these evictions were for nonpayment of rent.5 This means that an average of 14 to 17 
households faced loss of their homes every day — these included families with children, 
seniors, veterans, and single adults striving to make ends meet. These individual experiences 
of displacement ripple out into Maine’s economy. 
Housing Instability is Socially and Economically Harmful for Mainers and Maine. 
Maine has a shortage of 22,498 affordable homes for extremely low income Mainers.6 Maine 
needs more housing, and We must ensure that new housing made available is actually affordable 
to people with limited means. Currently, extremely low income tenants have insufficient income 
to pay the rent charged by affordable housing units.The Low-Income Tax Credit Program and 
Rural Tax Credit Program are the major sources of financing to create affordable housing in 
Maine. These programs deﬁne “affordable housing” as a unit that is affordable to households at 
80% annual median income (AMI). 80% of the AMI for a household of 4 in Maine was $62,880 
in 2021. New rental units created by these programs will not be affordable to households whose 
income is below this amount without some rent relief to help bridge the gap. Rent relief that 
helps address the affordability gap for these renters is necessary so that Maine’s most vulnerable 
tenants can afford to live in affordable housing. 
Meanwhile, the largest rental assistance program in the U.S., the Section 8 Housing Choice 
Voucher Program (“Section 8 Voucher Program”), only funds vouchers for 1 in every 5 families 
who are eligible for it. In Maine, there are 15,000 families on the Waitlist for the program. These 
families wait years for needed assistance. Without rental assistance, families face trauma and the 
devastating impact of losing the place they call home. Neighborhoods lose community members 
suddenly. Children are uprooted to change school districts mid-year, harming their educational 
and social development. Furthennore, in an eviction, the costs are high for families and 
communities with the burden for communities being borne by schools, local governments, 
organizations, and businesses. Tenants often lose most of their possessions — forced to take only 
what they can ﬁt in their car. Once evicted, many tenants find themselves unable to ﬁnd stable, 
safe housing and are forced to move into more substandard housing.7 
3 
Maine Childrcn ’s Alliance, 2023 Maine Kids Count, (May 2023), 
https://www.mekids.org/site/assets/ ﬁles:’203 l/2023_kidscount_databook __interactive.pdf 4 
ld. 
5 
Maine Affordable Housing Coalition, Evictions in Maine: Analysis of Eviction Filings and Outcomes as the Covid-19 Pandemic Threatens to Increase Rental Housing Instability, (Sept. 2020), 
https://mainehousingcoalitionorg/wpcontentluploads/2020/O9/Maine-Eviction-Report-FlNAL-September-2020.pdf 6 
National Low Income Housing Coalition, 2023 Maine Housing Profile, (Apr. 2023), https://nilhc.org/sites/default/ ﬁles/SHP __ME.pdf 7 Matthew Desmond & Rachel Tolberl Kimbro, Eviction ’s Fallout: Housing Hardship and Health, Social Forces (2015), https:1/scholanharvard.edulfiles/mdesmond/ ﬁIes/desmondkimbr0.evictions.fallout.sf2015_2.pdf.
One Waterville hotel worker described how hard it is to hear people calling the hotel searching 
for shelter in crisis: 
Listening to people who are desperately looking for housing call into the hotel is like 
listening to the apocalypse on the radio. Their whole lives are shattered and there's 
nothing I can do. You can’t pay rent when you aren’t making enough money. People 
haven't gotten help with rent in time and now they’re homeless. The housing crisis is so 
much bigger now and renters need help. 
An extremely low-income family of four in Piscataquis County just barely eams $20,000 in 
annual income. These extremely low-income households are the households most vulnerable to 
housing instability? 
One tenant from Winslow describes the impossible bind renters are in to balance the cost of 
housing with their other basic needs: 
[T]he biggest fear for me and many others is debt . . .. Poor people all over the state are 
plunging deeper into debt to keep aﬂoat so they don’t become homeless. Those stories 
you hear about people not being able to afford a $400 emergency? For many it’s much 
worse than that. . .. For me it’s keeping up with car payments. I had to push off my car 
payment for two months in order to make rent. I’m paying a lot of interest in order to 
make sure I don’t lose my housing. This is the bind that so many ﬁnd themselves in: we 
need our cars for when we work but keeping up with payments in addition to all the other 
needs our families have is nearly impossible. Others in my community are being driven 
deeper into debt due to overdue rent and fees as well as increased food costs, student 
loans, health insurance and medical expenses for those who lost coverage through their 
job, and phone, electricity, and intemet. 
For severely rent burdened households, missing any one of these bills can lead to housing 
instability and eviction--a family’s forced removal from their home. Finding affordable housing 
has become so difficult, many Mainers become homeless because they simply cannot ﬁnda 
home that meets their budget. 
Evictions trap people in poverty because unstable housing makes it extremely difficult to 
maintain steady employment? Evictions have been linked to psychological trauma and have 
been identiﬁed “as a risk factor for suicide. ”1° Those evicted are 63% more likely to lose 
Medicaid coverage, and getting prescriptions filled or storing prescriptions becomes 
8 National Low Income Housing Coalition, Housing Needs by State: 1\/Iaine, (Accessed on March 2, 2021) 
https://nlihc.org/housing-needs-by-state/maine, 
9 
ACLU, No EVICTION, supra note 5, at 3. 
10 
Matthew Desmond et al., Evicling Children, 92 SOCIAL FORCES 303, 303 (2013).
extremely difficult. “ A housing change during childhood can lead to half a year of loss in school.” Children that are forced to move three or more times generally have lower earnings, fewer work hours, and less educational attainment. ‘3 Children with unstable housing “are more likely to be truant, and are more likely to drop out”‘4 and they “are at higher risk for 
developmental delay, decreased academic achievement, anxiety, depression, behavioral disturbances, and even death.”15 Many of these evictions would be avoidable with timely access to ongoing rental assistance, which reduce and stabilize tenants’ housing burden. 
Despite knowing the beneﬁts of rental assistance, more money is dedicated to homeownership subsidies that have greater beneﬁts for higher-income households, instead of families that need it the most to survive. “
9 Rental Assistance Programs Bolster and Close Gaps in Maine s Housing System. 
When everyone has access to safe, stable, and affordable housing it makes all of our families and neighborhoods safer. Housing is one of the best studied social determinants of health. These studies have found that an individual ’s access to stable housing is linked to lower rates of violent crimes and survival crimes such as trespassing, sex work, loitering, and theft.” Providing stable housing for people who have recently been incarcerated has been shown to reduce recidivism rates“ . Housing assistance programs that stabilize tenants long term correlates with fewer incidences of intimate partner violence. 19 
Rental assistance is crucial to ensure stability for people with very low incomes to close the 
affordability gap. This is a population that the housing market will never be able to meet the 
needs of without structural, long term changes. This will help individuals meet their rent while 
more affordable housing is built, they wait for federal rental assistance, or while they strive 
towards a job that pays a living wage. 
A Center for Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP) study on Maine shows high levels of work force participation by those on rental assistance pro grams. The majority of individuals who could 
work, did. The study showed that the majority of individuals who accessed these vital rental 
assistance programs utilized them for an average of three years or less.” 
The pandemic afforded us a prime opportunity to collect and learn from data on the connection 
H ACLU, No Evrc'r|o.\* , supra note 5, at 6; THE NETWORK FOR Pursue HEALTH LAW, THE Puauc HEALTH Iwrrcarrous or Housmo INSTABILITY, Evrcrrou, AND HOMELESSNESS (2021), 
https://\vww.networkforphI.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/O4/Fact-Sheet-Public-Health-Irnplications-of-Housing-lnstability-Eviction-and-Homele 
ssness.pdf. 
‘2 ACLU, No Evrcrrou, supra note 5, at5 
*3 
14. 
H Matthew Desmond ct al, supra note 9, at 320. 15 
Ericka Petersen, Building a House for Gideon." The Right to Counsel in Evictions, 16 STAN. J. C.R. & C.L. 63, 69 (2020). 16 
CBPP, Research Shows Rental Assistance Reduces Hardship and Provides Platform to Expand Opportunity for Low-Income Families, (Dec. 5, 2019), https://www.cbpp.org/research/housing/researeh-shows-rental-assistance-reduces~hardship-and-provides-platfornrto-expand 17 
Kimberly Burrowes, Urban Institute, Can Housing Interventions Reduce Incarceration and Recidivism (2019). 
https://housingmattersurban.org/articles/can-housing-interventions-reduce-incarceration-and-recidivism 18 
HUD, Promoting Mental Health Through Housing Stability (2022). https://www.huduser.gov/p0rtal/pdredge/pdr-edge-trending-053l22.html 19 
The Network for Public Health Law (n4) 2° 
CBPP, (I116).
between housing stability for low income families and direct cash programs such as rental 
assistance and the expanded child tax credit. One state saw a 63% drop in daily eviction ﬁlings 
from before the moratorium on evictions and after the moratorium on evictions was lifted.“ In 
Maine, we have seen how cash assistance programs single handedly cut child poverty by over 
40%. The effectiveness of these programs looks like child poverty hitting historic lows in 2020; 
however, you can already see child poverty rates rising since the expanded child tax credit and 
emergency rental assistance programs have ended.” 
Rental assistance programs have not only been found to reduce poverty, homelessness, and 
housing instability, but are also associated with improving adult and child health and providing 
people the ability to move to low poverty areas.” Rental Assistance has been identiﬁed asa 
more effective intervention that substantially reduces the number of individuals and families 
experiencing housing instability. “ The CBPP study illustrates the impacts rental assistance can 
have on a families entire well being. Rental assistance reduced the number of families living in 
their cars, on the streets, and in shelters by 3/4 and reduced families couch surﬁng or living in 
otherwise overcrowded conditions by half. 
Finally, rental assistance helps preserve families and keeps more children in their homes,” which 
directly aligns with strategies three and four of DHHS’ recently released Maine Child Safety 
and Family Well-Being Plan. Strategy three is “to improve the economic security of parents and 
caregivers to provide safety and stability for their children ” and strategy four is “to provide 
services and resources to help parents and caregivers ensure the safety, health, and nurturing care 
of their children ” Children whose families receive rental assistance thrive at school and home 
showing fewer sleep disruptions and behavioral problems and closing the academic achievement 
gap by half. Higher college attendance rates, increased annual eamings of 30%, and overall 
higher success later in life including lower incarceration rates has been linked to children whose 
families had the opportunity to move to lower poverty areas.“ 
When families don’t have to stretch their budgets to meet unaffordable housing costs they can 
afford other necessities for their families or be able to put some into savings. Individuals and 
families with more disposable income have more money to put back into our local economies. 
This Bill Will Help Address Racial Inequality Highlighted by Maine’s Housing Crisis 
Existing rental assistance programs such as Section 8 are not available to newest members of our 
Maine Community — asylum seekers and refugees. Instead, these families must rely on the 
General Assistance program — a critical emergency social safety net that is not meant to bea 
21 
HUD, FY 2022 Impact Evaluation of the Emergency Rental Assistance (ERA) Program, (2022), 
httpsI//w\v\v.hud.gov/program_of ﬁces/spm/grnorngmt/grantsinfo/fundingopps/fy22_impacteval 
22 Maine Children ’s Alliance, (n5) 
23 CBPP, (n18) 
24 Id. 
25 
Id. 
26 Id.
permanent solution. Because the General Assistance caps on housing assistance are below 
market-rate rents, these renters are effectively barred from much of the rental market. Instead, 
they are often steered into substandard housing that poses a health and safety threat to their 
families. 
During the pandemic, many Black, Indigenous and people of color in Maine did not have the 
luxury of Working from home. Many make up Maine's essential workforce - seafood processors, 
dairy Workers, cleaning staff, health care workers, grocery workers, homecare workers, public 
servants, and more. Yet, as described above, these same essential workers face signiﬁcant 
housing instability and are at far greater risk of homelessness. In Maine, we must root out 
discrimination wherever we ﬁnd it. 
Rental Assistance Provides Stability for Renters in Unstable Times 
A Portland renter described the impact that rental assistance had on her ability to weather rent 
increases and stay housed and healthy during the pandemic. 
She said, I am a 70-year-old and have lived in the same place for the last 43 years. .. 
I recently received a notice of rent increase of 36.3% . . . A $300.00 increase effective 
July 1, 2020. Now, more than ever, I’rn grateful for Section 8 housing assistance . . .. All 
this in the middle of an emergency and I know there are many renters out there dealing 
with this on their own without any assistance. 
With a Section 8 Voucher, this tenant’s rent amount will stay stable with her income, and the 
Portland Housing Authority will pay the rent increase. 
Rental Assistance Should Ensure Stability, but Stigma Leads to Instability 
Every person and family should have the freedom to choose where they call home. 
Unfortunately, in Maine, landlords have more power over where someone can live, work, and 
send their children to school by denying Section 8 Vouchers. Discrimination against low-income 
tenants who participate in rental assistance programs has a far reaching impact that touches every 
aspect of their life. Maine must do more to promote housing stability and opportunity by 
protecting those who participate in rental assistance programs because even when families 
receive a voucher they will still struggle to ﬁnd safe, affordable housing. 
Section 8 Vouchers are intended to provide safe affordable housing options for low income 
families with the opportunity to move to lower poverty areas if they choose. These vouchers 
bridge the affordability gap to allow tenants to afford fair market rent homes. They are required 
to contribute 30% of their monthly income to rent and the rest is subsidized. This program 
provides stability for tenants and ensures landlords get paid. 
But voucher holders face outright discrimination because of their participation in the program. A
voucher holder should be able to move into any community in Maine with a market rate unit, but 
in reality, their housing choices are severely limited by their ability to ﬁnd a landlord who will 
participate in the program. Tenants routinely apply to dozens of landlords before ﬁnding one 
who will accept their voucher. 
Program administrators often put a time stamp on how long a voucher holder has to ﬁnd and 
lease a home. This ranges from 30 to 120 days. If they fail to do so they will lose their voucher 
and likely become or remain homeless. Maine Housing demonstrates these challenges in their 
report from 2015 that showed less than half of Section 8 Voucher holders found a place within 30 
days.” Hundreds of people in Maine who have vouchers can’t use them due to the limited 
number of landlords willing to participate in the program. 
In 2018, the Bangor Daily News documented one man’s long struggle to ﬁnd housing for his 
family.” Lawrence Bergeron had a housing voucher that would have assured his ability to pay 
the rent in any market-rate unit. Still, he had to apply to nearly one hundred apartments over 
almost six months until he found a landlord willing to accept his voucher. In that time, Bergeron 
and his four grandchildren lived out of their car. 
Lawrence Bergeron ’s experience is not unique. Though housing authorities have not published 
Maine’s statewide data on voucher utility rates, housing advocates agree that many voucher 
holders simply cannot ﬁnd landlords willing to rent to them. 
A social worker in Portland shared a story with Maine Equal Justice about a woman who became 
homeless after she was evicted due to a disturbance in the apartment caused by her abuser. The 
woman is currently in a homeless shelter. Though she has had a Section 8 Voucher for four 
months, she remains in the shelter because she can’t ﬁnd a landlord who will rent to her. 
Maine Housing reported a lower success rate with over 600 households being unable to ﬁnd any 
housing that would accept their voucher. With an average annual subsidy of $7,500, this 
represents over $4.5 million of federal rental assistance left on the table, and this only accounts 
for Maine Housing, one of the many housing authorities administering the Section 8 Voucher 
program in Maine. 
Landlord Policies Denying Voucher Holders Work Against Fair Housing Laws 
Disparate impact discrimination occurs when protected classes suffer disparate outcomes from 
seemingly neutral policies, i.e. a landloi-d ’s no-voucher policy. Regardless of a landlord ’s intent, 
a policy of refusing to rent to voucher holders disparately impacts non-white tenants, people with 
27 This \vas part of Maine Housing’s decision to extend their 30 day time limit to 120 days, in part to avoid the need to process extension 
requests. Maine Housing administers one-third of the State’s 12,000 Section 8 Vouchers with 
the rest being administered by local housing authorities. Callie Ferguson, Homeless with 4 Kids, A Bangor Man 
Called Nearly I00 Landlords to Find a Place to Live, Bangor Daily News (Nov. I9, 2018), 
https://bangordailyne\vs.c0m/2018/ I li l 9/news/bangor/homeless-with-4-kids-a-bangor-man-calle d-nearly~ l 00-landlords —to-ﬁnd-a-place-to-live/. 
2* 
Id.
disabilities, single women heads of household, and families with children. Such policies can 
shift low-income tenants into substandard housing in poor neighborhoods and perpetuate 
segregation, which Works against our national fair housing laws that envision communities with 
truly “integrated and balanced living patterns. ”29 
Demographics of Maine tenants served by federal rental assistance programs (including 
subsidized apartment complexes such as public housing) show that families and people with 
disabilities are likely to be disparately impacted by landlord policies denying vouchers. 52% of 
people receiving federal rental assistance are in families with children and 32% havea 
disability. ” Though racial demographics of voucher holders in Maine are not publicly available, 
studies from other parts of the country show that people of color are disparately impacted by 
landlord policies denying voucher holders regardless of the landlord ’s intent to discriminate. 
Nationally, at least 48% of Section 8 Voucher holders are Black and at least 18% are Hispanic. “ 
A recent study in Northeast Ohio documented that when Black and white testers responded to 
housing ads that explicitly mentioned no-voucher policies, the landlord treated the white testers 
more favorably than the Black testers. This included responses such as ignoring the Black tester 
but responding to the white tester and responding to the white tester first though the Black tester 
made the ﬁrst inquiry. The study concluded landlords were likely using no-voucher policies to 
some extent as a proxy for race~based discrimination. ” 
Though Maine has yet to conduct its own comprehensive study of race discrimination in no 
voucher policies, it is signiﬁcant that Maine Housing reports 34.6of Maine’s homeless 
population to be Black or African American,while representing less than 2% of Maine’s 
population. ” Pine Tree Legal Assistance has also provided statistics that they 
disproportionately represent people of color in evictions compared to Maine’s population 
demographics where only 5% of Mainers are non-white. These statistics reflect systemic racial 
disparities in Maine’s housing market. 
These barriers are not unique to Maine. Across the country tl1ere’s clear evidence of outright 
29 Ari B. Solotoff, Dussault v. RRE Coaclr Lantenr Holdings, LLC: Does the Maine Human Rights Act Recognize Disparate Impact Liability for 
Claims of Housing Discrimination Brought by Section 8 Recipients Under Maine Law?, 67 Me. L. Rev. 183, 206 (2014) (citation omitted). 
3° 
CBPP, Maine Federal Rental Assistance Fact Sheet, supra note 6. 
3‘ Abby Vesoulis, ‘A Mask for Racial Discrimination. ’ How Housing Voucher Programs Can Hurt the Low-Income Families They’re Designed to 
Help, Time (Feb. 20, 2020), h;_n>s:,- ’/tinicecm/5783945shct§jng-vouchersdisg ﬂmiiiatiqnj; see also Emily Badger, How Section 8 Became a Racial 
Slur: A History of Public Housing in America, Washington Post (June 15, 2015), 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/newsiwonk/wp/2015/06/l 5fho\vsection- 
8-became-a-racial-slur/ (documenting the history of stigmatizing associations between Black Americans, 
poverty, and subsidized housing, due to systemic racism in national housing policy). 
32 Michael Lepley & Lenore Mangiarelli, Housing Voucher Discrimination and Race Discrimination in Cuyahoga County 12, The Housing 
Center (Dec. 2017), https://wwwlhelrousingcenter.orglwpcontentl 
uploads/20 l 7/12/V0ucher-and —Race-Discrimination.pdf. 
33 Maine State Housing Authority, Maine Homelessness Survey: 
https://W\vW.mainehousingorg/docs/default-source/housing-reports/2022-point-in-time-survey-~state\vide.pdf?sfvrsn=laa686l5_7#:~:text=Note 
%3A%2OThe%20PIT%20reported%203%2C455, l l 0%20in%20do11restic%2Oviolence%20sl1elters.&text=%E2%80%9COutside%20Maine%E2 
%8O%9D%2Oregi0ns%2()de ﬁned%20by%2()the%20U.S.%2OCensus.
denial of Section 8 vouchers by landlords with the denial rate being even higher in more 
expensive neighborhoods. “ This is likely in part because landlords can more easily deny 
low—income tenants in tight markets with high competition for units. For example, the Portland 
Press Herald has documented how Port1and ’s rapidly gentrifying rental market has been 
squeezing voucher holders and other low-income tenants. “ However, the denial rate falls by over 
half in cities with protections against source-of-income discrimination. This leads toa 
deconcentration of poverty as renters move to lower poverty neighborhoods. As rents increase 
throughout the state, voucher holders will face increasing challenges to ﬁnding housing unless 
we act now to remove the barrier of unfair stigma against voucher holders. 
Low-Income Tenants Need LD 1710’s Protections for Equal Footing in Maine’s 
Competitive Rental Market 
According to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities data from 2019, 3 in 10 
Mainers with low incomes are either homeless or pay over half their income on rent. 
The pandemic has pushed Maine’s housing affordability problems to a crisis point, showing us 
how vulnerable our state is to a wave of evictions. In 2022, there were 4,972 evictions ” and 
according to Pine Tree Legal Services, 53% of those were for non payment of rent. 36 
While rental costs have risen across the state, wages haven’t kept pace. At the end of my 
testimony, I’ve included a graph and table that illustrate some of the cost challenges people with 
low incomes are experiencing during this housing crisis. 
LD 1710’s Protections Promote the Goals of Housing Voucher Programs 
A common argument against policies prohibiting discrimination on the basis of participation ina 
rental assistance program is that it violates Congress ’s intent to make landlord participation in 
the Section 8 Voucher program “voluntary. ” But policy makers and courts across the country 
have agreed that prohibiting discrimination against voucher holders promotes the 
purposes of the Section 8 Voucher program. 
Courts have rejected the characterization of the Section 8 Voucher program as “voluntary. ”38 
Instead, they’ve noted that the text and history of federal law creating the Section 8 Voucher 
Program does not “indicate, much less establish, that voluntary participation by landlords was an 
important Congressional objective, ” and “[t]he only declared objective is to assist State and local 
“Mary Cunningham, et al., A Pilot Study of Landlord Acceptance of Housing Vouchers: Executive Summary 3,Urban Institute (2018), 
https://\v\v\v.urbar1.org/researchlpublication/pilot-study-1andlord-acceptance-housing-choicevouchers. 
35 See Randy Billings, High-priced Housing Market is Squeezing Low-income Reuters, Portland Press Herald (Nov.9, 2019), 
https1//\v\v\v.pressheraldcom/2019/l l/09/low-income-families-squeezed-by-lirnited-housing-0ptions/. 
36 Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, Maine Federal Rental Assistance Fact Sheet (Dec. 10, 2019), 
https://wwwcbgp.org/research/housin2/federal-rentai-assistancefact-sheets#l\/IE. 
37 State of Maine Judicial Brance, 15-year monthly ﬁling trends, (Feb 2023), 
/https1//wW\v.courts.maine.gov/about/reports/fed-monthlyl5yr-report.pdf 
38 See Austin Apaﬂments Ass’n v. City of Austin, 89 F.Supp.3d 886, 895 (W.D. Tex. 20l5) (collecting cases).
governments in expanding affordable housing for low-income families. ”39 Accordingly, state and 
federal courts have found that prohibiting discrimination against voucher holders will “advance 
rather than denigrate ” Congress ’s objectives. “ In one of the most recent landlord challenges to 
such a policy, a federal court agreed with the City of Austin that the “purposes and objectives ” of 
the Section 8 Voucher Program are “‘to remedy the unsafe housing conditions and the acute 
shortage of decent and safe dwellings for low-income families, ’ not to protect landlords ’ 
rights.”‘“ 
Maine can meet landlords ’ concerns over the administrative components of the programs without 
harming low-income tenants. Many voucher programs across the country and in 
Maine have successfully used landlord incentives and suppoits to ensure that landlords can easily 
navigate the program. Those have included landlord bonuses for participating in voucher 
programs, hotlines to answer technical questions, repair assistance so units will meet 
program standards, and damage mitigation funds in case repairs are needed at the end ofa 
tenancy beyond the security deposit. “ Housing programs in Maine have already been successful 
with these models. For example, the Maine Homeless Veteran Action Committee launched a 
damage mitigation fund in 2020 which helps to house homeless veterans. FairTide, located in 
Kittery, launched a pilot program in 2020 which has also shown success. 
Maine can make voucher programs work for both landlords and tenants While promoting the 
goals of expanding access to stable homes for low-income tenants. 
The Law Court’s Holding in Dussault V. RRE Coach Lantern Holdings Requires the 
Legislature ’s Action to Advance this Non-Discrimination Policy 
The Law Court’s holding in Dussault v. RRE Coach Lantern Holdings, LLC (2014 ME 8, 86 
A.3d 52) requires the Legislature to make explicit the policy of non-discrimination against 
participants in rental assistance programs. Based on the Law Court’s interpretation of Maine 
Human Rights Act’s existing public assistance provision (5 M.R.S. § 45 81-A(4)) a landlord may 
legally refuse to rent to a Section 8 Voucher holder by simply asserting their desire not to 
comply with the administrative components of the program. (Dussau1t2014 ME 8, 111] 1'7-18, 86 
A.3d 52). The Law Court noted it was “limited by the language that the Legislature has enacted” 
in the Maine Human Rights Act, and the Legislature has not explicitly “required landlords to 
39 
Montgomery Cnty. v. Glenmont Hills Assocs. Privacy World, 936 A.2d 325, 336 (Md. 2007); see also Franklin Tower One, L.L.C. v. N.M., 725 A,2d 1104, 1113 (N .J . 1999) (“[T]he voluntary nature of the Section 8 program is not at the heart of the federal scherne. ”); C0mm'n on Human Rights & Opportunities v. Sullivan Assocs., 739 A.2d 238, 246 (Conn. 1999) (“Requiring landlords to extend rental opportunities to 
otherwise eligible section 8 recipients. . . is not an obstacle to the congressional agenda but serves instead to advance its remedial purpose”). 40 Bourbeau v. Jonathan Woodner Co., 549 F. Supp. 2d 78, 88-89 (D.D.C.2008). ‘*1 
Austin Apartment Ass’n, 89 F. Supp. 3d at 895 (citing 42 u.s.c. § 1437(a)(1)(A)). 42 For example, Marin County in California has a Landlord Partnership Program where participating landlords who lease 50 percent of their units to voucher holders can have building permit fees waived for repairs or improvements at the rental site. The program also offers a dedicated landlord liaison 24-hour hotline to address immediate concems, workshops and training for landlords, and an online landlord portal in an effort to make participation in the program “attractive and feasible ” and “streamlined. ” Marin Housing Authority, Landlord Partnership Program, https://www.marinhousing.org/landlord-partnership-program (last visited Apr. 19, 2021).
accept Section 8 vouchers. ” (Id. 1] 19.) 
LD 1710 explicitly prohibits landlords from relying on administrative and other program 
requirements as justification for denying voucher holders. This cures the lack of clarity that the 
Law Court highlighted in Dussault and will achieve our State’s desired non-discrimination 
policy. 
LD 1710 explicitly provides, “It shall be prohibited for a landlord to refuse to rent or negotiate 
for the rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of the 
person’s source-of-income or because of the requirements of any program providing the source 
of income,” and sets out speciﬁc “requirements ” a landlord may attempt to eschew, such as the 
tenancy addendum at issue in Dussault. As stated above, the overwhelming consensus in other 
states is that such policies advance the goals of the Section 8 Voucher Program. 
Changes to the Real Estate Transfer Tax 
LD 1710 also proposes to increase Maine’s Real Estate Transfer Tax for higher priced homes and 
dedicate a portion of the real estate transfer tax to pay for a rental assistance program. 
While Maine’s housing crisis has become worse property values have increased during the 
pandemic in every county across the State. The Maine Association of Realtors reported a 22% 
increase in median sales price between Fall 2019 and Fall 202043; 12.91% between February 
2020 and 202144; 16.8% between January 2021 and January 202245; 11.21% between January 
2022 and 2023 4‘ Increasing property values are linked to gentriﬁcation. Gentriﬁcation isa 
process which displaces low~income community members, usually renters, when more afﬂuent 
people move in. Gentriﬁcation is spurred by speculation in the real estate market which 
incentivizes landlords to raise rents and/ or evict tenants to pursue higher-end development. This 
is occurring not only in Maine’s cities, but also in rural parts of the State.” We must confront that 
gains for some result in losses for others and take steps to end the rental housing crisis. Adjusting 
Maine’s Real Estate Transfer Tax rates will capture some of the growth in Maine’s real estate 
market—growth that is contributing to the affordability crisis in many parts of the State— and 
supply revenue needed to face the rental housing crisis. 
Maine Equal Justice also emphasizes that increasing the tax rate will not slow or dampen 
Maine’s real estate market. Studies from other states have found that modest increases in real 
43 Maine Association of Realtors, State of Maine Single Family Home Sales, 
https://w\vw.mainerealtors.c0m/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Stateo ﬂ\/lair1e20Data.pdf (last updated Dec. 31, 2020). 
44 https://www.mainerealtorscom/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/MaineHousingReport-February2021.pdf 
45 https://www.mainerealtors.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/IvIaineHousingRepo11-December2 1 .pdf 
46 https1//\vww.mainerealtors.com/wp —content/uploads/2023/02/MaineHousingReport-January23.pdf 
47 See University of Maine School of Marine Sciences, Fishing Communities Need to Prepare For Gentriﬁcation Challenges (Aug. 23, 2016), 
https://umaineedu/marine/20 l6/08/’23/ﬁshing—corrrmunitiesneed-prepare-gentri ﬁcation-challenges-say-umaine-researchers-2/; Megan Mayhew 
Bergman, ‘We Have No Market But Lots of Lobsters ’: A Maine Lobsterwoman Fights For Her Livelihood, The Guardian (July 23, 2020), 
https://\vww.theguardian.com/environment/2020/jul/23/rnaine-lobstenvoman-coronavirusclimate-change.
estate transfer tax rates do not signiﬁcantly affect market behavior, likely because the RETT 
represents such a small cost in comparison to the overall transaction cost of buying a home. For 
example, a study of Washington D.C.’s 2006 RETT increase from 2.2% to 2.9% for houses sold 
over $400,000 showed the change did not significantly impact the frequency or number of 
transactions. “ 
Currently, 45% of RETT revenues are put into the HOME Fund at Maine State Housing 
Authority, which has historically used the funds for programs like homebuyer and owner 
assistance, home improvements and repairs, affordable housing development, and homeless 
assistance. All of these programs are important to Maine’s low-income populations, and Maine 
Equal Justice supports them. However, given the urgent needs outlined above, we recommend 
that both the increased revenue to the HOME Fund from Maine’s booming market and the 
increase in the RETT rate be speciﬁcally designated for rental assistance programs. ” 
Maine’s RETT rate has only been adjusted three times since its enactment in 1967: 1975, 1983, 
and 1993. This is the longest the State has gone without updating RETT since it was enacted. 
Maine is only taxing real estate transfers at 0.44% of the total price. At this point, all of our 
neighboring New England states have higher property transfer tax rates than Maine.” To put it in 
perspective with inﬂation, the $2.20/$500 rate in 1993 would be equal to $4.04 in 2021 dollars. 
On this basis alone, the Legislature should support an increase in Maine’s RETT rate to update it 
for our State’s needs today. 
A graduated tax rate, like what We have in our federal income tax system, is the equitable way to 
do this. Several other states and Washington D.C. have recognized this and increased their tax 
rates at the high-end of the real estate market.“ 
Maine Equal Justice supports increasing tax rates for property above the median sales price to 
capture revenue from the higher priced or luxury portion of Maine’s real estate market. We 
encourage the Committee to set the rates using a data-driven approach based on data from 
Maine’s real estate market and looking to other states’ successful use of a graduated RETT. 
Consumer Protections 
This bill also makes changes to the Maine Fair Debt Collection Practices Act and Maine Fair 
Credit Reporting Act to Protect Maine tenants who have been unable to pay unaffordable rents. 
48 Joel Sleinrod et al., The Behavioral Response to Housing Transfer Taxes: Evidence from a NotchedChange in D.C. Policy, 100 J. URB. ECON. 137 (2017). 
49 When Rhode Island increased its RETT in 2014 to $2.50 for every $500, it placed over 50% of the increase in restricted funds for rental 
assistance, homelessness prevention, housing retention, and lead abatement, retaining the rest for the state’s general fund and the municipality collecting the tax. 
50 
Massachusetts: $2.28 per $500; New Hampshire: $3.75 per $500; Rhode Island: $2.30 per $500; Vermont: 1.25% of sale price with lower rates 
for primary residences and owner-occupied farms. 
51 
Hawaii, New Jersey, Washington, and Washington D.C. have graduated tax rates with the initial threshold set around the state median home sales price. For an example of ho\v New Jersey protects low-income homeowners through its graduated RETT scheme, see N.J. Division of Taxation, Realty Transfer Fee Overview, https://www.state.nj.us/treasury/taxation/realty_over.shtml (last visited Feb. 26, 2021).
Maine Fair Debt Collection Practices Act 
Creditors have powerful debt collection instruments at their disposal. These debt collection tools 
can include garnishment of Wages, as well as the seizure of liquid assets and liens. The Maine 
Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA) provides protections to consumers. ” These 
protections prohibit the debt collector from harassing or abusing the debtor, making false or 
misleading representations concerning the debt owed or engaging in unfair practices to collect 
the debt.“ While the Maine FDCPA currently only applies to debt collectors, eleven states and 
the District of Columbia currently provide at least some of the protections offered by the FDCPA 
to all actions taken to collect a debt.“ 
Section 18 of this bill would extend the protections of Maine Fair Debt Collection Practices Act 
who are sued due to the non~payment of an unaffordable rent” While excluding landlords with 
fewer than 4 rental units. As the very least low-income tenants who are unable to pay an 
unaffordable rent should not be subject to harassment, abuse, or other unfair debt collection 
practices. 
Maine Fair Credit Reporting Act 
Section 5 of this act prevents anyone from reporting the non payment of an unaffordable rent toa 
credit reporting agency. Landlords typically refer unpaid rent to debt collectors, and many 
collectors regularly report debts to credit bureaus. This collection account is a negative entry ina 
credit report that can remain for up to seven years and significantly lower someone’s credit score. 
A lower credit score hurts many tenants’ ability to secure new housing. It also reduces access to 
affordable credit. Tenants in this situation are often forced to turn to predatory lenders and 
landlords who charge above-market rates for low-quality housing, trapping them in a spiral of 
debt. 5‘ This is because most landlords and property managers use credit reports and scores as 
part of their tenant screening process, even though they are not reliable predictors of tenant 
performance. Many will not rent to a household with any record of a late rent payment, so 
families whose credit reports indicate past struggles to make rent payments could have their 
applications rejected or be asked to pay unaffordable security deposits. A history of non payment 
of an unaffordable rent is not a good indicator of a tenant’s ability to pay an affordable rent.” 
An unaffordable rent creates a serious risk of harm to tenants, including eviction and 
homelessness. These risks should not be compounded by a reduced credit score resulting from 
52 https://legislaturemaine.gov/statutes/32/title32chl09-Asec0.html 
53 littps://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/32/title32secl10l3.html 
5‘ httpsI//librarv.nclc.org/bool</fair-debt-collectionialaska-stat-ssss» €)82404l-0824380. App. D. 
55 Affordable housing is generally deﬁned as housing on which the occupant is paying no more than 30 percent of gross income for housing 
costs, including utilitieslittps://archiveshud.govflocal/nvigoodstories/ ‘Z006-O4-Goglosc ﬁn 
56 littps1//www.nclc.orsz/wrycontent/uploads/2922/09/IB Salt in , the Woundpdf 
ﬂ ce!3872880 —why-rent-rcpnriing-Canzharm-rather'~than-help-vulnerable-terlamsjw
the non payment of an unaffordable rent. Prohibiting the reporting of a tenant’s inability to pay 
an unaffordable rent will therefore not harm landlords while protecting tenants. 
Conclusion 
I have been at the other hearings in this committee room, and I Was moved by the stories that 
have been shared. It has also made it clearly evident to me the importance of the HOME Act. 
When We talk about stability for renters, this is it. 
Everyone in Maine deserves a safe and affordable place to call home and the opportunities to 
fulﬁll their potential that come with it. This is critical both to the Well-being of families but also 
to attract and keep the workforce necessary to ensure our State’s economic development. 
Investing in housing stability for Maine people is the foundation to help Mainers rebuild better. 
Rental assistance and strong rights for renters can make all communities more open, affordable, 
and vibrant.
