Ann Dodd-Collins
Portland
LD 1710
Senator Teresa Pierce, Representative Traci Gere, and Members of the Committee:
My name is Ann Dodd-Collins and I am a resident of Portland.  I volunteer with 
Greater Portland Family Promise and Preble Street and I am testifying in support of 
LD 1710, “An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program 
and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance 
Program”.
This act, also called the HOME (Housing Opportunities for Maine) Act, will provide 
consumer protections for low income Mainers paying unaffordable rent, prohibit 
housing discrimination based on a tenant’s source of income, and create a rental 
assistance program.  We know that there is a state-wide housing crisis.  We also know
that rents are skyrocketing.  AND we know that asylum seekers who have come to 
Maine depend on General Assistance to pay rent until they receive their work permits,
but too many landlords refuse GA housing vouchers.  
Low income Mainers need help to stay housed.  “Affordable” housing units are not 
affordable to many low income renters.  More than half the households with very low 
income are paying 50% or more of their income on rent.  The rental assistance 
program outlined in this act would help Maine families pay their rent by covering a 
portion of the rent based on their income, which would provide stable housing for 
parents and their children.  It would free up income for food, transportation, medical 
bills, and other necessities.  This bill would also protect tenants paying a very high 
rent in the event their rent payment is late, something that can happen to families on 
General Assistance, and which makes it even harder for those tenants to find a safe 
rental in the future.
Cities and towns cannot solve the housing crisis.  The state needs to provide housing 
assistance so that all Maine families, whether they have been here for 10 generations 
or 10 days, can have a safe and affordable place to live.  Please vote Ought To Pass 
on LD 1710.

