Good afternoon / morning Senator Pierce and Representative Geer, co-chairs of the Committee on 
housing. 
My name is April Tomah. I am here today expressing my support for LD1710. I am the housing navigator 
for Wabanaki public health and Wellness. I am a Passamaquoddy tribal citizen. I am here today to 
discuss the housing crisis. I work with homeless every day to try to find a permanent home. There are so 
many people out there right now who don't have a home. I have clients that have vouchers such as 
Section 8, BRAPP, shelter plus care, or HCV vouchers, but the prices are so high that they can't get into 
these apartments. Most of my clients have low or no income. Most of that living streets or couch surfing 
or trying to make ends meet living in a hotel. Living in a hotel is very expensive. It is near impossible to 
save for security deposit rent or any other moving expenses. As a housing navigator for tribal members 
who do not live on the reservation. There's a housing on reservation for everyone. I see the suffering 
that these people when they have their voucher in hand but are still sleeping on the streets. The rent is 
so high orjust above the limit of their voucher. With LD 1701 we'll make it easier for my clients to find 
affordable rents. with what landlords and property managers are charging rent is not affordable for 
many main residents. Even someone who has 2 incomes has trouble affording the rental rate now. Over 
half of these households pay more and they can afford for rent. When these people pay most oftheir 
income for rent other areas suffer, they can't feed their families they can't afford a vehicle to get to 
work so they can make more money. Mean must bridge this gap to increase stability for renters. There 
are so many positives that will come from LD 1701 for the was homeless one of these being the ability to 
support their families and themselves. 
There are so many landlords out there that do not accept any kind of voucher and that works against 
fair housing laws to me this is discrimination. If a tenant has a voucher this is guaranteed money for 
these landlords. As a housing navigator I believe that this bill will help with the homeless crisis, also this 
will help the homeless succeed and become self-sufficient. When a homeless person gets a home, and 
they can have financial stability. Those who can work have an address to put on applications for a job. 
Those who are disabled have a safe place to be and call home. 
We have a lot of clients that have very low or no income. These people cannot pay the amount of rent 
that are charged by "affordable housing unit" . Having a rent relief program helps address the 
affordability gap to assist these residents that have low or no income in finding a permanent home not 
having to worry ”where am I going to sleep tonight. How am I going to keep my family warm” . Those of 
us who have a home don't understand what being homeless is. Imagine not being able to go home to 
your nice warm house. Sleeping in nice warm bed have a place to cook your food a safe place for you 
and your family. to fall asleep and not know if you will wake up in the morning because it's so cold out. 
This is one of the scariest things that somebody can go through. 
I have experienced homelessness after a fire in September of 2022. It took me 4 months to find a place 
for me and my fiancé and our foster children to live. Having to pay application fees after application fees 
and then not being approved is heart breaking. It cost us $5000 to get into the place we are now. we 
had to pay first month last end security deposit. I don't know a lot of people who have that kind of 
money just laying around to be able to pay to get into a new place. Even now we struggle. I couldn't 
imagine trying to do this with less income that I have now. 
Thank you for your time. I hope for your support on this important legislation.
