Maine Human Rights Commission 
# 51 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0051 
gﬁﬂra 
Q- ‘€,;,v Physical location: 19 Union Street, Augusta, ME 04330 
§.'§§'-' Phone (207) 624-6290 ' Fax (207) 624-8729 " TTY: Maine Relay 711 
. 0 wwwmaine. govgmhrc 
Amy M. Sneirson Barbara Archer Hirsch 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR COMMISSION CDUNSEL 
May 12, 2023 
The Honorable Teresa Pierce, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Traci Gere, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Housing 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 1710: An Act To Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program and Amend the 
Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance Program 
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing: 
The Maine Human Rights Commission ("Commission") is Maine's quasi-independent, neutral, apolitical State 
agencyl charged with enforcing our state anti-discrimination law, the Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S. §§ 
4551, et seq. (”MHRA" or the "Act"). The Commission is statutorily charged with the duties of investigating, 
conciliating, and at times litigating discrimination cases under the MHRA and the Maine Whistleblowers' 
Protection Act (”WPA"); promulgating rules and regulations to effectuate the MHRA & WPA; and making 
recommendations for further legislation or executive action concerning infringements on human rights in 
Maine. 5 M.R.S. § 4566(7), (11). With those duties in mind, the Commission is pleased to provide this 
testimony neither for nor against LD 1710, An Act To Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee 
Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance Program. 
This Bill would, among other things, amend the MHRA to prohibit discrimination in housing on the basis of 
source of income (in addition to the current prohibition on discrimination based on receipt of public 
assistance) and to require certain owners of rental housing to provide "affordable housing”. 
Background: MHRA Coverage of Discrimination in Housing on the Basis of Receipt of Public Assistance 
Recognizing a "basic human right to a life with dignity" , see 5 M.R.S. § 4552, the Maine Legislature enacted 
the MHRA in 1971 to "prevent discrimination in employment, housing or access to public accommodations ” 
on account of a protected trait. This includes protection against discrimination in housing on the basis of 
receipt of public assistance benefits by making it unlawful for ”[a]ny person furnishing rental premises or public 
accommodations to refuse to rent or impose different terms of tenancy to any individual who is a recipient of federal, 
state or local public assistance, including medical assistance and housing subsidies, primarily because of the individual's 
status as recipient. ” 5 M.R.S. § 4581-A(4). 
1 The Commission itself is made up of five Commissioners, appointed by the Governor for staggered five-year terms. By 
statute, there can be no more than three Commissioners from any political party. 5 M.R.S. § 4561.
In 2014, the Maine Supreme Judicial Court, sitting as the Law Court, interpreted this provision in the case ofa 
housing provider which refused to adopt the addenda required by a federal housing voucher program 
("Program"), resulting in its declining to rent to a Program participant. See Dussault v. RRE Coach Lantern 
Holdings, LLC et 01., 2014 ME 8. The Law Court found that this did not amount to discrimination on the basis 
of the renter’s status as a recipient of public assistance. First, the Court found that by refusing to adopt any 
addenda to its rental agreements, it was offering the same terms of rental to each of its prospective tenants. 
Id. at 11 16. Second, the Court found that Program participants were not excluded because of their status as 
recipients of public assistance, but because the owner did not want to be bound by the terms ofthe 
addendum. Id. at 1] 17. The Court stated specifically that it was bound by the terms of the MHRA as enacted, 
noting that although it had considered amendments to § 4581-A(4), the Legislature had not amended the 
statute to make discrimination on the basis of public assistance programs ’ terms and conditions unlawful, or 
participation in Program mandatory. Id. at 1] 19 (citing LD 685 § 2 (123'°' Legis. 2007) and amendments 
thereto). 
LD 1710's Impact on the MHRA and the MHRC 
A. Section 3: Discrimination based on source of income: 
Section 3 of LD 1710 would effectively overrule Dussault, making it unlawful to refuse to participate in state, 
federal, or local assistance programs. Housing providers owning four or more ”dwellings ”2 would be required 
to participate in these programs by allowing inspections, making repairs needed to meet the program 
standards, completing program paperwork, and providing information to the programs. This change would 
likely remove a barrier to housing for individuals who participate in assistance programs, since the paperwork 
and other programmatic requirements would no longer be legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for refusing 
individuals who use these programs to pay for their housing. 
Because LD 1710 does not propose amending 5 M.R.S. § 4583, which provides that the antidiscrimination 
provisions do not prohibit housing providers from imposing specifications in the renting of a housing 
accommodation that are ”consistent with business necessity and are not based on" protected class status, 
housing providers would be able to invoke an affirmative defense of business necessity if they refused to rent 
to a tenant receiving public assistance. As explained by the Law Court in Dussauit, reading § 4581-A and§ 
4583 together ”estab|ish[es] that a landlord may not refuse to rent to, or impose different terms of tenancy 
on, a recipient of public assistance who is an otherwise-eligible tenant primarily on the basis of that person's 
status as a recipient unless the landlord can demonstrate a business necessity that justifies the refusa|." 
Dussault, 2014 ME 8 at 1] 13. 
The Commission anticipates that this change would lead to a significant increase in housing discrimination 
complaints. The Commission has already seen a rise in housing complaints generally, and in housing 
complaints based on receipt of public assistance in particular, during the course of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Housing investigations are among the Commission's most burdensome, because they must be completed 
within 100 days. 94-348 C.M.R. Ch. 2, § 2.05(H). This means that the Commission's investigators must juggle 
2 The Commission would recommend defining this term to clarify whether it applies to owners of four or more rental 
units (such as a four-apartment building) or of four separate buildings at which rental housing is offered. The term 
"dwelling" is not defined in the MHRA. 
2\’ii—lRC Testimony, LD I833 Page 2 of3
their workload every time a new housing case is filed, prioritizing that investigation to ensure it is completed 
within a very abbreviated timeline. Because the Commission's investigators are already at capacity with their 
housing work, we anticipate needing an additional 50% of an investigator position to handle the additional 
work associated with complaints under this provision. 
B. Section 4: Requirement to provide affordable housing: 
The section of the Bill would add a new requirement that ”[a]n owner of more than 10 units of residential 
rental property"3 must make at least 10% of those units affordable housing. "Affordable housing" is defined 
with reference to the median income of the area where the unit is located, as defined by federal law. Failure 
to provide the requisite units of affordable housing would amount to housing discrimination. 
As the l\/IHRA was intended to address adverse treatment based on a person's innate characteristics, this 
section may be something of an outlier in the lVlHRA framework. It is closest to the Commission's 
construction requirements, which make it unlawful discrimination to fail to design and construct multi-family 
housing to accommodate individuals with disabilities. See 5 l\/l.R.S. §§ 4582-B & -C. Unlike those provisions, 
however, the affordable housing requirement is not tied to any particular protected class. 
The Commission's current expertise does not include knowledge of affordable housing, median incomes, and 
housing costs. To address this new area ofiurisdiction, the Commission's staff would require extensive 
training. The Commission would also need to update all of its housing informational, intake, and complaint 
forms, all of which are published online and in print in six different languages. The Commission anticipates 
receiving a huge increase in intakes and complaints based on the failure to provide affordable housing; as 
discussed above, any investigations in these cases must be completed within 100 days, a particular challenge 
since it appears these investigations would likely involve data-intensive analysis of available units, costs, and 
federal law. In order to absorb this work, the Commission anticipates needing at least one full-time 
investigator and one additional secretary associate legal position.
' 
Conclusion 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony neither for nor against LD 1710. The Commission 
would be pleased to discuss these issues with you at your convenience, including at the work session on this 
matter. 
Sincerely, _ 
?”;’%9L‘ Barbara Archer Hll'SCl’l 
Counsel for the MHRC 
3 
The Commission would recommend defining this term, which is not defined in the MHRA. 
MHRC Testimony, LD 1833 31’-age 3 of3
