Testimony in support of LD 1710 
Belinda Vemba 
12 May 2023 
Good Morning Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and the Housing 
Committee. 
My name is Belinda Vemba, I am a resident of Westbrook and I am here 
today to testify in favor of LD 1710, the Home Act. You may wonder whyI 
am so passionate about this specific bill. It is because having a place to call 
home gives a sense of identity and belonging. Passing this bill would mean 
that families like mine and thousands of others who spend unbearable 
months in homeless shelters, hotels, and outdoor encampments can get 
affordable housing. This will ease the heavy load that General assistance is 
currently shouldering. 
Passing the Home Act would mean that Section 8 and GA vouchers for 
housing will be accepted by more landlords. It would lessen discrimination 
against people with disabilities and single—parent families who often use 
these programs and it will push landlords to rent to them. Passing the Home 
Act will mean that we are all viewed the same as Mainers and not as “those 
people" or any other group of people who are put in a box. People who apply 
for apartments will have more equal rights. 
The Home Act Rental Assistance Program would help Maine families pay their 
rent by covering a portion based on their income. Maine families are 
currently playing a chess game when they have to decide what needs are 
more important. Passing this bill will mean that families can have peace of 
mind because they won't have to choose between housing and other 
necessities like food or heat. This dream can only be reached by helping 
people pay the difference as we work to lower the price of rent and hold 
landlords accountable.
Yes, I said it, hold them accountable, because we have too many abusing 
the rights of tenants and that is not okay. Don't get me wrong, we all have 
rights including the landlords of these apartments, but we will speak up 
when other people's rights are looked over. 
According to Pine Tree Legal, between 2017 to 2019 a total 12% of the 
families they represented were non-white, while only 5% of Maine's 
population is non-white. In the same time frame, people with disabilities 
made up 28% of Maine's extremely low~income renter households. People 
who are already facing inequities are the ones also feeling the brunt of this 
housing crisis. We can do better! It starts with the Home Act and so I stand 
here today for all Mainers asking that you consider this bill. 
I urge you to pass the Home Act and make a difference for the many Maine 
families who are struggling to make ends meet. We are on the brink ofa 
homelessness epidemic. If we don't act now, it will be too late and 
generations after us will suffer and will never know the true meaning of how 
it is to truly have a home. So please, let's stand together and make sure 
every person in Maine has a place to call home.
