LD 1710 
To the Distinguished Members of the Housing Committee: 
Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 1710 "An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee 
Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants and Municipal General Assistance Program" 
My name is Bruce Blackmer from Dedham, Maine. 
I am on the Executive Committee of the Greater Bangor Apartment Owners and Managers 
Association, GBAOMA. 
I am also a member of the Legislative Council working closely with, Attorney and Lobbyist, Dan 
Bernier representing landlords and property owners in, but not limited to, Waterville, Augusta, 
Portland, South Portland, Lewiston, Auburn, and Bangor areas. 
I have been a landlord since 1972. I have owned a 50-unit trailer park , multi-unit, and single- 
family homes. At one time, I managed 65 units. I have mostly provided affordable housing to 
low-income tenants. 
I am speaking in OPPOSITION of this Bill. 
I have had voucher tenants for as long as 19 years and as short as 30 days. I use the same lease 
for all of my tenants. Some years ago Section 8 Housing decided that I should use their lease as 
an addendum to mine. Since that would be discriminatory to my non-Section 8 tenants I refused 
to change my way of renting my units, so Section 8 refused to allow their clients to rent from me. 
I have never discriminated against voucher tenants, Section 8 Housing has discriminated against 
me. This issue wound up in court and the landlords were adjudged that they were not 
discriminating against voucher tenants if they used the same lease for all of their tenants. 
I have been associated with the Greater Bangor Apartment Owners and Managers Association for 
over 30 years. We usually have between 600 and 700 memberships consisting of two members 
each. That is about 1,200 active apartment managers in all. Over the years we have endured 
changes proposed by legislators. I cannot say that the housing has improved because of any of 
these enacted laws. Most changes attempt to beneﬁt the tenant, but landlords are represented 
by the legislature also. So why are the laws in favor of the tenant? I feel with the housing 
situation getting worse, it might be beneﬁcial to change your focus and support the landlords. I
have never heard from so many landlords who just want to sell out because of the problems and 
feeling of hopelessness that would be created LD 1710 were to pass. 
There were numerous bills concerning housing this year. Most were heard by the Judiciary 
Committee. Through testimony and discussion, the ﬁnal version of the bill was something most 
landlords could accept. The Judiciary Committee seemed to understand some of the 
landlord/tenant relationship and their problems. Which brings up the question of, why are we in 
this committee with this bill, when many of these issues were settled in the Judiciary Committee. 
The Judiciary Committee heard me say my moto many times, I have never evicted a "good 
tenant" . I think we should have a new moto. The way to solve the housing situation is to work 
with the landlords to solve the existing problems, not create new problems that make the 
landlords want to get out of the business. 
I urge you to oppose LD 1710 
Thank you for allowing me to voice my opinion. I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Bruce Blackmer 
14 Enterprise Drive 
Dedham ME 04429 
email: antsbiack1@gmail.com 
phone: 207-735-56587
