 
 
 
 
 
May 8, 2023                       To the Distinguished Members of the Housing Committee: 
 
Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD Opposition to LD 1710: "An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and 
Guarantee Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance 
Program" 
 
The Central Maine Apartment Owners Association (CMAOA) is a landlord membership organization of over 
650, as well as a cooperative team member of other landlord associations across the State of Maine including: 
Southern Maine, Lewiston Auburn, Greater Bangor Area, and Augusta Area.  We provide educational events, 
sponsor community events, provide access to discounts on supplies and industry needs like fuels, flooring 
materials and paint. Our overall goal is to support Landlords in providing safe and affordable housing in 
collaboration with the valuable good renters in our area.  CMAOA and the other organizations are neutral, 
nonpartisan, member led groups that have the common goal of keeping the rental housing industry safe, 
educated, and competitive.   
Although this bill has many areas of concern of detrimental effects to the offering of private rental housing, 
the most concerning are the 4th and 14th Amendment attacks.  Specifically, the act of forcing private property 
owners to participate in the voluntary Federally funded Section 8 program is a case that has been tried, 
appealed and found in favor that a private owner is not found to be discriminating primarily because of 
persons’ status as recipient of public assistance if they did not wish to bind themselves to the terms of the 
tenancy addendum required to be signed, attached, and modifying the Lessor’s rental contract. Further, it was 
found that private owners’ who are unable or unwilling to participate in the voluntary program due to 
business necessity (i.e. not wanting to contract for a fixed term lease, etc.) do not waive their protections from 
due process.  That is to say, disparate impact liability is not established by executing business necessity.   The 
appeals case of Dussault vs Coach Lantern Holdings, LLC (found summarized here: 
mailto:https://www.mainelawreview.org/volume-67-no-1-2015/dussault-v-rre-coach-lantern-holdings-llc/  ) 
Sec. 3. 5 MRSA changes proposed in this bill would be the equivalent of mandating that landlords accept terms 
of tenancy that are otherwise required only if the landlord chooses to participate in a voluntary federal 
program.  The program and ultimately, private housing contracts, would no longer be voluntary.  This would 
mean that ALL private property would be subject to forced contracts or ownership, usurping private contracts 
and skirting eminent domain laws.  CMAOA contends that if Maine believes they can be better landlords then 
they should make a fair market offer for a rental property and upon purchase they can institute, enforce, and 
assume all the liability for, their preferred contracts in rental housing.  
We urge you to oppose LD 1710.  
Board of Directors of Central Maine Apartment Owners Association, Waterville, Maine   
Click Here for CMAOA Website and Contact Information  

