HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Cheryl A_ Golek TTYI MAINE RELAY 71l 
9 Vicarage Lane 
Harpswell, ME 04079 
Phone: (207) 535-9857 
Chervl.golek@legislature.1naine.g0v 
Testimony of Rep. Cheryl Golek introducing 
LD 1710, An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee 
Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General 
Assistance Program 
Before the Joint Select Committee on Hausing 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and distinguished members of the Joint Select Cormnittee 
on Housing, my name is Cheryl Golek, and I represent House District 99, which consists of the 
Town of Harpswell and part of Brunswick. I am excited to be here today to introduce you to the 
Home Act, LD 1710. 
This bill was born before I was elected to the legislature. A diverse group of tenants and housing 
advocates identiﬁed the most pressing housing problems and developed policies to address them. 
These ideas came from a community process involving over 50 people with lived experience. 
While it was a collaborative process, LD 1710 strongly aligns with my personal experiences. 
The presentations and the site visits we’ve had on this committee in recent months have given us 
a clear but complex picture of housing problems in Maine. At this point, I think we can all agree 
that we have one of the most critical jobs in this legislative session as a committee: to take 
accurate and swift action to address the housing needs of our neighbors. 
We have already started this vital work by addressing housing ﬁrst, funding affordable housing 
construction, and more. These are all essential pieces needed to address our housing crisis, but 
much more needs to be done. LD 1710, An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and 
Guarantee Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants, which I will refer to from here on 
out as “The Home Act,” is another piece of the puzzle needed to create long-term solutions 
towards ﬁxing the housing crisis in our state. 
The Home Act has several parts, each designed to respond to a different problem that renters 
themselves experience in Maine’s housing system. There is a lot in this bill so I will talk a bit 
about each section. 
l. Section 17 establishes a rental assistance program 
District 99: Brunswick (Part), Harpswell
2. Sections 1 through 4 prohibit landlords from discriminating against tenants who have 
rental assistance, such as a Section 8 voucher 
3. ‘Section 19-27 dedicated funds from a graduated Tax (RETT) to help pay for the rental 
assistance program 
4. Sections 5 and 18 provide consumer protections to tenants who are unable to pay an 
unaffordable rent 
Section 17 establishes the Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program. 
This bill requires the Maine State Housing Authority to establish and administer the Maine 
Rental Assistance Program. 
The Maine Rental Assistance Program can do something that our state has not been able to do 
until now. It will end our state's wait list of approximately 15,000 people by creating a state-run 
housing choice voucher program to relieve the lowest-income renters. This would provide a 
voucher for all those on the waiting list for Section 8, meaning thousands of Mainers would only 
pay 30% of their income on rent instead of 50-70%. 
There is no other planto provide rental assistance to people with a total gross annual household 
income equal to 30 percent or less of the area median household income. 
Extremely low-income households are most vulnerable to housing instability. 52% pay more 
than l/2 of their monthly income towards rent, a threshold HUD deems severely rent burdened. 
This program will allow those on the waiting list to secure stable housing. It prevents eviction for 
those currently housed in unaffordable housing. It provides a voucher for those waiting in 
shelters today while they continue to wait for their federal housing vouchers. ‘ 
By creating a rent relief program, we will help those who are the most vulnerable to housing 
instability and have fallen through the cracks in our current system. We voted in favor of LD 2 in 
this committee, which will do important work helping 600 people using a housing- ﬁrst model. 
LD 1540, another essential bill, is a pilot program that will provide $300 rent relief for two years 
for those making roughly $52,000. I know this committee will work hard to ensure these two 
bills become law. Still, the HOME Act is the only bill we’ve considered that fully addresses the 
housing needs of 44,256 Maine renters at30% of the Area Median Income, that’s $24,047 a year 
for a household of 3.2 That means that a family of three is stretching just over $20,000 a year for 
three people on food, housing, utilities, clothing, medicine, gas,-car insurance, and repair, not to 
mention emergencies. Statistically, most of this group is paying over half their income on rent. 
1 
National Low Income Housing Coalition, Maine Housing Proﬁle (2023). hgps1//nlihc.org[oor/state/me 
2 Maine Housing.(n.d). MaineHousing - Rent Restricted Programs. Retrieved from 2022-income —eligibility-max- 
rent-levels-with-home-and-ht ﬁpdf 
District 99: Brunswick (Part), Harpswell
The Home Act will provide relief to this group of low-wage workers, people with disabilities, 
women-headed households, and families with children. This is a group who is ﬁnding 
themselves in apartments where the rent is going up, and they can no longer afford to. live there; 
they’re facing eviction and homelessness at alarming -rates and entering a cycle that lands them 
in shelters every couple of years. We need long-term ho-using solutions for this population to 
improve housing for low-income renters in Maine. There is no doubt that we need more housing 
all across the state. People of all income levels are struggling to ﬁnd affordable places to live. 
But it's not enough to say, "the market will provide" because the market will never drive down 
costs enough to be affordable for extremely low-income Mainers. Passing the HOME Act would 
play a signiﬁcant role in _preventing eviction and homelessness and stabilizing housing for 
thousands of Mainers. 
Sections 1 through 4 prohibit landlords from discriminating against tenants with rental 
assistance, such as a Section 8 voucher. 
It should go without saying that Housing discrimination is discrimination. 
Mainers with a Housing Choice Voucher, Social Security Insurance, or veteran’s beneﬁts often 
face income discrimination when trying to ﬁnd housing. Discrimination based on someone’s 
source of income to pay rent should be illegal in Maine. This discrimination against voucher 
holders hurts people of color, families, and people with disabilities. 
Section 8 housing is a federally run program. People wait four or more years to get a Section 8 
housing voucher. On top of that wait, they are given 30-90 days to secure housing or lose their 
voucher. There are currently anywhere from 600- 800 unhoused voucher holders in Maine 
because tenants cannot ﬁnd a landlord who accepts them. 
The lack of acceptance of these vouchers has severe life and death consequence. Russell 
Williams ﬁom Brunswick was a childhood friend of mine’s relative. He was a veteran and 
served in the Navy. His life had fallen on hard times over the years he became homeless. 
According to his family, he was working hard to change his life situation. He had recently 
received a housing voucher, but he was only given 60 days to ﬁnd housing. Time ran out, and he 
could not ﬁnd a place in that time frame, so he lost access to that voucher. Russel, 64, was found 
dead in his sleeping bag on an unusually cold November in 2019 when temps dropped to the low 
teens. I share this story with you because, for me, it hit close to home, and I knew that I must do 
whatever I could from then on out to change this broken discriminatory system. Sadly “Russell’s 
story is not singular to him,” but just one example of many. 
Voucher holders are forced to search for housing further and further from their jobs, families, 
and homes due to discrimination in our housing system. I personally know these things to be 
true. As a single parent, section 8 housing was lifesaving to my children and me, but ﬁnding 
housing was very difﬁcult even though, at that time, section 8 paid more than most of the rentsI 
looked at. I was often told bluntly: “Sorry, We don’t rent to you, people.” I would like to say that 
District 99: Brunswick (Part), Harpswell
I 
this doesn t happen anymore since that was 30 years ago, but it is still happening. I dealt with the 
same thing with my disabled brother and another family member. I share a snapshot of this 
personal story to show that the discrimination in our housing voucher system is real and has 
existed pretty much since it was created around 40 years ago. 
Considerable research shows that housing instability often unjustly affects renters from low- 
income or disadvantaged communities. Discrimination against voucher holders hurts people of 
color, families, and people with disabilities.3 According to Pine Tree Legal Assistance, between 
2017 and 2019, 12% of households they represented in eviction court were non-white, though 
only 6% of Maine’s population is non-white. 
According to a study conducted by the Maine State Housing Authority in 2022 34% of Maine’s 
homeless population is Black or African American even though, they make up less than 2% of 
Maine’s population.4 
The Home Act will address this issue by amending the Maine Human Rights Act to strengthen 
protections designed to prevent discrimination against a tenant because of their source of income 
It will make this form of discrimination, which affects the most marginalized tenants in Maine,a 
prohibited act when the tenant participates in a federal, state, or local tenant-based rental 
assistance program.’ 
We know it is possible to do this as Dozens of states and municipalities have already ﬁlled in the 
gaps in the federal fair housing law and established their own protections for voucher 
holders. According to the Poverty & Race Research Action Council, 17 states, 21 counties, 
and 85 cities have banned source-of-income discrimination as of September 2022.5 Source-of- 
income laws gained immense momentum over the past four years: Califomia, Colorado, Illinois, 
Maryland, New York, Rhode Island, and ‘Virginia all enacted statewide protections for voucher 
holders between 2019 and 2022. Now, more than 57% of households that use Housing Choice 
Vouchers live in cormnunities that have barmed source-of-income discrimination, compared to 
just over one-third of voucher holders in 2018. Source of income laws prevent the concentration 
of poverty, increase rental assistance acceptance and create greater freedom for families to 
choose where they live. 
To promote housing stability and opportunity, Maine must protect participants in rental 
assistance programs from unfair stigma and discrimination. We as a state can only create fair 
3 
Emily Badger. (2015) How Section 8 became a ’racia/ slur’ . Washington Post. Retrieved from 
https:[/wwvmwashingtonnostcom/news/wonk/wg/2015/O6/15/how-section-8-became-a-racial-s|ur[ 
4 Maine Housing. 2022 Pointin Time Count. Retrieved from https://WWW.mainehousing.0rg/docs/default- 
source/housing-reports/2022-point-in-time-survev---statewide.pdf?sfvrsn=1aa68615 7 
5 Brian Knudsen.(n.d) Expanded protections for families with Housing Choice Voucher. Retrieved from 
http://www.prrac.org/pdf/AppendixB.pdf 
District 99: Brunswick (Part), Harpswell
housing once we take steps to remove the discrimination within our housing opportunities. The 
Home Act will end the discrimination in our housing choice voucher program that has been 
happening since its creation. - 
We have heard from some landlords whoaccept vouchers and see Section 8 as the great program 
it is. The sad reality is that many more landlords have policies that refuse rentals to voucher 
holders. These policies work against Fair Housing Laws regardless of a landlord ’s intent; 
refusing to rent to voucher holders disparately impacts non-white tenants, people with 
disabilities, single women heads of household, and families with children. Such policies can shift 
low-income tenants into substandard housing in poor neighborhoods and perpetuate segregation, 
which works against our national fair housing laws that envision communities with truly 
integrated and balanced living pattems. 
Over half of the people receiving federal rental assistance are in families with children, and 1/3 
have a disability.6 Studies show that people of color are disproportionately impacted by landlord 
policies denying voucher holders. Nationally, at least 48% of Section 8 Voucher holders are 
Black, and at least 18% are Hispanic.7 
The Home Act requires that an owner of more than ten units of rental property must ensure that 
10% of the units are affordable. This will help prevent discrimination against voucher holders 
and increase the number of affordable housing units. 
We have heard many people talk about the fact that Section 8 housing vouchers do not pay 
enough, so to address that issue, any owner who participates in this program will be entitled toa 
tax credit for the loss of income experienced as a result of complying with the requirements of 
the Home Act. There are currently aroundal2,000 vouchers being used in our state. This beneﬁt 
willalso help landlords already accepting the Section 8 housing voucher programs. 
Sections 19-24 propose changes to the Real Estate Transfer Tax (RETT) to help pay for the 
rental assistance program 
The Home Act will amend the laws goveming the real estate transfer tax by creating a graduated 
tax based on the sales price of the real estate and dedicating those fundsto assist in funding the 
Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program. 
The Maine Real Estate Transfer tax hasn’t been raised since l993. That is 30 years since it was 
last adjusted. 
Raising the real estate transfer tax is a practical and sustainable way to fund rent relief to protect 
Maine's most vulnerable population from a volatile housing market. 
6 Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (January 19, 2022). Federal Rental Assistance Fact Sheets. 
Retrieved from https://wwwcbpp.org/research/housing/federa1-rental-assistance-fact-sl1eets#l\/[E 
7 
Abby Vesoulis (February 20, 2020). A Mask for Racial Discrirnination.' How Housing Voucher 
Programs Can Hurt the Low-Income Families They’re Designed to Help. Time Magazine. Retrieved from 
https://time.com/5783945/housing-vouchers-discrimination/ 
District 99: Brunswick (Part), Harpswell
While Maine’s low-income tenants have been suffering in the recession and the pandemic, 
Maine’s real estate market has been booming. 
Property values have increased during the pandemic in every county across the State. The 
median home price in Maine was $225,000 in 2019, $255,000 in 2020, and $295,000 in 2021. 
Representing a 16% increase over 2020 and a 31% increase since 2019.8 This bill raises this tax 
for only the most expensive home sales to help low-income people most harmed by the rise in 
housing costs pay their rent. Even a modest rate increase in the Real Estate Transfer Tax 
(“RETT”) will go a long way to fund programs and aid low-income renters, and it will do so 
without harming Maine’s real estate market and requiring the use of general revenue funds. 
This modest increase would not raise the RETT for anyone selling their home at or below the 
median home sales price in their county. This would be based on the yearly data compiled by 
Maine State. Housing Authority. 
Maine only taxes real estate transfers at 0.44% of the total price. Our neighboring New England 
states have higher property transfer tax rates than Maine. With New Hampshire and Vermont 
being nearly three times higher. To put it in perspective with inﬂation, the $2.20/$500 rate in 
1993 would be equal to $4.04 in 2021 dollars. 
A graduated tax rate is the equitable way to do this. We know it is fairer to spread the cost so 
those who are wealthy, buying million-dollar homes, pay a little more. Several other states and 
Washington D.C. have recognized this and increased their tax rates at the high end of the real 
estate market. In Maine, the increase proposed by this bill will raise over $9 million to help fund 
rent re1ief.9 
Passing the HOME Act will also save the State and Municipalities money. Fewer families will be 
displaced from eviction and ﬁnd themselves couch surﬁng, in overcrowded shelters, or on the 
streets. We have heard from people in this very room about studies that show evictions disrupt 
family stability and have high costs to the municipalities, including increases in emergency shelter 
costs, hospital costs (emergency room and inpatient), mental health costs, administrative burden 
costs for courts, and they deteriorate cormnunities when members are forced to move away from 
their support systems. ” And these are only the monetary costs to society and not the human costs 
that are devastating and leave lasting impacts. These costs are even more signiﬁcant during 
housing shortages when low-income tenants can’t ﬁnd replacement housing. You will hear more 
about this in other testimonies today. 
3 Glenn Jordan (December 22, 2020). Maine home sales continue to break records despite pandemic. Portland Press 
Herald. Retrieved from https://www.pressl1era1d.co1n/202O/ 12/22/inaine-home-sales-continue-to-break-records 
despite-pandemic/#:~:text=C01e%2Osaid%20Maine%20remains%20on.shy%20of%2Olast%20year's%20total. 
9 State of New Jersey Division of Taxation (n.d). Buying, Selling, or Transferring Real Property in New Jersey. 
Retrieved from https://WWW. state.nj .us/treasu1' _v/ taxati on/realtytransfees.shtml 
1° Stout.com (n.d). Cost-Bene ﬁt Analysis for Philadelphia Right to Counsel for Low Income Tenants Facing 
Eviction. Retrieved from https://www.stout.com/en/experience/cost-bene ﬁt-analysis-for-philadelphia-right-to- 
counsel 
District 99: Brunswick (Pait), Harpswell
Maine has had a waitlist for many years that have ranged up to about 26,000 people at times. Low- 
income Maine tenants have already been waiting for years. Mainers need housing stability. The 
policies in the Home Act are sound investments given the extreme costs of housing instability, 
eviction, and homelessness to our society. 
Sections 5 and 18 provide consumer protections to tenants who cannot pay an unaffordable 
rent. 
Finally, Section 5 of the bill prohibits reporting a tenant’s unpaid rent to a credit reporting 
agency in cases where the rent is unaffordable (over 30% of the tenant’s gross income). Section 
l8 of the bill provides protections offered by the Maine Fair Debt Collections Practices Act to 
tenants who are being sued for not being able to pay unaffordable rent. This part of the bill 
would bar landlords from reporting tenants’ non-payment of rent to the credit bureau, and it 
would provide additional protections under the Fair Deb Collection Act. 
In Maine, there are over 20,000 households whose income is below 30% of the Annual. 
Median Incomewho pay over ‘/2 of their income in rent. These at-risk households are also 
disproportionately Black and Latinx. These tenants who live at or below the poverty level will 
inevitably be placed in a situation in which they will be unable to pay, their rent. Many things 
could cause a tenant to fall behind on rent, and if they are already paying more than 50% of their 
income towards rent falling behind can be as simple as having to miss a day of work because ofa 
sick child. - -r 
The Home Act will end Credit Reporting of missed rent. Rent reporting carries enormous risks 
for_renters, especially the most vulnerable families already struggling with housing costs. While 
rent reporting can help some better-off tenants secure housing, it can make other renters 
homeless. ~‘ 
Summary _ y 
Maine is facing several crises at once, and many are interconnected. ’Housing is at the top of the 
list because it is the foundation needed to ﬁx the other issues. Maine people deserve safe, 
affordable housing, and our economy needs safe, affordable housing to grow. The HOME Act will 
save lives and cost the state less to create a permanent solution that will provide people with stable 
housing and end discrimination in our housing choice voucher program. »
f ,‘ 
I will end now with a quote from-— Matthew Desmond “It is hard to argue that housing is nota 
fundamental human need. Decent, affordable housing should be a basic right for everybody in 
this country. The reason is simple: without stable shelter, everything else falls apart.” 
Thank you all for your time, and l ask that you join me in supporting LD 1710, The Home Act. 
I am happy -to take any questions. 
District 99: Brunswick (Part), Harpswell
