T HE 
LAW OFFIGE ‘ DANIEL ]. BERNIER 
\_ —-:->=~----- —:- LLo ~—4+— 
April 26, 2023 
To The Distinguished Members of the Housing Committee 
From Daniel J. Bemier, representing the 
Central Maine Apartment Owners Association working in conjunction with the Rental 
Housing Alliance of Southern Maine, the Greater Bangor Area Owners’ and Managers ’ 
Association, the Capital Area Housing Association, and Lewiston Auburn Landlord 
Association. ‘ 
Re: LD 1 710 An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee 
Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance 
Program 
I am submitting this testimony in opposition to this legislation. 
This legislation in section three would require landlords to sign a contract witha 
Government Agency. Apartment owners would be required to sign contracts with Housing 
and the terms of those contracts are dictated in part by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development; they are adhesion contracts that cannot be negotiated. Currently an 
Apartment Owner can accept the tenns of the contract or decline the contract there is no 
negotiating the terms. Under this legislation, an apartment owner will no longer have the right 
to decline that contract no matter what the terms are. Are we going to go down the road 
requiring private citizens to sign contracts with government entities or face the Maine 
Human Rights Commission? Are Apartment Owners going to be the only business targeted 
for this or are there other Maine businesses that the legislature is going to start requiring to sign 
contracts with government entities? These contracts often require apartment owners to change 
the leases, let housing decide what is reasonable rent, tell apartment owners they cannot evict if 
Housing fails to pay the rent, and require landlords to make changes to the structure. This 
does not require equal treatment for tenants on housing but requires special treatment. 
Section four of the bill is going to require landlords to ensure that at least ten (10%) 
percent of units available for rental housing qualify as affordable housing if they own more 
than ten (10) tmits. Thus, rent will not be based on the landlords cost of operation but on 
the tenant’s ability to pay. This is a huge discouragement to investment which will just 
further make the housing crisis worse. The way to solve the housing crises is to build more 
housing. The Way to get more housing built is to encourage investment. LD 1710 will 
Page 1 of3 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bemierlawof ﬁce.com
discourage investment in housing. We need to focus our efforts on increasing the supply of 
housing. 
Section ﬁve would say a landlord could not report to any agency that a tenant is not 
paying “unaffordable rent” . That section deﬁnes affordable rent as not being more than 30% 
of the household ’s monthly income being used for rent and utilities. Is affordable based on 
their income at the time they sign the lease or is it based upon a later date when they stop 
paying rent? Do we need tenants to start reporting their income to landlords monthly to make 
this determination? I suspect that the tenants will not be happy if landlords now start requiring 
them to report their income monthly so the landlord can determine if the rent is affordable. That 
is a lot of paperwork and if the tenant does not comply does the landlord have to evict them for 
failure to report their income? If the tenant is paying some of the utilities bills like the electric 
bill does the tenant also have to disclose their monthly electric bills to the landlord for this 
calculation ‘? Can they be evicted if they do not? 
Section eighteen of the bill would apply the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act to any 
entity that is attempting to collect a debt for unpaid rent that is “unaffordable ” . I would take this 
to mean that if a landlord was giving a seven (7) day notice to a tenant for failing to pay rent 
then that puts them under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act. Before you give that notice 
you will have to make a calculation of whether the rent was affordable. What if the tenant does 
not give you the information you need to make the calculation? I would note by applying the 
Fair Debt Collection Practices Act to debt originator, landlords are very much being singled out 
over other Maine businesses. The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act was designed to cover 
businesses that make it their business model to collect debts that were originated by other 
people. This is using the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act in a very different way than was 
originally designed. So here again landlords would have to start asking tenants to provide them 
their monthly income statements as well as what their monthly utility bills so that the landlord 
could make a calculation. 
Rent is a contractual obligation. Tenants agree to a certain amount of rent when 
they move into the premises, if the tenant did not like the rent, they should not have signed the 
original contract with the landlord or they should move out. If the calculation is done only at 
the time of renting. Landlords would be smart to just not rent to people with lower 
incomes making the housing crises worse. If the calculation needs to be updated during 
the tenancy, this will place an impossible burden on landlords. 
We are in a housing crisis. The Maine Legislature needs to stop the onslaught against 
people who provide housing, that is apartment owners. The legislature needs to start working 
with people who provide housing, not against them. 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Very } yours, 
ii 
/Daniel emier. ’.. 
.1 
Page 2 of3 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bernierlawof ﬁce.com
