PINE TREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE, INC. 
Dylan Maeby ¢ Augusta Area Office 
P.O. Box 2429 
Augusta, ME 04338 
(207) 552-3103 ' V/TTY 711 * Fax (207) 623-7774 
www.ptla. org * dmaeby@ptla. org 
Testimony of Dylan Maeby, Pine Tree Legal Assistance in SUPPORT of LD 1710, An Act 
to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program and Amend the Laws 
Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance Program 
May 12, 2023 
Good Morning Senator Peirce, Representative Gere, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Committee on Housing, 
My name is Dylan Maeby and I an attorney with Pine Tree Legal Assistance. I am testifying 
today in support of LD l7lO. 
Pine Tree Legal Assistance is a nonproﬁt organization with ofﬁces statewide. We assist witha 
variety of civil legal issues, with a particular focus on housing cases. My area of practice is 
within our Veterans Unit, and I run our Medical/Legal Partnership with Togus VA. As a part of 
this work, I work closely with the VA Homelessness Prevention team, assisting Veterans witha 
variety of housing related legal issues, including evictions and housing discrimination matters. 
For the ﬁrst ﬁve years of my practice, I regularly witnessed how powerful a tool housing 
vouchers are in the effort to end veteran homelessness in Maine. I worked with countless 
veterans experiencing homelessness for years or even decades before they were ﬁnally able to 
ﬁnd and maintain consistent housing with the help of a voucher. I watched as the number of 
chronically homeless veterans in Maine continued to drop. However, more recently, I have 
witnessed this important tool slowly lose effectiveness. As housing markets tighten, landlords 
have more discretion over whom to rent units to, and unfortunately, this is often to the exclusion 
of voucher holders. 
This was never more salient than with an elderly veteran I met through my work at the VA. The 
veteran had a long history of experiencing homelessness over the last 20 years, mostly living out 
of his car or camping in the woods. However, this all changed for him once he was identiﬁed for 
a housing voucher, and he was ﬁnally able to maintain housing for longer than a few months. 
When we met, he had been living in his apartment for several years but was notiﬁed by his 
landlord that the building was being sold and his lease would not be renewed. The landlord gave 
the veteran plenty of notice, close to four months, which in the past would almost certainly be 
sufﬁcient to ﬁnd and rent a new unit. 
Unfortunately, over the course of those four months, I watched my client lose out on apartment 
after apartment simply because he was using a housing voucher. My client’s voucher went from 
a lifeline to a proverbial albatross in just a few years. While discrimination based on the receipt 
of public assistance, including housing vouchers, is already illegal under Maine law in practice, 
we see it happen every day. Landlords rely on the fact that housing vouchers create addition 
administrative burdens to deny potential applications. Those administrative burdens include
adding a tenancy addendum to the end of an existing lease or allowing a housing inspection prior 
to tenancy. In reality, these extra requirements do very little to change the nature or 
administrative cost of leasing to a voucher holder. An inspection is done by the agency issuing 
the voucher to ensure that the unit meets certain minimum requirements. All renters in Maine 
are entitled to similar requirements and anyone can call their local code enforcement ofﬁce and 
request an inspection. For voucher holders, this inspection simply happens automatically before 
the tenancy is established. 
LD l7lO would make clear that landlords no longer have the discretion to deny someone like my 
client the opportunity to rent an apartment, simply because he relies on the assistance ofa 
housing voucher. 
Pine Tree Legal Assistance supports LD 1710 because it will provide tenants with protection 
from discrimination due to their use of a housing voucher. No tenant should lose out on an 
apartment, simply because they are receiving rental assistance. I urge the Cormnittee to vote 
Ought to Pass on LD 1710.
