.1' 
1»? ~\\ 
/ MaineHousing 3/ MAINE STATE HOUSlNG AUTHORlTY 
Testimony of 
Erik C. jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
Before 
The Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1710 (HP 1099) 
"An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program and Amend the 
Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance Program" 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the ]oint Select Committee on Housing, I am Erik 
Jorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations and Communications at the Maine State Housing 
Authority (MaineHousing) and I am submitting this testimony neither for nor against LD 1710 
"An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program and Amend the Laws 
Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance Program" . 
MaineH0using has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 1969. We are 
an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to address the problems of unsafe, unsuitable, 
overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. We are authorized to issue bonds to ﬁnance single family 
mortgages for ﬁrst time homebuyers and for affordable multi-family housing. 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, including rental subsidies, 
Weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-income housing tax credit program, and 
homeless grant programs. We receive state general fund revenue for homeless programs and receive a 
dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund. 
Representative Golek’s bill seeks to solve a very difficult and real problem, assisting extremely low income 
households in our state (at or below 30°/o of area median income) who are characterized as facing a severe 
cost burden with regard to housing. This means that they are spending more than 50% of their household 
income on direct housing costs (mostly rent). The National Low Income Housing coalition estimates that 
just over half of renters in this income category are extremely cost burdened. And while the percentage of 
renters in this position is lower in Maine than in the other New England states‘ , it points up that this isa 
significant and serious challenge here, as it is across the country. 
As this committee knows well, we recently completed the federal Emergency Rental Assistance program. 
In that $350,000,000 program, which served nearly 35,000 Maine households, we found that almost 60°/o 
of the program participants had incomes at or below 30% of area median income. We can therefore infer 
1 
Housing Needs Bv State I National Low Income Housing Coalition (nlihcorg)
l
that most of those households would likely qualify for this program if it were to pass. We can’t of course 
predict how many would actually apply for this program, but the sense we get is that this has the potential 
to be a very large undertaking. 
This, then, leads us to some concerns. The first of these is one I have mentioned before, and it relates to 
the fact that short-term funding, such as comes from a state budget, is unpredictable. The ﬁscal note for 
the bill as amended will clearly be different than the one that was originally proposed, but we don’t know 
if the revenue provided by the proposed transfer tax increase will be sufficient to generate the amount 
needed when combined with other revenue from the general fund. I have not seen a revised ﬁscal note, 
but regardless, we are concerned with any program funded by the state on which people will rely for their 
housing. State funding can quickly evaporate during a time of economic recession, and our worry with 
any state~funded program of this magnitude is that it creates a situation where people who rely on the 
support might suddenly ﬁnd themselves without it. This is one of the reasons why the section 8 program 
is run by the federal government — voucher administrators can count on the resources being there year 
after year. It is not clear how a program like this would fare in a downturn. 
A second major concern is with administration. We don’t know exactly how this program would reach the 
public, but it would require deployment of a signiﬁcant administrative infrastructure, maybe at public 
housing authorities or possibly through a third-party vendor. However it is set up, programs that require 
income determination and veriﬁcation are very labor intensive and the administrative costs tend to be 
high. This program would need to come with adequate administrative funding to allow for enough staff to 
provide these services. The federal emergency rental assistance program, just for illustration, had dozens 
of people providing intake and application services around the state. It is not clear how many people 
would be needed to deliver a program of this size. 
One other speciﬁc concern relates to the “Rental Guarantee ” section (part 2) of the program. We certainly 
could allocate some of the provided funds to hire navigators; we would be happy to expand our landlord 
incentives and to connect landlords to lead abatement resources. But with regard to 2-B sub 2, in which 
MaineHousing would provide “letters of credit” to landlords on behalf of tenants (especially tenants who 
have, per section 1-C sub 1, not been screened for rental history or creditworthiness), we don’t think we 
can do that. Our legal department is very concerned that this would require us to enter into contracts with 
a large number of landlords and constitute a serious ﬁnancial liability for our agency. 
Finally, it’s worth pointing out that new state voucher holders would find themselves subject to the same 
apartment inventory shortages that are currently such a challenge for existing Section 8 voucher holders. 
As you know, searchers are often challenged by unavailability of units, and not just price. 
We appreciate Rep Golek’s willingness to work with us and with others in making adjustinents to the bill, 
but we do have some practical reservations about how such a voucher program would work. Thank you.
2
