 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Committee on  Housing  
Testimony of Hannah Hudson  on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
May 12, 2023  
 
Supporting:  
LD 1710 , “An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program and Amend the 
Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance Program ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative Golek  
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere , and members of the Committee on  Housing , I am Hannah Hudson, 
Policy and Communications Manager at  Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA). MPCA is a membership 
organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), also known as Federally 
Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  independent  primary care network 
in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and preventive medical, behavioral, and dental 
health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ). 
MPCA supports LD 1710 , and we thank Re presentative Golek  and the other cosponsors for bringing this 
legislation forward. By helping Maine families with low income afford housing by creating the Home 
Opportunity Fund and improving legal protections for renters, LD 1710 will give more Maine rent ers fair 
treatment, greater choice, and stability.   
Now more than ever, CHCs are being called to meet the diverse and growing needs of vulnerable 
populations and those seeking trauma -informed and patient -centered care close to home. CHCs’ ability 
to address a wide range of primary care issues, while also un derstanding and responding to Social 
Drivers of Health (SDOH), makes them a crucial part of the nation’s healthcare infrastructure and a 
leader in efforts to address inequities in health care delivery.  
Inequities in the SDOH  have wide -ranging effects on h ealth and survival. Community Health Centers 
utilize a “whole person” approach to providing services and unique care -team provider models . With the 
CHC collaborative care model, providers are often well acquainted with a patient’s needs beyond just 
medical  services. Primary care providers, behavioral health care providers, case managers, and many 
more non -clinical staff members, work together to ensure that CHC patients are receiving all the support 
they need.  They are positioned  to identify and address SDO H, including economic stability and access to 
safe neighborhood s and built environment s. 
When Maine families can afford safe and accessible housing,  the entire community benefits ; it helps 
people achieve financial stability, builds our workforce, strengthe ns our schools, and leads to better 
health outcomes .  
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please do 
not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
Hannah Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
