Good Morning Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and honorable members of the 
Committee on Housing: my name is Hazel Willow, I ai 
m a part of the Address Confidentiality 
Program here in the state so I do not share my municipality Typically but I am also currently 
unhoused and I am here today to testify in favor of l-D l7l O. 
In July 2020 I came home to lvlaine. My Spousal Abuser, I, and our newly minted 2 year old 
brought our Boston salaries up to Auburn and rented a $l ,400-a-month 4 bedroom one bath 
cape. Just less than a year later, in June 2021, my spousal abuser plunged our lite into 
permanent chaos by getting us evicted from that rental property, an intentional tactic many 
abusers perpetuate on their co-parents in an effort to maintain power and control over them 
and their lives. My child and I have not had stable housing since. I wasn‘t able to find 
affordable housing then, with my $75,000 a year salary; I remain unable to find affordable 
housing now. 
I have been trying since January of this year to find safe, stable housing for my young child 
and I have been unsuccessful. I have a Housing Choice Voucher and yet I cannot find 
anywhere to accept it. None of the private rental groups or owners have a rental rate that 
can be covered by the Voucher Payment Standard. Additionally because of the financial 
abuse my spouse perpetrated upon me my credit score is another barrier when looking to 
rent from private entities. l‘m on over a dozen waiting lists for different Subsidized Housing 
Properties in ‘/3 of the counties here in Iviaine. There is no county where I can find a safe 
home for us. There is no unit available for my child and I to ground and center ourselves, to 
have respite and solace as we recover from Domestic Abuse. 
My child has spent half of his young lite unhoused, a painful reality for me to endure. Like 
many unhoused Mainers and Domestic Abuse survivors it is not a reality I ever expected to 
find myself in, let alone with my child. We have no home to recover in. No haven in which to 
let our nervous systems decompress, no kitchen in which to make memories. No walls to 
exasperatedly wash marker off of, no tub to give my child a bath in and no room to read 
him a story in before bed. 
I ask that you support LDI 7l O not just for the countless Maine adults who aren't able to fully 
participate in life because of their housing insecurities but for the children of Maine who 
deserve to have a clean, safe, warm, securefplace to play with their Transformers, havea 
dance party, and sleep soundly at night. Thank you for your time.
