My business provides rental housing in central Maine. We manage several single family rentals, 
duplexes, and a four plex in the greater Waterville area. We provide excellent housing – housing 
that I would happily live in myself. I am writing in opposition to LD 1710. I fear that this bill 
will ultimately raise the cost of housing throughout Maine by substantially increasing landlord 
costs and risks. Please vote “No” on LD 1710.  
This b ill states that credit reporting is prohibited in the event that a tenant fails to pay. This is 
unacceptable. As property managers, our primary incentives to ensure payment is the risk of 
credit reporting and eviction. We do not wish to evict tenants – that is bad for both the landlord 
and the tenant, and evictions are a means of last resort in my business to remove undesirable 
tenants. Credit reporting encourages full payment of rent. In my business, we have to assume at 
all times that we have at least 10%  vacancy and/or non -payment of rent in all of the units. This 
helps to calculate how much we should charge to cover for business costs and still maintain a 
profit margin. If credit reporting is prohibited, we will need to change the vacancy/non -payment 
calculation to greater than 10% to off -set the increased risk of non -payment to maintain 
solvency. This means that we will need to raise rents in all units to off -set the increased risk. 
Raising rents is clearly bad for tenants, but it’s also bad for landlord s – it makes it harder to find 
tenants capable of paying. We have already raised costs significantly due to inflation increasing 
the costs of repairs and routine maintenance in my units, as well as the increased cost to purchase 
additional units. These cos ts are significant;  essentially double what we used to pay prior to 
pandemic. We have already raised the costs of my rents by several hundred dollars since the start 
of the pandemic, but the actual profit has stayed stagnant. The people of Maine do not nee d bad 
legislation to raise costs further.  
This bill states that owners of more than 10 units must provide at least 10% of their units as 
affordable housing. This section does affect us. Our business model provides more luxurious 
housing than the average r ental in Waterville – we own and operate several single family homes, 
complete with private yards and garages. These dwellings understandably command higher rents. 
We also make sure that the units in our multi -family units are equipped with tiled baths, mod ern 
kitchen cabinetry and appliances, and luxury features such as hardwood floors and air 
conditioning. The units are also sparkling clean. We do this to command higher than average 
rents, and mainly attract professional tenants. We would have to cut rent in one unit substantially 
to meet this requirement. Since we are a business, we will simply raise the cost of the 9 other 
units to compensate. However, if the market does not support the increased rent, we will have to 
seriously consider allowing one unit to fall beneath our usual appearance standard – this may 
involve cutting costs by not cleaning the units upon tenant move out, replacing tiled baths with 
glue-ups once the tile fails, not bothering to buff out scratches in the hardwood floors, covering 
the hardwood floors with rug if the floors become too damaged, not bothering to repair minor 
drywall scratches, not bothering to replace trim clawed by pets, placing sub -standard kitchen 
appliances, etc etc in order to reduce our routine maintenance and repair  costs. This is bad for 
tenants – high quality units attract excellent tenants, and market competition forces other 
landlords to raise their own appearance standards in order to compete. Over the course of years, 
this bill will cause  the average q uality of the rentals will DECREASE in Maine due to this lack 
of competition. This will result in all tenants paying higher costs for dirtier, less attractive, less 
modern housing and does nothing to help the affordable housing crisis.  
Section 8 simply does not pay going market rates. Compliance with Section 8 and similar 
programs is also extremely difficult. Section 8 will deny placing a tenant if, for example, a 
smoke detector battery is dead. While it is the law that landlords need to provide smoke 
detectors, we disagree with Section 8’s policy of waiting weeks to re-inspect a dwe lling over 
such a small detail that could be fixed on the spot. During that time, the tenant goes un -housed 
and the landlord goes unpaid with an empty unit , when such a small detail can be resolved within 
an hour of its discovery with a quick trip to the store. In this way, Section 8 tenants are relatively 
high risk from a  business perspective – the pay is sub -par, and the risk of vacancy is higher. 
Understandably, many landlords do not want to wait for  these tenants when other tenants are 
frankly easier to house more reliably. This keeps the business solvent.  
This bill fur ther states that landlords can only receive rental assistance payments under certain 
conditions. These conditions include excluding credit score and rental history from the 
application, waiving late fees, and not evicting tenants for non -payment. This is u nacceptable. 
Credit score is a reliable predictor of a tenant’s ability to pay, and usually a good predictor of 
how respectful a tenant will be to both the landlord and the property. It is a powerful tool to help 
landlords select tenants who will be succes sful to minimize the risk of non -payment and eviction. 
This is good for both landlords and tenants – no one wants an eviction to occur. Late fees also 
create incentives for tenants to pay regularly and on time. If we waive late fees for some tenants, 
than we must waive late fees for all tenants to stay in compliance with fair housing laws. It is 
discrimination for us to waive fees for some but not others. Finally, why can’t a business evict 
someone from a property if they fail to pay rent? Why are businesse s expected to subsidize other 
people’s housing by absorbing a loss of income? I can easily imagine a scenario where a tenant 
continues to live in rental housing indefinitely, not paying their share of the rent, and the landlord 
is powerless to do anything about it until they are ultimately forced to foreclose on the property 
due to loss of income to maintain it.  
Finally, there is language in this bill that states that landlords may be held to the same building 
code as “new construction” in Section 3 Subsect ion 5 B.b. This is  dangerous language for the 
state of Maine. We have the oldest homes in the nation, and I know for a fact that only one of our 
properties was constructed after 1980, and our oldest property was constructed in 1890. It is 
impossible to bri ng old buildings up to modern code without tearing down essentially the entire 
property. We can afford to rehab old buildings and bring them into compliance with code for 
existing construction; we most certainly cannot afford to tear buildings down and re -build like 
new. Please be prepared for  massive increases in  rents if you wish to make all units compliant 
with code for new construction.  
This is a bad bill for Maine. While it comes from a place of good intention, it ignores the 
busin ess realities that ultimately make providing rental housing more costly and difficult to 
provide. Maine needs legislation that incentivizes the construction of new units to increase  
housing supply  and decrease market pressures. Maine also needs to consider  legislation that 
would decrease the cost of doing business for landlords so that tenants have fewer costs  to cover 
with their rent. Please vote “No” on LD 1710.  
 
-Jamie Nickerson  
Fairfield, ME  
 
