Episcopal Diocese of Maine, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Presbyterian Church (USA), 
Religious Society of Friends, Unitarian Universalist Association, United Church of Christ, United Methodist Church  
 
Testimony before the Committee on Housing 
LD 1710: The Housing Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Act 
May 12, 2023 
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Members of the Committee: 
 
I am Rev. Jane Field, Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches. The Council has seven mainline 
Protestant member-denominations and two associate member congregations who represent 437 local churches 
in Maine with 55,000 parishioners in their care. I am testifying on behalf of the Council in support of LD 1710.   
 
All of the MCC churches have roots in Hebrew and Christian scripture, where the foundation of morality is love 
of neighbor as self and where covenant with God includes caring for our vulnerable and marginalized neighbors 
while building a society where people nurture and protect one another and ensure that everyone has a safe place 
to call home.  The biblical moral imperative for justice compels us to go beyond compassion and charity and to 
respond systemically.  In the current housing crisis we are facing, this means, among other things, working to  
ensure that more Maine families can stay in the homes they are currently renting. 
 
LD 1710 will accomplish that by putting more homes in reach for Mainers in every part of our state and giving 
families the freedom to choose the neighborhoods where they live.  Through legal protection for renters and by 
strengthening the administration and efficiency of Maine’s GA system, this bill addresses the current hardship 
faced by 58% of low-income Mainers who use more than half of their income just to pay rent.  Because Maine’s 
rental market is among the least affordable in the nation, without this relief, too many of our neighbors will 
continue to face displacement, eviction, and homelessness.  By imposing a modest increase in the tax on high-
end real estate deals, we can address this disparity—a disparity that disproportionately impacts people of color 
and those with disabilities. 
 
Caring for our vulnerable and marginalized neighbors in this way and building a society where Mainers nurture 
and protect one another and ensure that all of us have a safe and affordable place to call home aligns with a 
number of the Maine Council of Churches’ values as stated in our Moral Agenda, a document that calls us to 
advocate for: 
• Enactment of policies that benefit the most vulnerable 
• Tax and budget policies that reduce disparities between rich and poor 
• Sustainable communities marked by affordable housing. 
 
For these reasons, the Maine Council of Churches urges you to vote OUGHT TO PASS on LD 1710. 

Jane Field
Maine Council of Churches
LD 1710
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Members of the Committee:
I am Rev. Jane Field, Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches. The 
Council has seven mainline Protestant member-denominations and two associate 
member congregations who represent 437 local churches in Maine with 55,000 
parishioners in their care. I am testifying on behalf of the Council in support of LD 
1710.  
All of the MCC churches have roots in Hebrew and Christian scripture, where the 
foundation of morality is love of neighbor as self and where covenant with God 
includes caring for our vulnerable and marginalized neighbors while building a 
society where people nurture and protect one another and ensure that everyone has a 
safe place to call home.  The biblical moral imperative for justice compels us to go 
beyond compassion and charity and to respond systemically.  In the current housing 
crisis we are facing, this means, among other things, working to  ensure that more 
Maine families can stay in the homes they are currently renting.
LD 1710 will accomplish that by putting more homes in reach for Mainers in every 
part of our state and giving families the freedom to choose the neighborhoods where 
they live.  Through legal protection for renters and by strengthening the 
administration and efficiency of Maine’s GA system, this bill addresses the current 
hardship faced by 58% of low-income Mainers who use more than half of their 
income just to pay rent.  Because Maine’s rental market is among the least affordable 
in the nation, without this relief, too many of our neighbors will continue to face 
displacement, eviction, and homelessness.  By imposing a modest increase in the tax 
on high-end real estate deals, we can address this disparity—a disparity that 
disproportionately impacts people of color and those with disabilities.
Caring for our vulnerable and marginalized neighbors in this way and building a 
society where Mainers nurture and protect one another and ensure that all of us have a
safe and affordable place to call home aligns with a number of the Maine Council of 
Churches’ values as stated in our Moral Agenda, a document that calls us to advocate 
for:
•Enactment of policies that benefit the most vulnerable
•Tax and budget policies that reduce disparities between rich and poor
•Sustainable communities marked by affordable housing.
For these reasons, the Maine Council of Churches urges you to vote OUGHT TO 
PASS on LD 1710.

