 
  
 
Testimony of Jena Jones on Behalf of  
the Maine Council on Aging to the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing  
 
In Favor of LD 1710 – An Act to Establish the Maine 
Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program and 
Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants and the 
Municipal General Assistance Program  
 
Provided on Ma y 12, 2023  
 
Good morning , Senator Pierce , Representative Gere, and the members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing .  
My name is Jena Jones , and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at the Maine Council on 
Aging (MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy,  engaged and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings.  
On behalf of the MCOA and all five of Maine’s Area Agencies on Aging  (AAAs),  I am testifying 
in favor of LD 1710 . 
Maine is facing a housing crisis , but for older adults the situation  is particularly grim. Maine’s 
AAAs  are reporting an increase in calls for housing assistance an d services, Legal Services for 
the Elderly  (LSE)  are reporting an uptick in ca lls requiring representati on of older adult s in 
eviction  cases, sometimes directly because of the direct care workforce crisis.  Maine’s 
experience is not unique as older adults represent the fastest growing homeless population  in the 
nation .1 
Despite all of our liberties and freedoms , we have yet to e stablish the right to safe, affordable 
housing  for all . In 2019, LSE reported their eviction defense totals a t 161 cases , by 2022 that 
number reached 303.  Southern Maine Agency on Aging received 189% more calls in 2022 for 
homelessness than they did in 20 21. These challenges persist due to an overall lack of available, 
affordable housing and an egregious  lack of protections to ensure that the most at -risk people  
remain safely housed .  
What LD 1710, or The HOME Act, offers Maine residents are the kind of saf eguards necessary 
to begin to ensure housing becomes a right afforded to all. Critically, the bill prohibit s landlords 
from discriminating against tenants who receive rental assistance , establishes rental assistance 
for folks who are in need , and provides consumer protections for those who are unable to pay.  
 
1 Homelessness Among Older Adults: An Emerging Crisis , Kushel, 2020  b 
 

 
 Older women in Maine are particularly  likely to benefit from the protections offered by The 
HOME Act .  Older women are two times more likely to live alone as older men, and at least half 
of the older women in Maine who live alone do not have enough money to meet their basic 
needs .2  Because older women are more likely to experience housing insecurity an d a higher rate 
of becoming unhoused, The HOME Act addresses an  important gender and age equity issue .  
Ensuring affordability in housing options in Maine is  key to obtaining stability in the housing 
market, and ensuring tenant protections and assistance reduces the chance that older people will 
become unhoused.  LD 1710 is a big step toward stable ground. Not only will these supports help 
to curb homelessness rates among older adults in Maine, but they will also assist Maine in 
developing equity in housin g options by combating the stigma associated with housing 
assistance.  This is a win for Maine’s people and its economy. The MCOA urges this Committee 
to support The HOME Act.  
Thank you, I am happy to answer any questions.  
Jena Jones  
 
 
 
2 https://mainecouncilonaging.org/wp -content/uploads/2022/02/Economic -Security -Older -Women -in-Maine -
Report -FINAL.pdf , Economic Security of Older Women in Maine, Snow & Gattine, 2021.  
