Water\/ille Tenants Association 
Testimony in support of LD 1710, the HOME Act 
Jodie Hill 
May 12, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Geer and members of the Housing Committee, 
My name is Jodie Hill and l live in Waten/ille. I am a co-chair of the new Waten/ille Tenants 
Association. I also work a lot with Educare of Central Maine. 
Our community needs a voice for tenants and we‘re trying to be that voice. l’m here to talk to 
you about the need for affordable, safe housing in our state. 
My daughter and granddaughter are currently homeless. l’m here today to speak for them. 
I know many tenants who are afraid if they speak up, they’ll get in trouble with their landlords 
and lose their housing. l’m here today to speak for them too. 
Housing is a statewide problem for sure but l want to share with you what I see happening in 
Waten/ille 
0 High rents - need rent caps, this is ridiculous. People would need to be making at least 
$30/hr at their job just to get by to pay for the prices for rent, food, medical etc. 
O Increasing homelessness 
0 the cost ofjust applying for housing - someone is making bank on all those rental 
application fees. 
0 Empty houses that could be converted in multifamily housing 
0 Real estate interests and landlords have so much power and tenants have none 
First, l want to talk to you about how people’s wages don't match what people are charging for 
housing today. My daughter has started working at $14/hr. Has been homeless for _4 
months . She works as a substitute at Educare. But she doesn't have transportation and 
she's living on a shoestring. To sun/ive at even a thousand a month, that's like a job that pays 
$30/hr. l don’t know of anyjobs that pay that, but if you do please let me know and sign me up.. 
There's nothing she can afford. There should be help. l’m like her case manager, transporting 
her to work, appointments ,helping to call about apartments, going to see the apartments , 
asking questions at GA , Waten/ille Housing and the shelter. We’re trying like hell to geta 
voucher for her right now. FYI there is a 5-10 year wait for housing vouchers... We feel like 
we’re banging our heads against the wall. 
ln the meantime, she’s living in a motel. lt’s no place to live with a kid, with the amount of drugs, 
bugs , roaches, and police at all hours. There’s no kitchen to prepare food,there ’s no place to 
store food, so feeding her and her daughter is more expensive.
The motel costs $100/night. Any money she has she pays for the hotel and then the city’s GA 
program makes up the difference. That’s $3,000 a month. All her money has to go to the hotel, 
so she can’t get a car and can’t get to work without a ride. I asked the GA office if they would 
help with rent instead, and they said she had to find a place she can afford. There are no rents 
we can afford. $3,000 a month could pay for 2 families to afford stable housing. Let's put these 
resources to stable housing and get our family members, friends and neighbors out of horrid 
conditions. 
lt feels like us tenants are just taking it, and taking it. There's homeless people eveiywhere like 
never before that I've seen. Some are working but can't afford the rents. They’re only making 
enough to get groceries and pay for medical care. There’s no end in sight and that's why l’m 
here to ask you to join in this fight. 
Another big issue is that landlords won’t take vouchers, so even when you get the voucher, it's 
still a struggle. ljust tried to get my daughter into an apartment. I was asked: How much do you 
make? How many people? What kind of assistance? As soon as I said Section 8 or general 
assistance, they said no. Not all landlords are bad, but they have all the power, and when you 
have a lawyer going up against tenants, you know it’s not a fair fight. Tenants need state 
lzleaders to stick up for them for a change. 
The HOME Act would end the waiting list for Section 8 and make sure that people with vouchers 
don’t face discrimination. lt would give tenants living on next to nothing a chance to get into 
stable housing and rebuild their lives. 
Ever since l started speaking up about out of control rents and housing discrimination in my 
community, I've been bullied by landlords in the public and around town. But l’m not here to 
make friends, l’m here to get stuff done and l hope you are too. We need change now, the 
people can't wait. Please vote yes and pass the HOME Act.
