Maine Center er 
Economic Policy 
Testimony in support of LD 1710, “An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and 
Guarantee Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General 
Assistance Program. ” 
Josie Phillips, Policy Fellow 
5/12/2023 
Good morning, chairpersons Gere and Pierce, and all members of the Housing committee. My 
name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am testifying 
in favor of LD 1710 because it would increase the stock of affordable housing, equitably raise 
revenue that will let the state respond to the affordable housing crisis, and create much-needed 
stability for renters, who are disproportionately struggling to stay stably housed. By pursuing 
policies that increase Mainers’ ability to find and remain in housing, this bill would shore upa 
foundational element of Maine’s economy. 
LD 1710 would provide stability to renters by making it easier to find housing and, once housing 
has been found, providing the resources they may need to remain housed, preventing 
homelessness which can be devastatingly costly to both the person experiencing homelessness 
as well as to state and local budgets. By requiring that landlords owning more than 10 
properties retain at least 10 percent of these units affordable to families earning up to 80 
percent of the Area Median Income, LD 1710 would increase the array of affordable housing 
options across Maine, relieving some of the scarcity of housing that is currently plaguing all 
areas of the state. 
LD 1710 also makes it easier for renters with low incomes to find housing by barring landlords 
from discriminating against renters who receive rental assistance or Housing Choice Vouchers. 
Maine already has other laws barring landlords from discriminating against renters receiving 
public assistance, so this measure would add consistency to Maine’s laws and effectively 
increase the number of rental units that are available to Mainers with low income. Currently, too 
many vouchers are going unused because landlords refuse to accept them, and many rental 
listings will often indicate up front that they do not consider applicants using public vouchers. LD 
1710 would make state and federal rental assistance more effective by increasing the options 
available to tenants receiving this assistance. 
The rental assistance aspect of LD 1710 would then help keep Mainers with low income in their 
homes. This is important from a perspective of fairness, as the affordable housing crisis isa 
result of factors far beyond the influence of most Mainers, particularly those with low income. If 
households in need of rental assistance are unable to receive this support, they would likely 
have significant difficulty finding new housing, as there are more renters earning at or below 80 
percent of their Area Median income than there are units of housing affordable to these renters. ‘ 
Increasing access to rental assistance also makes sense from an economic perspective. When 
people are healthier, they are more productive, and our entire economy benefits as a result. 
Losing housing represents a significant threat to people's mental and physical health, but 
receiving rental assistance can help avoid these outcomes. Housing subsidies have been 
shown to improve mental health outcomes and access to health care." The pandemic 
Emergency Rental Assistance Program specifically was found to have improved food security 
and mental health.‘" Providing people with the support they need to remain in their homes has A W AK 
Board of Directors 
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Barbara Burt, Vice-chair l\/laulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lucy Van Hook 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica I\/laurer
been shown to be an effective safeguard for the health of Maine communities and, by extension, 
the prosperity of Maine’s economy. 
Finally, LD 1710 puts Maine in a stronger position to address the affordable housing crisis by 
equitably raising revenue which can then be used to increase the stock of housing in Maine and 
provide relief to Mainers struggling to stay housed. The federal Emergency Rental Assistance 
Program alone was spending approximately $500,000 per day in Maine,” and development of 
affordable housing costs hundreds of thousands of dollars per unit." Given the persistently high 
demand for rental assistance and the pressing need for significant investment in affordable 
housing, Maine will need to field as many resources as possible to address the immediate 
impacts of the affordable housing crisis as well as to pursue long-term solutions. This need 
makes the revenue raising element of LD 1710 critically important. 
The tax adjustments in this bill would have minimal impact to Mainers with low and moderate 
income who are trying to sell or purchase a home. This is because the proposed changes to the 
Real Estate Transfer Tax only apply to houses sold above the median sale price, meaning that 
half of all homes sold would be exempt from the tax increase. Even homes selling above the 
median sale price would be minimally affected. For instance, if someone was purchasing a 
home for $100,000 over the median sale price of $334,000, “ the buyers and sellers would only 
pay an additional $477 relative to the current tax structure, representing a 0.11% increase to the 
cost of buying or selling the home. Increasing revenue from the Real Estate Transfer Tax would 
also flow into the HOME Fund, one of the purposes of which is to assist first-time homebuyers. 
Given this, the tax adjustment included in LD 1710 would likely provide enough assistance to 
first-time homebuyers to more than offset the minor increase in tax for those purchasing homes 
above the median sale price. 
LD 1710 addresses Maine’s affordable housing crisis from multiple angles. lt increases housing 
options for Mainers with low income, funds rental assistance that will keep Mainers in their 
home, and equitably raises revenue that will allow Maine to better meet its residents ’ housing 
needs. Housing is the bedrock of Mainers’ personal wellbeing and the state’s economic 
prosperity. Because this bill fortifies Mainers’ ability to remain stably housed, I encourage this 
committee to vote yes on LD 1710. 
‘National Low income Housing Coalition, "Housing needs by state: Maine.” https://nlihc.org/housing-needs-by- 
state/maine 
" Health Affairs, "HUD Housing Assistance Associated With Lower Uninsurance Rates And Unmet Medical Need." 
https://www.hea|thaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2016.1152 
"l 
Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University, "Short-term benefits of emergency rental assistance 
extend beyond housing. ” https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/blog/short-term-benefits-e mergency-rentaI-assistance- 
extend-beyond-housing 
“' Maine Public, ” Municipalities warn of impending crisis for 8,500 Maine households, with rent relief nearing an 
end." https://www.mainepublic.org/maine/2022-10-31/municipalities-warn-of-impending-crisis-for-8-S00-maihe- 
households-with-rent-relief-nearing-an~end 
" Maine Housing, "Development Cost Trends in Affordable Housing. ” https://mainehousing.org/docs/default- 
source/housing-reports/2017-development-cost-trends-in-affordable-housing.pdf?sfvrsn=4014a115_4 
"* 
MaineHousing, "MaineHousing Outlook 2023." https://mainehousing.0rg/docs/default-source/policy- 
research/research-reports/outlook-reports/2023-mainehousing-outlook-report.pdf
