5/10/2023  
Dear Committee on Housin g, 
Re: LD 1710  
If LD 1710 ’s primary goal is to drive small landlo rds out of business , and force them to sell to corporate  
overlords,  then you have written yourselves a great bill.  This bill is very problematic  for the people of 
Maine and hard working small businesses who provi de rental housing.  It will re sult in less invest ment in 
housing in our state , which will over time degrade the housing stock . This bill is very out of touch with 
our needs in  Central Maine. Vote NO  on LD 1710.  
We are a small rental housing provider in the great er Waterville area. Our business  model has been to 
convert  unlivable  properties and make them great places to live.  I would live in any of  our rental  homes.  
I’d remind you that the lack of unit s in our state  is not caused  by rental housing provi ders.   In fact,  we are 
the solution,  and you should  try to work with us rather t han create laws like LD 1710 that attack us.  Our 
tight housing stock has been cause d by  both underbuilding and overly restr ictive zoning by the 
government that favored the single -family  home f or decade s. Even now , if you want to convert a duplex 
to a single -family  home that ’s easy. It is much more burdensome  to convert a single -family  home into a 
duplex.   
I maintain  that section 3 of this bill is illegal. I would advise the writ ers of this bill to become f amiliar with 
the Maine Supreme Co urt ruling Dussault v. RRE Coach Lantern Holdings, LLC .1 In short, it ruled that RRE 
Coach Lan tern H oldings could not be forced to enter a contract with a rental assistance  program. Based 
on this ruling this bill is unconstitutional .  
Furthermore, I have grave concerns about fo rcing housing  providers to make repairs to their proper ty to 
enter into a lease agreement.   For example, some housing providers have  failed their  inspection because  
the lawn was too tall. That is clear ly not a habitability  issue , yet both the housing provid er and the 
tenant had to wait a couple more weeks for a reinsp ection .  
The issue with the housing programs is the inspections which  take time, and the fact the y pay well below 
the market rate. Why would housing providers keep a unit off the m arket for a couple of weeks dealing  
with  the housing inspection process, when you could fill it  immediately ? That loss in rental  income  could 
mean the difference of a positive return  or a loss on that building for the year. The bigger issue  is the 
programs need to pay several hundreds of dollar s more per unit per month to be competitiv e against  
market rate housing. For example , on Maine Housing ’s website they say f air market rent is $971 for a 
two bedroom  in Kennebec Country , but we can rent nice 2-bedroom  units for $1,400 in Waterville. That 
difference is over $5,000 dollars a year. W e would lose money on our bui ldings i f we rented them at 
Maine H ousing ’s prices. They are pricing things from an era before the cost to buy rental buildings and 
the cost to repair  things easily doubled or tripled  in our area  during  and after  the COVID boom .  
Additionally , some emergency  assistance  programs like General Assistance  are only provided  for one 
month , which will not last the duration of a year long lease term. Will housing providers need to accept 
 
1 https://law.justia.com/cases/maine/supreme -court/2014/2014 -me-8.html  
one month  of assistance , only t o have to evict  the t enant  one month  later  since the tenant has little to 
no income ? That is setting all parties up for f ailure.  
Finally , many housing providers like more than one month secu rity deposit  because when a t enant does 
not make the payment during their  last month , there is nothing  left for damages. Most of these  
programs only allow for one month ’s rent for a security  depo sit. Just a couple of months ago we h ad a 
tenant who paid two  months  in security deposit  stop paying rent and they moved out and left  the place 
in bad condition.  Even after applying  their security deposit  to their b alance , they still owed over $4,000 
in late rent , utilities , and damages. Should we not be a ble to collect  on that debt ?  
It would be extremely  expensiv e to com ply with this provision: “[housing providers  will be ] required to 
bring the ren tal unit into compliance with the implied warranty of fitness for habitation as described in 
Title 14, section 6021 or local  building or housing codes applicable for new construction ;” Perhaps you 
should ta lk with  some fire  inspe ctors  and code enforcement inspec tors and housing provide rs before 
making such a requirement . They will tell you can never get these 1900 ’s buildings up to  a new  
construction  standard without tearing  them  down. Do you want to decrease the unit count in our state? 
It would be nearly impossible without a  blank check to bring 1900 ’s buildings that are so common in 
Central Maine up to new contraction standards. There are many part s of building code that make it 
easier  to comply  with existing construction. F or example, older buildings can have smaller egress  
windows than new construction.  
Frankly a lot of small landlords don ’t hav e the de ep pockets everyone seems to think  they do. I work full 
time as a teacher. I have a friend  who  also teaches and has a  small apartment building. Her rents were 
very affordable  (around Maine  Housing ’s fair market val ues) , but she was struggling to even pay the oil 
bill last w inter . There would be no way she would have been able to afford a mandated repair by the 
housing agency.   
My next issue is section 4. You have no right to make our units public housing. We have rec eived no tax 
breaks when we bought or repaired  our units, nor have we agreed to give the state any rights of 
ownership  of our buildings. This conflicts with the taking clause of the 5th Amendment  of the US 
Constitution  which state s, “Nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just 
compensatio n.” A large number of ou r units a re high -quality single -family  homes that rent for around 
$2,000 a month and there is no way to turn a profit on those buildings charging under $1000 per month  
as this law would req uire. If you want to create public housing,  take some of your funds in Augusta and 
offer to buy our buildings  for fair market value  or build your own. Do not steal f rom us.  This bill would 
force us to sell  building s to get our unit count under 10  to avoid this theft of property  by The State. I 
guarantee  the building s we sell will not be as cared for or as well run . Additionally, i n some instances  it 
may make sense  to convert a multi -unit building into a nice single -family  home to get top dollar during 
the sal e (that is not going to help th e number of d welling units in our state , and would truly make us 
feed bad ly as our goal has been to increase the number o f units available  to our community ). 
Subchapter 14 . 1 is also problematic . The r ental assis tance  program as wr itten has so many regulations 
associated with it that hardly any rental units will quality.  It pre clude s doing a background check on 
applicants , which  is somethi ng we would never agree  to. There is just too much liability if something bad 
occurred  to the neigh bors and we did not do due diligence. We always charge late fees for  late rent. We 
cannot waive this fee for one person,  or we ’d get in to fair housing issues,  and we have no interest  in 
$20,000 legal bills dealing with such a dispute.  Also, w hy would a housing provider allow a tenant  who is 
on public assistance  to not pay a portion of  their rent ? Once ag ain, if you allow this for housing  
assistance  tenants , we’d need to make that a univers al policy . Finally, it does not allow for high enough 
rents to get people housed , which is th e real  issue at hand.  
I have issues with the credit reporti ng section  in section 5. People need to pay their debt obligations. 
Although  I agree that that people should try to find housing that is affordable  or around 30% of their 
income, if they sign a lease agreement that is more expensive, they need to be sure they can meet those 
obligations. If they don ’t pay , housing providers should be able to collect  the d ebt. This is don e either 
through small claims  court and/or with collections that will report to the ir credit rep ort. Often times, 
years later t enants will want to buy a house or car and will settle the de bt. Section 5 is making i t such 
there are no repercussions  for not paying your de bts. Can the same group then ste al from  a grocery 
store with impunity  since food is  not affordable for them as wel l? If someone  buys a  new SUV that is 
unaffordable  and they cannot make  those payments , should those  late payments or repossession  be 
expunged  as well ? Peopl e need to be held accountable for their ac tions. Also , future housing providers  
should have an accurate picture of a person ’s credi t and rental history. Why would the legislature  have 
housing providers and t enants enter  a contract that is bound to fail because of the lack  information ? 
 For example , there ar e some people who are g reat w ith mo ney. They may spend 50% of their 
income on rent, but  they pay their bills on time and they have a 700 credit score. O ther people may only  
spend 30% of their income on rent but  have a 500 credit score and have numerous  collections  perhaps  
even collections from prior rental housing . Which tenant would you r ather rent to ? If you pa ss this law, 
we would no longer be able to t ake the first tenant because the credit report would not give an accurate  
picture of  their ability to pay rent  and this law would allow them  to not pay us with impunity  should they 
desire to stop paying. This provision would force us to further tighten ou r screening criteria, which would 
make it harder for many good renters to get housed. You are harming  the people who make good 
financial decisions  and helping those who make bad decisions. That is bad law making.  
Additionally, we sometimes get  a high -quality  co-signer that allows so me weaker applicants  to 
enter a house  that is more than three times their income . Does this law prevent us from collecting on 
the cosigner  if it was not affordable to the tenant , but was affordable to the cosigner ? Also, what i f an 
applicant makes three times the rent  when they apply, but they lose their job during their  tenancy,  and it 
is no longer affordable ? Can we no longer c ollect on that bill since they no longer have a job and the rent 
is unaffordable ? 
I’m opposed to increa sing the transfer tax to fund these programs. Buying a home is  already much too 
expensive in our state right now. We are already in  a high tax burd en state.  Plea se don ’t make home 
ownership more expensive  for the hard -working  people of our state.    
I’d also add that you are p laying with people ’s retirement funds by making bad laws like this. It ’s the 
equivalent  of robbing from IRA s, 401k ’s, 403b ’s, and the M aine  State Retirement programs. Many mom 
and pop landlords buy a building or two as a means to both save for retirement and invest capit al into 
our state rather  than sending it away to Wall Street. We are  proud to have invested in  and i mproved our 
community. Anti-rental housing proposals  laws like this really have us second guessing if investing in our 
state was a wise choice  after all.  
We need to let the free-market  work  as it’s the mos t efficient  way to allocate resources .  All you are 
doing with all this additional  red tape is forcing  rental housing providers t o tighten  up their  screening 
criteria so people  on the edge w on’t be able to get into our units. These  rules will lead to co mpliance 
issues for small mom and pop landlor ds and force the m out of the business . These  landlords compr ise 
the majority  of the rental units in our state . Most of our local hous ing providers  care about our 
community and offer great housing . In our ca se, w e go by ou r buildings at least once a w eek to ch eck on 
them. We are responsive  to our tenant ’s needs. We provide our tenants great places to live . We are 
proud of the pro duct that we offer. This law will force small providers to exit the market . Does the 
legislature really  want to turn Maine ’s rental stock into corporate  owned rental housing ? Come up with 
alternati ve pro posals that will increase the  unit count in Maine. That is the only true long term solution.  
 
Regards,  
Justin Giroux  
Manager, Habitat For ME LLC 
Fairfield, ME  
 
  
 
 
 
 
