Tesfimony in supporf of LD I710 
Karina Beadling 
I2 May 2023 
Senafor Pierce, Represeniafive Gere, and honorable members of fhe Housing 
Commiffee: my name is karina Beadling, I live in Belfasf and l am here foalay fo 
fesfify in favor of LD i7 I O." 
lvlaine is a beaufiful sfafe wifh wonderful people, hiding a sad frufh: in an age of 
shrinking housing invenfory, sfagnafing wages, and skyrockefing cosfs of living, 
Many of us are sfruggling fo afford housing. 
-Please know for each one of us here foday, fhere are fhousands more who 
cannof be here, who righf now, are feeling defeafed, afraid, and powerless, 
because fhey are sfruggling fo afford housing, while maybe facing evicfion 
homelessness... ls fhis fhe way life should be? 
I am humbled fo sfand in fronf of you foday as a graieful mofher of four who 
secured safe, susfainable housing for my children and I, lasf Sepfember, fhrough 
assisfance. Affer years of sfruggling fo find affordable housing, I don'f fake fhis 
for granfed. 
In my experience searching for affordable housing in lvlaine, I can say fhis 
sincerely: For a family like mine, if’s acfually almosf impossible fo find affordable 
housing in Maine. 
Affer leaving an abusive relafionship, i was very mofivafed fo find safe housing 
for my children and I, so I searched all over fhe sfafe. Af one poinf, I hada 
secfion 8 voucher, buf quickly found fhaf landlords were nof inferesfed in renfing 
fo a fenanf wilh a voucher.. Almosf all jusf said fheir renfal rafes were foo high, 
ofhers jusf never responded if I asked abouf accepfing secfion 8. If was very 
frusfrafing frying fo find any landlord fhaf openly accepfed if, and ulfimafely my 
voucher expired and I had fo seek ofher avenues.
I have always worked To supporf my family, buT in Today's renTal markeT, iT's no 
longer possible To work only one job and earn enough To pay renf unassisfed. 
Somefhing needs To give, families and people like me are being squeezed dry... 
For example, The renT in my Three bedroom 1.5 bafh in BelfasT is $2000 a monfh, 
which is roughly 90% of my income! -I am so grafeful To receive housing 
assisfance Through New Hope Midcoasf, which is a fanfasfic organizafion, buT 
wiThouT ThaT assisfance, we would be homeless. 
We cannoT neglecf To menfion ThaT There are coupled problems wiTh rising renTs 
For me, if would noT be possible To work any more Than I currenTly do- Thus 
meefing rising housing cosTs- because like many Mainers, l don’T have 
childcare, iT's almosT impossible To find childcare, my son has been on daycare 
waiTlisTs for years, and he's only 2 ‘/2! Some days I bring him To work, or The 
sTaTehouse jusT so l can geT some Things done. 
BuT This is noT abouT childcare, iT’s abouT Mainers being able To afford housing. 
Shelfer is a basic human need, so why are so many neighbors in our greaf sTaTe 
suffering a crisis of housing affordabilify of This magniTude3 finding a solufion will 
improve The lives of neighbors jusf like my family and Mainers like us.
