 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association   
 
In Opposition to the General Assistance Related Sections of  
LD 1710, An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program and Amend 
the Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance Program  
 
May 12 , 2023  
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Housing Committee.  My name 
is Kate Dufour, and I am testifying in opposition to the sections of LD 1710 impacting the 
General Assistance program on behalf of  the 70 municipal leaders elected by their peers to serve 
on the Association’s Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish positions on bills of 
municipal interest.   
Although originally adopted as a program of last resort, over the course of th e last several 
years the General Assistance  (GA)  program has become an avenue for supplement ing all other 
forms of state and federal aid.  Between 2013 and 2022, the state’s share for GA expenditures 
was roughly $11.2 million, annually. However, as of late, the lingering effects of a global 
pandemic and the resulting flight to Maine, the rapid conversion of year -round housing to short -
term re ntals, a booming housing market, and the increasing costs of necessities are all impacting 
the GA program. In 2023, state reimbursement under the program jumped to $23 million, 
increasing the combined state and municipal expenditure to an all -time high of $32 million.  
As a result, the cost of the program continues to increase and place burdens on the 
property taxpayers who are responsible for funding 30% of the assistance provided as well as 
100% of the expenses associated with administering the program.   
While municipal officials believe amendments to the program are necessary, 
unfortunately m any of the provisions found in sections 7 to 15 of the bill seek to not only 
increase cost s but to shift additional administrative burdens onto municipal officials.   
 Calculation of Maximum  (Section 7) .  Muni cipal  officials support amending the 
manner  in which the maximum level of assistance is calculated  since  the aid provided in many 
areas of the state falls short of the actual living expenses . However , simply directing 
municipalities  to do so  by calculating the limits according  to a new formula  is not entirely 
helpful. Instead, the Department of Health and Human Services  should be directed to calculate 
the maximum levels of assistance annually and  disseminate that information to m unicipalities in 
a timely fashion.   
 Comprehensive Application Form (Section 10). Not only does th is section of the bill 
require the use of a uniform application for all assistance programs, but it also  requires the first 
point of contact to calculate  eligibility for all programs.  This is of great concern because it falls 
as a state mandate on local administrator s who will now be required to become experts on all 
programs .  Or c onversely , it could put a nonprofit  organization  in control of the expenditur e of 
property tax dollars without the consent  of the very individuals  required to pay for a portion of 

those costs .   Under existing law, a community can already  shift responsibility  to administer  the 
program to a third part y.   
 Trauma -informed & Culturally and L inguistically  Appropriate Services  (Section 
12).  The bill also mandates that GA administrators  provide trauma -informed and culturally and 
linguistically appropriate services , again without any additional state reimbursement.  
Of note, the bill defines trauma -informed services, as the provision of services that 
“acknowledge and are informed by the widespread impact of trauma and recognize the potential 
paths for recovery; recog nize the unique signs and symptoms of trauma in clients, families and 
staff; respond by fully integrating knowledge about trauma into policies, procedures and 
practices; and seek to actively avoid retraumatization.”  While "culturally and linguistically 
appropriate services" means “services that are designed to serve culturally diverse populations in 
a person's preferred language; function effectively within the context of cultural beliefs, 
behaviors and needs presented by a person who applies to or is a pa rticipant in a general 
assistance program and the person's community; contribute to a work environment that supports 
diversity; promote community engagement; build trust and relationships with general assistance 
applicants and participants; actively suppor t and enable general assistance participants to make 
informed choices; and value and facilitate the exchange of information with general assistance 
participants.”  
These are tasks better suited for social work ers who have the appropriate  education  to 
properly  identify  trauma  concerns , and not necessarily for the municipal offi cials who are left to 
wear many different hats, due in large part, to state level mandates.  If this is a priority for the 
state, then the Department of Health and Human Services  should be required to provide  those 
service s to municipalities  at no expense to the property taxpayers .   
Period of Eligibility  (Section 13) . The bill requires communities to provide up to six 
months of assistance , instead of the current  limit  of 30 days , without putting into place the 
safeguard s that prevent  a state level claw  back of reimbursement or the denial of state aid should 
a recipient become ineligible for assistance during the period  of presumed eligibility . While the 
ability to assist  over a longer period of time  could serve as a tool for ensuring the acquisition of 
permanent housing, without  provisions in statutes protect ing municipalities, the investment is too 
high of a risk and too large a financial burden for property taxpayers to shoulder.  To put that 
figur e into context, the maximum amount of assistance that would be provided to a single 
applicant residing in a studio apartment ranges from a low of $ 24,912 in an Aroostook County 
municipality to a high of $ 38,592  in a York County community.     
However, muni cipal officials do believe that GA program reforms are necessary and to 
that end have asked Sen. Moore and Rep. Meyer to submit LD 1664 , An Act to Increase 
Reimbursement Under the General Assistance Program  and LD 1732, An Act to Expand the 
General Assista nce Program , respectively.   
The Association’s more complex GA related bill (LD 1732) seeks to address some of the 
issues raised by the municipal officials entrusted to administer the program and are being 
advanced by a working group of municipal leaders and GA administrators from rural, suburban, 
and urban communities.  The concern among members of the MMA working group is that while 
the program, which was once a resource of last resort, has morphed into a program that is 
necessary to supplement o ther state and federal assistance programs, the laws and rules guiding 
the program’s implementation have not kept up with the evolving environment.  The changes 
proposed in the bill seek to modernize the program by addressing accountability and resources.    
Both  bills, along with LD 1675 , An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the General 
Assistance Program Regarding Eligibility, Housing Assistance and State Reimbursement and to 
Establish a Working Group and LD 1426 , An Act to Secure Housing for the Most Vulnerable 
Maine Residents by Amending t he Laws Governing Municipal General Assistance  received 
public hearings on May 5  before the Health & Human Services  (HHS)  Committee .   
 
Rather than having two communities explor e the needed changes to the GA program, we 
urge the Housing Committee to ask  members of the HHS Committee to consider the  suggestions 
found in LD 1710 as they develop  an appropriate and comprehensive response to the GA 
program .    
 
Finally , the provision of LD 1710 seeking to create a rental assistance  program has 
tremendous  merit and if properly enacted could relieve the pressures currently place d on the GA 
program.  
 
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.   
