KCH  Investments LLC
GBAOMA
LD 1710
I oppose LD 1710! Reasons listed below.
- Under Section 3. I am against the government of any size requiring me to sign a 
contract with government agencies telling the number of units I need to set aside for 
"their particular requirements." Am I opposed to doing so under my own "free will" at
a later date? The answer would be no. Yet, the government has no business making 
private citizens enter into contracts they do not want. As long as Landlords are paying
their bill, providing tenants with a good place to live, they should be left to run things 
as they see fit without "Big Brother" dictating what private money has decided to do. 
We live in a democracy, not a dictatorship. That is not what this state is about nor this
country. 
-Under Section 4. Again, government of any size has no right to tell me who to put 
into my units! The government was not there when I purchased the property, met with
the bank, signed the papers, made upgrades to the units, took care of the lawns, 
plowed during the winter, made sure there was heat and hot water, took care of all of 
the little things that come up during the year that need fixing when the tenants contact
me, nor should they be telling me how many units I can own and make me put people 
in those unit who are unable to pay the full rent and utilities. 
The problem with this system is the Maine government wants to take care of 
EVERYONE at the tax payers expense. That is simply not possible. What ever 
happened to everyone pulling their OWN weight? Also, the current system that is in 
place needs to be overhauled. You want everyone to have housing, yet you do not 
want to hold the tenants accountable when they destroy perfectly good rental units for
reasons to high to count. Why do you think there are so many builders who are 
building "high rental units?" You are creating laws that are doing the opposite of what
is needed! Tell me what you are going to do about not holding tenants accountable, 
and maybe you will have mine and other Landlords attention to talk about reasonable 
laws when the accommodations are reasonable for everyone, not just the tenants!
-Under section 5 
Affordable rent is subjective as it all depends on your income. When you as 
legislatures purchase a home, the bank determines what you can afford by what you 
receive as income, and you need to decide what you are going to purchase with that 
money. If you do not pay your mortgage, the bank holds you accountable by stating 
you have defaulted on your loan, ultimately affecting your credit report. Why should 
tenants be held to a different standard? This is simply not fair business practices. 

