I oppose  LD 1710  because of the following reas ons. 
 
We have been landlords for almost 3 generations  and have seen how every branch of the government 
has tried to make rental property ownership less profitable and harder to keep rents low.  
 
Landlords ’ responsibility is to screen tenants to enable us to provide a  clean, quiet tenancy and have a 
lower vacancy rate. Our tenants appreciate our diligence in doing our job  with our screening and our 
efforts to keep costs low , but the regulations  are making this impossible.  
 
This proposed bill is a direct violation of my rights.  I understand some regulation is an unfortunate 
necessity in our new society , but this is an overreach and an attempt by government to take over yet 
another private business. Government has not proven to be a good steward of anything they control.  
Regulation upon regulation has caused this unaffordable housing crisi s. Inflation and overregulation  
caused by government  has escalated costs faster than any business can recoup by raising their income.  
Yet businesses are expected to pay their bills  with increasing  mortgage interest rate s, utilit ies, taxes , 
insurance,  etc. without any breaks or incentive s. Before a couple of years ago , we never raised rents on 
our current tenants. However, with increasing utilities, insurances, taxes, interest rates, we have had to 
raise rents a substantial amount ac ross the board  to cover co sts. With this being said, we have  lost great 
tenants because the cost was too high. These never -ending  regulations have made it difficult  for us to 
keep rents at the price our c lientele can afford. “Government  help” does not yield any positive results.  
Who is going to subsidize us to keep us afloat?  
 
Affordable housing is covered under government controlled section 8 subsidized housing - just t o name 
one program. L andlords are free to participate , but with this new legislation  we would be forced to 
provide with no subsidy.  This is just one more tax on one sector of business.   
 
Unaffordable housing is her e due to gov ernment  regulation policies and inflation . Income requirements 
are not negotiable . Banks cannot loan to people who cannot pay.  When they did give  mortgages to 
people that could not pay, it was due to the g overnment giving out low interest  and 0% loans . Stop 
raising costs  and rents will stay low. Landlords can not take advantage of any program s- such as the 
homestead exemption cre dit on property taxes just to name one. This is something that would he lp keep 
all costs and rents lower.  
 
Landlord s and  Tenant s do not need a th ird party  setting polic ies that cost every one time and money.  
 
We all need to learn to live within our budgets and be responsible for decisions and  the lifestyle s we 
choose . Government  cannot  change people nor can they change how unfair the world already is. What 
the government can do  is simply keep their hands out of it and stop making it worse.  
  
