Senator Pierce, Representative G-ere, and honorable members of the 
Committee on Housing: my name is Lucca Hamina, l live in Orono and I am here 
today to testify in favor of LD l 710. 
LD 1710, or the HOME act, is a piece of legislation meant to strengthen housing 
assistance within Maine and help out renters of all types. l think that I speak for 
most of us when I say this past year has put at the very least a strain on most of 
our finances, but for Mainers who were struggling with housing before COVID-l9 
and massive inflation l cannot imagine the hardship they face today. That is why 
passing LD l7lO is of the utmost importance. 
Over the course of the pandemic we all got a glimpse of our system's lack of 
resilience. In the face of major societal shake up we saw record unemployment, 
increases in those unhoused, rent moratoriums to try and manage the economic 
fallout of a pandemic. l try not to be a pessimistic person, but the world is 
changing and we need to be prepared for further unprecedented times in the 
future and start dealing with the unhoused epidemic already here today. 
While being unhoused presents a challenge even/where, Ivlaine is special as for 
half the year it is not only unsafe to live unhoused, but deadly. Back in February 
Maine saw a polar vortex which caused temperatures to drop well below O, 
during this time the city of Bangor coordinated a response that was mostly 
championed by volunteers. While l am happy to have been a part of the 
good-hearted people who helped make sure people could have somewhere 
warm to go, l am left with one question. Why must it fall on volunteers and other 
unhoused folks to help in the more dire of circumstances when we could 
prevent much of this with policy? 
l believe the HOME act will help us to do just that by making it easier for renters 
to rent through barring types of rent discrimination, creating rental assistance 
programs, and renter protections in case hard times hit them or all of us like they 
did not more than a few years ago. 
Please support LD l7lO. Thank you.
