Testimony in support of LD 1710 
Magalie Yangala 
12 May 2023 
My name is Magalie Yangala, I live in Portland and I am part of the Housing 
Leadership Team at Maine Equal Justice. I have also worked as a Natural 
Helper in my community and neighborhood. I am here to speak in support of 
LD 1710, the HOME Act. 
The reason I strongly agree and want this bill to pass, is because the bill 
really understands the importance of having a peaceful place to call home. It 
helps both single people and families. It helps people all around Maine. The 
HOME Act understands the struggle of being homeless. Being homeless is 
not often voluntary, it happens based on life circumstances. 
We don't have a lot of affordable housing in Maine. And rent keeps on going 
higher and higher. There is a lot of misunderstanding between landlords and 
tenants. Landlords often abuse the rights of tenants, and because the tenant 
is so afraid of not being able to find new housing, they do not complain. 
Tenants are not able to demand their rights be respected, because landlords 
have so much power. This leaves tenants feeling helpless, and scared, even 
when they are housed. 
Once this bill passes, I believe people will have hope that they will finally get 
the help they need to be able to afford their rent, and that they will be 
treated more fairly when applying for housing. It will help improve some of 
the struggles at General Assistance in Maine as well. It will help New Mainers 
transition from having to use General Assistance to being financially 
independent. Once someone gets a job, they need to be able to stay in the
housing they have, but once you start working and lose GA, there is no other 
safety net to help pay for the unaffordable rent in my community. Something 
is wrong if a person becomes homeless after losing GA when they are 
working. It means that affordable housing is not truly affordable compared 
to the wages of most Maine families. The same apartment that a family was 
living in while on general assistance must be affordable after GA. With the 
HOME Act this is possible! We need this safety net now more than ever! The 
HOME Act is an important way forward for Maine. Thank you.
