Testimony in support of LD 1710 
Marshall G. Mercer 
12 May 2023 
Grand rising Senator Pierce, Representative Gere & the Honorable Chairs of the 
housing committee. 
My name is Marshall G. Mercer. I am the Executive Director of Hope Brokers Inc. We 
are a 501 3)c nonproﬁt that focuses on creating spaces for the marginalized community 
of Maine. But our office & I reside in the state capitol. 
I am here to speak on behalf of LD 1710. If this bill would pass it would be a game 
changer for those who live here in Maine that work full-time jobs, while trying to support 
their education, or trying to feed their children but can’t afford the rent, because of it 
constantly being jacked up by greedy real estate agents that don’t even live in our great 
city of Augusta. I myself constantly have to choose between food that has to go in my 
stomach or gas that goes in my truck, while spending 70 hrs a week doing outreach and 
training the community in relational organizing, creating listening forums to hear and act 
on the barriers my community members are faced with. 
I barely make it & I know how to navigate through the resources. I am often showing 
members of the marginalized community how to as well. Yet it still is a hard task for me. 
This leads me to think about the obstacles of my friends that are un-housed today. They 
are literally under the mercy of this committee now. Most of them don’t even have a pot 
to piss in. Literally. Or are even able to get into half of these establishments around here 
today for X Y & Z reasons. If passed, this bill would: 
0 Prohibit housing discrimination- which means landlords couldn‘t refuse to rent to 
someone who uses Section 8, GA, or any other housing program, 
0 Create a rental assistance program, 
0 Make changes to the real estate transfer tax, and 
0 Provide consumer protection 
For years now people & organizations have been making too much money off the backs 
of your constituents. Those are the people I am here to speak for today. 
Thank you. 
Executive Director of Hope Brokers Inc 
Marshall G. Mercer
