Mary  Cook
The Opportunity Alliance 
LD 1710
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and honorable members of the Committee of 
housing: My name is Mary Cook, I live in Kennebunk, and I am here to testify in 
favor of LD 1710 the HOME Act.  I am a Social Worker and I have worked in 
housing and serving those experiencing homelessness for 12+ years.  The cost of 
housing and lack of affordable housing in the State of Maine is making it impossible 
for people to afford housing.  The traumas of housing insecurity and homelessness are
impacting Maine families and the State of Maine needs the HOME act in place to 
ensure all families and individuals have access to affordable housing.  
During the pandemic, I managed the Emergency Rental Assistance program for 
Cumberland County which assisted households with rental assistance.  This program 
has since ended for rental assistance and although there will be differences in how the 
Rental assistance program with the HOME act will be managed.  The benefits of this 
program for Maine families will be the same, so I would like to take some time to 
share some of the benefits we saw with ERA.  With rental assistance, families were 
able to pay for things like childcare, safer vehicles for transportation, and were able to
afford their necessities such as food without sacrificing their rent. We heard from 
families who were able to catch up on debts that they had accrued when they weren't 
able to afford their rents. Families were able to focus on their children and 
communities with more intention due to having the stress and anxieties of not making 
ends meet on their mind.  
We heard from an elderly couple who have been in their unit for most of their lives 
but with an increase in their rent and being on Social Security they were barely 
getting by.  With rental assistance, they were able to make their rent payments and put
money towards medication and other health care needs.  They are also now able to 
continue to age in place, in their community and where they are most comfortable. 
Our staff would also get communication expressing gratitude from Landlords of the 
benefits of the rental assistance program.  Landlords enjoyed working with the 
program because they were receiving consistent rental payments.  Landlords were 
able to avoid the challenging process of evictions with families and tenants who could
not afford their rent and were facing eviction.  Landlords were able to avoid the high 
costs of turning over units after an eviction.  When households can stay in their units 
longer, they start to build a community which benefits landlords and the 
neighborhood. 
When the Emergency Rental Assistance Program ended for renters, it was a huge loss 
for the State of Maine Families.  We are starting to see the impact of people losing 
this assistance as we hear of people struggling again to meet their rent due to the high 
and increasing costs of rent.  With the HOME Act, the State of Maine will be able to 
continue to support families in supplementing their rent and staying housed and 
continue to see the benefits as I've mentioned. 
I would also like to speak to the other benefits of the HOME Act which will prohibit 
housing discrimination.  I manage the PATH program for Cumberland and York 
County, which works with those that are experiencing unsheltered homelessness. We 
are seeing folks becoming unhoused at alarming rates, and people who are 
experiencing homelessness for the first time.  I will share one story of a PATH 
participant, I will call him Frank for today's purposes.  Frank is in his 50s and a Black 
Man.  Prior to his homelessness, Frank was housed and paying his rent without any 
assistance and working full time as a manager at a local grocery store.  After his 
landlord sold his property and the new owner increased the rent to an amount that 
Frank could not afford with his income.  This led to Frank becoming unhoused after 
not being able to find a more affordable unit. Frank then eventually lost his 
employment due to his housing instability and the difficulty of managing employment
while navigating homelessness. Frank now has an active voucher, and he is actively 
working for an apartment to pair it with.  He has been working on this for months and 
is not having luck in securing a unit.  With the protections of the HOME Act, Frank 
would not be discriminated against for utilizing a voucher to pay his rent.  The 
HOME Act also would have protected Frank at the time that his rent was increased by
being able to supplement his rent with the rental assistance program. This would have 
prevented him entering the trauma of homelessness to begin with and losing his 
employment.  Homelessness and housing insecurity doesn't just impact Maine 
families and individuals, it impacts our entire communities.  When everyone has 
access to safe and affordable housing, we all benefit as a State.  
Thank you for your time and consideration today.  I hope that you vote in favor of LD
1710 and continue to support Mainers in staying in their communities and continue to 
thrive. 

