PO Box 7860 i
t 
~ Portland, ME 04112 
<a 
t (207)774-5444 
AMERISAN CIVIL LIBERTEES UNHIN 
Maine www.aclumaine.0rg 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
Ought To Pass 
LD 1710 — An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee 
Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal 
General Assistance Program 
Joint Standing Committee on Housing 
May 12, 2023' 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Housing, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am 
Policy Director for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I am here in support 
of LD 1710, and in particular, section 3 of the bill, Which would prohibit 
discrimination against renters based on their source of income. 
As of 2019, housing assistance has helped lift about 3 million people out of poverty 
nationwide.1 When people experiencing poverty receive housing subsidies, it 
expands the quality of housing options and increases access to more resourced 
communities. 
The Housing Choice Voucher program, the largest federal housing assistance 
program, expands access to affordable housing to more than 5 million people in 2.3 
million households. The program is federally funded but managed by a network of 
state and local housing agencies — with more than two-thirds of families 
participating in the nationwide voucher program identifying a person of color as 
head of household? 
Housing vouchers can only be effective and provide rental assistance to more 
families if landlords and private rental agencies accept income subsidies and agree 
to rent to voucher holders. Currently, federal and most state laws do not protect 
1 https://www.cbpp.org/biog/programs-targeted-for-cuts-keep-millions-from-poverty-new-census-data —show 
2 https://www.cbpp.org/research/h0using/more-housing-vouchers-most-important-step-to-help-more-people- 
afford-stable-homes
voucher holders from rejection based on the source of income discrimination. Asa 
result, non-discrimination laws only protect 1 in 3 households that receive 
vouchers.~°> Because Maine does not protect from this kind of discrimination, 
landlords can refuse to rent to applicants based on the would-be renter’s source of 
income, whether that is a housing voucher, Social Security Disability, child support, 
or other public or adjudicated sources of income. 
This is an issue for low-income people in Maine generally, but particularly for 
Mainers of color because housing and lending practices have historically barred 
people of color, particularly Black people, from homeownership and growing 
intergenerational wealth. As a result of a combination of factors, Black households 
are much more likely than white households to be renters with incomes at or below 
the poverty level. While the Fair Housing Act protects against more overt 
discrimination, credit scoring systems, source of income discrimination, and lending 
practices continue to be barriers to Black people and other people of color achieving 
housing security. 
In our continuing affordable housing crisis, Maine should avail itself of every tool it 
has to ensure that those who need housing can get it. Data from other states show 
that implementing a prohibition on source of income discrimination would likely 
lead to higher acceptance of voucher holders as renters and a higher usage of the 
vouchers themselvesfl Ending discrimination based on a renter’s source of income is 
a tool Maine should not leave in the box. 
We urge you to vote ought to pass. Thank you for your time. 
3 
https://endhomelessness.org/legislation/source-of-income-discrimination/ 
4 https://www.cbpp.org/research/housing/prohibiting —discriminati0n-against-renters~using~housing-vouchers- 
improces-resu|ts#_ftnref17
