Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and honorable members of the Joint 
Select Committee on Housing: my name is Patty Kidder and l am a resident of 
Springvale, part of the city of Sanford. l am here today to testify in favor of LD 
1710: An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee Program 
and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants and the Municipal General Assistance 
Program. 
Housing insecurity and homelessness are very real problems for low income 
families in Maine. More than half of the lowest income households in Maine pay 
more than 50% of their income for their rent. That is not sustainable and they 
are constantly worried about being evicted. LD 1710 will create a Rental 
Assistance Program that will help low income working families to stay in their 
homes breaking the cycle of housing insecurity. 
During the pandemic, I worked with people who were either paying more than 
50% of their income for rent or were already homeless and we discovered that 
they could get a section 8 voucher and it would expire before we could finda 
landlord with an open apartment willing to take a chance on a low income family. 
You couldn't prove it, but it appeared the landlords were discriminating against 
the section 8 voucher and the families source of income. LD 1710 — the HOME 
Act would address this problem that many low-income, working families in 
Maine face when they have to move. 
During the Great Recession of ‘08, my husband lost the job he had for over 20 
years when the company closed its doors the end of May 2009. He was partially 
disabled and no one would hire him full time. lf we didn’t have a huge network of 
friends and family that was able to support us financially through those tough 
years, we would have lost our housing. Without their $500 to $1,000 per month 
contribution to our family budget, we would have been homeless and our
daughter would have been couch surfing for her senior year in high school in 
order to graduate with her classmates she had known since kindergarten. We 
were very lucky but many families don’t have that kind of support network and 
they need in help and security the HOME Act will provide. 
My husband grew up in a large family with housing insecurity. His father wasa 
subcontractor that worked on projects for companies so when he was working, 
he made plenty of money but when the job was finished, the money would run 
out before his Dad would find another temporary position. When the money ran 
out, they would lose their housing and the 5 children would be sent to live with 
different relatives all over New England. At one point the children had to live at 
an orphanage for 2 years while their parents put their lives back together. 
All of this trauma from growing up with housing insecurity has given my husband 
a life time of mental illness and the goal of never letting it happen to his own 
children. We wanted our children to grow up in the same house and in the same 
school system for the entire childhood and when that dream was threatened, he 
fell into a deep depression like l had never seen before. We had been through a 
lot together in our marriage. Life threatening illness and financial hardship but 
the thought of his family becoming homeless, like he had been in his childhood 
almost destroyed him. He is now 100% disabled and is just now starting to come 
out of the deep depression caused by losing more than half of his income 
putting his family into poverty. 
The housing insecurity that my husband suffered as a child has affected him his 
whole life in a negative way. Children with housing insecurity can't concentrate 
on their education when they don’t know where they will be sleeping that night, 
whether it will be in their apartment or a tent or a distant family members couch. 
The HOME Act will help keep low income working families in their homes and
save their children from a lifetime of suffering and help break the cycle of 
poverty by creating a Rental Assistance Program. 
The Rental Assistance Program is crucial to the success of this bill and the state 
will need a new revenue source to help pay for it. LD 1710 would make changes 
to the Real Estate Transfer Tax to help pay for the program that low-income 
working families so desperately need. We need to help families stay in their 
homes or the Unhoused Crisis will worsen and the humanitarian and financial 
cost will skyrocket. t 
LD 1710 has a large price tag but l believe that the cost of NOT passing the 
HOME Act will be many times more. Breaking the cycle of . poverty is key to 
providing skilled workers for Maine companies in the future. Providing housing 
security for our low-income working Maine families is key to breaking that cycle 
of poverty. We need to give our low income families the hope and security 
needed for their children to thrive not just survive. 
Please vote LD 1710 ought to pass and help our low-income families stay in 
their homes and provide the security they need to break the cycle of poverty. 
Honorable members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, thank you for 
your service and your time. 
Patricia E. Kidder 
4 Carpenter Street 
Springvale, ME 04083-1109 
pattykidderd19@gmail.com 
207-977-3325 (Call or Text)
