District 118:       Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Bayside, East Bayside, Oakdale and the 
University  of Southern Maine Campus  Friday , May 12th, 202 3 
 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross supporting  
LD 1710 , An Act to Establish the Maine Rental Assistance and Guarantee 
Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenan ts and the Municipal 
General Assistance Program  
Before  the Joint Select  Committee on Housing  
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere  and esteemed members of the Select  
Committee on Housing . I apologize for not being present this morning, please accept 
this testimony in support of  LD 1710 , An Act to Establish the Maine Rental 
Assistance and Guarantee Program and Amend the Laws Regarding Tenants 
and the Municipal General Assistance Program . 
 
Rental Assistance Programs Bolster and Close Gaps in Maine’s Housing System  
 
Guaranteeing stable, affordable housing makes our communities safer. 
Providing stable housing has been shown to reduce the rates of violent crime and 
survival crimes like theft, trespassing and loitering, and sex work1.  Long -term 
housing assistance has als o been linked with decreased incidence of intimate partner 
violence2.  Stable housing for people recently incarcerated has been s hown to reduce 
recidivism rates3. 
  
Rental assistance is key to bridging the affordability gap to make rents 
affordable for peopl e with really low incomes, that the housing market will not meet, 
with structural, long term changes. LD 1710  will help cover the cost of rent while 
seeking joys that pay a living wage or waiting for longer term federal rental 
assistance.  
 
                                              
1 Kimberly Burrowes, Urban Institute, Can Housing Interventions Reduce Incarceration and Recidivism (2019). 
https://housingmatters.urban.org/articles/can -housing -interventions -reduce -incarceration -and-recidivism  
2 The Network for Public Health Law (n4)  
3 HUD, Promoting Mental Health Through Housing Stability (2022). https://www.huduser.gov/portal/pdredge/pdr -
edge -trending -053122.html  ` 
 
 
    
    RACHEL TALBOT ROSS  
      SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE  
 
  
 
STATE OF MAINE  
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
SPEAKER'S OFFICE  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1300  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

A study showed that  those on rental assistance programs who can work, do 
work. Of the non -disabled, working -age households, in a study, 60% had at least one 
person in the workforce. The majority of individuals utilized rental assistance for 
less than three years4.   
 
Data on t he emergency rental assistance program showed one state saw a 63% 
decrease in daily eviction filings from before the moratorium on evictions and after 
the moratorium on evictions had been lifted5.   
 
In Maine, we have seen how cash assistance programs can si ngle handedly cut 
child poverty in half. Throughout the pandemic the expanded child tax credit and the 
federal emergency rental assistance program which provided us with a wealth of 
data demonstrating the effectiveness of these programs. Child poverty hit historic 
lows in 2020 in part due to these programs, and you can already see child poverty 
rates rising since the expanded child tax credit and emergency rental assistance 
programs have ended6.   
 
An article by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities foun d a plethora of 
benefits to rental assistance programs including improvements to adult and child 
health, the ability to move to low poverty areas, and a reduction in poverty, 
homelessness, and housing instability7.  In fact, rental assistance is shown to be  more 
effective than other interventions (such as transitional housing or short -term rapid 
rehousing) in reducing the number of individuals and families who experience 
homelessness, housing instability, and overcrowding8.  Families who participate in 
rental  assistance programs are less than half as likely to have their child placed in 
foster care. Additionally, rental assistance programs have shown a ¾ reduction in 
families living in shelters and on the street, they’ve “reduced families living in 
overcrowded  conditions by half”, and made a 40% reduction in the number of moves 
over five years9.  When individuals and families housing costs are more manageable 
they have more money to spend on food, health care, and other necessities. 
Disposable incomes help boost  the economy.  
 
Children whose families receive rental assistance show fewer behavioral 
problems, sleep disruptions, school changes, and higher academic achievements 
                                              
4 CBPP, (n16).  
5 HUD, FY 2022 Impact Evaluation of the Emergency Rental Assistance (ERA) Program, (2022), 
https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/spm/gmomgmt/grantsinfo/fundingopps/fy22_impacteval  
6 Maine Children’s Alliance, (n5)  
7 CBPP, (n18)  
8 ibid 
9 ibid 
including closing the achievement gap by half. Long term studies of families who 
had the fr eedom to move to higher opportunity neighborhoods have shown children 
have higher chances for success later in life including lower incarceration rates, 
higher college attendance rates, and a 30% increase in annual earnings as an adult10.   
 
Rental Assistance  Should Ensure Stability, but Stigma Leads to Instability  
 
Choice of where to live is core to our freedoms. Landlords are the gatekeepers 
of housing and get to decide where families live, where they work, and where 
children go to school. As demonstrated by data above, discriminating against low -
income tenants who participate in rental assistance programs has effects well beyond 
the walls of housing. To promote housing stability and opportunity, Maine must 
protect participants in rental assistance programs fr om unfair stigma and 
discrimination. Since, even when these families do get vouchers, many will still 
struggle to find safe, affordable housing. Too often, tenants face the unfair stigma 
that comes with participation in rental assistance programs. Maine mu st enact LD 
1710 to prohibit discrimination based on low -income tenants’ participation in rental 
assistance programs.  
 
The goals of housing voucher programs are to increase access to safe, 
affordable housing units and to provide opportunities to low -income families to 
obtain rental housing outside areas of poverty. Vouchers enable tenants to afford 
market -rate rents. Voucher holders pay just a portion of their income towards the 
rent (usually one -third of their monthly income) and the rest is subsidized. The  
program’s design promotes stability for renters and for landlords.  
 
But voucher holders face outright discrimination because of their status as 
voucher holders. In theory, voucher holders can move to any community in Maine 
and rent a market rate apartment,  but in reality, their housing choices are severely 
limited by their ability to find a landlord who will participate in the program. 
Tenants routinely apply to dozens of landlords before finding one who will accept 
their voucher.  
 
Voucher holders can become  and remain homeless and lose their vouchers 
when they can’t find a landlord who will rent to them. Most voucher programs give 
tenants a limited amount of time to “lease up” their voucher at a new apartment, and 
the program can terminate rental assistance if tenants fail to find an apartment in that 
time. This can range anywhere from 30 to 120 days. But in 2015, Maine Housing 
                                              
10 ibid 
reported that fewer than half of its Section 8 Voucher participants found housing in 
the first 30 days11.  Often, tenants lose their vo uchers simply because they can’t find 
a landlord who will accept their voucher in that time. Maine Housing reports 
hundreds of people in Maine who have vouchers can’t use them because tenants 
can’t find landlords willing to participate in the program.  
 
I would urge the committee to give strong consideration for LD 1710 and pass 
this bill for too many Mainers that will benefit and then succeed from this bill.  
Thank you.  
 
                                              
11 This was part of Maine Housing’s decisi on to extend their 30 day time limit to 120 days, in part to avoid the need to 
process extension requests. Maine Housing administers one -third of the State’s 12,000 Section 8 Vouchers with  
the rest being administered by local housing authorities. Callie Fe rguson, Homeless with 4 Kids, A Bangor Man  
Called Nearly 100 Landlords to Find a Place to Live, Bangor Daily News (Nov. 19, 2018),  
https://bangordailynews.com/2018/11/19/news/bangor/homeless -with-4-kids-a-bangor -man-called -nearly -100-
landlords -to-find-a-place-to-live/.  
