Testimony in support of LD 1710 
Rina Rengouwa Barclew 
12 May 2023 
Good Morning Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and the Housing Committee. 
My name is Rengouwa, l am from Gabon. I have two children, a girl who is soon to be 
15 and a little boy soon to be 2 years old. We have been living in Maine since March 21, 
2022. As soon as we arrived, we were taken care of by the shelter, then General 
Assistance in Portland took over. 
When we arrived in Maine, we were full of hope. We had heard only good things about 
this state. We said to ourselves, “This is a place where we can raise our children in 
complete safety.” But veiy quickly we realized the difficulty of having access to a house. 
We spent 11 months at the hotel. Not because we weren't looking for a house. But of 
the few houses we found, the owners did not want to rent to us because we were on 
General Assistance. 
Once we had found a two-bedroom apartment in Biddeford for $1,990, the rental price 
exceeded the limit that GA gives for a family of our size. We have seen our hope of 
having a place we can call home vanish. While living in the hotel, it was not easy to 
share a room with my soon-to-be-15-year-old daughter, my son, and my husband. We 
cooked in the shower. We've all had depression at some point. The rare time a family 
left the hotel because they had found a house, we would say to each other, “When is it 
our turn?” Waiting lists for housing, or for help to get housing, are very long. But families 
keep arriving every day. Homelessness is a serious problem, and something must be 
done. 
Today I decided to testify, to tell my story, and to sound the alarm. Ladies and 
gentlemen, legislators, we are aware of the efforts you are making for the well-being of 
the people of Maine. But there is still a lot to do. As a member of the Maine Equal
Justice leadership team, who has worked on this bill for many months, my opinion is 
that LD 1710, the HOME Act, offers solutions to problems we can't ignore. We must 
make housing accessible to all people in Maine. We need assistance, and we need 
equity. Please pass this bill and help address the realities that the inhabitants of Maine 
are facing every day.
