Robert Poole
Harpswell
LD 1710
I am a housing provider in the town of Brunswick.  I currently participate in housing 
assistance programs (Section 8, VASH) and most of my apartments are rented at rates
which are well below market. Having rented for many years, I'm familiar with the 
challenges faced by both renters and housing providers. 
Like me, many smaller housing providers in the area must split their time between 
rental property related activities, family responsibilities, and other jobs making it 
critical to minimize administrative burden and non-value-added activities. After 
reading through LD1710, it appears that a substantial amount of administrative 
burden will be placed on housing providers and managers who would be responsible 
for navigating and complying with the provisions of this document. This bill will 
adversely impact my business by increasing administrative costs and reducing the 
time available for property maintenance. 
It's well understood that Maine is facing a shortage of both market rate and affordable
housing. LD1710 does nothing to address the housing shortage and will discourage 
future housing investments. 
When working on LD1710 and the myriad of other bills related to housing, I 
respectfully request your consideration of the items below which are also major 
contributors to the current housing affordability situation.
1) In the current real estate market, renting apartments at "affordable" rates is not 
feasible for many housing providers due to the high price of entry into the market. If 
forced to do so, housing providers would have to compensate by increasing rents on 
market rate units, exacerbating the existing affordability problem. Alternatively, 
housing providers may consider other options such as the sale of rental properties or 
conversion to short term rentals or condos, both of which are in high demand. 
Takeaway- Housing prices are very high. Current rents are largely a reflection of the 
cost of housing acquisition or construction. 
 2) The overwhelming majority of my current and past tenants are wonderful people. I
have however had to deal with some other tenants who were extremely messy, failed 
to pay, had uncontrolled addictions, and/or harassed other tenants. Sadly, the costs 
incurred to repair the damage caused by bad tenants ends up being passed along to the
good tenants. For this reason, it's critical that housing providers be able to execute 
comprehensive background, rental history, and credit checks on prospective tenants 
prior to move in. Furthermore, its equally critical that the current legal processes for 
removing problem tenants be maintained to prevent property damage and the 
escalation of tenant-to-tenant conflicts. 
Takeaway- Bad tenants create problems for housing providers and tenants alike.  
Housing providers need the tools necessary to legally terminate their tenancy and to 
avoid bad tenants in the first place. 
3) Like many, housing providers were subjected to significant hardships while 
Covid19 related restrictions were in place. Housing providers were forced to shoulder 
an unfair burden during this time when many tenants chose not to pay rent.  Recovery 
from losses incurred during the Covid19 eviction moratorium, along with the looming
threat of increased regulation and draconian rent control measures such as those in 
place in Portland gives housing providers strong justification to keep rents as high as 
the market will allow. 
Takeaway- Housing providers are well justified in charging rents consistent with the 
current market. Treating housing providers as part of the solution, rather than part of 
the problem by eliminating the risk of the threats discussed above will help reverse 
the trend of rental price increases.
