Testimony in Opposition to LD1710 
My name is Scott Lawliss and I oppose LD1710.  I’m a medium sized landlord with units in Bangor, 
Brewer and Winterport.  I also represent the GBAOMA (Greater Bangor Apartment Owners and 
Managers Association) as its President.  GBAOMA has approximately 650 memberships.  We are 
composed of primarily small landlords.  We are typically, hardworking small business people who own a 
few rental units as an investment for retirement. 
It is important to remember that we, as Landlord’s house many thousands of Bangor residents in safe, 
well-maintained reasonably affordable apartments. Our tenants are comprised of people from all 
income levels.  We are a huge part of the solution to Bangor’s housing problem. 
LD 1710 would undermine our ability to provide that housing.  It would encourage landlords to look for 
loopholes in order to avoid the restrictions it imposes.  It would also force landlords to sign contracts 
against their will; something that seems like it should be illegal in this state or this country.  Most 
importantly, it would seriously discourage new development; seemingly a bad idea when there is such a 
shortage of housing in this state. 
The landlords of Bangor house people from all walks of life in Bangor.  We have plenty of low- and 
middle-income tenants.  We have tenants with vouchers and other subsidies.  We have lots of tenants 
with blemishes in their background including criminal records, bankruptcies, prior evictions and lots of 
other issues.  We have many Landlords of all sizes that house low-income and subsidized tenants.  Some 
landlords specialize in this business and some, like myself, have low-income tenants as a part of their 
over-all portfolio.  That said, housing lower income and subsidized tenants is a very different business 
then housing well employed tenants with good credit.  The former requires much more management, 
monitoring and sometimes enforcement.  Many landlords are intimidated by that.  I appreciate that the 
state would like to see more housing for the low-sector.  There are many good programs designed to 
encourage that.  In fact, Penquis Cap is currently promoting a new program to do just that.  We are 
working with them by allowing them to present to our membership next month at our general meeting.   
LD1710 will exacerbate the homeless problem by discouraging development and driving small landlords 
out of the business.  Its important to remember that all development helps the housing crisis.  If a 
developer in Bangor wanted to build 100 units for the well-employed healthcare workers in this town 
who are also having a hard time finding a place to live, everyone benefits.  The new tenants benefit as 
they can now find an apartment.  The developer benefits because investment works and they will be 
encouraged to do it again.  The low- and middle-income tenants benefit because there is now less 
pressure on the existing housing stock.  The city benefits as they have new taxable property and happier 
workers.  LD1710 would undermine all of this. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Scott Lawliss 
GBAOMA – President 
Full Sail Preperties LLC – Managing Partner 
