Testimony in support of LD 1710 
Selma Tinta 
12 May 2023 
Good morning Senator Teresa Pierce, Representative Gere, and all members of the 
housing committee: 
My name is Selma Tinta, I live in south Portland. I'm from Angola, and I've been here for 
one year. l‘m married and I have 2 children. I will share my own story and from my 
community. 
Since I arrived in Portland, Maine my family and I started experiencing homelessness. I 
remember, when I arrived in Maine in the middle of a snowstorm and my daughter 
asked us “where ARE we?” It was funny and scaly. We went to the Shelter then, they 
put us in the hotel and we lived there for nine months. Looking for a house every single 
day, as an asylum seeker everything becomes more difficult. For example, to find an 
affordable and safe house to call our home. Because it’s a long process until we might 
get our work permit and without it we’re not allowed to go and find a job. And I learned 
that those who don’t have income can’t have a house unless they get help from 
organizations or "General Assistance I thank God because I had a place to stay and 
after 9 months I got an apartment with the help of Greater Portland Family Promise. So, 
I confess that we have never been so humiliated and we are still getting benefits from 
GA while we’re waiting for work authorization. As an immigrant when we arrived here, 
all that we wanted was security and to feel safe. But for many of us it is far from the 
reality. 
Many families are still living in shelters, some families bouncing from place to place with 
kids and babies. Parents and children go into a depression without knowing what is 
really happening by changing schools, hotels or churches every week or every month. 
How can families in these conditions improve or move themselves? Every appointment 
that we have to go to the G A office we are scorned. They don’t care about our feelings, 
and mental health.
Our wish is that we start working as soon as possible. On the other hand, in Maine, 
houses are very expensive. Getting a firstjob here with a great salaly to afford it and 
other important necessities is almost impossible. 
Because, once we start working GA denied the assistance. I urge that LD171O pass and 
families can get or keep affordable houses. l have a friend who has a family of 5. He 
started work two months ago, and his assistance has already stopped. Consequently, 
next month he and his family will have to leave their house because he has a low 
income and the rent is high. He can't afford it. lf LD1710 passes, families all over the 
state who can’t afford the high rents can have peace and stop living in fear and anxiety. 
Families can keep the house where they are living because finding another one is 
difficult. Life is more than paying rent. It is to live with peace, working, improving and 
enjoying with family. 
Thank you!
