Testimony in support of LD 1710 
Stephanie Chase 
l2 May 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, honorable members of the Housing Committee: My 
name is Stephanie. I live in Augusta and I am here to testify in favor of LD 1710. Being 
homeless is one of the Worst types of crises that a person can go through. It’s exhausting to not 
know for sure if your family will be safe and Warm. I know this from personal experience. 
VVhen my son was 2, our family was given notice that we had to move out of the house 
we’d been renting since before he was born. We’d done nothing wrong, the landlords just wanted 
to move their adult kids in. We quickly found a new place that we could afford. The day that we 
moved in was the only time we ever saw that landlord. He didn’t tell us he was selling the place. 
A new landlord bought it and the rent went up 9 months later. We were still able to pay, 
but this meant I had to work into the 8th month of my pregnancy. It went up again when my 
daughter was only 4 months old. We could no longer afford to pay and got evicted. Our family 
spent the next 7 months sleeping on the ﬂoors of friends, relatives, and even strangers. 
In those 7 months, we stayed in 8 different places. This was particularly difficult for my 
son who was 4 years old, autistic, and struggled with change. He’d been uprooted from the 
school he loved, the routines he was used to, and everything he knew. He expressed this by 
making big messes and getting into trouble. It was hard on us and the families that we stayed 
with. Some places we were only allowed to stay a few days.
While staying with some relatives, we were told about the BRAP voucher program. 
When we applied, we found out we weren’t homeless enough. We were told if we slept in our car 
or in a public space, and this was witnessed by either the police or a member of the clergy, we 
could get the voucher. Luckily, we had a vehicle to sleep in and our relatives had a pastor who 
could vouch for us. Our kids needed a home, so that’s exactly what we did and we got a place. 
At this point, that was many years ago. My son is now 20 and my daughter 16. We’ve 
lived in the same home for 10 years now and it's been nice. For the first 5 years though, my son 
would beg me to never make him move again. He was afraid he’d have to leave his friend group 
and We’d lose our cats again. I’ve Worried about these same things. If there had been protections 
for us as renters or a rental assistance program, we might never have had to go through all that. If 
this bill is passed, less people in Maine will have to go through this kind of thing. Thank you for 
your time.
