Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and honorable members of the Committee on 
Housing. My name is Steven Santiago. I am a college student living in Orono and I am 
here to testify in favor of LD 1710. 
All people deserve a home. All people need shelter. In our ideals of American justice, 
those of liberty, fairness, equality, and recently equity, we are pushed to adopta 
framework that involves making darn sure that the rights and liberties of Americans are 
well met. However, there are people out there that are not well-met with their privileges 
and immunities of being a citizen both of the United States and of the State of Maine. 
Housing is the issue before us. We have the opportunity to make a change. We have 
the opportunity to choose whether we make it easier to access housing. We must 
choose to do so. This is only within our pursuit of justice. To close our access to shelter 
would be to make a choice that aligns towards endless suffering, aligns toward hatred, 
aligns towards a state that is cruel to some but not to others. A discriminatory state. This 
is not the America I found myself yearning for when I choose to engage with civic life. 
This is not the United States ideal I believe in. I also don't think the people of this state 
are keen on practicing state-sanctioned discrimination. 
I myself have struggled to find affordable housing. The only reason I can afford to live 
where I do, is but for the fact my grandparents are gracious enough to provide rental 
support. This pattern cannot continue however, and is forcing me to move back into my 
parents house. I need affordable housing because I want to live for myself, and when 
we're with family, we’re limited by familial obligation. I want a life for myself, and 
independent housing is the gateway to that life. 
We must make housing more accessible. LD 1710 aims to do just that. This moves our 
state towards an end state that seeks to do justice by its people. This is the state I want 
to live in. This is the state I believe we can get to. But we must act today. Pass LD 1710 
today. 
Thank you.
