Alyssa Corson
MaineGeneral-Edmund Ervin Pediatric Center
LD 1528
As a Care Navigator at the Edmund Ervin Pediatric Center through MaineGeneral I 
work with families of children that are developmentally delayed/diagnosed with 
Autism.  We know that the data shows the best intervention for these children is early 
intervention. I am seeing a lack of early intervention from CDS, with many children 
not getting services until they are enrolled in their local public school at the age 5. In 
meeting with one local CDS provider our agency was told there were over 28 children
in their catchment area that were waiting for a special purpose preschool setting (such
as Woodfords/The Children’s Center, etc) and that they will probably all end up in 
Kindergarten before a program would be found for them. These are children that CDS
should be providing early intervention for so they possibly do not need as much 
support when they reach Kindergarten. 
We are also seeing/hearing of:
One family took 4 referrals before CDS reached out- stating they never received the 
referrals which were either faxed w/a confirmation that they went through or done 
online by myself, other EEPC staff and PCP office, when a referral was done via 
phone they finally connected with family. 
Several families have made comments that they are burned out by working with CDS 
and report that “they didn’t do anything before why should I refer my child back 
there,” “they are not providing anything to my other child so why waste my time”. 
Children only attending preschool for partial days due to staff shortages- the children 
that need 1:1 supports
Children over 3 needing a preschool placement and being on the waitlist for 
placements and not getting any services in the meantime through CDS
Children that are under 3 and need ABA/Early Start Denver/Maine programming that 
is not being provided, some are only getting a staff person out to the home 1 or 2xs 
per month for 1 hour. 
A local case manager talked with CDS worker and asked to have Early Start Maine 
started w a family at the family’s request as their child was just diagnosed w Autism. 
CDS said that there is a program, but it is “just a book study", where mom would 
need to be able to read a chapter and then talk about it. CDS did not think mom had 
the availability to do that right now and that there was "plenty of time" to do it after 
the domestic violence/custody situation “calms down” that she has been in for many 
years. 
One child- 3 referrals were made for a 3 y/o to CDS- all denied via first phone call- 
w/o a meeting even being set- stating “he doesn’t have a dx that would qualify him 
for services”—the family has since pulled him from preschool due to aggressive 
behaviors and no support.   
One family, non-English speaking/reading- gets all info sent to them from CDS in 
English, they have missed multiple meetings w CDS and the TCM is never notified of
the meetings to help coordinate.
Child just diagnosed w Autism:  CDS suggested since he will be 3 in a few months 
they hold on to his referral and qualify him in a few months for the 3-5 y/o services as
it is such a short period of time. No other services/interventions offered by CDS while
the family waits for the childs 3rd birthday.
Coordination with a case manager outside of MaineGeneral w/concerns that CDS is 
not offering extended school year services (ESY) and says child does not qualify 
although child has only been getting partially served this school year and requires a 
1:1 aide. When asked by case manager to see the data showing that child does not 
need ESY she was told they (CDS) do not need to show that data. 
I have heard from several families that are burned out by working with CDS and feel 
that “they didn’t do anything before why should I refer my child back there”. 
