 
 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
May 17, 2023  
  
Submitted Electronically  
  Senator Joseph Rafferty , Chair  
Representative Michael Brennan , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural  Affairs  
c/o Legislative Information  Office  
100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333  
  
Re:  Neither For Nor Against -  LD 1528, Resolve, to Establish a Pilot Program and 
Convene a Work Group Regarding the Provision of Services by the Child Development  
Services System  
 Dear Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and members of the  Joint Standing Committee 
On Education and Cultural Affairs : 
 My name is Ben Jones  and I am a Managing Attorney at Disability Rights Maine, Maine’s  
protection and advocacy agency for individuals with disabilities.   On behalf of DRM, thank you 
for the opportunity to offer testimony neither for nor against  LD 1528, Resolve, to Establish a 
Pilot Program and Convene a Work Group Regarding the Provision of Services by the Child Development Services  System . 
 At DRM, we hear from families all across the state who have been failed by Child Development Services (“CDS”).  Just this school year alone, we have been contacted by the families of twenty -
eight  (28) children ages 3 -5 residing in  six of CDS’s nine catchment areas (or ‘regional offices ’).  
Each of these child ren are eligible for Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ( “IDEA ”) Part 
B services  from CDS  and have an active Individualized Education Program  (“IEP”), yet they are 
not receiving some or all of their services .  Half of these children are receiving no services from 
CDS while others are receiving  some related services and no specially designed instruction and  
  
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs  
May 17 , 2023  
Page 2  
 
 most all have experienced delay s in the process.  DRM is not the only organization hearing from 
CDS families.
1   
 This Resolve, and much of the past efforts to address CDS’s failures , are long -term and wide in 
scope .  As the chart presented to the Committee at the public hearing on May 1, 2023 shows , 
2 
CDS’s failure s have  been an open secret for over a decade without any meaningful changes or 
improved results . While long -term solutions are absolutely necessary – the effect of CDS’s 
longst anding and ongoing failures  to fulfill Maine’s federal obligations under the IDEA  are 
acute, depriving hundreds  of children of the services and supports they have a right to receive 
under federal law  and which are so critical for development .  It is chilling to  think about  the 
long-term impacts CDS’s failures have had on children, families and schools  over these 10 years ; 
and the long- term impacts  on Maine as a whole will be felt for decades . 
 Time and time again, DRM and other family organizations have tried to raise the alarm regarding the current state  of children with disabilities failing to access services from CDS.  For example, 
in our t estimony before this Committee in May 2019  – prior  to the Covid- 19 pandemic 
amplifying the issue  – we  wrote:  
 
“LD 1715 does not address or resolve the current problems facing CDS, which 
include an insufficient number of qualified staff , insufficient placement options, 
and inadequate funding. In its 2019 report to the legislature, CDS documented continued “challenges with the recruitment and retention of qualified personnel” and documented a shortage of professionals like speech and lang uage providers,  
                                                           
1 “It is not unusual for us to speak with families whose children are aging out of Part -B 619 and preparing to enter 
Kindergarten. They have been on waitlists for the entirety of their Part -B 619 eligibility,” LD 1528 testimony, 
Maine Parent Federation, May 1, 2023, available at: 
https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/display_ps.asp?PID=1456&snum=131&paper=HP0983#  ;  
“One family took 4 referrals before CDS reached ou t- stating they never received the referrals which were either 
faxed w/a confirmation that they went through or done online by myself, other EEPC staff and PCP office, when a referral was done via phone they finally connected with family. Several families have made comments that they are 
burned out by working with CDS and report that “they didn’t do anything before why should I refer my child back 
there,” “they are not providing anything to my other child so why waste my time”. Children only attending 
presc hool for partial days due to staff shortages - the children that need 1:1 supports[.] Children over 3 needing a 
preschool placement and being on the waitlist for placements and not getting any services in the meantime through 
CDS[.] … One child - 3 referrals  were made for a 3 y/o to CDS - all denied via first phone call-  w/o a meeting even 
being set - stating “he doesn’t have a dx that would qualify him for services” —the family has since pulled him from 
preschool due to aggressive behaviors and no support. One family, non -English speaking/reading - gets all info sent 
to them from CDS in English, they have missed multiple meetings w CDS and the TCM is never notified of the meetings to help coordinate. Child just diagnosed w Autism: CDS suggested since he will be 3  in a few months they 
hold on to his referral and qualify him in a few months for the 3- 5 y/o services as it is such a short period of time. 
No other services/interventions offered by CDS while the family waits for the childs 3rd birthday ,” LD 1528 
testimo ny, Alyssa Corson, Care Navigator, MaineGeneral Edmund Ervin Pediatric Center, May 1, 2023, available 
at: https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=1001967 4
  
2 See LD 1528 testimony, Maine Developmental Disabilities Council, May 1, 2023, available at: 
https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=173483   
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs  
May 17 , 2023  
Page 3  
 
 
which has resulted in preschool age children waiting for the services mandated by  
their individualized education programs.3  The 2018 CDS report indicated, 
“despite its best efforts, CDS continues to struggle with recruiting and retaining qualified staff and contracted providers and to identify the necessary number of placements to ensure that all children receive services, as  identified on their IEP’s, 
in a timely manner.”
4  In addition, the Part B 619 Advisory Committee noted that 
“current funding levels do not cover the  needed cost for the provision of special 
education and related services to this population”.5  These concl usions are 
consistent with DRM’s experience.  Increasingly, the calls we receive related to CDS focus on a lack of resources and availability of providers.  Students may be 
going without speech services or OT services, or they may even be told to stay 
home  because 1:1 adult services that have been determined necessary are 
unavailable.  If CDS is not able to find qualified staff and programs, and if current 
funding does not cover the services to which children are entitled, how will 
districts across the state fare any better when responsibility is transferred to them?   
How will local districts be supported to succeed where CDS has failed?  This 
question needs an answer.
6” 
 The example of CDS York  makes clear that CDS and MDOE continue to be unwilling or unabl e 
to address these issues .  In 2020, DRM filed a systemic complaint with the MDOE, asking that 
they investigate the lack of services provided to children served by CDS York.
7  MDOE issued a 
Report and Corrective Action Plan, finding  that “approximately 20% of students served by CDS -
York (about 99 children) are not currently receiving their full special education services, as required by their individual IEPs,” 88 of which were sitting on some form of waitlist.  In 
determining that CD S York committed systemic violations in failing to provide a free 
appropriate public education (FAPE) to all their students, MDOE directed CDS York to remedy the issues.  
 CDS York is still non -compliant.  MDOE’s  Corrective Action Plan is still being monito red 
today.  CDS York has not met the needs of all their children and has instead created a waitlist for 
their services .  In fact – the situation has grown worse.   In CDS’s most recent update to MDOE  
                                                           
3 Child Development Services, Annual Report to the Maine Legislature (February 2019) available at: 
https://www.maine.gov/doe/sites/maine.g ov.doe/files/inline -files/CDS%202019%20Legislative%20Report.pdf  
4 Child Development Services, Annual Report to the Maine Legislature (February 2018), available at: 
http://www.maine.gov/doe/cds/reporting/documents/2018CDSLegRptFINAL.pdf   
5 Memo to Robert G. Hasson, Commissioner of Education, on behalf of Part B 619 Advisory committee (December 
2017) Available at: 
http://www.maine.gov/doe/cds/guidance/documents/PartB619AdvisoryCommitteeRecommendations -Final.pdf   
6 In order to receive funding through the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), MDOE m ust submit a 
plan annually that provides assurances “the State has in effect policies and procedures to ensure that…a free appropriate public education is available to all children with disabilities…between the ages of 3 and 21.” 20 U.S.C. 
§1412(a)(1) . 
7 See MDOE Case No. 21.037CS, Disability Rights Maine v York CDS, available at: 
https://www.maine.gov/doe/sites/maine.gov.doe/files/inline -files/21.037CSCIR_Redacted_0.pdf   
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs  
May 17 , 2023  
Page 4  
 
 from  March 2023, CDS  reported that during the previous three- month period, 238 children were 
on a waitlist for services .  Just 54 children got  off the waitlist and began receiving  all their 
services .  184 children are left receiving some or none of the services in their IEP – close to 
double the amount MDOE found in February 2021 when MDOE made their findings.  Based on 
calls from families and conversations with community providers , including pediatricians – this 
pract ice of maintaining a waitlist for IDEA services is not limited to the CDS York area.   This is 
a state- wide problem.  
 This is a long way of saying – CDS and MDOE need to present a plan to actually mee t Maine’s 
obligations under federal law.  We urge the Committee to ask CDS and MDOE – How many children are we missing?
8  How many children have a current IEP from CDS?  How many of 
those children are not receiving all the services in their IEP?  H ow do they plan to address the 
current needs of children waiting for services?9  How many children are being pushed into 
segregated settings , both in early childhood programs due to the lack of s ervices and supports, 
and when they arrive for Kindergarten unprepared due  to the failure to provide early intervention 
services ?  And, how will they  make up for the failure to provide appropriate services  in the least 
restrictive environment  for years ? 
 There have been extensive recommendations from professionals hired b y this Committee on 
ways to remedy Maine’s failed delivery of services to children ages 3 -5, including Andy Gomm 
and his team at  the Public Consulting Group.
10 
 CDS  is under the incorrect belief that if you don’t have staff or programs, you don’t have to 
educate children  with disabilities  – you need only maintain a waitlist .  There is no ambiguity in 
the law – CDS  must provide students with disabilities a free appropriate public education.  We 
urge the committee to address the current, acute needs of Maine  children with disabilities as part 
of any further action  to address the system  as a whole.  
 I will be at the work session and would be happy to discuss this further if that would be  
helpful. 
 
Sincerely , 
 Ben Jones , Managing Attorney , Disability Rights Maine  
 
                                                           
8 “…there are 552 4 -year-olds and 41 5- year-olds with IEPs or 12.5% of students identified as eligible for special 
education services. In Maine, the identification rate in most SAUs is higher than 12.5%...”, CDS Annual Report, 
March 2 023, available at: https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9964  
9 “25.7% of its budgeted positions were vacant as of the writing of this report,” CDS Annual Report, March 2023, 
available at: https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9964   
10 Maine Early Childhood  Special Education  Implementation Plan , Public Consulting Group, December 1, 2020,  
available at: https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/6046   
