Maine Service Employees Association,      Page 1 of 2  
Local 1989 of the Servic e Employees Internationa l Union     May 1, 2023 
5 Community Drive ., Augusta, ME 04330  
Phone: 1 -207-622-3151  
www.mseaseiu.org  
  
   
 
Testimony of Jeff M cCabe 
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989 
 
LD 1528 , Resolve, to Establish a Pilot Program and Convene a Work Group Regarding the Provision of 
Services by the Child Development Services System  
 
May 1, 2023 
Before th e Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs,  
Cross Office Room 208 and Electronically  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , member s of the Committee on  Education and Cultural 
Affairs , I’m Jeff McCabe , director of politics  and legislat ion for  the Maine Service Employees Association, 
Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. The Maine Service Employees Association 
represents over  13,000 Maine workers,  including workers at  Child Development Service s (CDS) .  
 
We are here neither  for nor against this bill. We  thank the sponsor of the bill for keepin g us aware of 
this bill and the direction he is  recommending with this legislation . For our members at CDS, the children 
and families they serve are the top priority. Many  CDS worke rs are concerned when ever the L egislature 
takes up chan ges to CDS  as such changes directly impact the services they provide . We think this 
proposal  can and will be different.  
 
We think t hat what is proposed in LD 1 528, if impl ement ed in a manner that compl ements and work s 
with CDS , hopeful ly wou ld put Maine o n a path to continue provid ing key services to children and their  
families. We are hopeful that, if pass ed an d enacted into law, this bill would  expand access and grow 
critic al services .   
 Maine is a g reat state with many challenges  that differ from one  region to another. This committee has 
the ability with this approach to establish , not a cookie -cutter fix or a one- size-fits-all model but an 
approa ch that builds o n systems currently in place.  
 As you  consider LD 1528, we respectfully ask that you keep these points in mind:  
 
• The voices of both parents and CDS workers are key to a ny stakeholder  group ; 
 
• CDS workers , not just CDS management , should be included and provided a dmin istrative lea ve 
time to participate ; 
 
• Any pilot pro ject should include  information of how  and in what ways the  project  will work wi th 
CDS; 
 
 
Maine Service Employees Association,      Page 2 of 2  
Local 1989 of the Servic e Employees Internationa l Union     May 1, 2023 
5 Community Drive ., Augusta, ME 04330  
Phone: 1 -207-622-3151  
www.mseaseiu.org  
 • Funding for CDS and a p ilot project  must be adequate , sustainable  and o ngoing.  
 
With that I am happy to ta ke question s – and again I’d also like to stress  that we believe  the voices that 
matter most are  those of the p arent advocates, CDS workers and families who have worked with CDS  in 
past. We would be  happy to connect you with  those folks to answer any  questions. Thank you.  
 
 
