Maine Developmental Disabilities Council 
May 1, 2023 
Testimony in Neither For Nor Against LD 1528, Resolve, to Establish a Pilot Program and 
Convene a Work Group Regarding the Provision of Services by the Child Development Services 
System. 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
~L 
My name is Nancy Cronin, and I am the Executive Director ofthe Maine Developmental 
Disabilities (DD) Council. ‘ ln addition to my testimony l am handing out a three-ring —binder 
with all legislation, amendments, and reports regarding the transfer of Part C (early 
intervention for children aged O-2) and Part B §619 (early education for children aged 3-5)to 
local school districts. As you can see the first proposal to move the responsibility for 0-5-year- 
olds with disabilities from CDS to local schools was in 2005. It was the 122“d legislature and 
Governor Baldacci was in office. 
The original problem that prompted the thought to reorganize CDS started before 2005. The 
Appropriations Committees (multiple years) were continually frustrated that CDS was always 
overspent and needed additional funds. The core of the issue was; 
1. How expensive the CDS services were and, 
2. How difficult it was to budget when you have rolling enrollment for kids. (This issue 
continues to come up when public schools consider taking this responsibility on. 
Therefore a clear dynamic funding mechanism is desired outside of the current EPS 
model.) 
As you can see in the timeline, since 2005 there has been four(4) efforts to move Part B §619 
responsibility to public schools. (Only the initial bill included Part C.) This has spanned three(3) 
1 
Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 
197O.ThereThere has bee Maine's DD Council has been advocating with and for individuals with developmental disabilities for over 50 years. 
The DD Council is a federally funded, independent organization with members from across the state, including persons with disabilities, family 
members, and representatives of public and private agencies which provide sen/ices and/or funding for services for individuals with 
developmental disabilities. As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, capacity building and systemic change activities, with the 
goal that individuals with developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully included, integrated, and involved in their communities and 
the decisions impacting their lives. 
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330 207-480-i478 833-713-2618 wwwmaineddc oig
administrations (Baldacci, LePage, Mills) and ten(1O) different legislatures including ten 
different Education Committees. There has been five(5) groups formed and produced reports. 
Three(3) of taskforces with broad stakeholder representation, one(1) study done by OPEGA, 
and one(1) study conducted by an independent evaluator. All these efforts cost substantial 
resources. Every one of those bills, public laws, and reports are in the binder that you just 
received in chronological order. Please forgive that we ran out of white paper during printing 
and had to draw from our colored stock.E 
The reason systemic change has not occurred yet can be summarized into the below areas in 
which there remains concerns from a variety of stakeholders. 
Part C (0-2 year-olds) Issues 
0 ChildFind 
0 Eligibility 
0 Type of services offered 
0 Who should be the lead agency 
Part B (3-5 year-olds) Issues to Moving to Public Schools 
0 ChildFind 
0 Educators having appropriate knowledge regarding early childhood development 
0 Ensuring strong community , integration with organizations like Special Purpose 
Preschools,“ 
Head Start, and Childcare 
0 Sustainable Funding 
0 Physical Space 
We are Neither For Nor Against this bill because we must do something. Stalemate is no longer 
an option. Today a great many children are not being served. 
A Story About a Real 20 Month Old Alive Right Now 
l have known this grandparent for years. She has two daughters with Autism who are currently 
young adults. Her son is married and has a 20 month old son. This young child cannot stand, 
maintain much weight with his right arm, and is non-verbal. The videos she has sent me in 
combination with the child's birth story makes me very concerned about Cerebral Palsy. With 
early intervention that is comprehensive to the child's needs there are so many evidence based 
ways to provide treatment so that he may walk and talk. The child's doctor referred him to CDS 
and he is receiving Part C through the coaching model, 1 hour per week family coaching. That is 
all CDS is offering for this child's early intervention. 
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine O43 30 2O'7~480~ 1478 833-713-2618 wwwmainedclc oig
He has been expelled from multiple Child Care placements because he is too much for them to 
care for. l asked about the medical model. The parents finally were able to get their son ona 
waitlist for a Developmental Clinic. The child is waiting to see a neurologist and developmental 
pediatrician. For that child who is quite heavy for his age and cannot stand, walk, crawl, or talk 
we are losing valuable time to increase both his gross and fine motor development as well as 
his social skills.h 
Listening to the Doctor 
For years l have advocated and worked with medical professionals to expedite identification of 
children with autism. A few weeks ago I was at a social engagement and saw a Doctor that is 
also a colleague. He told me ”We have done such a good job identifying children nice and early 
only for them to go to CD5 and sit on a waitlist until they reach school age." 
We don't have another 18 years. 
As far as this specific bill: 
0 l am very concerned that moving any responsibility of 0-2 year olds to school districts is 
a terrible idea. 
0 A Workgroup to study and report recommendations ,to move 3-5 year olds to public 
schools has been done before and is a waste of resources. We need a workgroup to 
debate the issues openly and come to agreement on solutions. It is those solutions 
that need to be reported to you and then acted upon. The Department alone, cannot 
do this alone. Neither can the legislature, advocates, community, nor educators. We 
must work together and expect to compromise. Our children deserve nothing less. 
We have lost over 3 sets of 0-5 year-olds spinning wheels and kicking the can down the road. 
Now we need to do something. The big question that I have today is what will happen next? 
How much more paper will go into the binder? Will the 131rst legislature be the last on this 
issue? 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide input and I am available for any questions. 
ﬁjlﬁ QM 
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330 207-4804478 833-713-2618 wwwmaineclclo 01g
