Stephen Sayers
Kennebunk 
LD 1443
To: Senator Nangle, Rep. Stover, and Honorable Members of the Committee on State 
and Local Government: my name is Stephen Sayers and I wish to speak IN FAVOR 
OF LD No. 1443. I am a resident of Kennebunk. This bill seeks to create a single 
statewide recall policy for school board members. It has a series of strict limitations 
that would prevention a repetition of the recall election fiascos that have recently 
afflicted Kennebunk and other municipalities. Unlike many municipal charters, which
leave the circumstances justifying a recall vague and undefined, this bill provides 
specifics as to the misconduct necessary to justify a recall, and explicitly states that 
the discretionary performance of prescribed school board duties (such as, for example,
adopting policies to implement statewide anti-discrimination laws), cannot be the 
basis of a legitimate recall petition. This sensible and long-overdue statewide 
approach also recognizes the significant differences between school board members 
and other municipal officials. "Of Maine's political bodies, school boards may well be
the most complex and least understood." "Maine School Boards Are Unique: 
Understanding that Uniqueness Important," School Law Advisory #510 (Feb. 
2006)(prepared by Drummond, Woodsum & MacMahon). In Shaw v. Small, 124 Me. 
36, 41 (1924), the Supreme Court of Maine stated that "the (school) committee acts as
a public board. It in no sense represents the town. Its members are chosen by the 
voters of the town, but after election they are public officers deriving their authority 
from the law and responsible to the State for the good faith and rectitude of their 
acts." The current laws applicable to school board members and recall elections lump 
those members together with municipal officials, turning a blind eye to a century of 
principled adjudication to the contrary. Rep. Sayre's bill restores the differentiation of 
school board members from other municipal officials. The requirement for statewide 
standards and uniform statewide treatment for school board members will contribute 
importantly to ensuring that the recall process does not become politicized and used 
as a weapon for illegitimate reasons of the type on display in a number of recent recall
elections.  It will also prevent this process, which should be extraordinary and 
reserved for the most egregious misconduct, from becoming routine and a continual 
source of contention and divisiveness in local communities.
