"5 MAINE 
SCHOOL 
ms aW ASSOCIATION 
PUBLIC EDUCATION ADVOCATE5 
Peggy Lembo Splauie 
Boothbay Boothbay Harbor 
PRESIDENT ELECT 
Deer Isle Stonington CSD 
VICE PRESIDENT 
Faye Anderson 
IMMEDIATE PAST 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
Steven W Bailey 
MAINE COUNCIL OF 
SCHOOL BOARD 
ATTORNEYS 
Michael Buescher Esq., Chair TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
L.D. 1443 
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH A RECALL PROCESS FOR 
PUBLIC SCHOOL BOARD MEMBERS 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the State and LocalG 
ernment Committee. I am Steven Bailey, executive director of the Maine School 
Boards Association, testifying on behalf of the legislative committee of the Maine 
School Boards Association, neither for nor against L.D. 1443. 
Currently, Title 30-A, Chapter 121, §2505, sub-§9 is the only statute that provides 
guidance and parameters for recall of elected officials, to include school board 
members. Some municipalities with charters have included this provision as part 
of their section on elected ofﬁcials. These sections vary from community to com 
munity, and in those school districts whose towns do not have a charter, the only 
provision for recall is this recall statute as noted above. 
Of note, another northeast state prevents a recall within a board member s first 
year and also within six (6) months of an upcoming election. 
Prior testimony on L.D. 1102 provided the scenario now being experienced by' 
school boards.'L.D. 1102 and L.D. 1181 both are proposing recall of elected ofﬁ 
cials “for any reason” . Here is a section from that testimony for L.D. I102 that we 
think is pertinent to the review of this bill. 
School board members, once elected or appointed, attest to an oath “to faithfully 
discharge, to the best of my abilities, the duties incumbent on me as ‘Director of 
‘x’ school department according to the Constitution and laws of the State So help 
me God.” As stated within the oath, the Constitution and the laws of the state are 
to be followed by all school board members. Within Title 20-A §l001, duties are 
given to each school board of Maine’s public schools and not to individual school 
board members. Chapter 101, Subchapter l: School Boards - Duties of school 
boards - School boards shall perfonn the following duties. [PL 1981 c. 693 §§58 7 9 
(NEW)-1 
1. General duties. They shall have the duties prescribed to them in this Title 
There are 22 duties prescribed to school boards with this subchapter. 
School board members and their roles are different from that of selectmen, legisla- 
tors, or other elected municipal ofﬁcials. These folks are responsible and resp 
sive to those who elect them. While school board members are elected/appointed 
at the municipal level, their duties are, as noted above, prescribed by the Constitu 
tion and laws of the state. 
49 COMMUNITY DRIVE - 
AUGUSTA,MAINE 04330 
Phone: 207-622-3473 - 
800-660-8484 - 
Fax: 207-626-2968 - 
Website: www.msmaweb.com
School board members serve until they resign, are defeated within an election, or are dismissed when they 
miss three meetings in a row and their absences are unexcused (by statute and policy). School board members 
together form the governance team of their district. They only have authority when acting together in an ofﬁ- 
cially called meeting and take action within that meeting. 
The charge provided to school boards is an extremely important one, and they take this duty extremely serious- 
ly. They have responsibility for the safety, care, and education of all students within the district, and oversight 
of the full operation of the school district. No decision is made lightly and decisions are made based on what is 
in the best interest of the organization (the students and the school district). Parents play a key role in the edu- 
cation of the students, as important partnerships are developed between school staff and administrators for the 
beneﬁt of the students. With the key players being students, parents, teachers, support staff, administrators, 
superintendent and school board, the school board is the goveming body making decisions for the school dis- 
trict. Therefore, some decisions considered or made by school boards are extremely difﬁcult, and to some 
members of the public are going to seem controversial. School board members need to be able to engage in 
important and meaningful discussions during their meetings in order to determine what their vote will be in the 
best interest of students and in the best interest of the school district. 
L.D. 1443 is a bill that provides a partial structure for the process of a recall consideration. First of all, and im- 
portantly, there is section 1, Grounds for Recall as changed within the sponsor’s amendment. Clearly, this bill 
is different from L.D. 1102 and L.D. 1181 where recall can occur for any reason. Sections l.a through l.c pro- 
vide three much more speciﬁc criteria when a recall could be provided. After Grounds for Recall, 1.c, the 
statement that follows is a majorly important point within the proposed bill: “a school board member’s discre- 
tionary performance of a lawful act or a prescribed duty is not a ground for recall.” And while this is im- 
portant, there is some vagueness in this language here. The better policy is to have a very narrow avenue for 
recall that is limited to real, well-deﬁned misconduct and not simply hinging on the political winds of the mo- 
ment. 
Secondly, there is a procedure that describes both the percentage of voters that must sign a petition to initiate 
the recall as well as the percentage of voters who must vote in the recall election in order for the recall election 
to be valid. This percentage is set at 25% for the threshold of the voters in the school administrative unit who voted at the last gubernatorial election to sign the petition for recall. And the recall must be approved by a ma- 
jority of voters in the recall election in which the total vote is at least 30% (as clariﬁed by the sponsor through 
his amendment) of votes cast in the election. 
The other typical procedural steps are not included within this proposed L.D. and should be established to pro- 
vide clarity and precision within the recall process. There are municipalities that have these types of steps out- 
lined, and those in the Charters of Scarborough and Kennebunk could be followed. Therefore, we feel this pro- 
posal is incomplete. 
Additionally, Title 30-A, §2505 would be revised to exclude school board members from being impacted by 
this section of statute. Instead, recall of a member of a school board would be governed by 20-A, §l005 (were 
L.D. 1443 to be approved). 
Where all municipalities do not have a charter, and the current recall of elected ofﬁcials is now only guided by Title 30-A, §2505, sub-§9, the legislative committee of the Maine School Boards Association is neither for nor 
against L.D. I443. However, they do support the components of the proposed bill. Given L.D. 1443 in com- 
parison to L.D. 1102 or L.D. 1181, there is only one choice if there is to be a recall for school board members, 
and that would be L.D. 1443, to be considered with the recommended changes to provide greater clarity and 
precision.
