Tom Berry
Kennebunk
LD 1443
April 21, 2023
To: Senator Tim Nangle, Representative Holly Stover, and Honorable Members of the
Committee
From: Tom Berry
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1443, “An Act to Establish a Recall Process for 
Public School Board
Members.”
My name is Tom Berry and I have lived in Kennebunk for 30 years.
I am writing as a retired public school educator and concerned citizen to urge you to 
vote “ought to
pass” on LD 1443.
We have all seen - across the country and even here in Maine - how groups with 
political
agendas have sought to impose their ideas on local communities through specific 
tactics like
disruptions at school board meetings and attempting to force recall elections for board
members
whose views don’t align with theirs. There are those who say that this is “just the 
democratic
process” at work. I would suggest that it actually undermines the democratic process 
that we
already have, where there are regularly-scheduled elections to either re-elect or 
replace school
board members according to the will of the people.
(Last year, here in Kennebunk, the community experienced such a scheme where a 
concerted
attempt was made to remove two school board members for purported “reasons” that 
were
shown to be not based on any actual facts but rather, evidently, on personal animus. 
Although
the attempt to oust these board members was eventually soundly defeated, the 
experience was
long, rancorous, and exhausting for the town. And, clearly, unnecessary.)
If one disagrees with a particular school board member’s views towards education, let
that
person either run for that seat in the next election or support a different, preferred 
candidate.
The provisions in LD 1443 delineate clear and common sense guidelines for 
establishing
grounds for recalling a school board member.
I urge you again to support this civil and orderly approach where the recall option is 
reserved -
as had historically been the case - for truly exceptional errant behaviors on the part of 
an
individual board member.
Thank you all for considering this testimony.
