  
Testimony of  Melissa Hackett  
Policy Associate , Maine  Children’s Alliance   
In support of LD 1028, An Act to Expand the Higher Education Tuition Waiver for Persons Who 
Have Resided in Foster Care  
March 22, 2023  
Senat or Raffe rty, Representative Brennan  and esteemed members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee :  
 
My name is Melissa Hackett , and I am  offering testimony in support  of LD 1028  on behalf  of the 
Maine Children’s Alliance. Our organization  is a public policy, nonprofit advocating for sound 
public policies and best practices that improve the lives of all Maine children, youth, and 
famil ies. 
The transition from adolescence into adulthood is difficult for most  young people, as they begin 
to take on unfamiliar roles and responsibilities in this new phase of their lives. For many, this 
transitional period includes new employment or educational opportunities. During this time, it 
is critical that youth have strong relationships with parents or other adults who can provide 
ongoing  support or guidance to young people navigating this transition , as well as  access to 
resources to provide for their need s and to sup port them in a chieving their goals .  
For youth who have experienced the foster care system , the needs are just what all young 
people need to be successful , yet the significance of having those supports is much greater. For 
children who exit the state’s custody upon reaching the age of 1 8 or at the end of an extended 
care agreement, there may not be that permanent connection to another adult who can  
provide a consistent, supportive role in their lives . For many young people, biological parents 
play this  lifelong  role – helping complete a FAFSA, find ing safe and affordable housing, or filling 
out a resume or prep aring  for an interview .  
It is a missed opportunity for our state to not wrap around these young people and ensure they 
have what they need to be successful. This includes ensuring youth have the opportunity to 
engage in high er education.  For most , a lifelon g parent is available to help a young pe rson 
navigate the financial aspects of at tending college  – including providing financial assistance . For 
many young pe ople in foster care considering college, this may not be an option available to 
them . Given that the state has assumed the role of custody for these young people, we have a 
responsibility to ensu re they have the same opportunities we would want any young person to 
have . This includes the opportunity to attend college without incurring  substantial , personal 
financial debt .  
This legislation would importantly increase th is opportunity fo r young people in foster care, by 
expanding  the number of tuition waivers from 30 to 50 . We en courage the co mmittee  to 
support this, and to additionally  consider what adult supports should  be provided t o young 
people in en gaging in this application process . We are also aw are from p revious l egislation 
consi dered on this topic, that th e online process for appl ying and receiving one of these waivers 
has been  first-come, first -served. We would encourage the committee to discuss with 
stakeholders how  a more equitable process might be implemented to consider all applicants 
and ne ed in determining the allocation of these waivers.  
We all benefit when every you ng person  in Maine  is prepared for success. As they enter 
adulthood, young people become Maine’s workforce , future leaders , and parents.  We should 
make our best effort, then, to ensure y oung people  have access to educat ional opportunities  
that will lead to emp loyment that supports thei r success in to adulthood.  We urge the 
committee to support this legislation, and ensure more young  people who have experienced 
the foster care syste m ha ve greater access and support to achieve their educational goals.  
Thank you.  
