FIKME FINANCE AUTHORITY OF MAINE 
Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
In Support of L.D. 1028 
An Act to Expand the Higher Education Tuition Waiver for Persons 
Who Have Resided in Foster Care 
March 22, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am here to 
testify in support of L.D. 1028, An Act to Expand the Higher Education Tuition Waiver 
for Persons Who Have Resided in F oster Care. 
This bill would increase from thirty to fifty the number of tuition waivers for 
postsecondary education allowed to be granted each academic year to persons who, at the 
time of their graduation from high school or their successful completion of a general 
educational development (GED) examination, were in the custody of the Department of 
Health and Human Services (the Department) and resided in foster care or subsidized 
adoptive care or were minor wards of a subsidized permanency guardian. The bill also 
makes changes to the provisions of the law regarding how the tuition waivers are 
apportioned to postsecondary educational institutions. Also, the additional twenty 
waivers must be funded with General Fund appropriations. This is a very important point 
and key to FAME’s support: we and our partners involved in the program can administer 
this expanded program only with new funding. There is no funding currently attached to 
the bill, and that will be essential. The bill further provides that students who are eligible 
to enter into a voluntary extended care and support agreement (a V-9 waiver) with the 
Department must enter into such an agreement to be eligible for a tuition waiver. 
FAME administers the tuition waiver program for persons who have resided in 
foster care in partnership with Maine’s public higher educational institutions —the 
University of Maine System, the Maine Community College System, and Maine 
Maritime Academy; the Department; and J MG. Thirty new tuition waivers each year are 
available to students who were foster children under the custody of the Department and 
for adopted persons whose adoptive parent(s) received a subsidy from the Department
1
when they graduated from high school. Recipients must be Maine residents attending a 
school within the University of Maine System, the Maine Community College System, or 
Maine Maritime Academy. For those individuals not selected for the Foster Care Tuition 
Waiver Program, FAME and its partners have added additional assistance through 
outreach and individualized counseling regarding other financial aid options. I have 
provided a fact sheet on the program to provide additional information. 
Each year the program averages approximately fifty-four eligible applicants for 
the thirty available program slots. Approximately twenty-four eligible applicants are thus 
placed on the program waitlist each year. Currently, participating higher educational 
institutions absorb the costs of the waivers as no state funding is or ever has been 
provided. For academic year 22-23, initial estimates peg that cost (including new waivers 
and renewals) at approximately $150,242 at least. Increasing the number of waivers to 
fifty obviously would increase the costs. As far as utilization of the program, data from 
2019-20 disclosed that, for initial & renewal applications, about 71% of the recipients 
received their waiver at a University of Maine System school, while 26% did so ata 
Maine Community College System school, and 3% at Maine Maritime Academy. 
This committee, especially bill sponsor Representative Michael Brennan (who 
introduced the original bill creating the program in 1999), has thought about, studied, and 
amended this program at various times over the years. FAME has been pleased to have 
been involved with that work along with our partners mentioned above. The most recent 
consideration of a possible expansion of the program occurred during the 129*‘ Maine 
Legislature. At that time, Senator Russell Black sponsored a bill, L.D. l566, An Act to 
Increase the Number of Recipients Under the Tuition Waiver Program for Participants in 
Foster Care, which would have expanded the program from thirty to sixty waivers, but 
without any state funding. This committee subsequently amended the bill into a resolve 
directing the public higher educational institutions to study, in collaboration with FAME, 
the Department, and JMG, the matter further and report back with findings and 
recommendations. 
The January 15, 2020 report by the Public Higher Education Systems 
Coordinating Committee provided a good history of the program, findings with respect to 
the need for and operation of the program, and offered suggestions as to how to improve 
it going forward. Among other things, the report noted that there were as of that time 
2,356 Mainers of traditional college-going age (18-25 years) in foster care or adopted 
through the state’s foster care system or in permanency guardianship. Only three percent 
of this population was able to benefit from the tuition waiver program, however, due to 
the statutory limit of thirty waivers per year. The report also found that demand for the 
program exceeds available statutory slots: approximately twenty to thirty individuals are 
placed on the program’s wait list annually due to the annual statutory limit of thirty slots. 
The report further found that the waiver program is critical to increasing college 
aspirations and attainment among a vulnerable population that would otherwise be less 
likely to pursue postsecondary education. The report also recommended that, if the 
program were to be expanded in the future, state funding will be essential as the 
participating schools could no longer afford to simply absorb the costs. It also
2
recommended that if such state funding were to occur, that FAME’s administrative costs 
(which have never been funded) be fairly covered. As a result of the report and 
discussions in this committee, FAME and its partners made changes to its administration 
of the program to better align with deadlines in the college admissions process and to 
ensure that applicants who do not receive the waiver are connected with other financial 
aid resources that improve their likelihood of postsecondary attendance. 
We are keenly aware of the great interest in and need for the program. Having 
administered this program since its creation in 1999 and participated in numerous 
conversations over the years with legislators and stakeholders, FAME has witnessed the 
positive impact the waiver has had on the lives of participants. It increases college 
attainment, workforce readiness, and self-sufficiency for those fortunate to benefit from 
it. Maine’s Ten-Year Economic Plan among other things calls for increased strategies to 
increase the skills of our workforce, especially for those disengaged from school and 
work. Importantly, this bill proposes state funding that would be essential for the 
participating schools to accomplish the waiver expansion. We hope the Legislature 
decides to enact and fund this bill. We would be happy to administer an expanded waiver 
program. 
Finally, we have a couple of suggestions for your consideration at the work 
session for possible improvement to the bill: 
(l) Section 1 should make clear that children who have been adopted out of foster 
care need not apply for or enter into a voluntary extended care and support 
agreement with the Department of Health and Human Services in order to 
remain eligible for a tuition waiver; and 
(2) FAME’s reasonable costs and expenses of administering the program should 
ﬁnally be paid and this could come out of amounts appropriated to the 
program going forward. 
Thank you for your consideration of my comments. I will be happy to answer any 
questions you have.
3
FHME FINANCE AUTHORIIY OF MAINE 
TUITION WAIVER PROGRAM AT STATE POSTSECONDARY EDUCATIONAL 
INSTITUTIONS FOR PERSONS WHO HAVE RESIDED IN FOSTER CARE 
What is the program? 
The Tuition Waiver (Foster Care) Program is governed by Maine law as set forth in 20-A 
M.R.S.A. §§ 12571 - 12573 and Chapter 608 of the Rules of the Finance Authority of Maine. 
Under the program, certain foster children and adopted children/wards under subsidy from the 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) may receive a tuition waiver toa 
participating Maine public college/university. 
How does one apply for the waiver? 
Individuals must complete the Tuition Waiver Program Application available on FAME’s 
website and: 
1. Provide proof of acceptance or enrollment in an undergraduate degree program by 
submitting one of the following: 
0 A copy of the college admissions acceptance letter 
0 A letter from the college registrar ’s office confirming one’s degree program status 
0 A current college transcript showing one’s degree program status 
2. File the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). Although there is no 
deadline, an application is not considered complete until an individual has filed their 
FAFSA. 
Who is eligible? 
Eligible students must meet one of the following conditions at the time of graduation from high 
school or upon completion of HiSET/GED or equivalent: 
¢ Be in Maine’s foster care program 
0 Be adopted from Maine’s foster care program and adoptive parent(s) receive a 
subsidy from Maine DHHS 
0 Be a minor ward of a permanency guardian and that guardian(s) receives a 
subsidy from Maine DHHS 
FAME verifies an applicant ’s status with DHHS upon receipt of an application. 
How are students selected? 
FAME selects qualified students on a first-come, first-served basis. This is based on a completed 
application as set forth above. We also use a postmark date and do not allow online or in-person
1
delivery out of fairness to those without internet access or who may live far from our Augusta 
ofﬁce. 
What are the award amounts? 
The award is the actual amount of tuition waived at the college/university that one attends. 
Is the award renewable? 
Yes. The award is renewable for up to five years of full-time enrollment or the equivalent, prior 
to receipt of a baccalaureate degree. Renewal applications are mailed to current recipients by the 
end of February. In addition to the application, one must complete the FAFSA and continue to be 
in good academic standing. 
Which schools participate in this program? 
0 All of the University of Maine System schools 
0 All of the Maine Community College System schools 
0 Maine Maritime Academy 
What help is provided to unsuccessful applicants? 
For those individuals not selected for the Foster Care Tuition Waiver Program, FAME and its 
partners (UMS, MCCS, MMA, and JMG) have added additional assistance through outreach and 
individualized counseling regarding other financial aid options. 
Prepared by FAME 3/22/23
2
