TESTIMONY TO THE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE 
 
RE: L.D. 494 – AN ACT TO CONFORM STATE FUNDING TO THE FEDERAL HYDE 
AMENDMENT, LIMITING FUNDING FOR SOME ABORTION SERVICES 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, fellow legal colleagues and Members of the Judiciary 
Committee: 
 
In 1773, Massachusetts colonists threw tea into the Boston Harbor to protest the heavy taxes 
being levied on the Colonies. It is in the Spirit of the American Revolution, and based upon my 
conscientious objection to the use of taxpayer funds for abortion services, that I write in support 
of L.D. 494. 
 
The British tax schemes found objectionable by the American colonists were largely economic 
levies. In contrast, there is a strong moral objection to taxation for abortion. The use of public 
funds for abortion services will impose a tax on a large segment of the Maine population that 
finds abortion to be morally repugnant. You have heard countless hours of testimony from 
hundreds of Maine residents on the moral and ethical pitfalls of abortion. There are hundreds of 
thousands of Catholic, Evangelicals and other Christians who believe it would be a serious sin on 
their part if they were forced by the sanction of State law to make any financial contribution 
whatsoever that is utilized to destroy the lives of the unborn. 
 
It is already abhorrent that Maine law allows widespread abortion. If however it is the considered 
judgment of one political party that widespread abortion represents sound public policy, it should 
require those who desire the services to pay for the services. The taxpayers did not cause these 
individuals to become pregnant; most of these couples exercised their free will in engaging in the 
activity that inevitably results in pregnancy. Only they and their supporters should undertake any 
expenses associated with termination of pregnancy. If there are poor women who desire 
abortions, let Planned Parenthood raise the money or provide “charity” care if they deem it a 
worthy cause. 
 
Likewise the sanction of State law should not indirectly impose this expense of those who 
conscientiously object to abortion by mandating that insurers provide abortion services. If 
insurers are required to insure abortion services, this will cause an increase in everyone’s 
insurance premiums, an indirect tax. 
 
The purpose of taxation is to promote the public good. In light of the serious moral questions 
around the widespread use of abortion, and the impact of ending viable life on our common soul, 
the State must not force these abhorrent moral practices in face of the groundswell of opposition 
that has become evident. 
 
For these reasons, I ask you to vote “ought to pass” on L.D. 494, on L.D. 1197, L.D. 1410 and 
L.D. 1614 and to vote “ought not to pass” on  L.D. 935. 
 
Brett D. Baber, Esq. 
Dedham, Maine 
