Chuck Bradshaw
Hancock, Maine
LD 494
LD 494 An Act to Conform State Funding to the Federal Hyde Amendment, Limiting 
Funding for Some Abortion Services
STATEMENT IN FAVOR
Senator Carney, Representative Mooney, and members of the Judiciary Committee
My name is Chuck Bradshaw.  I live in Hancock. I write this to you today in support 
of LD 494.
First, I want to commend the dignity and stamina with which you conducted the 
hearings on LD 1619 on Monday.  
Now, regarding LD 494, I am writing to state my conscientious objection to taxpayer 
funding of abortions in Maine.  I would prefer to see priority given to policies that 
assist women, children, and struggling families so as to encourage marriage, 
childbirth, and the nurture and protection of children.
Consequently, I ask your Committee to vote NO on LD 494.
I am also writing in FAVOR of these Bills:
LD 771 An Act to Protect a Woman's Right to Withdraw Consent for an Abortion 
Our laws should be biased in favor of defending human life, including the lives of 
unborn human beings.  If a woman should reconsider her decision to abort, at any 
time while the baby is still alive in her womb, her decision should be honored.  
Please vote YES.
LD 1197 An Act to Prevent Coerced Abortion
“Get rid of it,” says the boyfriend, or maybe the husband.  You heard testimony 
Monday evening or Tuesday morning from at least one woman who had been given 
that ultimatum.  And perhaps, if the mother chooses to keep “it,” she is at risk of 
abuse or abandonment.  This Act is no more than a common sense measure to protect 
the mother and her unborn young.
Please vote YES.
LD 1249 An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via Telehealth by 
Prohibiting Physicians from Prescribing Abortion-inducing Drugs or Devices 
Through Telehealth or Other Electronic Communication
It is alarming that these powerful poisons, that are known to cause severe 
complications in some 20% of the women who take them, are so lightly regulated.  A 
woman should be screened in person by her physician and be under the doctor’s care 
while taking these medications.
Please vote YES to enforce responsible limits on the distribution of chemical abortion
drugs.
LD 1614 An Act to Require an Ultrasound and Certain Counseling Before an 
Abortion
On the Guttmacher Institute website, measures like this one enacted in other states are
dismissed as “efforts to personify the fetus” and possibly dissuade the woman from 
having an abortion.  In response, I charge the abortion industry with attempting to 
dehumanize the developing baby in the mother’s womb— against the best scientific 
evidence for the full humanity of the baby— and to convince the mother that abortion 
is her best, perhaps only choice.  Again, in the belief that the State should be biased in
favor of preserving human life as much as possible, I recommend approval of this 
Bill.
Please vote YES to ensure that pregnant moms are put in a position to make an 
Informed Choice.
LD 1809 An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent
A primary or secondary school, counselor, or medical care provider has a 
responsibility to respect the wishes of the parent of a minor.  Parental consent is 
required before the child can have her ears pierced, or receive a tattoo, or go on a field
trip, or have blood drawn, or even take an aspirin while at school.  But under current 
law, no parental notification or consent is required for the child to receive treatment 
for drug or alcohol addiction, STD infection, mental health problems, birth control, or
sexual assault; or for an abortion.
The school in its role, and these other professionals in their role of providing services 
(medical, mental health, etc.) to minors, are accountable to the minor child’s parents; 
they are extensions of the parental role while the children are in their custody.  It is 
their business to support the parents in their role, not to drive a wedge between the 
minor child and her or his parents.  Are there abusive, violent, or negligent parents 
who might make the child’s situation worse?  Yes, some, but it is wrong for the law to
treat all parents as if they were unfit to support their children.
Compared to having one’s ears pierced, or seeing an R-rated movie, the 
circumstances that call for the treatments and services mentioned above have the 
potential to inflict lasting physical or emotional wounds on the child.  The importance
of the parents’ full support, perhaps working in concert with the professionals, should 
be taken for granted.  At the very least, the parents should be notified, and their 
consent sought, before administering these services to a minor.  The parents might 
then consent to the treatment, while respecting the confidentiality of what goes on 
between the school staff person or other professional.
Please vote YES on LD 1809 in the interest of parents’ rights.

