 
 
Committee  on Judiciary  
Cross Building, Room 438  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
c/o Susan Pine tte, Committee Clerk  
 
Re: LD 494 -    An Act to Conform State Funding to the Federal Hyde Amendment, Limiting Funding for  
                          Some Abortion Services  
       LD 771 –   An Act to Protect a Woman’s Right to Withdraw Consent for Abortion  
       LD 1197 – An A ct to Prevent Coerced Abortion  
       LD 1249 -  An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via Telehealth by Prohibiting Physicians  
                          from Prescribing Abortion -Inducting Drugs or Other Devices Through Telehealth or Other  
                          Electronic Communication  
       LD 1614 -  An Act to Require and Ultrasound and Certain Counseling Before an Abortion  
 
Dear Senator Carney , Representative  Moonen  and esteemed member of the  Committee on  Judiciary,  
 
I represent the National Association of Social Workers, Maine Chapter  in opposition to LD 494, LD 771, 
LD 1197, LD 1249, and LD 1614.  We believe that limiting funding and restricting providers ’ ability to 
provide the full range of reproductive care services is a health eq uity issue , a women’s rights issue , and 
contributes the cycle of poverty in families.     
Disparities in reproductive healthcare access are deeply rooted in our society. Despite the rate of 
unwanted pregnancies decreasing overall, the rate among women expe riencing poverty is still five 
times higher than the rate for women with higher incomes (Guttmacher Institute , 2011 ). Restricting 
access to abortions for women with low incomes will further exacerbate these inequities, which 
disproportionately impact women of color.  
Insured access to abortion cannot become a matter of economic class when women forced to carry an 
unwanted pregnancy to term are more likely to experience poverty than other women (American 
Public Health Associatio n). Currently , about 25% of women who qualify for Medicaid and  who  seek an 
abortion are forced to carry an unwanted pregnancy to term due to the cost in states where insured 
abortion access is limited (Guttmacher Institute).   
Social workers, per our Code of Ethics , must promote clients’ self -determination by “seek[ing] to 
enhance [their] capacity and opportunity to change and to address their own needs” (NASW). The 
decision to become a parent is one of the most important and personal decisions that we as h umans 
make, and when women have autonomy in making decisions about their own reproductive healthcare, 
they have greater control over their economic security. Maine’s women are both capable and 
deserving of the opportunity to make the decisions that are bes t for their health, lives, and futures, 
 
 regardless of economic status and free from stigma and judgment.  
Over my 40+ years as a clinical social worker, I have seen the economic, physical, and emotional toll 
that restricted access to abortion services has had on multiple clients  and their families .  Mary was a 
beautiful, sassy , and bright 21 -year -old woman who was first referred to me for anxiety and depression 
symptoms .  She was pregnant, had two children, and was married to t he father of her children. Her 
husba nd was emotionally and physically abusive  to her.   Her religious upbringing was a key factor in 
her not considering abortion nor divorcing her husband .  I supported her right to choose, did my best 
to help her manage her mental health issues , and ensure th at her children were safe.  Yet no 
evidenced -based treatment s were  going to help Mary’s mental health issues , while living  under siege  
in a home filled with trauma.  Twenty years later, she was referred back to me for counseling.  Her 
sassiness and hope had been eroded ; her  beauty faded  and her mental health issues had escalated to 
the point where she could only leave her home for health  appointment s. She had seven grown children 
and was still married to the same abusive man, who was on disability for a combination of physical  and 
mental health issues .  Not surprisingly, several of her seven children had chosen life partners who were 
abus ive, as this was what they grew up with and considered normal. Their hope for better lives and 
breaking the generational poverty cycle was dimming.  
NASW Maine urges you to  provide hope for Mary and families such as hers and  oppose LD 494, LD 771, 
LD 1197, LD 1 249, and LD 1614.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Julie M. Schirmer, LCSW, ACSW  
President, Board of Directors  
Chair, Policy Committee  
NASW Maine Chapter  
Resident, Falmouth, Maine  
naswmechapterpres@gmail.com  
 
 
 
 
 
