 
43 Gabriel Drive, Post Office 
Box 587 Augusta, ME 04332-
0587 
 t: 207.622.7524 | f: 
207.622.0836 
www.MaineFamilyPlannin
g.org 
info@MaineFamilyPlannin
g.org 
 
 
 
Maine Family Planning 
Testimony in Opposition to 
LD 494, An Act to Conform State Funding to the Federal Hyde Amendment,  
Limiting Funding for Some Abortion Services 
May 5, 2023 
 
 
 Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, Maine Family Planning is testifying today in opposition to LD 494, An Act to Conform State Funding to the 
Federal Hyde Amendment, Limiting Funding for Some Abortion Services. LD 494 would take away healthcare 
coverage for Mainers who need abortions, undermining their economic security and jeopardizing their future.  
 
 Maine Family Planning provides comprehensive sexual and reproductive health care, including abortions, at 
18 locations statewide. Insurance coverage bans and restrictions have no basis in medicine, but they can have 
profound negative effects on people’s wellbeing.  
 
 A 2009 report by the Guttmacher Institute and Ibis Reproductive Health estimated that one in four  poor 
women in the U.S. is forced to carry an unwanted pregnancy because she can’t afford abortion care. These figures 
will grow in a post-Roe country. The groundbreaking Turnaway Study  conducted at the University of California, San 
Francisco, shows that denying a woman a wanted abortion -- including by telling a patient that the care they need 
isn’t covered by their insurance -- creates long-term economic hardship, exacerbating financial insecurities and 
presenting a host of challenges not just to the patient but to their children as well.  
 
 Insurance bans hurt patients and delay access to time-sensitive care. Poorer patients can be forced to delay 
their abortion procedure for as long as two to three weeks  while they raise money. If a person ends up being unable 
to obtain an abortion altogether, they are more likely to experience pregnancy complications than someone with a 
planned pregnancy. We don’t have to look far for evidence of how these restrictions harm Maine people -- and how 
lifting them made a meaningful difference for our fellow Mainers. When similar legislation to LD 494 was introduced 
in the 130th session, one young woman testified about the impact this coverage had on her life: “Because of my 
access to abortion care, I will be able to finish school this summer and enter the work force, following my dreams, 
and be able to start a family if and when I am ready. Today I do not only speak for myself; my story is only one echo 
of the generations of women simply wanting the freedom to choose their own future with dignity. At your hands is 
the opportunity to continue throwing life preservers, so please don’t let us drown.” We urge the committee to 
reference the brave young woman’s testimony  as you consider yet another bill about denying MaineCare members 
coverage for abortion care.  
 
 Since our state law ensuring equitable coverage for abortion care under public and private insurance plans 
went into effect in 2019, people are better off. We’ve heard the exhales of relief on the phone when patients come 
to understand the care they need will be covered. This means they can schedule their appointment sooner and with 
more flexibility. It means one less bill to cover for those who are already struggling to make ends meet.  
 
 At this moment, when we are more aware than ever of all the troubling inequities within our healthcare 
system, it just doesn’t make sense to hold back coverage from someone who is eligible and in need -- or to realign 
Maine law with outdated federal policy aimed at make it as difficult as possible for poor people, especially people of 
color, to make their own decisions about their pregnancies. The Hyde Amendment was introduced soon after Roe v. 
Wade was decided and its intentions were clear. Representative Henry Hyde, the amendment’s main proponent, said 
“I would certainly like to prevent, if I could legally, anybody having an abortion: a rich woman, a middle-class woman, 
or a poor woman. Unfortunately, the only vehicle available is the… Medicaid bill.” The Hyde amendment is a racist, 
classist, sexist piece of archaic policy that, despite our strong state-level protections, continues to restrict access to 
abortion care in Maine for service members and veterans insured through TRICARE, tribal citizens who receive health 
care through IHS, and others with federally funded insurance. Hyde is completely out of step with Maine values.  
 
 Mainers’ access to care should never depend on where they live, how much money they make, or what type 
of insurance they have. On behalf of Maine Family Planning and our patients, I urge the committee to reject LD 494.  
 
