Peter & Erin Allen
Burnham
LD 494
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee. 
Our names are Peter and Erin Allen from Burnham, ME. We are writing to you in 
Support of LD 494.
According to God, our Creator, abortion is murder (Deuteronomy 5:17).
Government was created by God to protect the people, not to murder them. (As seen 
as early as Genesis). Our founding fathers also formed our government on the basis of
life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, which all three are being stripped from these
children. As elected officials, solutions should be sought, and murder should not even 
be considered as one of those solutions. Forcing people who do not agree with murder
to pay for the very act is not what elected officials are elected for. To reiterate, you 
are elected to protect the people, all people, including the unborn (Jeremiah 1:5). 
Some people would say "The majority of the people want abortion." The majority in 
Nazi Germany wanted to murder Jews as well, does that make it right? A majority of 
people wanted slavery, does that make it right? Elected officials are supposed to do 
what is best for the people. Elected officials are not genies elected to grant everyone's 
selfish wishes. 
Some of our elected officials bemoan the fact that our economy is dying and we need 
to attract people into the state of Maine out one side of their mouth, and then support 
murdering citizens of Maine out the other side of their mouth. This double tongued 
speaking boggles the mind. As I am sure you have already heard, this is not a 
republican or democrat issue nor is it liberal versus conservative; Rather, this is is a 
matter of good versus evil; this is right versus wrong. 
If elected officals are so willing to give money to take away life with tax money for 
the abortion industry, they should be just as willing to use tax money for those who 
want to bring and sustain life. 
We do not believe taxes coming from the people should support something that is 
against God, the one who has allowed us all to have breath and life, life that started in 
the womb, at conception. There is a day coming when we will all be judged for our 
actions, but because of God's love and desiring that none should perish, He still 
allows the rain to fall on the just and the unjust (Matthew 5:45). When judgement 
comes, the time of His patience, grace and mercy is done. (2 Peter 3:9)
Please don't make the mistake to vote for using tax money to support wickedness 
because of the pressures of society and those with agendas. We pray that after hearing
all these testimonies, the Lord may have worked in your hearts and one day see you in
Heaven, as this is God's desire too. 
We ask the committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 494. God Bless You.
