  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Regina Rooney  on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
In Opposition of LD 494: “An Act to Conform State Funding to the Federal Hyde 
Amendment, Limiting Funding for Some Abortion Services”  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
May 5, 2023  
  
Senator  Carney , Representative  Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary , I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
(MCEDV)1 in opposition to LD 494, “An Act to Conform State Funding to the Federal Hyde 
Amendment , Limiting Funding to Some Abortion Services .”  
 
Four  years ago, MCEDV supported the expansion of MaineCare coverage for abortion 
services because we have seen over and over again the important role that access to 
abortion  can have on a survivor’s immediate and long -term safety , and because we believe 
that o ption s to increase  safety should not only be available to people  who can afford t o pay 
out of pocket  or have access to private health insurance.  We write  in opposition to this bill 
for the  same reasons.  
 
People often think that safety planning  must involve  the police, the courts, or a shelter, 
but creating lives free from abuse is more complicated than that.  A survivo r’s ability to 
decide whether or not  to have a child  is a critical factor in their ability to manage  both  the 
risks posed by their abusive partner  and their  long -term  economic security, which is what 
survivors cite most often as the barrier that keeps them trapped.   Maine’s law providing for 
abortion coverage for people on MaineCare, which by design covers our  state’s  most 
economically vulnerable people, is therefore a n important antidote to the tactics that 
abusive partners frequently use to coerce or force pregnancy2. Removing this coverage 
limits the options for people who are already at an economic disadvantage when dealing 
with their partner’s abuse and plays into the hands of those who want to maintain control 
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year, including court ad vocacy services in the civil and criminal courts.  
2 “Reproductive coercion ” describe s behaviors used by a person to exert control over their partner’s 
reproductive and sexual health in order to control that person. It can include tactics like sabotaging bi rth 
control, coercing a partner into unprotected sex  by “stealthing” and other means , and preventing their partner 
for exercising reproductive choice . Learn more: mcedv.org/learn -about -abuse /reproductive -coercion/  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
over their partners by coercing or forcing pregnancy to create long -term legal connection 
and economic dependence.  
  
For these reasons, MCEDV respectfully encourages you  to vote against  LD 494. Thank you 
for the opportunity to provide this perspective, and I welcome any questions you may 
have.    
 
 
Contact Information:    
Regina Roone y 
Education & Communications Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 430 -8334   
Email:  regina@mcedv.org    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
