Dan Davis
Porter
LD 1154
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Housing Committee members,
I represent no agency or entity other than myself, and would like to express support 
for LD1554.
The State has scheduled ‘questions and answer’ periods over the next two months 
(April & May) to help educate the public on LD2003 while it is still completing 
missing portions of the law through rule-making (March & April public input).
Many municipalities have already expended significant funds attempting to 
understand this law and its impacts on their design in advance of the July 1, 2023 
roll-out, but it is not rationally possible while the State itself is still figuring it out up 
to within a month of initiating a substantive change in law. 
It has come to my attention that a State Representative even claimed to their 
constituents that LD2003 public law was merely guidance and is optional. If our 
legislature still does not understand LD2003, how can all of the municipalities, and 
why then was it passed into law with so many unknowns?
Most Maine towns will not be able to compete for the limited funds that were 
provided by the State, as they will be overshadowed by the larger urban centers with 
more robust infrastructure and attraction.
Few towns can barely turn around an integrated structural planning change in two (2) 
years, let alone one (1) month. Even if they could, there are not the regional planning 
resources to support it, as even SMPDC stated they do not have sufficient labor 
staffing to take on any new client communities. 
It is estimated that even for a community of 1,500-1,600 people alone, it would take 
roughly $15,000.00 in outsourcing regulatory drafting support to properly integrate 
this law as it stands right now.
Southern Maine Regional Planning Commission and Maine Municipal Association, 
and even the State Fire Marshall’s Office and MEDEP are still unclear on the overall 
breadth and depth of impacts of this law across the state and within their jurisdictions,
or the extent of litigation that will be needed to clarify the law. Both SMPDC and 
MMA promote a 2-year delay which is the basis of another bill, LD665 bill, which is 
appropriate given the circumstances.
The Housing Commission already recognized publicly that the approach of LD2003 
was designed for larger communities that are expected to have cohesive services and 
close-by economics, an integral sidewalk network, public parking, and public transit. 
Yet this approach is ultimately being applied everywhere in Maine, leaving it up to 
each municipality, many very small low-tax base communities without these aspects 
to contend with a ‘one-size-fits-all’ mandate on development and its peripheral 
unintended consequences. This is both unreasonable and unfair.
The law pushes 97% of the regulation of the impacts to roughly 70% of the 
municipalities in this State where a one-size-fits-all mandate is disproportionate and 
excessive, a mandate which will have many long-term adverse side-affects that will 
likely need to be corrected by future legislatures, if flexibility, low-population 
exemption, and time are not afforded to Mainers. 
Many smaller towns will have to deal with this on their own, somehow, even though 
definitions and cost impacts of the law are still being created. The changes in 
definitions of suitable dwellings, structures, density, parking, and stormwater 
management due to this law will dramatically impact code enforcement, 
comprehensive planning, functional local design constructs, and introduce expensive 
legal entanglements through no fault of the individual communities. Local 
governments will need to amend regulations to modular housing communities, mobile
home parks, campgrounds, cluster subdivisions, private campsites, rv-camper-tent 
uses, auto graveyards, rentals, phosphorous loading, lot coverage, impervious %, net 
acreage, and net density in order to properly compensate for the likely negative 
impacts of LD2003 as it is currently written. These are largely rural issues that larger 
urban centers don’t have to contend with or have the resources to properly manage, 
but it is a reality that needs to be discussed for most of Maine. Again, this sort of 
effort takes years, not a month, for smaller communities without fiscal resources, and 
what small resources were earmarked by the State will undoubtedly be out of their 
reach.
I would respectfully encourage the Housing Committee to support an OUGHT TO 
PASS for LD1554, to provide some competent and reasonable flexibility based on the
widely varied levels of capability, capacity, size, and speed throughout our State. 
LD214 and LD665 are complimentary and necessary to pass with this bill as well.
Thank you.
Dan

