MEDA Testimony in Opposition 
LD 665, An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is Required for Affordable Housing 
Development, Increased Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units 
LD 214, An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Zoning and Land Use Restrictions to Limit Certain 
Requirements to Municipalities with a Population of More than 10,000 
LD 1154, An Act Regarding Accessory Dwelling Units and Municipal Zoning Ordinances 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Honorable Members ofthe Joint Select Committee on 
Housing; 
On behalf ofthe Maine Real Estate and Development Association (MEREDA), I am testifying in 
opposition to the following three bills: LD 214, An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Zoning and Land 
Use Restrictions to Limit Certain Requirements to Municipalities with a Population of More than 10,000; 
LD 665, An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is Required for Affordable Housing 
Development Increased Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units; and LD 1154, An Act 
Regarding Accessory Dwelling Units and Municipal Zoning Ordinances. 
MEREDA is Maine's premiere trade association representing commercial real estate and the state's 
housing creators. MEREDA members are housing creators, engineers, architects, designers, bankers, 
lawyers, brokers, and many other organizations involved in the real estate industry. MEREDA’s guiding 
principle is the promotion of responsible real estate development — responsible real estate development 
is community development. Through the advocacy efforts of its Public Policy Committee, MEREDA works 
to advance a more fair, practical, and predictable policy landscape for housing creation in Maine. 
MEREDA opposes the three bills, LD’s 214, 665 and 1154, because they would change the existing law at 
Title 30-A, Subchapter 3, as enacted by Public Law 2021, Chapter 672 —— 
known as LD 2003 in the 130"‘ 
Legislature and hereinafter. MEREDA strongly supported LD 2003 in 2022. We continue to believe that 
the land use regulations advanced by that measure will help significantly increase the number of 
housing units available to Mainers. Additionally, we believe it will most help the small community 
housing creators who want to add a unit of housing to their property — opening up a new desperately 
needed housing unit. We believe the provisions in LD 2003 are modest — they do not incentivize the 
creation of large-scale developments. Rather, they incentivize smart growth. 
MEREDA understands that many towns feel they do not have the resources they need to implement or 
administer this law. MEREDA respects that towns have a great burden to bear in our housing crisis and 
agrees that they need more support Q to help them support their residents into safe, affordable 
homes. However, MEREDA believes that the promise of LD 2003 is one which cannot be delayed. 
MaineHousing was before this Committee some months ago and mentioned that in communities where 
emergency rental assistance had ended, those who lost their housing were largely able to "self—solve" by 
couch~surfing, moving in with relatives, etc., We all agree that this is not an ideal solution. However, if
7‘ kl‘ .s it 
:: :: :: __,“<i;~ iiir-;?»1:§' .A£I.~i:i§_; W t iri'$l?ﬁil 
9 ~ “I “ 
re ~.l~~~ -“XE 1"" ‘TIFF more of those relatives were able to build ADUs, they could create a permanent housing solution, rather 
than being forced into a challenging situation. This is just one small example of the many ways in which 
LD 2003 could help contribute to ending the shortage of housing and ease the pain of the crisis for many 
Mainers. 
Finally, we believe LD 2003 should apply universally. We believe the market will drive most of the new 
housing units into the areas where they are most needed — as a general matter, the towns in those 
regions have the resources they need to meet the legal obligations under the law. MEREDA believes that 
a delay, or dilution in the applicability of LD 2003 will have the effect of limiting the law's ability to meet 
our communities ’ housing needs. 
We appreciate the time and consideration of the Housing Committee. MEREDA hopes that you will not 
take action to roll back, reduce the applicability of, or extend the effectiveness of, LD 2003. We believe it 
needs time to work before changes are made, and we believe it's time for all Maine towns to embrace 
the smart growth opportunities in the law as a needed solution to our housing crisis. 
Thank you again, and on behalf of MEREDA, I urge you to vote Ought not to Pass on LD's 214, 665, and 
1154. 
Sincerely 
Elizabeth M. Frazier 
On behalf of Maine Real Estate & Development Association 
efrazier@pierceatwood.com
