 
 
PO Box 18187,  Portland,  Maine 04112  |  Tel: (207) 831-MCCE (6223) 
www.mainecleanelections.org | info@mainecleanelections.org  
TO:  The Honorable Craig Hickman 
  The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
  Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE:  Thursday May 11, 2023 
RE: LD 1811 An Act to Clarify Required Political Committees 24-hour Reports 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the committee, 
My name is Anna Kellar, and I am the Executive Director of Maine Citizens for Clean Elections. I briefly 
testified neither for nor against LD 1811 during the public hearing on May 3rd, and this written 
testimony expands on those comments and answers questions posed by Rep Boyer and Rep Riseman. 
The testimony submitted  by Director Wayne of the Maine Commission on Ethics helpfully lays out the 
campaign activities currently reported in 24-hour reports that would not be captured in the 
independent expenditure reports. Notably, in 2022 this included “$134,164.54 in costs of 
communications to influence voters that did not meet the definition or $250 threshold of an 
independent expenditure. This included robo-texting, robocalls, slate cards, GOTV efforts, social media 
ads, and more.” 
 
There is a compelling case that voters and the media should have information about these expenditures 
before the election, as well as the contribution information recorded in these reports.  
 
The proposal to increase the threshold for ballot question committees (BQCs) from $1,000 to $5,000 
also risks losing important information. While most campaign expenses for statewide referendums are 
larger than $5,000, it would be possible for a campaign to conduct significant robocalling or robo-texting 
for a few thousand dollars, and voters should have access to that information. Additionally, LD 1811 
would impact municipal referendum campaigns, where expenditures of less than $5,000 can have a very 
significant impact.  
 
In preparing this testimony, I spoke with several journalists and campaign professionals who frequently 
submit or access these reports, and there is undeniably some confusion about which types of 
expenditures fall under each type of report. While fully eliminating the 24-hour report would result in 
the loss of important information, it is worth investigating whether these reports could be combined 
with the independent expenditure reports, the types of information reported in each type of report 
made more distinct, or the thresholds made more consistent. 
 
This committee has heard a number of bills this session proposing to either strengthen or weaken the 
reporting requirements for candidates, PACs, and lobbyists. Let me respond as directly as we can. While 
 
 we welcome any effort to eliminate duplicate requirements or those made unnecessary by other 
developments, we will steadfastly oppose any attack on the public’s right to this information. Disclosure 
is the one tool that conservatives, liberals, and moderates all endorse. Public support for disclosure is off 
the charts. And the most important factor of all —  our democracy cannot function if voters do not have 
all the information they need to make a decision. As Justice Kennedy wrote, disclosure does not 
"prevent anyone from speaking" and is "less restrictive than limits on independent expenditures." 
Moreover, "transparency enables the electorate to make informed decisions and give proper weight to 
different speakers and messages." We must have strong disclosure laws. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the 
Committee. 
