Gallant Funeral Home 10 Elm Street Waterville, ME 04901 - (207) 873-3393 
Testimony in Support 
LD 505 — An Act to update the Reimbursement Rates for Transportation Of Deceased 
Persons by Funeral Homes 
March 15, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health & Human 
Services Committee. My name is Craig Mclnnis. I live in Waterville, and I have been a licensed 
Funeral Service Practitioner for 5 years. I work at Gallant Funeral Home in Waterville. 
I am in support of LD 505 — An Act to update the Reimbursement Rates for Transportation Of 
Deceased Persons by Funeral Homes because: 
I feel that this bill is needed to help offset the amount of money we as a fimeral home spend to 
make these transports on behalf of the Medical Examiner. Over the past year we have seen high 
increases on the price of vehicles, equipment, insurances and fuel. When we make a transport to 
the lVIE’s Ofﬁce on the weekend or after hours they require us to bring a second person to assist 
us with moving the deceased. This person also needs to be paid, which comes out of the 
transporting funeral homes budget. At the current rate we as the funeral home are paying out 
money to transport on the behalf of the Medical Examiner ’s Office. 
An example of how this effects our business is as follows. Under Maine State Law fimeral home 
employees are not allowed to be salaried. We had a call for a transport from China to the ME’s 
Ofﬁce. Our removal team was on another call in Fairfield at the time and responded to this call. 
We as a funeral home had to pay both employees to do the removal and go to Augusta. By 
paying both employees straight time for this removal at the current rate we took a loss doing this 
transport. Sometimes this loss is made up for if we end up keeping the case. The deceased was 
from the Portland area and once the ME completed their investigation a funeral home from that 
area cared for the family. 
Thank you for your time today 
Respectfully, 
Craig Mclnnis 
(207) 873-3393 
emcinnis@gal|antfuneralhome.net
