Written Testimony before the State of Maine Legislature 
LD 505 — An Act to update the Reimbursement Rates for Transportation Of Deceased 
Persons by Funeral Homes 
Position: Support 
Testimony By 
Erik Tiner, Funeral Practitioner 
March 15, 2023 
Co-Chairs, Senator Baldacci and Representative Meyer, members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Erik Tiner and I am a funeral service practitioner in this great 
State of Maine. I am a member of the Maine Funeral Directors Association Legislative 
Committee. MFDA is comprised of funeral practitioners throughout the state. Asa 
Representative of l\/IFDA, as well as manager of The F ortin Group Funeral Home with locations 
in Lewiston, Auburn, Lisbon and Rumford, I wish to go on record as supporting LD 505 as 
currently written. 
I ﬁrst would like to state that for the most part, Maine’s funeral service practitioners and the 
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) have a very good professional relationship. 
Over the years funeral service practitioners have transported human remains to the Ofﬁce of the 
Chief Medical Examiner which is housed in Augusta, Maine. Practitioners have done this since 
the inception of the OCME. Basically, the system works relatively well wherein practitioners are 
contacted by the OCME to transport (remove) human remains from the place of death and assist 
law enforcement officers at the scene when requested and as appropriate. At times the funeral 
service practitioner contacted to assist with transportation (removal) services are local, 
sometimes know the family whose loved one has died, and assist them at these difficult times. 
However, more and more often we do not know the person and they are not from the local area. 
On many occasions when an autopsy is not ordered and transportation services to Augusta are 
not required, the local funeral service practitioner will transport the remains to their facility 
where they will shelter the remains until a Deputy Medical Examiner is able to complete their* 
examination and necessary tests. 
In 2011, we came to this committee where our reimbursement from the OCME had not increased 
since 1998. We were successful in 2011 getting the fee’s increased and we were supported by 
the OCME. In short, practitioners have been overlooked in many budgets from the OCME. 
Times have changed and costs to provide these very valuable services have increased. 
Some factors that should be taken into consideration include: the cost of a removal vehicle in 
2011 was $24,000 and today is over $30,000. There is an bill this year being put through that 
will require expensive changes to the vehicles, licensing fees for Funeral Practitioners, Funeral 
Service Establishments and Funeral Attendants have all gone up since 2011, as well as new 
requirements imposed for training for all licenses. The costs of labor, fuel and insurance, as well 
as the cost of goods that are used and provided as part of the support service to the OCME have 
increased across the board. 
It shouldn’t be too difficult for anyone to appreciate the fact that Maine’s funeral service 
practitioners cannot and should not continue to be expected to provide support service to the 
OCME at a loss. Like everyone else, they wish to remain in business. It is imperative that 
reimbursement fees at least cover the expenses incurred by practitioners in support of the 
OCME. 
Funeral practitioners across the state are in hope that the Health and Human Services Committee 
can appreciate their dilemma. It’s not that practitioners are imwilling to continue to offer support 
the OCME, but rather a simple fact that they cannot afford to do so at a financial loss. Stop and 
think about it, it is not just the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner that would be encumbered 
if practitioners ceased to offer support, but the families who must rely on the services of the 
OCME, the citizens of Maine.
Thank you for your consideration as we ask for your support for an increase in transportation 
fees for funeral service practitioners supporting the Oﬁice of the Chief Medical Examiner
