February 16, 2022 
Senator Baiclacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health & Human 
Services.Committee, 
l am writing to youtoday in support of LD505, An Act to Update Reimbursement Rates for 
Transportationof Deceased Persons by Funeral» Homes. My name is Idella P. Thompson Marquis andI 
have worked for Mockler Funeral Home in Caribou for nearly 14 years, including as a practitioner of 
funeral service since 2019. 
This bill is to increase the reimbursement to funeral homes when transpoitingi deceased individuals to the 
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME). From our funeral home to the OCME and back, it is 492 
miles. Our funeral attendants need to leave between 3:30AM and 4:00AM to make it to the OCME fora 
9:00AM start time. We are very fortunate that the OCME does their very best to schedule funeral homes 
travelling long distances in the morning so that the procedure can be ﬁnished by l2PM and our employee 
can get back on -the road to Caribou — however this still puts them arriving back at the funeral home at 
5:00PM. One trip to the medical examiner ofﬁce ties up one staff person ﬁ'om 3:30AM until 5:00PM— 
and this is if everything goes perfectly to plan — a I3 and a half hour work day, plus 492 miles ona 
vehicle. lf things do not go well, we sometimes have to stay overnight in a hotel to avoid sending 
someone back down the interstate the following day. With the increase in fuel, vehicle, meals, hotel, labor 
and equipment prices — it is "easy to see how an increase in reimbursement is needed. 
The work that is done at the Ofﬁce of the Chief Medical Examiner is an asset to our state, and is widely 
underappreciated- . This department is used by both citizens, and non-citizens who die in our state. We 
need to ensure that this department has what they need, and that we can all continue to transport to their 
facility. Increasing the reimbursement rates will aid in being able to ensure a timelyarrival at the ofﬁce of 
the Chief Medical Examiner by qualiﬁed transportation staff. 
Thank you for taking the time to read my letter and considering this bill. 
Respectfully, 
Qdﬂyg \k.\\ll\vt--t>s0¢\ 
ldella P. Thompson Marquis 
(207 )492-9385 - w. 
ldella.pt.marquis@gmail.c0m
