Written Testimony before the State of Maine Legislature 
LD 505 — An Act to update the Reimbursement Rates for Transportation Of Deceased .- 
Persons by Funeral Homes . i' 
Position: Support 
Testimony By 
James R. Femald CFSP 
Past-President of Maine Funeral Directors Association 
March 15, 2023 
Co-Chairs, Senator Baldacci and Representative Meyer, members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Jim Femald and am proud to say that I am a fifth generation 
funeral service practitioner in this great State of Maine. I am a member of the Maine Funeral 
Directors Association Legislative Committee. MFDA is comprised of funeral practitioners 
throughout the state. As a Representative of MFDA, as well as an owner of Brookings-Smith 
Funeral Homes with three chapels in the Bangor Region, I wish to go on record as supporting LD 
505 as currently written. 
I first would like to state that for the most part, Maine’s funeral service practitioners and the 
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) have a very good professional relationship. 
Over the years funeral service practitioners have transported human remains to the Office of the 
Chief Medical Examiner which is housed in Augusta, Maine. Practitioners have done this since 
the inception of the OCIVIE. Basically, the system works relatively well wherein practitioners are 
contacted by the OCME to transport (remove) human remains from the place of death and assist 
law enforcement officers at the scene when requested and as appropriate. Most often, the funeral 
service practitioner contacted to assist with transportation (removal) services are local, often 
know the family whose loved one has died, and are often able to assist them at these difficult 
times. Generally speaking, the frmeral practitioner is the family’s local contact which often gives 
the family comfort to know things are being handled by someone they know and trust and yet 
still maintain the professionalism needed to assist the OCME. On many occasions when an 
autopsy is not ordered and transportation services to Augusta are not required, the local funeral 
service practitioner will transport the remains to their facility where they will shelter the remains 
until a Deputy Medical Examiner is able to complete their examination and necessary tests. 
It was April 28, 2011, I made this same testimony in front of the same committee Where our 
reimbursement from the OCME had not increased since 1998. We were successful in 2011 
getting the fee’s increased and we were supported by the OCME. In short, practitioners have 
been overlooked in many budgets from the OCME. Times have changed and costs to provide 
these very valuable services have increased. These costs have increased so much that when we 
provide transport from the Bangor Region we are actually providing this service at a loss. 
Some factors that should be taken into consideration include: the cost of a removal vehicle in 
2011 was $24,000 and today is over $30,000 if you can fmd one to purchase. Licensing fees for 
Funeral Practitioners, Funeral Service Establishments and Funeral Attendants have all gone up 
since 2011, as Well as new requirements imposed for training for all licenses. The costs of labor, 
fuel and insurance, as well as the cost of goods that are used and provided as part of the support 
service to the OCME have increased across the board. I have had the unforttmate circumstance 
that an employee was hurt moving and transporting deceased remains for the OCME that went 
against my business Workers Compensation Insurance. 
It shouldn’t be too difficult for anyone to appreciate the fact that Maine’s funeral service 
practitioners cannot and should not continue to be expected to provide support service to the 
OCME at a loss. Like everyone else, they wish to remain in business. It is imperative that 
reimbursement fees at least cover the expenses incurred by practitioners in support of the 
OCME. 
Funeral practitioners across the state are in hope that the Health and Human Services Committee
can appreciate their dilemma. It’s not that practitioners are unwilling to continue to offer support 
the OCME, but rather a simple fact that they cannot afford to do so at a financial loss. Stop and 
think about it, it is not just the Oﬁice of the Chief Medical Examiner that would be encumbered 
if practitioners ceased to oﬂ' er support, but the families who must rely on the services of the 
OCl\/IE, the citizens of Maine. 
Thank you for your consideration as we ask for your support for an increase in transportation 
fees for funeral service practitioners supporting the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
4
