 
  
 
 
    
April 25, 2023  
 
The Honorable Craig Hickman  
Senate Chair, Veterans & Legal Affairs Committee  
Maine Legislature  
 The Honorable Laura Supica  
House Chair , Veterans & Legal Affairs Committee  
Maine Legislature  
 
Re: Statement in Support of L.D.  1590 
 
Dear Chair Hickman, Chair Supica , and Members of the Committee, 
 
Campaign Legal Center (CLC) respectfully submits this statement to the Committee 
in support of L.D . 1590, a bill to require the disclosure of sources of big campaign spending 
in Maine elections . CLC is a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization dedicated to protecting 
and strengthening democracy across all levels of government. Since the organization’s founding in 2002, CLC has participated in every major campaign finance case before the U.S. Supreme  Court, as well as in numerous other federal and state court cases. Our work 
promotes every American ’s right to participate in the democratic process.  
Since the Supreme Court’s 2010 decision in Citizens United v. FEC , outside 
spending in elections has skyrocketed, increasing from $205 million in 2010 to $2.9 billion in 2020.
1 In Maine , outside spending  has followed the same trend.2 Some outside spenders 
have used methods designed to evade disclosure laws, allowing wealthy special interests to hide the true source of money used to influence elections.
3 As big outside  spending 
 
1 OpenSecrets, Outside Spending , https://www.opensecrets.org/outside -spending/  (accessed Apr. 19, 
2023 ). 
2 FollowTheMoney.org  Chart of Independent Spending in Maine , 2006- 2022, 
https://www.followthemoney.org/show -me?dt=2&is -s=ME&f -fc=2,3#[{1|gro=is -s,is-y  (accessed  Apr. 
19, 2023) . See also  MAINE CITIZENS FOR CLEAN ELECTIONS , THE SHELL GAME: HOW INDEPENDENT 
EXPENDITURES HAVE INVADED MAINE SINCE CITIZENS UNITED  (2013) 
https://www.maineclean el ections.org/sites/default/files/web/MCCEReport11_TheShellGame_Letter.p
df.  
3 See, e.g. , BRENDAN FISCHER & MAGGIE CHRIST , CAMPAIGN LEGAL CTR., DIGITAL DECEPTION : HOW A 
MAJOR DEMOCRATIC DARK MONEY GROUP EXPLOITED DIGITAL AD LOOPHOLES IN THE 2018  ELECTION , 
(2019)  https://campaignlegal.org/sites/default/files/2019-
03/FINAL%20Majority%20Forward%20Issue%20Brief.pdf ; see a lso  Anna Massoglia & Karl Evers -
Hillstrom, ‘Dark Money’ Topped $1 Billion in 2020, Largely Boosting Democrats , CTR. FOR 
 
 2 increasingly impacts elections, campaign finance laws must protect  the integrity of our 
elections by ensuring voters know  which wealthy special interests ar e spending big money 
to influence their votes.  
CLC has carefully reviewed L.D. 1590, and it is a constitutional piece of legislation 
that would increase transparency and reduce secret spending in Maine elections. As 
explained below , L.D. 1590 is intended to require  big outside spenders  in Maine elections to 
disclose the original sources of money used for that spending . The bill also updates Maine’s  
disclosure law to ensure political ads provide viewers with information abou t the original 
source s of funds used to pay for those ads. These reforms are consistent with well -
established U.S. Supreme Court precedent affirming the importan ce of transparency in 
campaign spending to “insure that the voters are fully informed about the person or group 
who is speaking .”4  
CLC recommends amending the bill to ensure that it accomplishes the intended goal 
of original source disclosure and to further strengthen and cl arify  its reporting 
requirements . By doing so, L.D. 1590 would provide  Maine voters with necessary  
information about the wealthy special interests spending money to influence their vote . 
I. L.D. 1590 would increase transparency in Maine  elections by providing 
more information to voters  about who is really spending  big money spent 
to influence their vote s. 
L.D. 1590  amends Maine  campaign finance transparency law to establish  a system 
for tracing big money spent in Maine elections back to its original source. Requiring 
transparency for the original sources of big money spent on elections  promote s First 
Amendment interests by providing the  public with the  information necessary to engage in 
democratic self-government and to hold elected representatives accountable.  
A.  L.D. 1590 would reveal the original sources of large contributions spent 
to influence Maine elections.  
Under current Maine  law, when groups raise  or spend money  above certain 
thresholds in state elections, they must register with the Maine Commission on 
Governmental Ethics & Election Practices  as a political action committee  or ballot question 
committee, as appropriate,5 and file public reports  disclosing basic information about their 
political spending , including  direct contributors of more than $50.6 Maine  law also requires 
political ads  to include a disclaimer stating who paid for the ad and the top direct  
contributors to the ad sponsor.7 But when wealthy special interests play shell games and 
funnel money through other entities that then pass it along to groups  paying for political 
ads, those wealthy special interests  can evade public identification as the sources of big 
 
RESPONSIVE POLITICS  (Mar. 17, 2021),  https://www.opensecrets.org/news/2021/03/one -billion -dark -
money -2020 -electioncycle/ .    
4 Citizens United v. FEC , 558 U.S. 310, 348 (2010) (internal citations and quotation  marks omitted).  
5 21-A M.R.S. §1052-A (1). 
6 21-A M.R.S. § §1059 and  1060. 
7 21-A M.R.S. §1014. 
 3 money spent in elections.8 This kind of secret spending,  sometimes called “dark money,” 
deprives voters of critical information  about who is really paying for election -related 
messaging.9  
L.D. 1590  would reduce  secret spending in Maine elections by requiring  more 
transparency for big outside spenders —specifically, certain political committee s spending 
more than $ 50,000  on expenditures for candidate elections or ballot measures  in an election 
cycle. These big spenders —called “covered committees ” in the bill— must disclose the 
sources of “original funds” received  during the election cycle  from certain contributors , as 
well as  any third parties  that passed the money along before reaching the spender . 
“Original funds” generally means the personal funds of individuals , like money received 
from salaries or wages,  or the business income of organizations. A covered committee is  
required to report its original source information  in its regular reports to the Ethics 
Commission .  
L.D. 1590 also would incorporate this enhanced transparency for outside spending in 
on-ad disc laimers when covered committees run political ads, ensuring that voters know 
who is really funding that messaging. Although identifying the sponsor of a political ad is 
important, it does not tell voters the whole story, especially when those ads are sponsored 
by groups  that receive significant funding from wealthy special interest groups. Under the 
bill, the top do nor disclaimer on ads  run by covered committees  would include, in addition 
to the sponsor of the ad, the sponsor’s top three contributors of original funds.  
Finally, bill establishes  a notice and opt -out system, requiring each covered 
committee  to notify their large donors —called “covered contributors” —that their  donations 
may be used for election spending in Maine and allowing donors to opt out of having their 
donations spent for such purposes. This system enables covered contributors  to control 
whether their donations to groups engaged in different types of spending will be spent on 
elections. Under the bill , a covered contributor that does not opt out is required to identify 
whether its funds are “ pass-through ” funds from another sou rce and, if so, identify the 
original sources  of those funds . If covered contributors opt out, their donations will not be 
used on elections and, therefore, those donors will not be included in the covered committee’s disclosure reports.  If a covered contributor receives notice that its  donations 
may be used for election spending  in Maine  and do es not provide the original source 
information within 21 days, their funds are presumed to have been opted out  and may not 
be spent by the covered committee to influence Maine elections . 
 
8 See, e.g. , Steve Mistler , Pulse Newsletter: Tax Filings Shine Light On Democratic Dark Money In 
Maine , MAINE PUBLIC  (Dec. 4, 2021) https://www.mainepublic.org/politics/2020 -12-04/pulse -
newsletter -tax-filings -shine -light -on-democratic -dark- money -in-main e.   
9 In one study of Maine  state elections , dark money spending jumped from under $20,000 in 2006 to 
over $1.6 million in 2014, just one election cycle after Citizens United  was decided.  See CHISUN LEE, 
ET AL ., BRENNAN CTR. FOR JUSTICE , SECRET SPENDING IN THE STATES  7 (2016), 
https://www.brennancenter.org/our- work/research -reports/secret -spending -states .  
 4 B.  L.D. 1590’s  transparency provisions promote First Amendment 
interests and are consistent with long- standing U.S. Supreme Court 
precedent . 
Voters have the right to know  about the political messages they receive —includ ing 
who is funding those messages —and requiring transparency for the original sources of big 
money spent on elections is critical to  making that right a reality for Maine voters . 
Knowing who is spending big money to support a campaign helps voters determine who 
supports which positions and why. As the  U.S. Supreme Court has repeatedly recognized in 
decades of decisions upholding campaign finance disclosure provisions:  
“[D]isclosure provides the electorate with information as to where 
political campaign money comes from and how it is spent by the 
candidate in order to aid the voters in evaluating those who seek 
federal office. It allows voters to place each candidate in the political 
spectrum more precisely than is often possib le solely on the basis of 
party labels and campaign speeches.”10 
The Court’s precedents have long  recognized that transparency in election spending 
improves the functioning of government and its responsiveness to the public. In its foundational campaign finance decision, Buckley v. Valeo , the Court upheld disclosure laws 
enacted following the Watergat e scandal  and identified three  important  interests advanced 
by campaign finance disclosure : (1) providing  voters with information necessary to evaluate 
candidates and make informed decisions; (2) deterring  corruption and the appearance of 
corruption by shi ning a light on campaign finances ; and (3) aiding  enforcement of other 
campaign finance laws, like contribution limits.
11 
Since Buckley , the Court has consistently reaffirmed the constitutionality of 
campaign finance disclosure  laws .12 In McConnell v. FEC , the Court upheld the federal 
Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act’s expanded disclosure system, which  was designed to 
address the problem of “independent groups [who] were running election -related 
advertisements ‘while hiding behind dubious and misleading names.’”13 Notably , in Citizens 
United v. FEC , even as the Court struck down limits on corporate election spending , the 
Court again upheld —by an 8 -to-1 vote —the  constitutionality of federal election disclosure 
laws that applied to that spending , stating that “transparency enables the electorate to 
make informed decisions and give proper weight to different speakers and messages.”14  
 
10 Buckley  v. Valeo , 424 U.S. 1, 66- 68 (1976) (per curiam)  (internal quotation marks and footnote 
omitted).  
11 Id. 
12 See McConnell v. FEC , 540 U.S. 93, 189- 202 (2003) (approving disclosure rules for “electioneering 
communications,” a type of political ad that evaded disclosure requirements under Buckley ’s narrow 
interpretation of “express advocacy.”); Citizens United , 558 U.S. at 366- 71; John Doe No. 1 v. Reed , 
561 U.S. 186 (2010); see also First Nat’l Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U.S. 765, 792 n.32 (1978) 
(“Identification of the source of advertising may be required as a means of disclosure, so that the 
people will be able to evaluate th e arguments to which they are being subjected.”).  
13 McConnell, 540 U.S. at 197. 
14 Citizens United , 558 U.S. at 369.  
 5 Following Citizens United , the federal courts of appeals  have  continued to  affirm th e 
constitutionality and importance of  state election  disclosure laws .15 Recently, the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the Ninth  Circuit upheld the constitutionality of  a San Francisco law 
requiring independent spenders and ballot issue committees to include  certain  “secondary 
contributors” in  disclaimers on political ads.16 Similar to L.D. 1590’s  requirement for 
covered committees  to include top donors of original funds in their on -ad disclaimers, San 
Francisco’s secondary contributor requirement is  “designed to go beyond the ad hoc 
organizations with creative but misleading names and instead expose the actual 
contributors to such groups.”17 In upholding this law, t he Ninth  Circuit  found that the city’s  
requirement was substantially related to the government al interest in informing the 
electorate “[b]ecause the interest in learning the source of funding for a political 
advertisement extends past the entity that is directly responsible .”18 
Additionally , the Supreme Court has long recognized that laws cannot 
constitutionally discriminate against the poor.19 This principle is especially critical in the 
context of elections and voting rights.20 Political power and influence should not be 
allocated based on wealth, and while Citizens United protects wealthy  special  interests’ 
right to spend unlimited amounts  independently  to influence elections, disclosure laws 
protect the countervailing right of the electorate to assess the credibility and merits of the 
messages paid for by that spending.  
*** 
In the wake of Citizens United , wealthy special interests have been able to funnel 
their campaign spending through webs of nonprofits and other  entities that do not have to 
publicly disclose their donors, leaving voters in the dark about who is really funding 
political ads . Requiring big outside spenders to publicly disclose the original sources of 
money they spend in Maine elections  is the solution to ending  secret  spending  in Maine  
elections . In doing so , Maine  would  follow in the footsteps of recently passed enhanced 
 
15 See, e.g. , Gaspee Project v. Mederos, 13 F.4th 79 ( 1st Cir. 2021);  Indep. Inst. v. Williams , 812 F.3d 
787 (10th Cir. 2016);  Yamada v. Snipes , 786 F.3d 1182 (9th Cir. 2015);  Del. Strong Families v. 
Attorney Gen. of Del. , 793 F.3d 304 (3d Cir. 2015); Vt. Right to Life Comm., Inc. v. Sorrell , 758 F.3d 
118 (2d Cir. 2014); Justice v. Hosemann , 771 F.3d 285 (5th Cir. 2014); Worley v. Fla. Sec’ y of State , 
717 F.3d 1244 (11th Cir. 2013); Real Truth About Abortion Inc. v. FEC , 681 F.3d 544 (4th Cir. 2012); 
Ctr. for Individual Freedom v. Madigan , 697 F.3d 464 (7th Cir. 2012); Nat’l Org. for Marriage v. 
McKee, 649 F.3d 34 (1st Cir. 2011); Human Life  of Wash. v. Brumsickle, 624 F.3d 990 (9th Cir. 2010); 
SpeechNow.org v. FEC , 599 F.3d 686 (D.C. Cir. 2010) (en banc).  
16 No on E, San Franciscans Opposing the Affordable Housing Production Act v. Chiu , No. 3:22 -CV-
02785- CRB, 2023 WL 2397500 (9th Cir. 2023).  
17 Id. at * 9 (internal citations and quotation marks  omitted) . 
18 Id. 
19 See, e.g. , M.L.B. v. S.L.J., 519 U.S. 102 (1996) (finding unconstitutional a state statute requiring 
payment of court fees in order to appeal termination of one’s parental rights); Boddie v. Connecticut , 
401 U.S. 371 (1971) (finding unconstitutional a state law restricting the right  to divorce based on the 
ability to pay court fees and costs) . 
20 See, e.g. , Bullock v. Carter, 405 U.S. 134, 144 (1972) (striking down a filing fee requirement as a 
condition for a candidate to have his name placed on the ballot, and explaining, “we would ignore 
reality were we not to recognize that this system falls with unequal weight on voters, a s well as 
candidates, according to their economic status”); Harper v. Virginia State Bd. of Elections , 383 U.S. 
663 (1966) (striking down a state statute requiring payment of a poll tax as a voter qualification).  
 6 election transparency laws across the country, like Arizona’s Voters’ Right to Know Act that 
overwhelming passed at the ballot this past November,21 thereby  protect ing and 
strengthen ing Mainers’ right to know who is spending big money to influence their votes . 
As the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit recently explained in upholding a 
Rhode Island election transparency law, “a well- informed  electorate is as vital to the 
survival of a democracy as air is to the survival of human life .” 
II. Recommendations  to strengthen L.D. 1590.  
CLC strongly recommends amending the bill  to explicitly require covered 
committees to disclose the identities of sources of original funds and the amounts from each source. As currently drafted, L.D. 1590 would require covered contributors to identify the 
sources of original funds —and amounts of original funds from tho se sources —to the covered 
committee  receiving those funds ,
22 but the reporting obligation for covered committees does 
not explicitly require disclosure of the identities of the sources of original funds received by 
the committee and the amounts from each s ource.23 This ambiguity could undermine the 
bill’s efficacy , as the critical element of the bill’s new disclosure requirements  is the 
identification of the sources of original funds spent to influence elections.  
CLC also recommends the following  amendments to the bill to strengthen and 
clarify the reporting requirements:  
A. Establish a minimum threshold for reporting the identities of sources of 
original funds . As noted above , the bill should be amended to explicitly require each 
covered committee to disclose  in its reports to the Ethics Commission  the identities of the 
sources of original funds received by the committee  and the amounts from each source . 
Additionally, the bill should establish a threshold monetary amount of original funds above 
which the reporting of the identity of the source and amount of original funds is required.  
By establishing a minimum threshold above which sources  of original funds  must be 
reported, the disclosure requirements would appropriately focus on the  sources of big 
money spent to influence Maine elections.24 
B. Cla rify the definition of “original funds.”  The definition of “original funds” 
should be amended to clarify that, in the case of a covered contributor donating “pass -
through funds” to a covered committee, the covered contributor is required to identify the 
original source information for funds it receives from others that comprise those 
contributions. As currently drafted, the definition of “original funds” appears to encompass 
only a covered contributor’s original funds.  
C. Require detailed information about transfers of original funds by third 
parties.  The reporting requirements should be amended to require covered committees  to 
report more specific information about transfers of original funds by third parties  before 
 
21 Elizabeth Shimek, Arizona Leads on Stopping Secret Spending , CAMPAIGN LEGAL CTR. (Nov. 29, 
2022), https://campaignlegal.org/update/arizona- leads -stopping -secret -spending .   
22 L.D. 1590 , 131st Leg ., 1st Spec. Sess.  § 2 (Me. 2023).  
23 See id. at § 4.  
24 Similarly , adopting a minimum threshold for the sources of original funds that covered 
contributors must disclose to covered committees under s ection 2 of the bill would similarly 
streamline the bill’s requirements to focus on the sources of big money spent in Main e elections.   
 7 those funds are donated to  the covered committee, including the dates and amounts of those 
transfers. This additional information  would ensure  that large contributions can be traced 
effectively  from the covered committee  back  to its original source.  
D. Notic e to all contributors . The bill should be amended to require covered 
committees to provide  the notice to all of their donors  and not only  to covered contributors . 
Under the notice requirement as currently written , a donor to a covered committee  who has 
given under $10,000 would not receive the notice  and would, thus, not have the opportunity 
to opt those funds out of being used for election -related purposes in Maine . If the donor 
later exceeds the $10,000 threshold,  there may be practical difficulties  in effectively 
adminis tering the opt -out process. For example, if such a donor opts out, the donor’s intent 
may be undermined for earlier donated funds for which no notice was required and, as a 
result, were already spent by the recipient covered committee for election purposes.  
Requiring notice and the opportunity to opt out to all donors to covered committees ensures clarity  of the obligations of both covered committees a nd their major donors.  
CLC would welcome the opportunity to work with the Committee and other 
stakeholders to implement our recommendations.  
III. Conclusion . 
In light of the important changes this bill would make to strengthen Maine’s 
transparency laws, CLC respectfully urges the Committee to amend L.D. 1590  as described 
above  and to support  the bill as amended . Thank you for the opportunity to submit this 
statement in support of this important legislation. Please  do not hesitate to contact us  if 
you have further questions . 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
/s/  
Aaron McKean   
Legal Counsel   
 Campaign Legal Center  
1101 14th  St. NW, Suite 400  
Washington, DC 20005  
