STATE OF MAINE  
COMMISSION ON GOVERNMENTAL ETHICS   
AND ELECTION PRACTICES  
135 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  
04333- 0135 
 
 
OFFICE LOCATED AT: 45 MEMORIAL CIRCLE , AUGUSTA, MAINE  
WEBSITE: WWW.MAINE.GOV/ETHICS  
PHONE: (207) 287 -4179                   FAX: (207) 287- 6775  
 
Testimony of Jonathan Wayne, Executive Director of the  
Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices  
before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
April  28, 2023  
 
 
Senator  Hickman , Representative S upica , and distinguished members of the 
committee: my name is Jonathan Wayne, and I am the Executive Director of the Maine 
Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices. Thank you for the 
opportunity to testify concerning L.D. 1590.  
The idea of L.D. 1590 is that certain political committees registered with the 
Commission (a “covered committee”) would need to report not just the “covered 
contributor” that directly made  a contribution, but also other persons that were th e sources 
of the money that the covered contributor gave to the covered committee . 
 
 
 
 
 
The staff of the Ethics Commission believes that our department could administer 
L.D. 1590, if it became law.  We appreciate that the bill  is drafted  to take effect on 
January 1, 2025, which w ill provide us with time to  conduct a rulemaking and to ada pt our 
electronic filing system to receive new types of information concerning contributions. This would involve a one -time expenditure of money to pay for an enhancement to our 
current system.  In order to conduct a successful rulemaking to implement the new 
requirements, the Commission would engage in earnest outreach to all interested parties, 
including reform advocates and the political comm ittees .  We would have no objection if 
the Commission were directed t o conduct a maj or substantive rulemaking on this 
particular topic , although that could delay the IT implementation of the law.  Sources of 
original funds  Any 
intermediaries  Covered 
Contributor  Covered 
Committee 
(PAC, BQC, 
Party)  
2 
 Summary of Statement by Campaign Legal Center  
(in response to request by Rep. Walter Riseman)  
The Campaign Legal Center, a n advocacy organization based in Washington D .C., 
submitted a  detaile d and  thoughtful  statement in support of L.D . 1590 in the form of an 
April 25, 2023 letter  from  its legal counsel, Aaron McKean.  The three paragraphs below 
are intended to provide a very short summary of the CLC’s statement  but are no substitute 
for readin g the  full submission.  
On pages 1 -2 of the statement, the CLC sets out the problem s it believes will be 
addressed by L.D. 1590, which include a ten -fold increase in outside election spending 
during 2010- 2020 and efforts by some outside spenders to hide the true sources of money 
used to influence elections.  The CLC describes on pages 2 -3 how the proposed law would 
require each covered committee to disclose not  just their covered contributors but also the 
original sour ces of the funds given by those covered contributors . 
On page s 4-5, the CLC argues that  L.D. 1590 promotes governmental interests that 
federal  courts have found to be sufficient to uphold the constitutionality of campaign 
finance disclosure laws .  In particular, the CLC believes L.D. 1590 will help voters make 
informed decisions in elections and give proper weight  to different speakers and 
messages .   
Finally, the CLC recommends amending L.D. 1590 to resolve some ambiguities in 
the current lan guage of the bill and to  improve the information that covered committees 
would be required to report .  The CLC suggests:  
• the bill should be more explicit that a covered committee is required to disclose the 
identi ties of the sources of original funds and the amounts from each source  
(Commission s taff agrees the current  language proposed for  §§ 1064(4)(A)&(B) is 
ambiguous ), 
• the bill should require the disclosure of original funds above a monetary threshold 
to focus on the sources of big money contributed to influence Maine elections , 
• the bill should resolve an ambiguity in the definition of original funds because the 
current drafting would unintentionally limit the information that would be 
3 
 disclosed to the public ( Commission staff agrees the current language proposed 
for § 1064(1)(D)  is ambiguous ), 
• the covered committee should be required to disclose the dates and amounts of any 
transfe rs of original funds  by third parties to better trace how th ose funds started 
with the original sources and ended up in the possession of the covered contributor  
(as written, L.D. 1590 requires only the disclosure of names of these th ird parties) , 
and 
• the covered committee should give a notice to all of its donors that the donor may 
choose to opt out of having its donation used to influence a Maine election (as 
written, L.D. 1590 requires only that the covered committee give this notic e to 
contributors giving more than $10,000).  
 
