 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senator Hickman  
Representative Supica  
Joint Standing Committee on Veteran s and Legal Aff airs 
 
RE:  OPPOSITION to LD 1590 “An Act to Require Disclosure of Campaign Funding 
Sources”  
 
May 23, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Hickman and Representative  Supica  and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs,  
 
My name is Nicole Clegg  and I serve as the Acting CEO at Planned Parenthood of 
Northern New E ngland  and Planned Parenthood Maine Action Fund (“Planned 
Parent hood”) . I write to day to express Planned Parenthood ’s strong opposition to 
LD 1590 – “An Act to Require Disc losure of Campaign Funding S ources .” 
  
As you may be aware, Planned Parenthood of Northern New England provides 
comprehensive reproductive and sexual health care to more than 14,000 people 
in Maine at four health centers located in Biddeford, Portland, Sanford and 
Topsham. People turn to us for affordable, high -quality care including wellness 
exams, birth control, disease testing  and treatment, cancer screenings, abortion 
care as well as a variety of primary care services. We see everyone who comes to 
us regardless of ability to pay, and in a typical year, we provide approximately  $3-
3.5 million in free and discounted care to our communities in Maine each year.  
 
Plan ned Parenthood of Northern New England does not often  submit testify on 
bills related to campaign finance  even though we do raise and spend money on 
campaigns through our PAC, Planned Parenthood Maine Action Fund.  
 

We are  firm believers in campaign finance transparency , disclosure and 
accountability.  We are also deeply concerned that the requirements in LD 1 590 
go too far  and threaten the personal safety of our contributors and supporters.  
 
The stated goal of LD 1590 appears to be to force disclosure  of “big spenders” in 
Maine  so that the public can see who is funding election spending.  While this 
may be a l audable goal, it fails to acknowledge that this “transparency” is 
happening on the backs of donors who may be contributing to organizations  
subject to threats from opponents .  For thos e donors, the disclosures in LD 1590 
subject them to potential harassmen t and targeting.  Th ose risks to privacy and 
safety  have the very real consequence of chil ling their speech in possible violation 
of the  First  amendment.  
 
Planned Parenthood’s donors  can face very real dan gers from abortion opponent s 
who in the past have used not only verbal threats but physical confrontation  with 
those with whom they disagree.  Forcing donors who choose to support Planned 
Parenthood  generally to then voluntarily disclose their name and add ress if that 
contribution i s then used for electoral work is not only dangerous -it deters First 
Amendment free speech.  
 
Unfortunately, we live in a  climate with a demon strated rise in political targeting 
and violence  against our organization .  Given this, we need to be ever vigilan t 
when seeking to balance the laudable goals of increased campaign finance 
spending transparency with the rights of donors to fre ely, and safely, exercise their 
First Amendment . 
 
LD 1590 will do nothing less than put Planned Parenthood donors in a terrible  
dilemma, agree to a public disclosure which may make them targets for 
harassment , or worse,  or suppress their right to participate in an election by 
“opting out” of electoral activity.  
 
We urge you to reconsider your support of LD 1590 and to protect vulnerable 
donors by voting “ought not to pass.”  
 
Sincerely,  
Nicole Clegg  
Acting CEO, Planned Parenthood of Northern New England  
