Janet T‘ Ming V Maine Department of Health and Human Set vrtts 
‘Z er Licensing and C€l"iiﬁ(f‘lit0El I -1 " ii 
“, . ‘.74’ Sr- ....9 GM “Hm ll State House Siitﬂtﬂi _ A :33’ 
» 4i Anthony Ave-nutB 
Jeanne M. I amhrew Phi). 
Com imssioner ' 
Augazsta, Maine 94333-tltlll 
Tel.: (ZW7) 287-9300; Toll Free: (8(l(l} 79l-40%) 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay); Fax: (Z37) Z87-SSW 
Testimony of Joseph Zamboni, Chief Operating Ofﬁcer 
Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD 475 
An Act to Simplify and Clarify the Licensing of Assisted Housing Facilities 
Sponsor: Rep. Michelle Meyer 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services: 
My name is Joseph Zamboni, l am the Chief Operating Ofﬁcer of the Division of Licensing and 
Certiﬁcation for the Department of Health and Human Services. 
I am here today to help introduce and express the Division ’s support for LD 475, An Act to 
Simplify and Clarify the Licensing of Assisted Housing Facilities. Thank you to Representative 
Meyer for sponsoring this Department bill. 
The purpose of this bill is to create more consistent language across Maine’s Title 221 regarding 
the terms “assisted housing” and “residential care.” “Assisted Housing” is an umbrella term under 
which other programs fall, including both assisted living facilities and residential care facilities. 
These two types of facilities differ in the physical environment, requirements, and the services 
provided by the facility. Currently, the deﬁnitions in statute contain some circular and 
contradictory elements. 
This bill Will provide a deﬁnition for assisted living facility; and clarify that residential care does 
not include a treatment facility, a residential program for individuals with intellectual disabilities, 
or a supported shared living arrangement. It will replace the term "assisted housing program" with 
the term "assisted housing facility" and replace "assisted living program" with the term "assisted 
living facility." It will amend the deﬁnition of "assisted housing services" to include medication 
management and nursing services and remove those services from the deﬁnition of "assisted living 
services." And ﬁnally, it will provide that the term of the license for an assisted housing facility is 
2 years. 
This bill relates to LD 449: An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services to 
License Home-based and Community-based Services for Persons with an Intellectual Disability, 
Autism Spectrum Disorder or a Related Condition or an Acquired Brain Injury and Deﬁne Autism 
1 
The proposed bill would also make minor modiﬁcations to Title 21, Elections, by changing “program” to “facility ” where 
appropriate.
Spectrum Disorder, presented by Representative Javner on behalf of the Department. LD 449 
allows the Department to create a separate licensing category for services provided to adults with 
disabilities. The changes in LD 449 and LD 475 are coordinated and we will work to ensure that 
licensing transitions from one category to the other occur with no lapse in licensing authority. 
The Department supports these proposed technical changes to better clarify, and make consistent, 
the terms and language used for these services we license. Making these particular terms consistent 
across Title 22 provides the Division, our providers, and consumers a much better chance of 
understanding the intended message and will foster better communication between the state and 
those we serve. Consistency in our assisted housing and residential language will also help to 
ensure faimess, predictability, and clarity. It helps to reduce confusion and misunderstanding 
among the public and consumers and reduces the possibility of unequal or biased treatment. 
Finally, these technical changes will support the Department ’s plan to simplify assisted living and 
residential care rules at CMR 10-144, Ch 113 (Regulations Governing the Licensing and 
Functioning of Assisted Housing Programs)? The Department would like to have one simpliﬁed 
rule, without the many subparts3 we currently have, for the beneﬁt of licensees. 
The Division also asks the Committee to consider an amendment attached to this testimony. This 
language that would limit the number of licenses in one physical plant. This is intended to ensure 
that multiple licenses cannot be used for the same level of service on the same ﬂoor or within the 
same house. Under current regulations, providers can use this structure to avoid staffing minimums 
and other licensing requirements. The Division would be comfortable exempting providers that 
currently operate in this fashion; however, the practice should be curtailed moving forward. 
Lastly, the Division has spoken to the Office of Aging and Disability Services (“OADS”), and they 
are in support of these changes, however they have suggested to not remove the defmition of 
Independent Housing with Services Program from statute. This would require an amendment as 
well, and we are happy to work with OADS on that language for your work session. 
For these reasons, we hope the Committee will support this bill and the proposed amendment. I 
want to thank you for your consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have 
and will attend the work session. 
2 10-144 (formerly l0-149) l_l_3_: Regulations Governing the Licensing and Functioning of Assisted Housing Programs 
currently has l0 sections, including: Assisted Housing Programs: Infection Prevention and Control, Level I Residential Care 
Facilities, Level II Residential Care Facilities, Level III Residential Care Facilities, Level IV Residential Care Facilities, LevelI 
Private Non-Medical Institutions, Level II Private Non-Medical Institutions, Level III Private Non-Medical Institutions, and Level 
IV Private Non-Medical Institutions. 
3 10-144 (formerly 10-149) _(_I‘h;;§1<;zj_l_l_§, currently has ten (10) subparts.
DLC’s Requested Amendment 
§7 851. Assisted housing programs facilitiesu 
Assisted housing programs facilities are authorized under this chapter in the following 
settings and subject to the following standards and licensure requirements. 
1. Standards. Assisted housing programs facilities further the independence of the 
resident and respect the privacy and personal choices of the resident, including the choice to 
continue to reside at home for so long as the assisted housing program facility, as it is 
fundamentally designed, is able to meet the needs of the resident. Assisted housing programs 
facilities provided to residents must be consumer oriented and meet professional standards of 
quality. 
2. Settings. 
_A., Assisted housing facilities consist of the following 
settings: 
6% 
LB» . Assisted living programs facilities, as deﬁned in section 7852, subsection 4 
fl_-A; or 
2.9. Residential care facilities, as deﬁned in section 7852, subsection 14. 
B. Beginning _, 2023, an applicant for an assisted living facility or residential 
care facility license may not receive more than one license at the same license level for 
services offered in the same house or other place maintained wholly or in part for the 
purpose of providing assisted living services or residential care services. License levels 
are set by the department in rule. An assisted living facility or residential care facility 
that, on the effective date of this subsection, held more than one license at the same 
license level for services offered in the same house or other place maintained wholly or in 
part for the purpose of providing services is grandfathered. The department may continue 
to issue grandfathered applicants more than one license at the same license level if all 
other licensure requirements are met. 
Additionally: 
Otherwise clarify that “Independent Housing with Services Programs ” are a type of assisted living 
facility subject to Department rules, but not subject to licensing. DLC can Work With OADS to 
develop precise edits for the Work Session. 
Unstrike: §785l.2.A. "Independent housing with services programs, as deﬁned in section 
7852, subsection 6 ;" and unstrike §'/851.3 "Independent housing with services programs 
are not subject to licensure."
