Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Maine Committee on 
Judiciary, 
 
My name is Elizabeth Caruso. I live in Caratunk, and I’m testifying in support of  
 
LD 1953 A Resolution – Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of Maine to establish a Parental 
Bill of Rights 
 
I recognize that party pressures appear to sway the voting decisions of this legislature.  But the issue 
of parental rights crosses all party lines and populations regardless of locality (rural or urban), 
income, employment, societal status, race, ethnicity, sex, and/or ideology. This bill will give Maine 
voters the right at the ballot box to speak for themselves on whether the government or parents have 
parental rights over their children. 
 
Now more than ever, there is a need to establish a Parental Bill of Rights that will protect and ensure 
the fundamental right of parents to direct the upbringing, safety, development, and education of their 
children. 
 
Might I remind you that citizens are not the property of the government. Government and schools 
don’t own our kids and are not co-parents, and this is the time for the legislature and citizenry to 
solidify that. The government has no right to interfere with a child’s upbringing. Our Declaration for 
Independence states “that to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, 
deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed…”  Thus, the very purpose of this 
government – of which you are here to represent the citizens -  is to protect the citizens’ rights. This 
resolution would do just that. 
 
With the escalating controversies over our children’s education, health, and safety, Maine parents 
have made it quite clear that their concern over their children’s welfare is bringing them out of their 
homes to make their voices heard.  Maine parents are not going away.  They are not going to be 
silenced, deceived, or return to complacency.  
 
This essential legislation establishes clear guidelines for government agencies including school 
districts to follow when considering any action that may infringe upon the rights of a parent in their 
child’s education, health and safety. 
 
You are here to represent citizens - not unions, lobbyists, or governmental institutions. Your duty is to 
cast your vote for the freedom and rights of Maine citizens and parents today. Your support of this 
resolution will ensure transparency over secrecy and will enable parents to be involved in solutions 
regarding their own children.  
 
I submit to you that, if you oppose this resolution, you are effectively telling Mainers (your 
constituents) that you don’t want them to be able to vote on a parental rights resolution at the ballot 
box, that you don’t believe they should have a say in the upbringing, safety, and welfare of their 
children, and that you believe in governmental overreach and control over Maine children – contrary 
to our Declaration of Independence. 
 
I respectfully ask you to vote “ought to pass” LD 1953, and let this resolution go to the ballot box and 
enable all Maine voters the freedom to use their voices in the democratic process.  
 
Thank you for your time and attention and for your service. 
 
