70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, I am Mike 
McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic League of Maine 
envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom flourishes, families thrive, and life 
is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including in governance. 
I am here to testify in support of LD 1953 RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Establish a Parental Bill of Rights which is sponsored by Representative Poirier. CCL Maine does 
not often support Constitutional Amendments and it is our belief that Parental Rights already exist but 
something twisted has occurred within our society where families, Law Enforcement/First Responders 
and now parents have become the “bad guys.” 
 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to provide that the State,  any of its 
political subdivisions, including, but not limited to, a school board, school district  or school 
administrative unit, or any other governmental entity may not infringe on the  fundamental rights of a 
parent to direct the upbringing and education of that parent's minor  child without demonstrating that 
such action is reasonable and necessary to achieve a  compelling state interest and that each action is 
narrowly tailored and cannot be achieved  by less restrictive means. It describes parental rights that are 
reserved to the parent of a minor child without obstruction or interference from the State, any of its 
political subdivisions, including, but not limited to, a school board, school district or school 
administrative unit, or any other governmental entity. It requires a school board, school district or 
school administrative unit, in consultation with parents, teachers and administrators, to develop and 
publicly adopt a policy to promote parental involvement in the public school system. A parent claiming a 
violation of these provisions may bring an action for declaratory relief, injunctive relief and money 
damages against the State, any of its political subdivisions, including, but not limited to, any school 
board, school district or school administrative unit, or any other governmental entity that the parent 
claims has violated these provisions. 
 
Parental rights are so well known and established that it is incredible to many of us that this is a 
conversation to be had. Like defining what a woman is. Who would ever have expected to debate that 
parents have certain, foundational rights? The alternatives to the child’s guidance such as educators and 
medical people are in a child’s life for snapshots of time, parents are forever. Thus, parents need to 
oversee the choices available to their child in education and healthcare. Parents must be in the know on 
all aspects of a child’s life including what is occurring in the classroom and with medical situations. 
Finally, parents deserve accountability when the government oversteps. In a recent Public Hearing, I 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 heard an accusation that most parents are abusive. That is wrong, most parents want what is right for 
their child. We must stop both the idea that the parent is “the bad guy” and that the state has a right to 
inject it’s opinion in the upbringing of a child. 
 
 
If these points are not reasonable to you, I would ask – why? 
 
The organization (and CCL Maine ally) Alliance Defending Freedom has a great tool that is available for 
free, entitled Promise to America: www.adflegal.org/campaign/promise-to-americas-parents#promise. 
This tool has the core values of parental rights, stories of others who have fought for what is their right, 
a tool kit and a resource for lawmakers, a resource for pastors. I ask that committee members visit the 
site and check it out. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration today.    
Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your families. God bless. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
