Testimony in Support of LD 1953 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
May 23, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 1953
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Parental Bill of
Rights 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary:
I am submitting this testimony in support of LD 1953, “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment
to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Parental Bill of Rights.” My name is Nathan Gould, and I 
have lived my entire life in the Town of Winterport.
For nearly half a year this Committee has considered a myriad of bills, some in support of 
liberty and protecting the vulnerable, some restricting liberty and denying the right to life. The room 
in which the distinguished Members of the Committee sit has become a battleground in the Maine 
theater of the culture war in which our Republic regrettably finds itself. In this war of truth and 
ideologies, like those physical wars of history and the current day, one of the most prevalent victims 
are parents and their children.
We see families divided, torn apart, maligned, and abused in this conflict. The perpetrators are 
often those who claim to be protectors and educators: the school system, teachers and counselors. 
We see the rights of parents, as the primary protectors and guardians of their children, trampled by 
fringe ideological fanatics; we see school administrators thumb their noses at the taxpayers for whom 
they are supposed to work. If I showed the disrespect to my employers that is shown to parents by 
these school administrators at school board meetings and elsewhere, I would have an abundance of 
free time to send even more testimonies to you fine people—though I wouldn’t be able to afford the 
gas to drive to Augusta without a paycheck. School administration and faculty are supposed to work 
for the parents, not against them, not above them, regardless of how many degrees and certificates 
hang on their office walls.
The accounts detailing how certain school employees worked to instill ideas of gender 
confusion into students behind the backs of parents are available—this should never happen. It is no 
obscure fact that Commissioner Makin revealed the push to put social-emotional learning and divisive 
Testimony in Support of LD 1953 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
race and gender indoctrination above academics, above reading, writing, and arithmetic. This is an 
absurd misalignment of priorities when you consider the embarrassing nadir to which our students’ 
academic performance levels have descended.
The family unit is foundational to our society. It is the core unit of government. It is essential to
creating and training new Mainers—and by “new Mainers” I mean the next generation raised here 
and immersed in our values and culture of responsibility, independence, service, integrity, and 
freedom. A strong, stable family is absolutely necessary for ensuring that, tomorrow, we will have 
strong, stable citizens. Attacks on this foundation are attacks at the very heart of our State. We see the
heartbreaking results of this assault in broken homes, in fatherless inmates, in the drug abuse 
epidemic, in sexual confusion, in rampant depression and suicide. Now more than ever we need to 
enshrine the rights of the parents in our State Constitution, to protect them from the excesses of 
bureaucrats who deem themselves above respecting the bond between a parent and their child.
Almighty God gives each child to their caregiver and gives that caregiver the responsibility to 
bring up that child in the way they should go, to raise them from dependent infants to independent 
adults. All I see government do is create a miserable dependency. All I see bureaucracy do is intrude in
the lives of the People of Maine. Such an abusive relationship is no substitute for a parent or guardian.
The State cannot provide a suitable alternative to a parent.
I have no doubt that the Committee understands that we find ourselves at a crossroads. Our 
State can stand on our fundamental principles or let them crumble and repeat the tragedies of past 
authoritarian regimes. It is my sincere hope that the Committee will consider the earnest testimonies 
of concerned parents and citizens and stand with the People of Maine, rather than bow to the whims 
of a vocal minority. I believe the 131st Legislature may be the most consequential in our State’s history,
and I ask for the Sovereign Ruler of the Universe to grant you all wisdom and direction sufficient to 
guide us to a better future, rather than the bleak devastation that looms on our horizon. I ask this in 
the Name of His Son, Jesus Christ. I believe it is no hyperbole to say that destiny of our Republic is at 
stake. I wish to see the miraculous gift of this Nation bestowed upon our forbears by our Creator and 
passed down to us not disintegrate as our families are undermined. I wish to see our Nation prosper 
and its opportunities and heritage be passed down to our posterity, not crumble to dust. We must 
protect our families if we are to have any hope of preserving our Union.
I ask the Committee to vote Ought to Pass. Thank you for the opportunity to submit these 
testimonies this session. Thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
