Tyler Brown
Vassalboro
LD 1953
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Tyler Brown and I am testifying in opposition to LD1953 "Proposing an 
Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Parental Bill of Rights"
As a parent of two school age children, I have taken the responsibility to be involved 
in my children's education through the use of the readily available means that already 
exist for parental involvement. I have attended every Parent Teacher Conference, 
every IEP meeting, school board meetings, been involved with the Parent Teach 
Organization and taken the time and effort to setup appointments with administrators 
and teachers and most importantly, talk with my children about their educational 
experience.
I don't need a politician or another parent telling me what "rights" I should have while
disregarding the current responsibilities all parents have to be involved in their child's 
education. Nor do I need politicians or a minority of parents controlling what is and is
not being taught in my child's classroom. 
Parents already have the right and the individual responsibility to be involved in their 
children's educational experience. This "Bill of rights" is nothing more than an 
attempt at controlling what is and is not taught in schools and mentions nothing about 
parents responsibilities to utilize the tools that already exist to know what their child 
is being taught. 
This bill also seeks to undue the three time majority approved law of LD 798 that 
removed philosophical and religious exemptions for approved vaccination schedule 
requirements to enter public school.
This bill, is a step toward control of classrooms and schools, what is and is not taught 
by a minority of intolerant parents who refuse to take the individual responsibility to 
be involved in their child's education and would much rather control the educational 
experience of other people's children.
Should a parent take the individual responsibility to utilize resources already in place 
to inform themselves of their child's educational experience and not like aspects of it, 
they can take the responsibility and move their child elsewhere that conforms with 
their beliefs instead of trying to control what other peoples children are learning.
I urge you all to vote ought not to pass, to preserve our states incredible educational 
experience for all students and parental responsibility.
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony.
