g STATE or MAINE 
Mg. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
.u'aT i.- AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 
Jana T_ Mms Laura A. Fortman 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Christopher Quint, State Workforce Board, Maine Department of Labor 
In Support LD 120, An Act Regarding the Committee Structure of the State Workforce 
Board 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, Tuesday, February 7, 2023 
Greetings, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing. My name is Chris Quint, Director of the State Workforce Board. The State Workforce Board's (SWB) 
purpose is to ensure that Maine's workforce development system helps Maine people and businesses compete 
successfully in the global economy, by convening state, regional and local workforce system partners to: 
v enhance the capacity and performance of Maine's workforce development system, 
0 align and improve the outcomes and effectiveness of workforce programs and investments, 
1 promote economic growth, and 
Q engage businesses, workers, education providers, economic development, labor representatives and 
other stakeholders to achieve Maine's strategic and operational workforce vision and goals. 
The State Workforce Board (SWB) is putting forward LD 120, ”An Act Regarding the Committee Structure of the 
State Workforce Board," to address technical changes to statute that reflect the current functioning of the Board 
and to provide flexibility in the future. We appreciate Senator Daughtry for sponsoring this bill and 
Representatives Roeder and Gere for co-sponsoring. 
In 2021, the SWB underwent a process to restructure the existing committee structure. The Maine State 
Workforce Board established several new committees at its December 2021 Board meeting by a unanimous 
decision of those present. The committees are intended to align with the state's workforce and economic 
development goals to support a thriving Maine economy for workers and businesses alike. The new committees 
are aligned with the state's priorities and will support alignment and coordination of programs and opportunities 
across the different agencies and stakeholders that comprise the state's workforce system, with the goal of 
supporting the state's economic growth through greater economic mobility for workers and a trained workforce 
for employers. 
This legislation would clarify the SWB’s authority to create subcommittees as necessary. This will allow the SWB to 
make any necessary changes to committee structure without needing to make corresponding legislative changes 
moving forward. This change would align with the Board's work and allow us to be responsive moving forward to 
the needs of the state and our workforce needs.' 
Another small change was adding language to clarify the ability for the Governor to name a designee that attends 
Board meetings on their behalf. This refines language that was recently added in 2019 under Public Law 2019 
Chapter 246, when a section regarding "Board Membership" was added to statute requiring confirmation of 
certain seats and clarifying requirements in the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act and makes it 
consistent with the federal WIOA law and state statute. 
PHONE: (207) 623-7900 TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-5292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs.' 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
The legislation also includes language changes in the section related to the Commission on Disability and 
Employment. This new section revises language to align with recent statute changes that intend to use more 
inclusive, human-centric language in the Maine Revised Statutes. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have now or ata 
future work session.
