March 3, 2023 
To: Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
From: Erik Hyatt 
Re: SUPPORT OF LD610 “An Act To Expand the 1998 Special Retirement Plan To Include 
Employees Who Work for the Office of Chief Medical Examiner" 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and the members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing. Good afternoon, my name is Erik Hyatt l am the Director of Laboratory and 
Mortuary Operations and a 21 year employee of the State of Maine. 
There are many studies out there on Depression and PTSD for first responders about how the 
traumas they experience directly and vicariously affect them. They have systems in place to 
help mitigate the negative effects, peer group counseling, debriefings, and so forth. 
The "W0rk-Related Trauma, Alienation, and Posttraumatic and Depressive Symptoms in 
Medical Examiner Employees." study, conducted in 2017 by St. John's University is the one 
study we have to tell us: "workplace stressors have specific, identifiable effects on social- 
cognitive processes that contribute to mental health risks. Both primary and vicarious 
exposures were associated with the development of negative cognitions (sic)" ln layperson 
terms, what we see and do has a negative effect on our health and welfare. lt also told us that 
those of us who deal with death; ”lt is a stigmatized occupation. ” (Thompson). 
The first responders call their witnessed trauma of death into our office where one of 7 people 
who answer the phone, among their other duties, take all the demographic information, the 
details of the case, and all pertinent information to then make a determination as to how we 
are going to process it. Then they gather records, upload the pictures that are sent to us, inform 
who needs to be informed to get the work done, schedule transport, and then answer another 
call from a family member of a totally different case to help them process their trauma by 
providing answers. 
Last year they did this 4217 times. 
Each call had to be heard and a determination made. Each of those calls were reviewed ina 
morning meeting by the entire staff of 10 people and 2 Doctors. 2503 of those cases needed 
something more. 601 became an in depth record review. 1522 of them became external exams 
with blood draws and pictures to upload. 597 of them came into the OCME to be cared for bya 
staff of 2 Medical Examiner Assistants and me. 
95 of those were exams. Exams most times because they were too decomposed for an autopsy 
to be conclusive, but still needing xrays, samples taken, and to be respectfully cleaned of 
infestation. And yes, the upstairs can smell it too.
403 Autopsies. 43 Homicides, all 10 of us involved directly or vicariously to maybe the worst 
thing one can do to another. 48 under the age of 18 and 22 of those under the age of 1, the 
worst thing for this father and grandfather. 311 other human beings whose family and society 
need answers for. All of them, when we're done, stitched closed, washed, and respectfully 
stored till they can rest. 
We also ran toxicology on 1619 cases to determine cause of death and help track the Opioid 
Pandemic. While three of us processed and shipped these cases it was the 7 upstairs that made 
all the arrangements to get the samples to us. 
We are the last responders. We 10, care for the dead of Maine, in some cases we are the last 
dignity they will see. We reach out for the unidentified and forgotten trying to find them rest. 
More than that we care for the living left behind wanting answers. 
Please support LD610 and give us a chance to retire and rest. 
Thank you, 
Erik M Hyatt 
Fa rmingdale 
207-593-6346
