To The Joint Committee on Labor and Housing,  
I wanted to send you a letter to give you a view of the  Office of Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) from an 
administrative standpoint an d why we  should be eligible for special retirement.  
I have worked at OCME for almost seven (7) years, and I take pride in my work and helping families 
during the one of most difficult times of their lives. If we are approved for special retirement, I will still 
have another 18 years to work at the OCME. There are many rewarding aspects of this job but there are 
also many sides to this job that are mentally and emotionally taxing . There are only four (4) 
administrative staff at  the OCME that handle all incoming pho ne calls , death reports, photos, and 
visitors to the OCME , along with all other administrative duties. We review every case that gets reported  
and make sure that we have all the information and supporting documents necessary to make a decision 
on that case . We are also the s tate clearinghouse for all missing and unidentified people . That includes 
monitoring all people that are reported missing in the state of Maine and making sure that we have all 
the information (DNA, fingerprints,  dental records, etc.) so that in the event that unidentifiable remains 
are located, a quick identification can be made . We  work diligently following up on new science or ideas 
for identifying our unidentified individuals. The amount of work the OCME produces, for how few staff 
there are, is astounding.  
There are days when you take phone call after phone call where family is distraught or angry and need 
you to be an outlet for them.  You understand their grief and do your best in every situation to make 
them know that their loved on es matter ed. Sometimes you do not have a minute between phone calls 
to process and re -group ; it’s on to another phone call and you need to push those feelings aside  and 
move on to help the next family . It’s replaying these conversations in your head on your way home and 
wishing that you had said or done something different to make it easier for them . It’s trying to shut it all 
off so that you do not bring it home to your family.  
It’s the days where you tak e the report of a child death , and it reminds you of a child in your life . Maybe 
they were bullied in school or at home and decided that killing themselves was their only option . You 
cannot take that report, see those photos, and read their suicide note an d not have that impact your 
life.  
Our office staff processes every photo of a dead body at a scene or exam , and we often use these 
photos to get details of a scene that were not relayed to us in the initial report.  We use these photos to 
talk with familie s about the injuries that their loved one suffered. Or maybe it was a fire and there is 
little left of that person, try to imagin e explaining this to a family member .  You cannot just decide that 
you are not going to look at them anymore, it ’s part of the job.  
I have taken the report on a friend that died and processed  the photos of their death. I have heard many 
phone calls where my heart stop ped because I thought it was a report of death on someone I knew , and 
sometimes it was .  I have held the hand of a best friend’s  deceased  child after their autopsy , and that 
was one of the hardest things that I have done in my life. This was a life changing moment for me and 
something that I will always carry with me .  
This job changes you , whether you believe it doe s or not. I went several years thinking that this was just 
a job and that I would be able to block it all out and not let it impact my life,  but that certainly is not the 
case . The cumulative trauma, transference, worry, and stress of this job  is something  that needs to be 
recognized. It is seeing death every. single. day . It is a job that  makes  you hyper -aware of how fragile life 
is. It also makes you angry because you see the awful things that people do to each other.   
Our office took 4, 217 reports of de ath in 2022. That is on average, 11.5 deaths reported to our office 
every day. That is the potential for 11 famil ies to call, 11 sets of scene photos to process, and 11 
opportunities for it to be someone you love or remind you of someone you love.   
I am not looking for sympathy or recognition for doing the job I was hired to do; I simply want you all to 
take another look at the impact this job has on us and to consider approving early retirement. The 
amount of institutional knowledge  from those that have been here for several years has proved to be 
invaluable . Giving incentive to keep  those  people on long -term and be able to  have that knowledge is 
irreplaceable in this line of work.  Working at the OCME is not just another state office job; we handle 
the dead, and the circumstances of their deaths, working intimately with state and local law 
enforcement to ensure Maine’s death investigations are held to the highest national standard.  
