Testimony of Jeff McCabe 
Maine Service Employees Association, SElU Local 1989 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
In Support of LD 610, An Act To Expand the 1998 Special Retirement Plan To Include 
Employees Who Work for the Office of Chief Medical Examiner (Emergency) 
Sponsored by Representative Hasenfus 
March 2, 2023, Cross Office Building Room 202, and Electronically 
Senator Tipping, Representative Amy Roeder, members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing, my name is Jeff McCabe, Director of Politics and Legislation for the Maine Service 
Employees Association, Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. The Maine 
Service Employees Association represents over 13,000 public sector and publicly funded 
workers across the state, including workers in the Office of Chief Medical Examiner within the 
Maine Office of Attorney General. We're here in support of LD 610. 
We appreciate the introduction of this legislation on behalf of the workers in the Office of Chief 
Medical Examiner. The issue of who is currently included in the 1998 Special Plan and who is 
currently excluded from it is a real one. lt impacts many public servants in our Great State of 
Maine, and it must be addressed immediately for the State to recruit and retain qualified 
workers. We also appreciate this committee's diligence on this overall issue. Over the past 
three, members of this committee have heard testimony from other state workers seeking 
inclusion in the 1998 Special Plan. Those workers are employed in the Maine State Police 
Crime Lab and the Computer Crimes Unit within the Maine Department of Public Safety. They 
have asked to be included in the 1998 Special Plan due to the exceedingly difficult work they do 
in service to Maine people. 
LD 610, the subject of this hearing, is similar in intent, but it seeks to include in the 1998 Special 
Plan another group of State employees: those who work in the Office of Chief Medical 
Examiner. Like their colleagues in the State Police Crime Lab and in the Computer Crimes Unit, 
the workers in the Office of Chief Medical Examiner also do exceedingly difficult work in their 
service to all Maine people. The job of these workers is to work with the bodies of death victims 
and to be in contact with their families. This is traumatic work, so it’s past time for them to 
become eligible for the Special Plan. We would welcome an amendment to ensure this 
legislation applies notjust to future hires but to any and all workers currently employed in this 
particular office. 
The current exclusion of workers in the Office of Chief Medical Examiner from the Special Plan 
is a contributing factor to the recruitment and retention problem in this particular state office; it’s 
emblematic of the recruitment and retention problem throughout Maine State Government. 
Members of this Committee also may be aware our union continues to demand immediate 
progress on addressing the low-wages the State of Maine pays to state employees. On 
average, State employees make 15% less than their counterparts throughout New England, 
even after adjusting for regional pay differences, according to the State of Maine Market Study
Report dated Nov. 20, 2020. In order to recruit and retain qualified employees, the State of‘ 
Maine must respect them, protect them and pay them fairly for their work. 
Passing LD 610 would be an important step toward showing the workers in the Office of Chief 
Medical Examiner the respect they have earned. I would ask that the committee consider 
allowing MainePERS and MSEA employees in the Office of Chief Medical Examiner to craft the 
language that is needed before the committee takes its vote. We feel that MainePERS has the 
most up-to-date language needed and you have heard from MainePERS already this session 
that they are committed to the members the sen/e. We feel committed to working with them to 
make sure we also are serving our members the best we can. 
We bring a number of these bills to this committee knowing that funding will depend on available 
financial resources and We have seen in years past bill similar to this be funded by department 
resources or even special revenue sources. This bill is prime for receiving funding from 
settlement funds via the Office of the Maine Attorney General or other financial resources. 
Thank you and l would be glad to answer any questions.
