ti; ' CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER BOARD OF TRUSTEES T 
a ‘ n e Dr. Rehecca Wt. Wyke Brian H. Noyes, Chair 
Richard T f"ﬂei:\/eel V ce Chair 
PUBUC EM9L0YEE$ RETMEMENT 5%/f;~~rEM Henry Beck, State Treasurer, Ex Ofizczo 
John S. Beiiveau 
Shirrin L. Biaisdeli 
Mark A. Srunton 
John H. Kimball 
Kenneth L. Wilfiams 
DATE: March 2, 2023 
TO: Senator Michael Tipping, Chair 
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair 
Members, ]oint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
FROM: Kathy]. Morin, Director, Actuarial and Legislative Affairs 
SUBJECT: Testimony on L.D. 610 — An Act to Expand the 1998 Special Retirement Plan to 
Include Employees Who Work for the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Ioint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Kathy Morin, and I am the Director of 
Actuarial and Legislative Affairs for the Maine Public Employees Retirement System. 
MainePERS is neither for nor against L.D. 610. We are here to provide information and offer 
any assistance the Committee might need regarding this bill. 
State employees are covered by either a "regular plan” or a "special plan.” The majority of 
state employees are covered by the regular plan, which permits retirement after twenty-five 
years of service and/ or attainment of normal retirement age of 60, 62 or 65. Special plans 
typically allow for retirement with fewer years of service and / or at a younger age. Because of 
the more favorable provisions of the special plans, they are more expensive to fund. 
Employees in the Office of Chief Medical Examiner are covered by the regular plan. L.D. 610 
would move these employees into the 1998 Special Plan effective Iuly 1, 2022, and would apply 
retroactively to include all covered service in the special plan. Under this plan, participants 
become eligible to retire in one of two ways: 1) by accruing 25 years of service in a covered 
capacity; or 2) by accruing 10 years under the 1998 Special Plan and attaining age 55. Under 
the first provision, all service in a covered capacity is counted towards meeting the 25-year 
requirement while under the second provision, only service earned in a covered capacity after 
the date that a specific group is included in the plan is counted towards meeting the 10 year 
requirement. 
This bill will have a fiscal impact because the Constitution does not allow the creation of new 
or additional benefits unless immediately and fully funded. New benefits are created under 
L.D. 610 because covered employees would be able to retire earlier and with a higher benefit, 
and therefore would receive benefits in excess of those currently accounted for and funded, 
creating a new unfunded actuarial liability (UAL). 
vvvvvv.mainepers.org LOCATION LOCAL FAX 
‘I39 Capitol Street, /\ugusta, I\/IE 04330 207~512~31OO 207~5'I2-SIOI 
MAILING ADDRESS TOLL-FREE MAINE RELAY 
PO. BOX 349, Augusta, ME 04332-O3/I9 ‘I-800-451-9800 71‘I
éw - LD 610 Testimony 
egvgg March2 2023 
WM ¥*1)%£t.l(; §EM§>l,O ‘a’EES REHREMENT §3YSi‘t1t~§ Page2 
During the 1305‘ Legislature, the Committee considered L.D. 1746, which was amended to 
include the same proposal as L.D. 610. At that time, MainePERS estimated the cost for the 
plan change to be approximately $458,000 in increased UAL. There would also be an increase 
to the ongoing employer and member normal costs for the employees covered by this bill. 
MainePERS will work with the Department and the Office of Fiscal and Program Review to 
confirm the individuals covered by this proposal and to update the costs associated with 
amending the retirement plan coverage for this group of employees. 
MainePERS has one concern about the way L.D. 610 is drafted. Speciﬁcally, the bill as 
proposed includes a Iuly 1, 2022 special plan coverage date for these employees. This bill does 
not currently have an emergency preamble, which means that it is unlikely to be effective by 
that date. We would recommend that a date beyond what is projected to be the general 
effective date for this session’s enacted laws be used as the effective date for entry into the 
plan, so that correct member and employer contributions can be timely made. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. I would be happy to answer your 
questions and will be available at your work session.
