March 2, 2023 
To: Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
From: Lindsey Chasteen, MBA 
Office Administrator with Maine Office of Chief Medical Examiner 
Re: LD 610 ”An Act to Expand the 1998 Special Retirement Plan to include Employees Who Work for the 
Office of Chief Medical Examiner ” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Committee Members, thank you for taking the time to listen 
to testimony regarding this bill. 
I am Lindsey Chasteen, Office Administrator with the Office of Chief Medical Examiner and I am in favor 
of this bill. I have worked for the State of Maine for almost nine (9) years, and have been at the OCME for 
the past eight (8) years. 
Imagine if you will, the aftermath of a tragic event. Maybe it's a car accident, a shooting, or a natural 
disaster. In the midst of the chaos, there is often one question that haunts the loved ones left behind: 
what happened? V' 
The Medical Examiner's Office is tasked with answering that question. We have the statutory 
responsibility to investigate deaths in Maine; to determine the cause and manner of death that will be 
listed on a death certificate, communicated to families, and used by law enforcement to prosecute crimes. 
You hear in the news that the Medical Examiner's Office is investigating, or the Medical Examiner's Office 
is conducting an autopsy. My office does so much more than anyone realizes. We corroborate law 
enforcement's theories with physical evidence, we provide genetic information to families who losea 
child too soon, we confirm the identities of missing people and return them home. 
Across the country Medical Examiner offices are undervalued and underfunded. However, when death 
occurs, we are the ones there. We are the ones discussing death scenes with law enforcement whilea 
mother cries and screams in the background because she just found her child dead. We are the ones 
reading a teenager's suicide note to see if they mentioned whether they were bullied at school, so we can 
notify the school and maybe prevent the death of someone else's child. We are the ones explaining toa 
daughter how her father died and providing the autopsy report to her primary care physician, so they 
understand the family history. When everyone else is offering condolences and are unsure what to say to 
a widower, we are there. We are there to provide answers, educate on next steps, and sometimes, just 
there to listen. 
The American Psychiatric Association defines "vicarious trauma" as part of a cluster of trauma and 
stressor-related disorders. it is the emotional residue to traumatic events and experiences of others. We 
are exposed to vicarious trauma every day, and keep showing up. We show up for the dead, we show up 
for their loved ones, and we show up for each other. People have sought therapy because of what they've
been exposed to while working at the OCME and been asked to find a different therapist because the 
therapist couldn't handle what that person had to say. How isolating that must be; to seek help and be 
told what y0u’ve experienced is too traumatic for the person who is supposed to help you. What we do is 
not easy, yet l have never worked with a more compassionate and dedicated group of people. 
Some cases are easier to handle than others, but everyone has their "tough cases" . For me, it's young 
girls. I have an eight (8) year old daughter, with blonde hair like her dad. Seeing a seven (7) year old girl 
with blonde hair who died in a house fire has haunted me. That could have been my daughter. We must 
compartmentalize our work, or it will destroy us. Yet, this is how we choose to serve our communities. 
l am encouraging you to support LD61O, expanding Maine's special retirement to include the Office of 
Chief Medical Examiner, in acknowledgement and understanding that most people don't want to think 
about what happens to the dead, let alone do ourjobs.
