Office of Chief Medical Examiner
30 Hospital Street
Augusta, ME 04330
February 20, 2023
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04330
To: Senate Chair, Senator Michael Tipping, House Chair, Representative Amy Roeder; and The Members 
of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing. 
Good Afternoon; I am Ryan Eagles, a Medical Examiner’s Assistant for the Office of Chief Medical 
Examiner. I appreciate this opportunity to speak before you today in support of this bill. 
25 years of service to your state is an amazing feat. 25 years of service to the state in a capacity where 
one sees, hears, feels and smells trauma, multiple times a day is even more incredible. In my opinion, 
the special retirement plan was initiated to minimize one’s time working a highly stressful and traumatic 
job; one such as working at the Office of Chief Medical Examiner. Other job fields that have been 
granted the special retirement package are police, fire, emergency medical technicians among other 
front-line workers. 
To illustrate how much trauma we endure daily, let’s look at some numbers. Since the new year, we 
have autopsied 5 babies less than one year old. In 2022 we autopsied 22 babies less than one year old. 
In 2022 we also autopsied 43 people where the pathologist has ruled the death a homicide. Often these 
cases are difficult due to the horrific state the body is in. We have people come to our office in pieces 
that have been hit by trains, run over by vehicles or crushed by equipment. All of which we must process 
which includes photos, x-rays and sample draws. This is before making the Y incision to eviscerate the 
body for the doctor to examine the organs. 
To further exemplify how each staff person at OCME is affected by death day in and day out, allow me 
to explain the process of how our office works. It often starts with a 911 call reporting a death to the 
police. When they arrive and gather some information, they call our office, where an administrative staff 
person takes the call. They ask questions to determine circumstances of death, the state of the body, 
and detail injuries. All this information is shared with a death investigator and then a doctor who 
decides how the case will proceed. If the person needs an exam by a Field Medical Examiner, staff will 
schedule them to do so, or if the body is needed to come to our office for further studies, staff may 
schedule a funeral home to bring them to us. 
As you can see, every single person in our office hears about death, reviews photos of death scenes and 
uploads them into our computer system, talks with family members about their loved ones, speaks to 
law enforcement about their investigation and works with funeral homes and doctors in hospitals to 
assist with completing a death certificate. Our office is an open floor plan with low walled cubicles which 
means everyone is exposed to each call even if they did not receive the call themselves. We all 
communicate about the progress of cases, so we are all aware of what was done and/or needs to be 
done. 
In addition to these duties, the office takes calls of missing people and arranges for DNA to be collected 
should the person be found and is not identifiable. We examine people who are decomposed past the 
point of making a positive visual identification. Often the body is accompanied by bugs and leaking fluid. 
Again, we use DNA to identify these people, often having to cut a piece of muscle or bone for the lab to 
extract DNA.
Given that this is a  high stress, traumatic job, mental health plays a big role in coping with our jobs. We 
attempt to practice self-care through therapists, integrated medicine, meditation, yoga, strength 
training and talking with coworkers. 
When we stop caring for ourselves tragic things happen. Patrick Toman was employed as a Medical 
Examiner’s Assistant at our office for 16 years. No one knew how much Patrick was hurting until he 
committed suicide, in the office, on January 4, 1995. 
I enjoy my job and the work I preform. It is important work and often leads to closure for the family. I 
take my work seriously executed with compassion and dignity for our patients. I am in support of LD610 
and believe that after 25 years of service to the people of this great state that I should have the 
flexibility to pursue other endeavors.  
Thank you all for your time and consideration of this bill. 
Sincerely, 
Ryan Eagles
