Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing:
I am submitting this testimony in support of LD610 “An Act To Expand the 1998 Special Retirement Plan 
To Include Employees Who Work for the Office of Chief Medical Examiner”
I am the spouse of Erik Hyatt, who works for the OCME.  I am also a registered nurse with over 27 years’ 
experience.  I can say in all honesty, even with my experience in illness, trauma and death, I would not 
have the fortitude to deal with what my husband and his co-workers deal with on a daily basis.  In my 
work, we have good days, with some positive aspect of the job- sending someone home, successfully 
administering life saving measures.  Even his “good days” involve tragedy- like identifying a J. Doe or 
someone’s skeletal remains so a family can finally have closure.
This office sees the absolute worst that humanity can do to each other.  Every questionable death in the 
State of Maine is investigated by their office.  Imagine being the person who had to autopsy a child, to 
discover that they suffered years of abuse and died at the hands of those abusers.  They then have to 
take pictures of and record every injury. EVERY injury.  
One child they autopsied had 40 and 50 “distinct blunt-force injuries” per the court testimony quoted in 
the newspaper.  Another died of blunt force trauma and had a fractured spine, ruptured bowel, a brain 
injury, in addition to other injuries per the news report.  My husband had been part of many cases like 
this, and I say with all honesty, he was NOT “okay” after. But he still does his best for the people of 
Maine every day, as does everyone he works with. 
I’m not privy to all the workings of their office but I have interacted with all the employees at outside 
events.  I have extensive mental health experience, and while diagnosing is outside my scope of practice, 
I can clearly see the signs and symptoms of Post-Traumatic Stress Syndrome or Post-Traumatic Stress 
Disorder.   I’ve seen them try to not react when curious citizens ask them about their job with questions 
like “What’s the weirdest death you’ve ever had”.  Worse is when asked “Did you have to do the 
autopsy on so-and-so?  That was so sad wasn’t it”.  
In closing, I thank you for considering my written testimony and your support of these diligent workers 
for the citizens of the State of Maine.  
Sincerely,
Violet.m.hyatt@maine.gov 
