 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1752-Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building Types  
 
Joint Select  Committee on Housing  
May 9, 2023 
 
Senator  Pierce , Representative  Gere  and members of the Committee  on Housing , 
 
My name is Eamonn Dundon , and I am the Director of Advocacy  of the Portland Regional Chamber of 
Commerce. We represent 1,300 businesses in our region who employ over 65,000 Mainers. We are submitting 
this testimony  today to express our organization's  support for LD 1752 .  
 
We understand  that Maine’s housing supply crisis  requires a multifaceted approach that involve s a broad range 
of strategies.  While no single  solution will be sufficient to address the problem,  we believe that LD 1752 is one 
of the moderate -impact proposals that can help unleash production and create more housing opportunities for 
Mainers . By decreasing the cost of housing production and reducing  the political backlash that has hindered 
progress in many communities, this legislation has the potential to make a rea l difference.   
 
While the process to establish preapproved building types will occur at a later date, we believe that  the City of 
South Bend, Indiana offers  a model that Maine can look to1. The preapproved building types established by 
South Bend  range from single -family homes designed to fit on small infill lots, to duplexes and small apartment 
buildings . These plans are  in keeping with the development patterns of municipalities in our state , and they 
have strong historical precedent, including Sears’ model home kits that can be found in communities around 
Maine.  
 
If done right, preapproved building types can unlock much of the production legalized in LD 2003, particularly 
for small scale and o wner -occupant developers. In conversations and  public meetings with residents all over 
our region, we have found that this type of moderate -density infill development is what people most want to 
see in their communities . However,  it’s exactly this type of development that is hardest to build due to 
entitlement, design, and construction costs  and a smaller unit count over which to spread those often 
prohibitively high “soft costs” . By allowing for these pre -approved building types in municipally designated 
growth areas , we can significantly reduce these costs and make real housing opportunities possible for Maine 
families  who are, for the most part, not experienced and sophisticated developers, but instead committed 
community members who want to do their part  to expand housing opportunities while also building equity in 
their communities.  
 
We do have one small suggestion, and that is to specify in this resolve that the catalog of pre -approved  building 
types should include a mix of unit compositions , from smal l infill single family development up to duplexes, 
triplexes, and small apartment buildings. It is only with this range of typologies that we can fully realize the 
multifaceted approaches necessary for expanding supply in a contextually appropriate manner in Maine 
communities.  
 
In conclusion, w e want to thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers . We believe that LD 1752 
is an important step forward in addresses Maine’s housing supply crisis, and we ask for your expeditious 
approval of this important legislation.  
  
 
1 South Bend Preapproved Building Types  
