 
 
 
LD 1752, Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building Types 
Testimony in Support 
May 9, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Honorable Members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing,  
My name is Elizabeth Frazier, and I am submitting this testimony on behalf of the Maine Real Estate & 
Development Association in support of LD 1752, Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building Types. 
MEREDA is a statewide, membership-based organization founded in 1985, whose members include real estate 
owners, for—profit and non—profit developers, bankers, property managers and other related professionals 
who are committed to supporting responsible development and real estate ownership throughout Maine. 
Through the work of its Public Policy Committee, MEREDA pursues a more fair, predictable, and practical policy 
environment. 
LD 1752 would direct the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry (DACF) to adopt 
preapproved building types that can be used to streamline the construction of new housing units in Maine. The 
intent of this resolve is to create a dialogue between DACF, planners, and housing creators, to expedite the 
construction of new dwelling units across the state.  
LD 1752 would take into consideration the things that govern how a housing unit gets built – local land use, 
statewide land use, and the current Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC) and National Fire 
Protection Association Life Safety Code. Bringing these parties together will to create template designs for 
building projects will help jump-start small and community housing creation in Maine.  
The expense of developing a project is often not just in the cost of land but in the time and actual dollars spent 
on planning, architectural and environmental design, and permit approval processes that can take years to 
finalize. This high expense is a barrier to housing creation and inadvertently creates a system whereby only 
those with deep pockets can afford to building housing – they can afford the high risk/high reward proposition.  
For most housing creators, there is no special financing available for development costs, and certainly not in the 
costs of defending and working toward a permit approval. These added costs, without any financing or support 
mechanism, can prevent new or small-sized housing creators from using innovative solutions to provide housing 
in their communities. We think LD 1752 is a step in the right direction, and we look forward to continued 
collaboration to break down barriers to housing creation and prevent a playing field where the only ones who 
can afford to participate are those who can afford a high-risk/high-reward proposition. Please vote Ought to 
Pass on LD 1752.  
Thank you.  
Sincerely,  
Elizabeth M. Frazier, On Behalf of the Maine Real Estate & Development Association  
