 
19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622 -7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®   
 
 
Testimony in  Support of  LD 1752  (“Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building 
Types”)  
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
 
May 9, 2023  
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Housing , my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. 
We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association 
established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s 
economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved 
in both r esidential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes 
industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building 
inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Associa tion 
of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports  LD 1752 . The bill would direct the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , Bureau of Resource Information and 
Land Use Planning,  to work with a consultant to develop a set of building types that 
municipalities  could adopt as preapproved buildings to help reduce the cost and time 
associated with building permits.  The bill would add more housing supply options statewide 
by shortening the timeframe of building, from permitting through completed construction. The 
bill would reduce  potential costs with standard design s that can be pre-approve d for fast -
track developmen t. This is a commonsense approach to adding  more options for housing  
units , which will help increase Maine’s needed housing inventory.  
 
For these reasons, we support  LD 1752  and respectfully urge you to vote Ought To Pass. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
 
