   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Barbara Burt, Vice -chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lucy Van Hook  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Testimony in support of LD 1752, “Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building Types .” 
Josie Phillips,  Policy Fellow  
5/09/2023  
 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Gere and Pierce, and all members of the Housing committee. My 
name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am testifying 
in favor of LD 1752 because it would streamline production of affordable housing, reduce the 
costs of housing development, and help Maine meet its housing production goals.  
 
There do not seem to be many studies done to date on the impact of providing pre -approved 
building designs for affordable housing development , but it stands to reason that this measure 
would incentivize affordable housing development by simplifying t he permitting process and 
therefore reducing development costs. A Brookings review of the costs of affordable housing 
development  found that “soft costs ,” which include “design, engineering, financing, permitting, 
and impact fees” account for between 20 to  30 percent of total costs on average .i By simplifying 
the design process and making the permitting stage simpler, providing pre -approved housing 
designs could significantly reduce these costs, allowing more people to develop affordable 
housing in the sta te and reducing the amount of public subsidies that are necessary to make 
affordable housing viable.  
 
Not only would pre -approved designs save money for both developers and the public,  but they 
would also likely cut down on the amount of time affordable ho using takes to reach the market. 
Currently, development for multi -family housing in the Northeast region takes more than 20 
months on average .ii Shortening this time window would allow Maine to meet its housing 
production goals more quickly and provide quicker relief to Mainers struggling to find housing.  
 
By providing pre -approved designs, LD 1752 would likely add significant efficiencies to the 
affordable housing development process. These efficiencies would save time and money, from 
a private and public perspective, and in doing so put Maine in a better position to alleviate the 
affordable housing crisis. Because of these benefits, I encourage t his committee to vote yes on 
LD 1752.  
 
 
i Brookings Institute, “ Making apartments more affordable starts with understanding the costs of building them .” 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/making -apartments -more -affordable -starts -with -understanding -the-costs -
of-building -them/  
ii U.S. Census Bureau,  “Average Length of Time from Start to Completion of New Privately Owned Residential 
Buildings.” https://www.census.gov/construction/nrc/pdf/avg_starttocomp.pdf  
