 
 
 
BUILD MAINE 
Build Maine, 65 Water Street, #1, Skowhegan, Maine 04976 
connect@build-maine.com 
May 9, 2023 
 
RE: Testimony of Build Maine in support of LD 1752, A Resolve to Prepare Pre-Approved Building 
Types 
 
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing,  
My name is Kara, and I am the Chair of Build Maine. We are a statewide non-partisan organization 
working to align fiscal, economic, environmental, and quality of life goals within our state through 
pragmatic and common-sense solutions to building our rural and urban communities. 
Build Maine supports LD 1752, which proposes to prepare a range of building types for communities 
to access to address the housing crisis.   
 
The initial bill language proposed that the process would develop 5 – 8 pre-approved buildings, each 
with 8 to 10 options, including small single family homes, duplexes (over/under, back/front, side by 
side), small apartment houses (3 to 10 units), small apartment buildings (6-12 units), and 
shophouses (2-8 units). Some of this detail seems to have been omitted from the revisors version.  
 
Many communities across the state have an acute shortage of multi-family types and mixed-use 
building types. Evan in rural towns, there is a documented need for studios and 1-bedroom units, 
which can be provided via small scale infill buildings.  This bill is trying to help create pre-approved 
plans for these types.  It is important to note that these types have not been routinely built in Maine 
for a long time, and significant knowledge has been lost.  Buildings with more than 2 units are also 
more complicated and expensive to design because of increased life safety and other code 
requirements.  There is significant time and effort saved for smaller scale developers by preparing 
plans for these types.  This also provides a direct benefit to communities because these types are 
often very popular with the public.   
 
Pre-approved buildings can work in communities that have either form-based codes or conventional 
zoning.  Form-based codes are a zoning approach focused on allowing development to align more 
directly with a community’s goals for growth.  Building types are a separate but helpful tool that can 
either plug into a form-based code, or help a community with outdated zoning code by giving them a 
way to quickly enable certain buildings in specified areas.   
 
In other places where this tool has been used, the building types have been part of a living 
catalogue, where types are added and removed to respond to emerging needs, and to adjust or 
remove types that aren’t working due to financial, financing, or other reasons. The critical part of the 
catalogue development process is the open process used by the state to publicly vet the types, so 
that the catalogue has broad support and appeal and there are options that work for communities 
across the state. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Kara Wilbur, Chair 
Build Maine 
