 
 
mainehousingcoalition.org                              info@mainehousingcoalition.org 307 Cumberland Street, Portland, ME 04101  
 
131st Legislature Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition  - May 9, 2023 
In favor of 1752 – A Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building Types  
sponsored by Senator Pouliot 
Hello Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name 
is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition. 
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) is a nonprofit membership organization of more than 140 Maine 
housing development, architecture, construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services organizations. We 
work to address Maine’s housing crisis by advocating for the creation and preservation of housing for all people in 
Maine.  
MAHC is sharing this testimony today in favor of LD 1752 - A Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building Types that is 
sponsored by Senator Pouliot.  
LD 1752 proposes establishing a set of building types that municipalities may adopt as preapproved building types in 
order to reduce the cost and time associated with processing building permit applications and ease the burden on small 
municipalities challenged with resources.  
Maine is in a housing crisis and demand outstrips supply. MAHC supports LD 1752 because it shortens the timeframe, 
and lowers the cost to add more housing supply options statewide. Statewide efforts like this that require low upfront 
costs for a long-term benefit across all Maine communities to improve the housing stock are vital. Reducing barriers of 
all kinds to building housing can be a part of Maine’s comprehensive approach to ensuring all Maine people have a 
home. Preapproved buildings have proven effective in other States such as Indiana and California, and Maine can build 
on their models for success.  
MAHC encourages LD 1752 to maximize potential impact by including preapproved buildings of a variety of sizes and 
types from ADUs through small multi-family developments that fit into the character of all Maine communities. This 
diverse approach is critical as our state faces a dire housing crisis. Residents want housing options to meet their unique 
needs, and developers of all kinds need options for building types that meet their availability of land and resources. 
MAHC asks that you support LD 1752. 
Laura Mitchell
Maine Affordable Housing Coalition
LD 1752
131st Legislature Joint Select Committee on Housing
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing 
Coalition  - May 9, 2023
In favor of 1752 – A Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building Types 
sponsored by Senator Pouliot
Hello Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing, my name is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the Executive Director 
of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition.
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) is a nonprofit membership 
organization of more than 140 Maine housing development, architecture, 
construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services organizations. We 
work to address Maine’s housing crisis by advocating for the creation and 
preservation of housing for all people in Maine. 
MAHC is sharing this testimony today in favor of LD 1752 - A Resolve, to Prepare 
Preapproved Building Types that is sponsored by Senator Pouliot. 
LD 1752 proposes establishing a set of building types that municipalities may adopt 
as preapproved building types in order to reduce the cost and time associated with 
processing building permit applications and ease the burden on small municipalities 
challenged with resources. 
Maine is in a housing crisis and demand outstrips supply. MAHC supports LD 1752 
because it shortens the timeframe, and lowers the cost to add more housing supply 
options statewide. Statewide efforts like this that require low upfront costs for a 
long-term benefit across all Maine communities to improve the housing stock are 
vital. Reducing barriers of all kinds to building housing can be a part of Maine’s 
comprehensive approach to ensuring all Maine people have a home. Preapproved 
buildings have proven effective in other States such as Indiana and California, and 
Maine can build on their models for success. 
MAHC encourages LD 1752 to maximize potential impact by including preapproved 
buildings of a variety of sizes and types from ADUs through small multi-family 
developments that fit into the character of all Maine communities. This diverse 
approach is critical as our state faces a dire housing crisis. Residents want housing 
options to meet their unique needs, and developers of all kinds need options for 
building types that meet their availability of land and resources.
MAHC asks that you support LD 1752.

