227 Water Street, Suite 208 
Augusta, ME 04330 
Growsmart Maine “7VVlMgT0WSI?1(2)1'ITtlii1(i)1l(¢£)i( i‘2 
Z023 
Board of Directors 
Rebecca Casey 
Chair 
[ithan Boxerdwacomber 
Vice-Chair 
jean Claveau 
Treasurer 
Maggie Fleming 
Secretary 
Kirsten Brewer 
[on Boyton 
Elimbeth Frazier 
Philip Hussey 
jet? Levine 
Zoe Miller 
Carol Morris 
Lynne Seeley 
Ben Smith 
Sally Stockwell 
Galen Weibiey 
Mark C. Wiesendanger 
Maineﬂousing 
E.r—oj]'icio 
Rhiannon Hampson 
USDA: Rural Development 
Ex-oﬁicio 
Daniel Hildreth 
Emeritus 
Evan Richeri; 
Emeritus 
Anna Marie Thron 
Emeritus Testimony of Nancy Smith, CEO of GrowSmart Maine 
In Support of LD 1752, Resolve, to Prepare Pre Approved Building Types 
May 9, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Honorable Members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing, 
My name is Nancy Smith, I live in Ellsworth, and I am the CEO of GrowSmart Maine. 
We are a statewide non-partisan non-profit organization helping communities navigate 
change in alignment with smart growth. We advocate for comprehensive policies and 
funding for smart growth practices and outcomes. 
We have partnered with Build Maine to guide a transparent crowd-sourcing of policy 
proposals that began a year ago, and has drawn together over a hundred people from 
across Maine and beyond. Policy Action 2Q23 has resulted in sixteen proposals from 
eight working groups, all addressing the shared goal, “to address barriers to and 
create incentives for equitable, sustainable growth and development that 
strengthens downtowns and villages of all sizes while pulling 
development pressure away ﬁ'om productive and open natural areas. We 
do so acknowledging that Maine has urban, rural, and suburban settings 
for which any solution may or may not be a ﬁt and a variety of people 
who deserve to be welcomed to their communities. ” 
This testimony reﬂects the positions of GrowSmart and Build Maine. 
Eight of these bills are coming to your committee, and I am pleased to support this bill, 
as well as share context with an overview of Policy Action 2023 proposals. Many of 
these proposals offer pragmatic, incremental steps while others are provocative in that 
they call for us to examine assumptions that have led to the unsustainable growth 
patterns of the past sixty years. All of them will improve economic, social, and climate 
metrics across the state. 
There are three goals for Policy Action 2023, and we are already seeing results in each 
category: 
0 To pass sound policy solutions to address the goal listed above 
0 To build advocacy capacity within the broad reach of stakeholders who support 
this goal 
0 To advance the provocative discussions we need to have if we are to have 
meaningful outcomes with long term, sustainable impacts in strengthening our 
downtowns and pulling development pressure away from productive and open 
natural areas.
Speciﬁc to this bill, as you can see in the attached Fact Sheet, LD 1752 proposes a 
catalog of building plans from which municipalities can adopt for use within their 
locally-designated growth areas. Because the community will have already approved 
these designs through a public process, the developer is eligible for an expedited review 
process for projects where these building types will be constructed. This cost and time 
the local communig. 
I will note a drafting error on page 1, line 8 and 9, where the phrase “”when the pre 
approved building types are located along existing streets or within designated growth 
areas... ” the word “or” should be removed so the language reads “along existing roads 
within designated growth areas” to avoid this process applying to sprawling growth 
along our roadways. This change will ensure the expedited permittingprocess is not 
identiﬁed as where they want to see more development. 
As an additional clariﬁcation, this bill is intended for building types that include 
housing, such as small single family homes, duplexes, small apartment houses of three 
to ten units, small apartment buildings of six to twelve units, and “shophouses ” with 
retail on the ﬁrst ﬂoor and residential above. 
We also support allowin 
of pre-approved building designs is available. This brings additional ﬂexibility and 
choice for communities as they determine what ﬁts in their downtowns and village 
centers. 
This is voluntary for municipalities, adding a tool to increase the speed and quality of 
housing construction for residents without sacriﬁcing the work already underway to 
address climate change and without creating the next crisis of access to farmland and 
open space. 
GrowSmart and Build Maine will assist the committee in any way that is helpful.
f.
