 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
Date May 8, 2023 
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee on Housing in support of LD 1752 – Resolve, 
to Prepare Preapproved Building Types  
To Chairperson Pierce, Chairperson Gere, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing.  
My name is Rebekah Lane and I am the Community Organizer for Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine. I am 
here today to express our support, and ask for your support, of LD Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building 
Types  
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access to nutritious 
food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the public in the fight to end 
hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 600 organizations to help distribute food 
to community members in need. Our network of partner agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior 
centers, school programs, and healthcare facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working 
with communities of color to address food security in a culturally responsive way.  
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with the state 
legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make Maine a stronger, better 
place to work and live.  
The ability to streamline the process around building permit applications by the creation of these 
preapproved building types will help getting people into stable housing situations faster, which will lead to 
better overall outcomes around hunger, as well.  
During a recent advocacy meeting we talked about how housing is a close second to general food access 
when it comes to anti-hunger work. Housing stabilization means more capacity for individuals to address 
hunger needs, it also means access to kitchen space to prepare meals, a place to eat with dignity, and the 
ability to access community in a more permenant way.  
Reducing the cost and time associated with building permit applications means more housing can be created 
in our state that meets the needs of those facing housing instability and food insecurity while also ensuring 
that the environmental impacts of these buildings have been considered without each local municipality 
having to verify each permit individually.  
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. 
Sincerely, 
Rebeakh Lane, Community Organizer, rlane@gsfb.org   
