F stm 2 0;‘ MAINL 
1 DEPARTMENT or PROFESMONAL 
AND FINANCZAL Racutmxora 
BUREAU QF F1N1’3\NC1ALINST1TUT§0NS 
36 STATE HOUSE S’i‘A'i‘lON 
AUGUSTA, MAENE 
04333-0036 
JanetT Mills LLOYD P. LAFOUNTAIN Ill 
GOVERNOR supsnmrsuosnv 
131st Maine Legislature, First Regular Session 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and 
Financial Services 
Testimony of Gordon Laurendeau, Attorney, 
Bureau of Financial Institutions 
Department of Professional and Financial Regulation 
Neither for Nor Against L.D. 1277 
An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Property Investment by Credit 
Unions 
Tuesday, April 4, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the 
Committee: 
My name is Gordon Laurendeau and I am the Attorney for the Maine 
Bureau of Financial Institutions. On behalf of the Bureau and the 
Administration, I am here to testify neither for nor against on L.D. 1277, An 
Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Property investment by Credit Unions. 
This bill would amend Title 9-B to allow credit unions to invest in real 
property for a limited period of time, as long as such an investment is 
allowed under federal law. A credit union would have up to 180 days after 
the date it acquired title to real property to transfer ownership of the 
property to a third-party. 
‘ 
It is the Bureau’s understanding that the Maine Credit Union League 
has been working with the Sponsor on this proposal, which is intended to 
make it easier for credit unions to assist those members seeking alternative 
O 207 624 8570 TTY USERS cam. Mmm RELAY 711 
207 624 8590 FHCE PHONK ( )n 
CONSUMERTGLLFREEZ (800) 9656235 FAX ( )_ 
OFFICES LOCATED AT: 76 VORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER MAINE 
WEBSITE: http://www.ma1ne.g0v/pfr/financialinstitutions
mortgage products due primarily to the member’s religious prohibitions 
against paying interest on loans. 
To facilitate these home purchases, the Bureau understands that the 
transaction would be structured in a manner that requires the financial 
institution, or a subsidiary, to serve as a co-owner on the property. Co- 
ownership would only last until the loan is sold on the secondary market. 
Ultimately, the member homeowner would make equal payments to the 
owner of the loan until the member’s ownership share reaches 100%. 
This bill is an effort to permit the temporary co-ownership between 
the credit union and the member that is created as part of the purchase 
process. Current Maine law in Title 9-B M.R.S. § 864 only allows a credit 
union to purchase and invest in real property that will be used for credit 
union branches or offices; L.D. 1277 amends that law so that a credit union 
may own real property for the limited purpose of closing a loan and 
transferring the loan package to a third-party within 180 days. Federal law 
contains similar limitations on property ownership by federal credit unions 
in 12 CFR 701.36, but these limits on federally-chartered credit unions do 
not appear to apply to Maine state-chartered credit unions. 
The Bureau supports the general concept of making home ownership 
available to more Mainers, and is willing to work with the Sponsor, 
Committee, and industry stakeholders to develop legislation that will 
achieve this goal. The Bureau would like to point out that a credit union 
lending program is only under development at this time, meaning we do not 
yet know exactly what changes may be needed in the Banking Code to 
accommodate the program. 
lf the bill moves forward, the Bureau recommends the Committee 
consider amending the bill so that it is clear a credit union service 
organization (CUSO) is also authorized to purchase real property for the 
purpose of transferring ownership. This is because the loan activity may 
generate from a credit union’s lending subsidiary service organization, 
rather than directly from the credit union. Further, the Committee should 
also consider what may happen if a loan is not sold within 180 days of 
closing for reasons that may include paperwork delays or the inability to sell 
the loans on the secondary market. Finally, the Bureau thinks it is 
appropriate to put a cap on this type of lending calculated as a percentage 
of net worth to avoid concentration risk to the credit union should these 
loans remain on the credit union’s books for longer than 180 days. Asa
starting point for such a program, the Bureau suggests that credit union 
property ownership be capped at 10% of a credit union’s net worth. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I would be 
happy to answer any questions from the Committee.
