Community Credit Union 
Testimony by Jennifer Hogan 
In Favor of LD 1277: An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Property Investment by Credit Unions 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
April 4, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, 
My name is Jennifer Hogan, and l am the President/CEO at Community Credit Union. Community Credit 
Union is based in Lewiston, with approximately $95 million in assets and 11,000 members. Today l am 
submitting testimony in favor of LD 1277, "An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Property Investment by 
Credit Unions." 
LD 1277 would essentially allow Credit Unions to own property that they do not partially occupy, 
something that is not currently allowed at this time for Credit Unions. I note that specifically for two 
reasons: 
1. This prohibition is limited to Credit Unions; Banks can already own property they do not occupy. 
This change does not provide Credit Unions any advantage over Banks, itjust simply provides us 
with parity. 
2. This change would allow our Credit Union, and all State-Chartered Credit Unions, to be 
innovative in providing a sharia-compliant lending option to our state's Muslim community. 
Offering a Sharia-Compliant lending option is Community Credit Union's motivation behind supporting 
LD 1277. 
Sharia-compliant financing is financing activity that complies with Sharia or Islamic law. 
Sharia prohibits riba, which in simple terms is defined as interest paid on all loans of money or interest 
received from a deposit account. Some religious practices within the Muslim community forbid riba as 
it is seen as an unethical practice in their culture. This means that many individuals within our Muslim 
community are not afforded the same opportunities to purchase cars or purchase homes (as an 
example) unless they choose to violate their religious beliefs.
lslamic law does allow someone to pay a fee for service. In sharia-compliant lending, a home buyer will 
essentially pay the same amount over the life of a mortgage as a traditional home buyer. The interest 
that would normally be charged is instead turned into a fee. Banking regulations require that any 
required fees charged be incorporated into the interest rate. Once you do this, the loan is no longer 
Sharia-compliant. 
There are banks across the country who are offering Sharia-Compliant mortgage products. Most of 
them are using an LLC or they are not a traditional banking institution that is bound by Federal and State 
banking regulations. 
There are three models in which Sharia-Compliant lending can be offered: 
1. Installment Loans 
2. Lease-to-Own Agreements 
3. Co-Ownership Agreements 
In all three of these models, the financial institution, at some point in the process, either owns or co- 
owns the property. LD 1277 is designed to amend the laws regarding property investment by Credit 
Unions and would allow Credit Unions to own property for a limited period of time so they could be an 
active participant in Sharia-Compliant lending and better serve their communities. 
l have personally been researching Sharia-Compliant Lending for the past five years. Every time l think 
I'm getting somewhere, l hit a wall. Through conversations with my attorney, our State Regulators at 
the Maine Bureau of Financial institutions and the Maine Credit Union League, and with the passing of 
LD 1277, we are closer than we have ever been. l believe that every Mainer, regardless of where they 
originally came to Maine from, has a right to realize the American Dream without having to sacrifice 
their religion or beliefs. That American Dream may look different to each person you ask — for some it 
may establishing a savings account, owning a car, starting a business, and among other things, owninga 
home. l'm committed to seeing this through and helping our community realize the America Dream! 
l appreciate your time and consideration of the passing of LD 1277. I would also like to speciﬁcally thank 
Senator Rotundo for working with me, as well as others, to draft this bill. Her genuine care of our 
community, her constituents, is commendable. l would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have.
