Moine Credit Union Leogue
A 2 Ledgeview Drive - 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 1236 - 
Portland, ME 04104 
207-773-5671 - 
1-800-442-6715 
www.mainecul.org 
In Support of LD 1277 
An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Property Investment by Credit Unions 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
April 4, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members ofthe 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, 
My name is Krista Simonis and I am the Director of Governmental Affairs at the Maine Credit 
Union League. The Maine Credit Union League is the trade association for Maine's 50 credit 
unions and over 725,000 members statewide. We respectfully submit the following testimony 
in favor of LD 1277. 
Credit unions began in this country as a way to provide lending and credit services to 
communities of French speaking laborers who could not access the services oftraditional 
banks. This ethos of cooperation and meeting the needs of the undersen/ed still guides our 
community credit unions today, which is why we thank the sponsor for putting forth this bill. 
With immigration, Maine has seen a growth in the population of Muslim Mainers. Some 
religious practices within the Muslim community forbid the payment of interest, or riba. With 
traditional models of banking, this leaves many without access to the capital needed to buy 
homes, expand businesses, or even hold savings accounts. Our credit unions have worked 
with their communities when possible to provide products, like savings accounts, that respect 
religious beliefs and still provide access to services. However, current law does not allow for 
the creation of a mortgage product that would allow credit unions to accomplish this goal. 
LD 1277 is based on years-long research, yet we recognize that there are still outstanding 
questions with this bill. We intend to continue working with the Bureau of Financial 
Institutions to resolve these issues. Ultimately, we believe the path forward will rely on 
allowing credit unions to hold property temporarily. This would enable our credit unions to 
offer loan products like zero percent interest installment loans that would allow the Muslim 
community access to home financing while still respecting their religious beliefs. 
The restriction against property ownership only exists for credit unions. Banks can choose to 
offer these types of products already, however many do not. This bill would provide parity 
and allow our state-chartered credit unions to compete with banks and serve their 
communities. Our communities in Maine have changed, and we must change with them to 
meet the needs of our neighbors. LD I277 is a beginning in how we can adapt our lending 
institutions to continue to serve the underserved and make sure all Mainers have somewhere 
to call home.
