-it DJ Z“ 3..
i
t 
~' Peggy Rotundo THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 21 l3 lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony introducing 
LD 1277, “An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Property Investment by Credit Unions” 
Senator Peggy Rotundo 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and other distinguished members of the Committee On 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Peggy Rotundo andI 
represent Senate District 21, the City of Lewiston. I am here today to introduce LD 1277, ” An 
Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Property Investment by Credit Unions". 
This bill will amend the laws regarding property investment by credit unions, allowing them 
to offer loans to members of the Muslim coinmunity by participating in Sharia-compliant 
lending. This change would essentially provide parity for credit unions with banks, which 
already offer these products. At this time, credit unions are not able to purchase property that 
they do not partially occupy. Changing this law to allow credit unions to offer Sharia- 
compliant loans will expand the options available to this part of our community and allow 
more people to fully participate in Maine's economy. 
Sharia-compliant financing is financing activity that complies with Islamic law. This law 
prohibits riba, which can be defined as interest paid on all loans of money or interest received 
from a deposit account. Some religious practices within the Muslim community forbid riba as 
it is seen as an unethical practice. According to the website Investopedia, ”Islam aims to 
promote charity and helping others through kindness [and to] remove sentiments of 
selfishness and self-centereclness, which can create social antipathy, distrust, and resentment. 
By making riba illegal, Sharia law creates opportunities and contexts in which people are 
encouraged to act charitably — loaning money without interest. ” 
This means that many credit union customers Within our Muslim community are not afforded 
the same opportunities to purchase land, businesses or homes unless they choose to violate 
their religious beliefs. 
Islamic law does allow someone to pay a fee for service, however. In sharia-compliant 
lending, a homebuyer, for instance, will essentially pay the same amount over the life ofa 
mortgage as a traditional homebuyer. The interest that would normally be charged is instead 
turned into a fee. 
Chair, Appropriations and Financial Aﬂairs Committee 
State House: (207) 287-1515 * Fax: (207) 287-1585 * T011 Free: 1-800-423-6900 * TTI’: 711 
Peggy.R0z ‘m1a'0@legislafure. maine. gov * legislarzu'e.ma1' ne. gov/senate
There are three models in which Sharia-Compliant lending can be offered. The installment 
loan model allows a financial institution to purchase the property, then turn around right 
away and sell it to the new owner for a price higher than the amount for which it was 
purchased in order to recoup what would have been charged in interest. The resulting 
installment loan would have a zero percent interest rate. The lease-to-own model allows the 
financial institution to purchase the property and lease it to the individual in a lease-to-own 
agreement. After the full amount of the property purchase has been paid through the lease 
agreement, the individual would own the property. Finally, the co-ownership model allows 
the financial institution and the borrower to be co-owners in the property. The two parties buy 
the property and the ownership of the property is determined by each party's investment. The 
borrower makes monthly payments, gradually purchasing all of the financial institution's 
ownership stake to become the sole owner of the property. 
Fortunately, members of the Muslim community in Lewiston will testify today to describe in 
real terms how this bill will affect their lives. Many of these people recently joined me ina 
meeting with Governor Ianet Mills, who has expressed support for this measure. 
I recently spoke with Iohn Barr with Maine's Bureau of Financial Institutions, who is working 
with the credit unions to find a way to allow them to offer loans to members of the Muslim 
comrnunity by participating in Sharia-compliant lending. You will hear from the Bureau, 
which hopes in the coming months to have a solution to offer to this Committee. 
Thank you for your openness to finding a solution that will allow more people in my 
community and throughout the State to receive loans to purchase homes and participate more 
fully in building Maine's economy while complying with their religious beliefs. I am happy to 
take any questions.
