Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee Hearing 
LD 661-An Act Naming Plummer Pond in Elm Stream Township 
March 20, 2023 
Room 206 
Cross Office Building, Augusta, ME 
1:00 PM 
Testimony by John MacDonald of Pownal 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and esteemed members of the Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife Committee, my name is John MacDonald and I am a resident of Pownal. 
As with my father who spoke earlier on LD 660 about naming MacDonald Pond, I'd like also to 
thank Representative Anne Graham for introducing this bill to name Plummer Pond and 
Representative Larry Dunphy for co-sponsoring the bill with Anne. And thank you too to the 
lF&W committee for hearing the bill here today. 
My long connection with what we propose to be named Plummer Pond first began way back in 
1986 when I was thirteen years old. My grandfather's name was drawn that year in one of the 
early moose lotteries and I was able to join with a group of family members for that moose hunt 
in the area of the pond. 
We headquartered at the Plummer log cabin back then since my brother David had recently 
married Thedy, the granddaughter of Alton Plummer of Raymond who had purchased the cabin 
near the pond a short time before in the early 1980's. I remember I had to be excused from 
school that week to take part in the moose hunt, a terrific treat for me if ever there was one. 
My grandfather did take a moose that year in what turned out to be one of the most memorable 
experiences of my life. Since then there have been countless successful family-related moose 
hunts conducted out of the Plummer camp along with hunts for deer, bear, partridge and other 
game, plus some great fishing trips and trips for pure relaxing and exploring as well. 
Most recently, just this last fall, I was able to take my 11 year old daughter Eleanor, along with 
my father and brother David, for my daughter's first trip to the camp. During our four day stay 
there Eleanor shot her very first partridge. Something she will likely not ever forget. 
After over 30 years of his involvement with the Elm Stream camp, Alton Plummer passed away 
in 2007 at the age of 96. His large extended family, he fathered 8 children, have continued to 
remain active in the ownership and maintenance of his Elm Stream camp for over 40 years now. 
As shown on the attached Google map, the Plummer cabin is located just south of the 20+ acre 
unnamed water body we are proposing to name Plummer Pond. It is the only cabin remaining of 
13 log cabins of its type reportedly built back in the 1890’s for logging operations in the area ofI
I
I 
‘I 
.~>
I
A 
it 
I!
I
I 
‘I 
I vi
I
l
I
I:
Elm Stream. Elm Stream no doubt made for a popular route to float logs to the West Branch of 
the Penobscot and down to the sawmills of Bangor back then. 
Given this long experience of the extended Plummer family enjoying the beautifully remote 
country of the historic old log cabin near the pond, we feel it makes perfect sense to name this 
unnamed pond after them. There are no camps located on the shore of the pond, and actually 
none others anywhere near the pond. 
Negro Brook, which is the outlet to the pond, crosses under a bridge the Plummers built for 
driveway access to their cabin. In fact, the Plummer cabin is the only one that exists along the 
entire length of the six mile Elm Stream Road. lt truly is located all by itself in the area of the 
pond. So we feel there is no likelihood of another name being as closely allied with this pond as 
the Plummer name. 
Over the past months we have been in touch about the possible naming of the pond with the 
Huber Corporation which administers the lease for the Plummer cabin and manages the land in 
the area around the pond for its owners, Sandy Gray Forest LLC. 
Earlier this month we notified Trevor London, Huber's point person for Sandy Gray Forest, 
about today's hearing on the naming of the pond. Mr. London has since voiced no objection or 
concern with the pond naming. 
Our guess is that Sandy Gray Forest "will be happy to see the Plummer name officially adopted 
for the pond. The naming will certainly give extra definition and historical meaning to their 
beautiful and remote timberland holdings. 
We look fonlvard to the committee's favorable vote on this bill and are happy to answer any 
questions or concerns you may have. 
Thank you for your attention.
