MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Neither for Nor Against L.D. 1036,  
An Act to Require All Police Officers to Carry Naloxone 
Hydrochloride When on Duty
March 21, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the 
Chief of the Cumberland Police Department. I am submitting testimony on behalf 
of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association Neither for Nor Against LD 1036.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and personal 
relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in law 
enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police training 
and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for equality of law 
enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the prevention and detection 
of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics; and to promote the 
profession of law enforcement as an integral and dedicated force in today's society 
sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
The bill amends the law requiring the administration and dispensing of naloxone 
hydrochloride by law enforcement officers, corrections officers and municipal 
firefighters to further require law enforcement officers to obtain medical 
training in the dispensing of naloxone hydrochloride and to carry naloxone 
hydrochloride at all times when on duty.  
We know that naloxone hydrochloride is a necessary tool out in the field because 
it saves lives. In fact, the majority of law enforcement agencies already have 
policies in place that require their officers to carry it with them because they know 
the importance of it.  However, we are providing testimony neither for nor against 
because we wanted to share a few suggestions to the current bill language.   
First, we think that the current definition of who this bill applies to casts too broad 
of a net.  We know that, in an ideal world everyone would carry naloxone 
hydrochloride with them, but in order to make this bill effective right now we think 
that the mandatory provision should be narrowed to “patrol” or “uniform patrol” 
officers.  Law enforcement departments can then choose to develop policies to 
require additional positions to carry it depending on the specific circumstances of 
the job.   
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
Second, the bill requires that the law enforcement officers carry the naloxone 
hydrochloride “at all times when on duty”.  We think that the term “readily 
available” is better suited to achieve the goals of the legislation.  
Third, the bill contains language that the officer “shall…administer or dispense 
intranasal naloxone hydrochloride as clinically indicated ”. We are worried that this 
opens the officer up to liability if they do not administer the naloxone 
hydrochloride.  In most cases, the officer will be administering the life saving drug; 
however, there could be a situation where the officer can not administer it because 
of the dynamics of the call. For example, they arrive to a scene where there are 
multiple people overdosing and they do not have enough to provide to everyone or 
there are combative people on the scene, and they need to prioritize ensuring that 
the scene is safe before administering it. We would ask the Committee to change 
the language to have it be a “may” like it is for fire departments or something like 
“as clinically indicated and reasonable to do so given the circumstances of the 
situation.”  
Finally, there is a question about the cost of requiring law enforcement agencies to 
carry it. We would suggest that the committee check with the Attorney General’s 
Office about this because they are the ones who are currently supplying naloxone 
hydrochloride to law enforcement agencies. We would want to make sure that their 
program is continued to be funded because we think that their program is perfectly 
suited to be the distributor; their program requires that the agencies that receive the 
product to implement policies about it and that the officers that carry the product to 
receive training. We think that these are important safeguards to making sure that it is 
effective so that it can save lives.  
We want to thank the sponsor for bringing this important piece of legislation. The 
amount of overdose reversals has been in the thousands because of naloxone 
hydrochloride. And, on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want 
to thank the committee members for your work on this Committee.  
