, . " 
9O Box 7860 
t % Portland, ME 001:; 
at 
A 7 
(207)774-5444 I 
I I ' I 
I I 
wwwaclumaine org 
AMERICAN CIVIL UBERTIES UNION 
Maine , 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought to Pass - LD 1036 
An Act to Require All Police Ofﬁcers to 
Carry Naloxone Hydrochloride When on Duty 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY 
March 20, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety, greetings. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support LD 1036 because it could save 
lives.E 
Over the past two sessions, the Legislature has enacted multiple pieces of bipartisan 
legislation to address Maine’s overdose death crisis. Each of these policies moves closer toa 
recognition that Mainers who have substance use disorders need treatment, not jail. This bill 
represents a small step down that path. 
Substance use disorders cannot and will not be solved with prison sentences. A law 
enforcement ofﬁcial who saves someone from an overdose also takes an oath to enforce our 
criminal laws, including laws criminalizing drug possession. That might mean that someone 
saved from an overdose might soon find themselves in handcuffs and on their way to jail. That is 
why, although this bill’s goal of saving lives is laudable, we urge you to try to ensure that ﬁrst 
responders to drug overdoses are ‘not police but trained healthcare professionals. Emergency 
Medical Technicians (EMT s) are in the best position to respond to overdose calls. We urge this 
committee to consider ways of properly resourcing EMTs so that they, as trained medical 
professionals, can be the first responders to overdose calls.
l
Evidence shows that treatment works much better than repeatedly arresting and 
convicting a person for drugvoffensesl Yet, We have tried to arrest and jail our way out of the 
overdose crisis. The result has been a tragic trend towards mass criminalization and 
imprisonment of people who are predominantly poor, and who have substance use disorders and 
other mental illnesses at higher-than-average rates. When thousands of Mainers go through the 
same motions each year, it’s time to stop focusing on individual faultpand moral failing, and to 
start looking at the system as a whole. We must acknowledge that our approach is causing these 
cycles of incarceration. 
Things can be different. The evidence shows that people are shaped by circumstances. 
Effective policymaking, then, demands that We focus on changing circumstances, not people. 
This means pulling our money out of failed systems and creating more alternatives. This 
reinvestment is not only more effective and efﬁcient; it is fairer and more humane. 
We urge you to vote ought to pass. 
1 
See More Imprisonment Does Not Reduce State Drug Problems Data show no relationship 
between prison terms and drug misuse, Issue Brief, Mar. 8, 2018, Pew Charitable Trust, 
https://WWW.pewtrusts.orgfenfresearch-and-analvsis/issue-briefs/20l 8/03/more-imprisonmenb 
does-not-reduce-state-dru2-problems.
2
