$5 ,-:@* 
_ ....F“'-1 '\._. 
.» 4-\ ll 
Pi???-f€??'='!}~"¥-iv 3 
~ *1?-='~ 
i'E,\._,;.,.J",§ 
Eric Brakey 131“ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 1686 "An Act to Eliminate Unconstitutional 
Restrictions on Access to Cannabis by Removing Certain 
Restrictions on Medical Use and Personal Use and to 
Recognize Cannabis and Hemp as Food Protected as a Right 
Under the Constitution of Maine“ 
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
Monday, April 24, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Veterans 
and Legal Affairs Committee, I am Eric Brakey, Androscoggin Senator, 
representing the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. 
l am here today to present L.D. 1686, "An Act to Eliminate Unconstitutional 
Restrictions on Access to Cannabis by Removing Certain Restrictions on 
Medical Use and Personal Use and to Recognize Cannabis and Hemp as 
Food Protected as a Right Under the Constitution of Maine" 
l am submitting this legislation at the request of Samantha Brown,a 
member of the Maine cannabis community. In my first term, l worked with 
Ms. Brown on legislation to increase access to smokeless forms of medical 
cannabis in Maine healthcare facilities, to help people, like her daughter 
who suffers from a rare epilepsy disorder. 
This legislation poses several questions. Should cannabis and hemp be 
recognized as food? lf so, are cannabis and hemp protected under the 
recently passed “Right to Food” amendment of the Maine Constitution? 
And if so, do pre-existing statutory limits and requirements on the personal 
use of cannabis violate the Maine Constitution?
Let’s begin with the first question. Are cannabis and hemp food? 
The American Heritage Dictionary gives the definition of food as: 
“Material, usually of plant or animal origin, that contains or 
consists of essential body nutrients, such as carbohydrates, 
fats, proteins, vitamins, or minerals, and is ingested and 
assimilated by an organism to produce energy, stimulate 
growth, and maintain life. 
Cannabis and hemp both seem to fit this definition. They are natural plants 
that contain nutrients and are commonly ingested as an ingredient in food. 
It seems pretty clear cut that cannabis and hemp are food. 
For the second question, if cannabis and hemp are food, what protections 
does the Maine Constitution protect for the Maine people regarding them? 
Ratified at the ballot box in November 2021, the full text of the “Right to 
Food Amendment ” in our Declaration of Rights is printed with my written 
testimony. 
“All individuals have a natural, inherent and unalienable right to 
food, including the right to save and exchange seeds and the 
right to grow, raise, harvest, produce and consume the food of 
their own choosing for their own nourishment, sustenance, 
bodily health and well-being, as long as an individual does not 
commit trespassing, theft, poaching or other abuses of private 
property rights, public lands or natural resources in the 
harvesting, production or acquisition of food.” 
lf cannabis and hemp are food, then our Maine Constitution asserts that all 
Maine people have “the right to save and exchange [cannabis and hemp] 
seeds” and “the right to grow, raise, harvest, produce and consume” 
cannabis and hemp “for their own nourishment, sustenance, bodily health, 
and well-being. ” _. 
'. 
g. 
As such, this protection for the personal use of cannabis and hemp calls 
into question the constitutionality of several pre-existing statutory limits. 
1. ls it unconstitutional to limit the number of plants an individual 
can possess, cultivate, transport, or transfer without
remuneration? 
For a constitutional analogue, would it be constitutional for statute to 
limit the number of firearms a person can own and possess? Asa 
constitutionally protected negative right, the right to keep and bear 
arms (like the right to food) generally means people can do what they 
want, so long as they don't violate the rights of others. 
2. Is it unconstitutional for the government to require the tagging 
of cannabis plants? 
Returning to the same constitutional analogue, the Maine Legislature 
has long maintained that gun registries are unconstitutional —- even 
passing proactive legislation to prohibit any future establishment of 
one. lf gun registries are unconstitutional, then why would a cannabis 
registry be any more constitutional? 
This legislation would recognize hemp and cannabis as food protected 
under our Constitution, repeal plant counts for person use, and repeal tag 
requirements. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. l would be happy to take any 
questions to the best of my ability. That said, l will note that Samantha 
Brown (who drafted this legislation) is here at the public hearing and can 
speak more in depth to the proposal. I would encourage you to ask her 
questions.
