Cannabis is among, if not THE, safest alternative medicine known to humans. With a long 
resume of health benefits from tumor suppression and mood disorder relief to nausea and pain 
relief the list goes on and on. Restricting access to this plant only hurts the people that would 
otherwise benefit from having safe unrestricted access. Aside from the legitimate medical 
benefits, cannabis is a much safer way to unwind and relax than other substances that are more 
accessible and more easily available. With the long list if benefits that cannabis has on the 
human body, there are also biological and evolutionary indications that the human body is 
designed to ingest and process cannabis as part of the intended diet. The Cannabis plant 
contains numerous components, including cannabinoids and other active molecules. The phyto-
cannabinoid activity is mediated by the endocannabinoid system. Phytocannabinoids are found 
in plants while endocannabinoids are located within mammal bodies. The prefix “phyto” signifies 
that they are plant-derived in the former, while “endo” reveals the endogenous nature of the 
latter. Cannabinoids affect the nervous system and play significant roles in the regulation of the 
immune system. Medium and high-intensity exercise has been shown to activate the 
endocannabinoid system. Research also shows that exercise significantly up-regulates CB1 
receptors and enhances CB1 receptor sensitivity, which is why exercise can protect against the 
consequences of stress but also indicates how cannabis activating these same sites may have 
the same desired effect. To deny these scientific facts is to deny the truth. The human body is 
designed to have cannabinoids in it. The human body naturally produces endocannabinoids. 
They are present in various organs and tissues, such as the muscle, brain, and circulating cells. 
Endocannabinoids become active when they bind with a cannabinoid receptor. The receptors 
are also located throughout the body in all of us naturally. This is undeniable. Until recently, 
scientists had identified cannabinoids only in the Cannabis plant. Current research, however, 
has found cannabinoids in many plants, including clove, black pepper, Echinacea, broccoli, 
ginseng, and carrots. Furthering the comparison to food crops and our constitutional right to 
which while also furthering the evidence that these cannabinoids are in fact necessary to our 
daily intake, and framing cannabis as more of a “super food” for these nutrients than anything 
else. I truly hope that this bill passes into law as it is long overdue and as history continues I feel 
this moment will be looked back on and seen as a major step, among the first, in the right 
direction for humanity. 
 
 
- Jake Spencer (Pinehurst)  
Jake Spencer
Acton
LD 1686
Cannabis is among, if not THE, safest alternative medicine known to humans. With a 
long resume of health benefits from tumor suppression and mood disorder relief to 
nausea and pain relief the list goes on and on. Restricting access to this plant only 
hurts the people that would otherwise benefit from having safe unrestricted access. 
Aside from the legitimate medical benefits, cannabis is a much safer way to unwind 
and relax than other substances that are more accessible and more easily available. 
With the long list if benefits that cannabis has on the human body, there are also 
biological and evolutionary indications that the human body is designed to ingest and 
process cannabis as part of the intended diet. The Cannabis plant contains numerous 
components, including cannabinoids and other active molecules. The 
phyto-cannabinoid activity is mediated by the endocannabinoid system. 
Phytocannabinoids are found in plants while endocannabinoids are located within 
mammal bodies. The prefix “phyto” signifies that they are plant-derived in the 
former, while “endo” reveals the endogenous nature of the latter. Cannabinoids affect 
the nervous system and play significant roles in the regulation of the immune system. 
Medium and high-intensity exercise has been shown to activate the endocannabinoid 
system. Research also shows that exercise significantly up-regulates CB1 receptors 
and enhances CB1 receptor sensitivity, which is why exercise can protect against the 
consequences of stress but also indicates how cannabis activating these same sites 
may have the same desired effect. To deny these scientific facts is to deny the truth. 
The human body is designed to have cannabinoids in it. The human body naturally 
produces endocannabinoids. They are present in various organs and tissues, such as 
the muscle, brain, and circulating cells. Endocannabinoids become active when they 
bind with a cannabinoid receptor. The receptors are also located throughout the body 
in all of us naturally. This is undeniable. Until recently, scientists had identified 
cannabinoids only in the Cannabis plant. Current research, however, has found 
cannabinoids in many plants, including clove, black pepper, Echinacea, broccoli, 
ginseng, and carrots. Furthering the comparison to food crops and our constitutional 
right to which while also furthering the evidence that these cannabinoids are in fact 
necessary to our daily intake, and framing cannabis as more of a “super food” for 
these nutrients than anything else. I truly hope that this bill passes into law as it is 
long overdue and as history continues I feel this moment will be looked back on and 
seen as a major step, among the first, in the right direction for humanity. 
