 
April 13, 2023  
  
  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs:  
  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony today.  My name is Anne Patterson,  and I am 
the Director at Mt. Desert Island Adult and Community Education.  I have worked in this role for 
10 years.  I also worked for RSU 24 Adult Ed for three years.  
  
I am here today to testify in support of LD 1367 - An Act Regarding the Funding Formula for 
Adult Education .  Adult education is an important organization in Maine, and it’s time that the 
legislature made the move to fund it completely.  While the money b eing asked for in this bill is 
only a start to move adult education to full funding, it’s an essential start.  
  
My program consists of myself (full -time) and one full -time teacher. The local share for my 
program was $143,000 this year. My subsidy was just under $48,000. The subsidy has dropped 
in recent years. If we were getting fully subsidized, we would be receiving just over $103,000.  
 
If we were subsidized at the full rate, we’d be able to add a part-time ESL instructor or 
additional help for our high school completion students,  especially for evening classes 
which, at this time, we cannot offer. Just this past month (March) our active academic student 
population doubled.  If we get many more referrals, we may have to defer them until fall.  
 
Two factors  have precipitated this increase in students: refugees  from Ukraine needing 
language instruction and a dramatic increase in the number of students coming from the  high 
school whose education was severely impacted by COVID . Both of these groups require 
intensive instruction. We need more instructors who can extend our current learning center 
hours and help with the surge of incoming students.  
  
Three of our young (17 -18) students are also the parents of at least one child.  
One young lady  came to us in the fall. She was juggling childcare for both children, living with a 
family member in tight quarters, and traveling 20+ miles to get to our program. She prepared for 
and took the HiSET passing with very solid scores. We also got her enrolled in an online 
Beha vioral Health Professional Certificate class. We recently learned that she has a job using 
her BHP certificate and is about to get her own place to live. This student is exemplary of 
how adult education can turn people’s lives around for the better.  
 

Another quick story: A young Jamaican girl came to us in 2016. It took her a few years to work 
through the HiSET program, but she passed. She also took a C.N.A. class and worked as a 
C.N.A. for a while. In 2019 she  joined the U.S. Navy and also became a U.S. citizen. Currently 
she is in nursing school.   
 
Both of these young women have added great value to their communities, all because they 
came through an adult education program. It works!  
 
As you can see, Maine Adult Education is an important workforce and educational partner in the 
statewide system.  Adult Education programs need to be fully funded to be able to meet the 
goals of helping every adult in need gain the necessary skills to gain  employment or enter post 
secondary education.  
  
Thank you for your time today.  
  
Sincerely,  
Anne Patterson  
Anne Patterson, MS Ed  
Director  
apatterson@mdirss.org  
207-288-4703  
 
 
