:~‘“c0"%”a 
¢ Augusta Adult & Community Education 
5 é 22 Armory Street, North Wing, Augusta, Maine 04330 
vvvvvvvvvvvv (207) 626-2470' 
www.augustaadulted.org 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the 131st Legislature ’s Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
As the director of Augusta Adult and Community Education, I am testifying in favor of LD 
1367- An Act Regarding the Funding Formula for Adult Education. As many of you are aware, 
Adult Education programs are funded separately from the school district. Adult Education sawa 
slight subsidy increase of $300,000 in 2019 but nothing else in the past ten years. Local 
programs have been forced to increase their share to adequately support and fund their Adult 
Education programs. 
When looking at the costs to run an Adult Education program, I will note that Augusta Adult 
Education pays facility rental fees to run the program. Facility fees are not subsidized in the 
current subsidy formula. We currently pay $24,800 and our lease agreement has an annual 
increase of 3%. Again, this is not a subsidized expense and we can not use federal or state grant 
funds to pay this required fee. 
Subsidized expenses include: 
0 Academic instruction expenses 
0 Administrative expenses that support academics 
O Supply expenses for academic courses 
The current FY 24 budget for Augusta Adult and Community Education is $823,074.08, which is 
a $35,785.08 increase from the FY 23 budget While our state subsidy from FY 23 to FY 24 
decreased by just under $11,000. Our proposed local contribution for the FY 24 budget is 
$530,004.01; our state subsidy allocation is $224,570.07. Our program makes approximately 
$20,000 in enrichment fees (enrichment programming is not subsidized in any amount) and uses 
that money to balance our academic budget. 
In Augusta We are lucky that we have strong local support; this is not the case in other districts. 
Many other adult education programs are responsible for similar overhead costs. They also 
simply do not have adequate state funding to employ full-time teachers and staff making it 
difficult to expand programming to support the growing number of learners entering programs. 
Even in a larger program like mine, the local taxpayer has a limit.
$t~*““""””*/1 Augusta Adult & Community Education 
f 22 Armory Street, North Wing, Augusta, Maine 04330
1 ,_ (207) 626-2470' 
www.augustaadulted.org 
Adult education provides many opportunities for Maine residents - from basic education to job 
preparation. One current leamer came back to us because he could not pass a plumber ’s exam,I 
will read a letter written by this student momentarily. We also have an important partnership with 
Maine Veterans Home, students interested in the CNA earn while you leam program sign up with 
Augusta Adult and Community Education where we administer an assessment to determine if 
their reading level is where it should be to enter the CNA program. If the student's reading level 
is 240 or above, the student moves on to Maine Veterans Home where they are hired on asa 
health aid and work while they take the CNA course. This allows them to earn money while they 
also pursue their education. The students who do not meet the reading requirements are provided 
with tutoring through Augusta Adult and Community Education to improve their literacy skills. 
Once the student has met their literacy goals and obtained the required score, they are eligible to 
begin working with Maine Veterans Home. At the completion of the CNA course, students retum 
to Augusta Adult and Community Education where we administer the state exam. 
It is important to point out that Adult Education programs serve a wide range of learners. Adult 
Education programming has not seen a signiﬁcant subsidy increase in over ten years. It’s time to 
take a look at the funding formula and appropriately allocate funds to programs that serve our 
local communities. By increasing Adult Education funding, we can help grow Maine’s local 
economy by investing in our local leamers. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Kayla Sikora, M.Ed., C.A.S. 
Director of Augusta Adult and Community Education 
22 Armory St. Noithwing Buker 
Augusta, ME 04330 
Phone- 207-626-2470 
Email: kayla.sikora@augustaschoolsorg
