 
Written Testimony -April 13, 2023 Public Hearing 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 1367-An Act Regarding the 
Funding Formula for Adult Education.  My name is Monique Roy and I am a former Director of 
Adult Education.  I have worked in adult education in many roles over the past 12 years and 
have witnessed the lifechanging work that happens in local programs.  Adult education 
programs focus on individual learning but it isn’t just an individual that benefits from 
programming, it is also the communities in which an individual resides and works.   
 
What is important about this bill is not only does it ask for an increase in adult education 
funding; it requires a working group to review the mechanics of adult education funding.  
Through this examination in how programs are funded now, decisions about how things are 
funded in the future can be based on the statutes that dictate how programs operate, the 
practical, day to day functioning of programs, as well as the needs of the learners and 
communities in which these programs serve. 
 
I believe the working group, and in turn this legislative body, will discover that although the 
amount of programming and services for adults in Maine has risen exponentially, the funding to 
support programs providing these services has stayed stagnant. The demands of creating 
workforce development programming to support the Maine Jobs and Recovery plan in essential 
areas such as healthcare, IT, construction, retail, hospitality and education, is one example.  In 
addition, many programs are being asked to supplement or complete the education of students 
who would normally be served by their local high school without additional funds to do so.  I 
strongly suggest that the data reviewed by the working group include funding ear marked for 
adult education that flows into K-12 through the EPS formula.   
 
Although I am no longer working in an adult education program, as a Learning and 
Development Director at a healthcare organization, I lean heavily on the adult education 
programs in my area to provide education and training to our workforce.   
 
Adult education programs are everywhere and do everything.  They are not a nice addition to a 
school district or town, they are an essential service that keeps Maine competitive in education 
and workforce development.  Please support them by pushing this bill forward. 
 
Thank you in advance for your time and dedication. 
 
Sincerely, 
Monique Roy 
Director Learning and Development 
monique.roy@gmail.com  
 
