 
EMDC  40 Harlow Street, Bangor, Maine, 04401   |   Phone: 207. 942.6389    |   Fax: 207.942.3548   |   emdc.org   
 
April 05, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony today.  My name  is Patti Saarinen and I am the Deputy Director of 
Workforce Services with Eastern Maine Development Corporation.  I have been directly involved with job training and 
workforce programs for the past 40 years and in all that time there has been a connection  with adult education.  
 
I am providing this testimony in support of LD 1367 - An Act Regarding the Funding Formula for Adult Education .  Adult 
education is a critical organization in Maine and it’s  important that it be adequately funded .  While the money b eing 
asked for in this bill is only a start to move adult education to full funding, it’s an important start.  
 
Eastern Maine Development Corporation (EMDC) is the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) service 
provider for 9 counties across Maine.   In Central/Western Maine, we work closely with many adult education programs 
including RSU54 Adult & Community Education, Oxford Hills/Nezinscot, Lewiston and Auburn, Spruce Mountain, Franklin 
County, Region 9, and Gray -New Gloucester.  A major way we ha ve collaborated is on employer -driven training; these 
trainings involve employer input for the curriculum and include everyone helping with marketing, assessment, selection, 
case management and placement.  We have done cohorts in sectors such as healthcare , construction and culinary.  We 
also work together to help individuals gain work readiness skills and participate in individual occupational training.  Over 
the past 21 months we have enrolled  195 people utilizing 19 adult education offices across our 9 co unties.  
 
Through our partnership, we have seen many adults complete their Hi SET (replacement for the GED),  earn credentials 
and find meaningful employment.  One such gentleman came to us as a dropout without a driver’s license and limited 
work history.  Wo rking together we helped him complete the Hi SET, get his driver’s license and go on to get his CDL ; he 
ended up with a steady, driving job.  Another was an older woman from the Philippines who had work authorization but 
little work history, no license and limited computer skills.  Through our mutual support, she got her license, improved 
her computer skills and enrolled in a Certified Medical Assisting class.  She passed the class and national exam and is 
now working.  
 
Above are just some of the stories  that show how important Maine Adult Education is as a workforce and educational 
partner in the statewide system.  Adult Education programs need to be fully funded so they can continue to help adults 
and disengaged youth gain the skills necessary for emplo yment or to enter post - secondary education.  
 
Thank you for your time.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Patti Saarinen  
Deputy Director of Workforce Services  
psaarinen@emdc.org  
207-991-3651  

