 
Oxford Hills / Nezinscot Adult Education  
256 Main Street, South Paris, Maine 04281 
207-743-8842 
April 13, 2023 
 
RE:  Support of LD 1367 – An Act Regarding the Funding Formula for Adult 
Education 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs:  
 
This letter is in support of LD 1367 - An Act Regarding the Funding Formula for Adult 
Education.  Adult education is an important educational option for many adults and families in 
Maine. I t is time that the legislature made the move to fund it completely  to minimize the risk of 
reduced services simply because there is no money to pay for them .  While the money being 
asked for in this bill is only a start to move adult education to full funding, it’s an important start.  
Oxford Hills/Nezinscot A dult Education received  approximately $145,400 in subsi dy for the 
three districts it serves:  SAD17 (Oxford Hills School District), MVR11 (Maine Vocational Region 11), and RSU10 (representing the towns of Buckfield, Hartford and Sumner).  Had this program received the full amount of the subsidies, then the amount would have been nearly 
$310,000.  The amount received  represents  47% of the total. 
 Currently, the program ’s expenses exceed the revenue received from su bsidy, local share and 
grants. In recent years, the program has had to rely on temporary sources of funding to balance 
the budget and has had to reduce expenses related to instruction, including supplies, professional 
development and technology.  
 While the program is experiencing an ever -decreasing revenue flow, it has expanded its 
academic program significantly.  Oxford Hills/Nezinscot Adult Education provides academic 
and HiSET instruction at the Oxford County Jail; academic and basic educational services for 
parents in the Head Start Program in N orway  and soon in the Nezinscot Region (Buckfield, 
Hartford, Sumner).  These academic programs are in addition to the traditional academic, 
English Language Acquisition and HiSET programs that are offered year -round. The program 
currently has over 100 academic enrollments.  
 
Maine Adult Education is an important and critical educational partner in the statew ide 
educational system . It is important that Adult Education programs be fully funded to be able to 
meet the goals of helping every adult in need gain the necessary skills to gain employment or enter post-secondary education. 
 
Thank you for your time today.
 
 
Sincerely , 
  Tina Christophersen Director  
 
 Tina Christophersen  
Director  
 
Heidi Durgin  
Academic Advising  
Coordinating  
 
DJ LeVasseur  
Workforce and Career  
Advising  
Coordinating  
 
Jeanna Packard   
Secretary  
 
Lindsey Roberts  
Secretary  
 
Kathleen Beauchesne 
Teacher  
 
Eli Merrill  
Teacher  
 Kate Molloy  
Teacher  
 
 

