eBlGYCLEi 
COALITION ea-if esaaaaaa 
. February 28, 2023 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 31 , 
An Act to Allow the Commissioner of Transportation to Reduce Speed Limits at 
Construction Sites with Input from Municipalities and Utilities . 
Greeting distinguished members of the Committee on Transportation: 
My name is James Tassé, and I submit this testimony on behalf of the Bicycle Coalition of Maine 
(BCM) on LD 31, “An Act to Allow the Commissioner of Transportation to Reduce Speed 
Limits at Construction Sites with Input from Municipalities and Utilities. ” BCM is neither for 
nor against this legislation. 
The Bicycle Coalition of Maine is the statewide organization that advocates for bicyclists and 
pedestrians. We work to make Maine better for bicycling and walking, and to protect the safety 
and rights of vulnerable users of the public ways.- 
The BCM frequently hears complaints from residents across the state about the threat posed by 
speeding traffic on residential roads and downtown streets. Unfortunately, the process of setting 
speed limits in Maine is based upon the 85th percentile speed (which is the speed that 85% of- 
drivers will drive at or below) of traffic on a road. If a study shows that the 85th percentile speed 
exceeds the posted limit on a road, the posted speed limit may actually be increased. So asa 
policy that would sidestep absolute reliance on the 85th percentile, we support this bill, which 
would provide more ﬂexibility to reduce speeds without having to go through the full process of 
a speed study conducted by MaineDOT.' 
However, we feel that the purview of this bill is too narrow. The MaineDOT commissioner, as 
well as municipal leaders, should be able to exercise the authority to lower speeds on roads in 
other contexts besides just construction zones. Vlfhile roadway workers absolutely deserve the 
protections afforded by lower speeds in the areas they are working, the BCM feels that these 
same protections should be extended more broadly to vulnerable users in other locations as well. 
We therefore are more supportive of other bills, such as LD 527, which would give 
municipalities similar authority to lower speed limits on roads posted 35 mph or less and with 
traffic volumes of 6000 AADT or less. 
38 Diamond Street I Portland, ME 04101I 
www.bikemaine.orgl207-623-4511
BICYCLE 
GOALITION p 
es“ aaaaeaa: 
We a reciate that LD 31 opens the conversation on the speciﬁc, situational reduction of speed 
PP 
limits in certain contexts. We believe it is important for the Legislature to be aware that there 1Sa 
growing dissatisfaction with the process that sets speed limits across the state. BCM believes that 
the same authority to reduce speeds in construction zones should be extended to municipalities 
so that they can better manage speeding trafﬁc in residential and downtown contexts as well. 
Thank you for your time and service to the people of Maine. 
Sincerely,i 
James Tassé 
Assistant Director 
Bicycle Coalition of Maine 
38 Diamond Street I Portland, ME 04101 
www.bikemaine.org|207-623-4511
