188 Whitten Road, Augusta  ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
 
 
Testimony of Matthew Marks in Support of LD  3 1  
“An Act to Allow the Commissioner of Transportation to Reduce Speed Limits at Construction Sites 
with Input from Municipalities and Utilities”  
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
February 2 8, 2023 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Transportation my name  is Matthew Marks,  I am a Principal at Cornerstone  Government  Affairs,  and 
here  today  to speak  on behalf of my client  The Associated  General Contractors  of Maine.  AGC  Maine  is a 
statewide  commercial  construction  trade  associati on and a Chapter  of AGC  America  which  was founded  
in 1918 with  27,000  contractors,  suppliers,  and service  providers.   
 
Before  I address  the bill and the positive  changes , it’s important  to consider  the current  statistics  on the 
hazards  of working  alongside  traffic.  Every  year  AGC  America  surveys  contractors  to learn  about  the 
specific  incidents  that occur  within  a work  zone.  In addition,  federal statistics  make  it clear,  even  with  
safety  improvements  and awareness,  much  can be done  to improve  worker  safety.   
 
• 73%  of firms  reported  at least  one accident  within  a work  zone.1 
• 14%  reported  at least  one construction  worker  was injured  in the crashes.  2 
• 40%  of those  crashes  resulted  in at least  one driver  or passenger  injury.  3 
• 99%  of firms  believe  the risk was higher  in 2022  compared  to the prior year.4 
• Maine averages more than 500 crashes and two fatalities in the work zone annually .5 
• In 2020, Maine had three work zone fatalities .6 
 
This bill corrects  a provision  by allowing  rules  to be established  for a work  zone  speed  reduction  in 
construction  sites  that are not under  the management  of Maine  DOT  or the Maine  Turnpike  Authority.  
As a driver,  it is currently  unknown  if the site is regulated  under  the law for speed.  The work  conducted  
by a contractor  outside  of agency  oversight  for speed includes  utility  work,  municipal  road  repair,  and 
maintenance.  Contractors  are guided  by the Manual  for Uniform  Traffic  Devices  (MUTCD)  and 
Department  regulations.  In section  6c.01,  the manual  describes  the process  for temporary  traffic  control  
plans.   
 
In the AGC  America  survey,  it was clear  that one method  for reducing incidents  is the enforcement of 
traffic  violations,  and right  now  that isn’t  possible  on sites  as I described.  In the graphic  below  from  the 
survey  responses,  both  tougher  laws  and stricter enforcement are clearly  supported  by the industry.   
 
1 AGC America Northeast Work Zone Survey Question 1  
2 AGC America Northeast  Work Zone Survey Question 2  
3 AGC America Northeast Work Zone Survey Question 3  
4 AGC American Northeast Work Zone Survey Question 7  
5 https://www.maineturnpike.com/News/Recent -News/Work -Zones -are-a-Sign-to-Slow -Down.aspx  
6 National Work Zone Safety Information Clearinghouse Fatal Cra sh Data  
188 Whitten Road, Augusta  ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
 
 
In 2021,  a construction  worker7 in Saco  was hit when  two cars collided  while  traveling  through  a work  
zone  that was not regulated  by a speed  reduction.  While  the site was properly  marked  by traffic  barrels  
and signs, speed  was not enforceable.  While  she survived,  she sustained  serious  life-threatening injuries  
as a result  of the incident , which  highlighted  the challenges  with in our current  law.   
 
Work  zone  safety  is an ongoing industry  and agency  discussion.  Both  Maine  DOT  and the MTA  have  
frequently  met with  AGC  Maine  and other  industry  partners  to advance  the use of equipment,  lighting,  
signage,  and work  zone  design  to improve  safety  conditions.  We’ve  also partnered  to increase  public  
awareness  through  earned  and paid  media  along  with  increased  enforcement  strategies  when  
necessary.  AGC  Maine  provides  annual  training  for work  zone  planning for supervisors  that covers  the 
MUTCD  and general safety  practices.  Our goal  is to ensure  that everyone  can perform  their  work  and 
arrive  home  safely.  I encourage  the Committee  to help  us achieve  our goal  and pass  this important  bill. I 
am happy  to answer  any questions.   
 
7 https://www.pressherald.com/2021/08/20/construction -worker -hit-seriously- injured -by-suv-in-saco/  

