Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Support for
LD 31 - An Act to Allow the Commissioner of Transportation to Reduce Speed Limits at Construction 
Sites with Input from Municipalities and Utilities
February 23, 2023
Sen. Chipman, Rep. Williams and distinguished member of the Committee on Transportation, my 
name is Rebecca Graham, and I am providing testimony in support for LD 31, An Act to Allow the 
Commissioner of Transportation to Reduce Speed Limits at Construction Sites with Input from 
Municipalities and Utilities, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association (MMA). 
MMA represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature and receives its 
policy positions at the direction of our 70 member Legislative Policy Committee made up of elected and 
appointed municipal officials elected by their peers to serve from each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. As 
such, the positions of the Association are reflective of the balance necessary to achieve state policy goals 
for the impacts of legislation on communities of varying resources and populations. 
To that end, MMA’s LPC is broadly in favor of a consultative process directed in section 2-A of 
the proposed legislation that would allow the temporary reduction of speed limits in construction areas, 
promote communication between utility engineers and the municipality they are operating in, and enhance 
public safety. While the immediate construction zone is of paramount concern, sometimes projects also 
impact adjacent roadways that drivers seek to avoid traffic delays. This can push traffic onto less traveled 
roads at higher speeds and in greater volumes as well. To mitigate the potential impact on adjacent 
residential roads, officials ask that you also consider inserting language at the end of the first sentence 
under 2-A that reads “or adjacent public ways that may be impacted by the project.”
As not all municipalities have full time staff or police departments, often relying on county or 
contracted agencies, and volunteers to provide vital functions, officials also ask that the routine and 
technical guidance developed from this process account for these communities first in the rulemaking to 
implement this policy. This will allow any adopted speed limit change policy to be efficient, enforceable, 
and achievable for all utilities, and construction project managers regardless of the municipalities they 
operate in. 
Thank you for your consideration of LD 31, and I will be happy to answer any additional 
questions you may have and be available for the work session if desired.
