2/26/23
Good Morning. 
My name is Dr. Robert Zakrzewski (Zock-shref-ski) and I first want to apologize for not being 
able to provide my testimony to you in person, but I work as a psychologist in several schools in 
the greater Bangor area and am not able to take time off to personally attend this hearing. 
Thus, I am providing this written statement in hopes you will consider it when determining your 
stance on this bill, ME LD128. 
I have been a resident of Maine since 2005, and I am also a veteran of the United States Army, 
having served my country as an active-duty soldier from 1987-91, and as an Inactive Ready 
Reserve soldier until 1995. 
Over my early years as a soldier and my ongoing public service as a psychologist, I have worked 
hard to find myself in the extremely fortunate position to be able to own numerous vehicles, 
some of which are only able to be driven in the late spring to early fall as they are not made for 
Maine’s winter roads.
So, a few months ago when I went to my town office to register my latest vehicle, my fourth, I 
was politely denied my request for another Veteran’s plate, being told I could not have any 
more than 3. While I was disappointed, I certainly understood it was something not within their 
control but was rather a State matter. Thus, I reached out to my local senator, Mr. Joseph 
Baldacci, who graciously heard my request and agreed to take up the matter and present it to 
you today. 
I want to be clear that I certainly understand there was probably a reason why the plate limit 
was originally set. However, I also want to make sure you understand the pride I, and my fellow 
veterans have had, in having served our country, as well as being able to display that pride via 
the plates we put on our vehicles. Having veteran plates on my current vehicles has allowed me 
to meet other veterans across the country, and I’d like to be able to continue to make those 
social connections with my other vehicles as well. So, I’m humbly asking you to please consider 
raising the limit on the number of Veteran plates Maine residents and veterans are able to 
purchase, particularly knowing that while we do not necessarily drive the vehicles year-round, 
we are still the primary register/driver.
Thank you for taking the time to listen to my testimony and I will respectively accept whatever 
decision is made today. 
Robert Zakrzewski, PhD
17 Stoneybrook Way
Hermon, ME 04401
207-852-6150
Dr. Robert.Zakrzewski@gmail.com
