*3" 
_-1 ,_ STATE OF MAINE 
’f;;-* .;,*§,~,- HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE 
11“ AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
C)ffiL‘cI (I07) ZS7-l-I40 
Al\/IYBARATA, 3 
(en; <:07»333-1&1? 
ASSIST \\T HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADER - Fax: (Z07) 2 87- l -I-I9 
E - M 2: i It An1§.Ar:1lai{i l¢‘ __’lSlI1lllI ‘C.l111]l1c gm 
May 9, 2023
. 
A Testimony in Support of L.D. 1747 
' 
“An Act to Return the Sales Tax Rate to 5 Percent” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Distinguished members of the Committee on Taxation, my 
name , is Amy Arata and I represent House District 104 which includes New Gloucester and part of Gray. 
Sales taxes are among the most regressive of taxes. In fact, the IRS has a discussion explaining how sales 
taxes disproportionately impact the poor on their “understanding taxes” website for students. 
When the tax rate was increased from 5% to 5.5% as a part of a budget compromise in 2013, a promise 
was made to return it back to 5% in two years. I have included the language of part M of the approved 
budget bill from 2013 as well as some news coverage. As the article by Steve Mistler states, there wasa 
lot of budget drama at that time, and unfortunately, the budget made it cost more to buy goods. The letter 
to the editor in 2015 reminds us that businesses were told that the sales tax would go back to 5% after 
June 30, 2015. I am offering this bill because I believe that the goverrnnent should keep its promise. With 
excess revenues and high inﬂation, the time is right for tax relief. Maine is frequently ranked as having 
among the highest tax burdens in the nation, and we can do better. 
This bill would decrease the sales tax rate from 5.5% to 5.25% beginning October 1, 2023, and further 
decrease the rate to 5% beginning July 1, 2024. This bill would not change the rate of the sales tax 
imposed on prepared food, rentals of lodging, rental vehicles, liquor, the service provider tax, or any other 
taxes. The bill language lists these other taxes although they are unchanged, and I hope this doesn’t cause 
confusion as you read the bill. 
The intent of the gradual step-down in rates was to make it easier for the state budget to absorb the 
expense. However, in light of the concerns raised by the Department of Administrative and Financial 
Services regarding implementation by MRS, I am happy to propose an amendment to implement the full 
sales tax reduction to 5% elfective January 1, 2024. 
A small sales tax cut isn’t going to make a big splash in the newspaper or guarantee anybody’s re- 
election. It’s not exciting, but it’s a step in the right direction. It’s a good opportunity for compromise 
between the parties. This tax reduction will help those with low incomes the most, especially in light of3 
high inﬂation and rising prices. I urge you to fulﬁll the promise that was made in 2013 and pass LD 1747 
as amended. » 
Respectfully, 
Amy Arata _ 
State Representative
Budget drama done, it's time for details; Mainers will get some relief on 
property and income taxes, but also face a higher sales tax. - Correction 
Aggended 
Portland Press Herald (Maine) 
June 27,2013 Thursday 
Final Edition 
l* Correction Appended 
Copyright 2013 MaineToday Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved 
Section: FRONT; Pg. A7 
Length: 629 words 
Byline: STEVE MISTLER State House Bureau— 
Dateline: AUGUSTA 
Body _ f 
The Legislature's passage Wednesday of a $6.3 billion budget for the two years starting July 1 ended the politics of 
the budget. 
Up next: the impact. 
The budget includes a temporary increase in the sales tax and the meals-and-lodging tax, so it will affect residents 
and nonresidents. it may also lead to higher property taxes in communities around the state. 
In exchange, many Mainers will see reduced income taxes. About 70,000 will have no income tax liability at all. 
The reduction stems from Republicans ‘ resistance to rolling back signiﬁcant income tax cuts that were passed in 
2011 - and paid for in the budget that passed Wednesday. 
Democrats and Republicans offset the tax cuts with other initiatives. One increases the sales tax from 5 percent to 
5.5 percent for two years. The increase is projected to produce $146 million in state revenue. 
it also means it will cost more to buy goods. And some sales-tax exemptions will disappear. 
Newspapers and other periodicals will lose a sales-tax exemption, worth $5.9 million over the biennium. 
The budget calls for a commission to study the state's sales-tax exemptions and ﬁnd $40 million in savings. 
Dining out or staying in a hotel or lodge in Maine will cost more. The budget includes an increase in the meals-and- 
lodging tax for the next two years, from 7 percent to 8 percent. 
While the 2011 income tax cuts will remain, wealthy Mainers will encounter limits on deductions. The budget limits 
deductions, to generate $65 million in state revenue. 
The budget reduces revenue sharing to Maine cities and towns by $75 million. Gov. Paul LePage proposed cutting 
$200 million but the Legislature restored $125 million of that. The reduction still will force property-tax increases or 
service reductions in many Maine communities.
5.5 percent sales tax was supposed to be temporary 
Kennebec Journal (Augusta, Maine) 
March 15, 2015 Sunday 
Copyright 2015 ProQuesl Information and Learning 
All Rights Reserved 
Copyright 2015 Kennebec Joumal 
Section: Pg. 1.A; ISSN: 0745-2039 
Length: 260 words 
§°d¥ __ -_ 2. 0_ 
ABSTRACT 
Between the state and government, all business owners are expected to collect the sales tax, state withholding, 
federal withholding, child support, etc., all with no remuneration to the business owner in any way. 
FULL TEXT 
l recently saw in the newspaper an article about the state sales tax being considered for an increase from 5.5 
percent to 6.5 percent. 
l have a letter that the state sent to all businesses, dated Sept. 1, 2013, that says effective Oct. 30, 2013, the sales 
tax would increase "temporarily" from 5.0 percent to 5.5 percent. That increase would be in effect until June 30, 
2015, at which time it would go back to 5.0 percent. 
What happened? Doesn't anyone from the state remember that letter? 
It is hard enough doing business in Maine, where it seems that the state manages to come up with many taxes to 
load on to the business owners. No wonder so many businesses, large and small, give up and move to a more 
friendly business state. 
Between the state and government, all business owners are expected to collect the sales tax, state withholding, 
federal withholding, child support, etc., all with no remuneration to the business owner in any way. But if we ﬁle our 
return one day late, the state or the government is right there to charge us a penalty with interest for being late. 
The same article about the tax increase stated that all auto repairs would remain taxed at the new rate of 6.5 
percent. That is incorrect. Tax is paid only on the parts used in a repair. The labor is not taxed. 
Credit: 
ILLUSTRATION 
Dominick Rinaldi Sr. 
Skowhegan 
Load-Date: March 16, 2015
5.5 percent sales tax was supposed to be temporary 
End of Document 
Page 2 of2
l
2
3
5
6
7
8
9 
10 
ll 
12 
13 
I4 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 COMMITTEE AMENDMENT “A“ to H.P. 1079, L.D. 1509 
P/4!?/’l 
This Part increases the tax on sales of prepared food, lodging and liquor sold in bars 
and restaurants and similar licensed establishments to 8% and the general sales tax to 
5.5% from October l, 2013 to June 30, 2015. The amount transferred to the Tourism 
Marketing Promotion Fund during this period is 5% of the 8% tax. 
1?-ART. N 
This Part provides that the sales tax applies to the sale of products transferred 
electronically in this State if the product would be subject to the sales tax if sold ina 
nondigital physical form. 
PARTO 
This Part does the following. 
1. It removes the provision for funding from the Maine Budget Stabilization Fund 
certain payments for adjustments to state valuation for sudden and severe disruption of 
municipal valuation. 
2. It speciﬁes the date by which a claim for adjustment must be ﬁled. 
3. It amends the provision setting out what constitutes a sudden and severe 
disruption. It clariﬁes and speciﬁes the procedure for a rnLmicipality's ﬁling of a claim 
and the review and determination of that claim by the State Tax Assessor. It provides that 
obsolescence remains as a qualifying cause of sudden and severe disruption in municipal 
valuation if it is functional or economic obsolescence not due to short-temi market 
volatility. It clariﬁes that relief is available when the cause of the loss was not reasonably 
determinable until the prior tax year. 
4. It provides the procedure for ﬁling a petition for relief. It clariﬁes what 
information must be included in the appraisal report and speciﬁes that the report must be 
prepared by a qualiﬁed professional appraiser meeting speciﬁed requirements. It also 
expressly allows the State Tax Assessor to ask for and obtain the previous 3 years’ worth 
of assessing records with respect to the property subject to the sudden and severe 
adjustment request to ftuther verify the adequacy of the application. 
5. It requires the State Tax Assessor to issue a written decision approving or denying 
a municipality's requested relief including the ﬁndings of fact that are the basis of the 
decision. It provides that a denial of a claim for adjustment is the final agency action 
subject to review in Superior Court. It requires the State Tax Assessor to provide a copy 
of the denial letter to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction 
over taxation matters. 
6. it requires the Commissioner of Education and the Treasurer of State to apply 
adjustments for sudden and severe disruption to the following ﬁscal year for purposes of 
calculating educational funding obligations and municipal revenue sharing. 
7. It requires a taxpayer seeking a business equipment tax exemption and owning 
property exceeding 2% of the total valuation of the municipality to provide annually to 
the municipality income and expense information that is sufﬁcient for the assessor to 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT
