.3» STATE or MAiNE 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
54 STATE HOUSE STATION .'
__ 
‘UM; AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 0054 
Laura A. Fortman Janet T. Mills 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Michael Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards, 
Maine Department of Labor 
In Support of LD 14, 
An Act to Simplify an Assessment Notice Requirement 
Under Department of Labor Laws 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, Tuesday, February 7, 2023 
Good morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing. l am Michael Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards for the Maine Department of 
Labor (Department). I am here today to speak on behalf of the Department in support of LD 14, An Act to 
Simplify an Assessment Notice Requirement Under Department of Labor Laws. 
26 MRSA §61 establishes a Special Revenue Fund for the Bureau of Labor Standards to carry out the safety 
educational and training objectives outlined in 26 MRSA §42. This funding comes from an annual assessment of 
licensed insurers and self-insured employers based on their Workers’ Compensation costs. Subsection §3 
currently requires the Bureau of Labor Standards to notify these licensed insurers and self-insured employers of 
the annual assessment via certified mail.7 
In recent decades, emerging technology, as well as various changes within the Department and State 
government, have rendered that process rather archaic and impractical for all concerned. For most of those we 
assess, email has become the preferred means of invoicing and direct deposit the preferred means of paying. If 
LD 14 passes we plan to quickly implement the necessary changes to allow these modern methods to be used, 
though the mail option will still be available to any who prefer it. 
The changes proposed in LD 14 will allow the Bureau to modernize our system in order to improve efficiency and 
provide better service to our constituents. We urge you to vote in favor of LD 14. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have now or ata 
future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth. 
PHONE: (207) 623-7900 A 
TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-5292 
'l‘he Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
