To whom it may concern, 
My name is Alesa Glazier.  I was diagnosed with stage III ovarian cancer in 2016 and went on to develop 
a secondary form of cancer (myelodysplastic syndrome) in 2020, resulting from my treatment.  I am 
currently receiving hospice care services and would like to offer my testimonial supporting the 
legalization of psilocybin for medicinal purposes. 
I first learned about the benefits of psilocybin for people who have terminal illness in a support group 
for advanced cancer patients that I participate in.  One of the other members who had been 
experiencing a lot of fear about dying came to group one day a changed woman----her entire demeanor 
was different: she was much more peaceful, calm and smiling.  She shared that she had taken a 
treatment using psilocybin under the care of a trained guide, and that her fear of dying had completely 
vanished.  
From there, I began to do some research about the benefits of psilocybin.  I had grown up in a time 
when there was a lot of messaging about the danger of psychedelics, and initially I felt some fear and 
hesitation.  The more I researched, however, the more I was convinced about the benefits of psilocybin 
treatment for people in my situation.  I learned that there were (and are) multiple clinical trials 
happening at reputable institutions like Johns Hopkins that have positively demonstrated significant 
benefits of psilocybin treatment with cancer patients, including decreased depression, loss of fear about 
death and dying, and improved quality of life.  I also learned that there are minimal side effects and risks 
to this natural form of treatment which has been used for Millenia in indigenous cultures.  
Before my own treatment, I was feeling significant anxiety about the ultimate unknown---death.  I was 
afraid that what I wanted to believe (that there is something beautiful on the other side) might not be 
true.  I was afraid that the journey might be dark, frightening and painful.  I was afraid of suffering.  
While it is hard to put into words what happened during my own treatment which was also with a 
trained guide, I can tell you that I emerged from the experience with a complete knowing that there is 
nothing to fear.  That experience gave me a vision and a deep knowing that will carry me all the way 
through the rest of my life, leaving me without fear, and it brought me a deep sense of comfort and 
peace that remains with me today, nearly six months later.  
I personally know seven other people with advanced cancer who have also tried psilocybin, and while all 
their journeys were different, the outcome has been the same: to a person, each one is no longer afraid 
of death and has a lasting sense of peace about it. 
I hope that Maine will be amongst the states that are leading the way to ensure greater quality of life for 
people who are living with advanced and terminal illnesses by legalizing psilocybin.” 
 
Alesa Glazier 
PO Box 143 
South Gardiner, Me 04359 
