Bill Holt
Westbrook
LD 1914
May 14, 2023
Re: LD1914 An Act to Enact the Maine Psilocybin Health Access Act
Position: Support
Dear Senator Hickman, Representative Supika, and the esteemed members of the 
Committee on
Veterans and Legal Affairs:
My name is Bill Holt. I am a patient of an osteopathic physician who has 13 years of 
clinical experience
treating thousands of patients with refractory medical and psychiatric conditions using
cannabis
and other experimental treatments like psilocybin-containing mushrooms. He is the 
owner and
medical director of Integr8 Health, a private practice in Falmouth, an internationally 
renowned
expert and educator in the field of medical cannabis, author of several peer-reviewed 
scientific
journal articles and a textbook for clinicians,. I myself, am a  resident of Westbrook, 
and a husband and father of
1adult son. I would highly recommend  as a patient, and
I strongly encourage you to support LD1914 which will provide legal access to a 
highly-effective
and comparably-safe medical intervention for those who have not responded to 
conventional
treatments. It is especially timely and important to support this legislation because a 
rapidly
growing number of patients in Maine are using psilocybin-containing mushrooms and
products.
In this testimony I will focus on the safety of psilocybin therapy at the individual and 
public
health level and my observations of patients who are illegally using psilocybin 
currently.
Personal and Public Health Safety of Psilocybin:
Psilocybin has an acceptable risk profile and is as safe or safer than most medications 
used to
treat psychiatric symptoms. The most common side effects of psilocybin therapy 
include
transient moderate increases in blood pressure and heart rate, nausea, dizziness, 
weakness,
tremor, drowsiness, yawning, paresthesia, blurred vision, increased tendon reflexes, 
physical and
psychological discomfort, and transient episodes of psychological distress. In many 
cases, the
uncomfortable aspects of the experience are an inherent part of the therapeutic 
process.
The most devastating and long-lasting adverse effects of psilocybin reported in the 
scientific
literature are hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (HPPD) and prolonged 
psychosis.
Interestingly, these severe adverse effects have not occurred in clinical trials of 
psilocybin,
according to a 2020 systematic review and meta-analysis. 1 This is likely because in 
the trials,
psilocybin is administered in a therapeutic setting and with professional support, 
factors similar
to the conditions described in LD1914 which are intended to increase the probability 
of a
positive outcome. 

