1 
20362799.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Support to L.D. 1914,  
An Act to Enact the Maine Psilocybin Health Access Act
May 16, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Charles Rumsey. I am 
the Chief of the Cumberland Police Department, and the President of the Maine 
Chiefs of Police Association. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine 
Chiefs of Police Association in opposition to LD 1914.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the concept draft bill summary,  
This bill enacts the Maine Psilocybin Health Access Act, which establishes 
a regulatory framework in order to provide psilocybin products to 
individuals in Maine who are 21 years of age or older.  
The Maine Chiefs oppose enactment of LD 1914 for two main reasons.  
First, it would create an entirely new regulatory process that would be pushed on 
the towns without the option to opt in. Maine is still grappling with the unresolved 
issues in the adult and medical use for cannabis and adding a new substance would 
complicate things too much.  
Second, it would allow for personal use of psilocybin. We do not take any position 
on the clinical and therapeutic benefits of psilocybin but we do not think that there 
is enough information out there for the public to begin to safely consume it without 
guidance of a medical professional.  
For these reasons, we would ask you to oppose LD 1914 and vote ought not to pass 
on this bill. On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank 
the members for your work on this Committee.  
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
