David Shields
Nobleboro
LD 1914
My name is David Shields, a retired resident of Nobleboro. I am writing to share my 
concerns about Maine's prohibitions that preclude my access to psilocybin to treat my 
chronic cluster headaches.
I am testifying on how these prohibitions make it impossible for me to take advantage
of what appears to be a possible treatment for this debilitating malady.  My cluster 
headaches began 2 years ago, and since then, my quality of life has greatly 
deteriorated.
My wife and I recently moved to Maine to enjoy time with our family, especially our 
young granddaughter.  But during the downturn portion of my chronic cluster 
headache cycles, which normally last for months at a time, I cannot function normally
because of extreme pain and crippling fatigue .  As a result, I cannot participate in 
family activities.  Additionally, a small consulting business that I started, shortly after 
retirement, has become almost impossible to continue with.  
I want to share my story with the Council to explain how cluster headaches have 
greatly diminished my quality of life. My wife and I were diligent about saving for 
retirement so we could travel, spend more time with family and take advantage of 
learning programs for seniors.  My consulting business was also adding a great deal to
my quality of life because it kept my mind sharp and the extra income allowed us to 
spend time together doing what my wife and I enjoyed.
I am sharing this story with the Council to help you understand how debilitating 
chronic cluster headaches have been, not only for me, but for my family as well.  
During the first 7 years of retirement, I felt that I was contributing to the quality of my
family members' lives.  I also was getting great satisfaction helping my clients 
improve their businesses by sharing my years of experience investigating and 
commercializing new business opportunities.
Traditional treatments for chronic cluster headaches are insufficient.  While 
investigating other possible medical solutions, I learned about testing programs for 
psilocybin, which appeared to show that taking psilocybin may offer a solution to my 
suffering.  But current regulations are making it impossible for me to see if it works.  
This is very frustrating to me because what may hold the promise for a life-changing 
treatment, allowing me to go back to a normal, healthy life, is currently out of reach.
I am very hopeful that the council will give greater consideration to changing current 
regulations to make psilocybin available to cluster headache sufferers. Based on 
everything I've read, as well as what my doctors have told me, psilocybin could allow 
me to return to a normal life.
I would like to thank the chair of this council for reading my testimony. Your 
consideration of this testimony and my suggested solution is very much appreciated.
