Jessica Cooepr
Norway
LD 1914
Respected members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee, 
I am a mother, artist, worker-owner of two cooperatives, executive director of a 
creative non-profit, and engaged citizen in my town and the state of Maine. I am 
submitting written testimony in favor of LD 1914
The brief personal story that I would like to share is in regards to the inadequacy of 
our health care systems to address mental health in a complete and whole way and its 
impact on my life. 
One of the most challenging relationships of my life lasted 7 years. As a young person
at the time I had no tools to support this person with their severe mental health issues, 
issues with addiction, and self harm. Time and time again, the mental health system 
failed this person who needed safe guided work through deep personal traumas. This 
constant struggle to support this person had a huge negative impact on myself and 
would have had even deeper negative impacts on our child. Walking away from 
someone who was causing so much harm but needed so much support was both 
extremely difficult and also probably spared myself and my child from a lifetime of 
trauma. I regret that there were not better systems in place to help this person at that 
time.
Evidence based research and movements to legalize Psilocybin in other states have 
helped countless individuals to successfully work through their traumas and turn their 
lives around.
The shift towards safer and broader systems of support will help to move our 
communities in a more resilient and positive trajectory. Maine can and should be 
leading in this regard. There is increasing support and resources, networks and 
organizations, all dedicated to helping people in our communities get safer access to 
better help and I hope to see this bill LD1914 pass to continue moving this work 
forward, for the sake of young families in our state dealing with the impacts of trauma
and mental health issues. 
Thank you,
Jessica Cooper
Norway, Maine
