Lena Ramsay
Mariaville
LD 1914
15 May, 02023
Senator Hickman, Senate Chair
Representative Supica, House Chair
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0100
Re: LD 1914 - An Act to Enact the Maine Psilocybin Health Access Act
Position: In support
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished Members of the 
Committee,
My name is Lena Ramsay and Im a veteran living in Mariaville, Maine. I am in 
support of you approving LD 1914. Psilocybin is transforming the lives of so many 
veterans who have been resistant of the traditional treatments offered through the VA.
So many of us come back from deployment experiencing severe PTSD, depression 
and severe anxiety only to be given a combination of medications in attempt to ease 
symptoms, when in fact these medications have side effects that make things worse. 
With psilocybin this is not the case. I have witnessed so many veterans find not only 
immediate, long lasting relief from their symptoms that they have been able to reduce 
or completely stop taking medications completely. This must be considered! Not only 
will it save the VA an enormous of amount of money in providing medications to 
veterans that clearly do not work, it will save lives!!
For a veteran, such as myself, to come back from Afghanistan completely devastated, 
with no hope and struggling each and every day to just survive, psilocybin not only 
gives hope but restores the desire to want to live again. Sadly without the approval of 
LD 1914 many of us have to fear, on top of everything else, that we will be caught 
taking a natural medication that works. How can this be in the current world that we 
live in? With great respect, I ask you to consider this fact. What if it was a member of 
your family that was given a treatment for a severe condition that was working after 
years and years of trying other treatments but you were told that if you were caught 
you would face an unsympathetic legal system. What a horrible situation to be in. 
Many veterans and families of veterans are in this situation. Watching friends and 
family suffer but not being able to get them the treatment and support that really 
works is agony.  However, by approving LD 1914 you have the chance to change 
this!! 
Its time that we give the many veterans in our great state of Maine the chance to heal 
and have hope again.  It is a shame that this has not happened already. That many of 
us even fear writing a letter to you today. It is a shame that we have fear of gaining 
access to a treatment that works. What we need now is support from you. 
Thank you greatly for your consideration in this matter.
