PO Box 7860 
,1’ Portland, ME 04112 
* www.ac|umaine org 
AMERIUAR awn LIBERTIES umuu 
Maine ~ 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought To Pass - LD 1914 
An Act To Enact the Maine Psilocybin Health Access Act 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ONA 
VETERANSAND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
May 15, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization 
committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties in Maine. On behalf of our 
members, I urge you to support LD 1914, as it Will help protect the lives of many in 
Maine who struggle with substance use and mental and behavioral health 
disorders.- 
One of the many detrimental consequences of the War on Drugs has been 
government interference with the exploration of alternative drug therapies that 
could help people with many debilitating conditions like depression, anxiety, and 
substance use disorder. If enacted, this bill will create safety standards for trained 
facilitators to oversee psilocybin therapy in licensed facilities and approve licenses 
for facilitators, service center operators, and producers of psilocybin mushrooms and 
products. The bill does not allow home use of psilocybin, and does‘ not allow 
marketing of any psilocybin products. If this bill is enacted, people in Maine may 
consume psilocybin only “under the supervision of a psilocybin service faci1itator. ”1 
I 
In a state where lack of treatment for substance use disorders killed more 
than 700 people last year, psilocybin therapy is particularly promising. Veteran 
1 
LD 1914, p. 2, 6 (“A client may participate in an administration session only ata 
psilocybin service center, unless the department authorizes a psilocybin service 
facilitator to provide psilocybin services to the client at another location ”).
psilocybin researcher William A. Richards, currently a psychologist at the Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, writes that “[t]here is an abundance of 
published studies that strongly suggest that the use of psychedelic substances may 
be of significant value in the treatment of numerous mental health conditions. ” 
Research has shown psilocybin to be extremely promising to treat opioid use 
disorder, alcoholism, and other substance use disorders? This committee, and this 
legislature, owe it to the thousands dead, and the many hundreds who might die 
from lack of treatment supports, to make this therapy available. 
This bill will save lives. It would ensure that Maine takes a very careful 
approach to the legalization of psilocybin. We urge you to vote ought to pass. 
2 William A. Richards, Sacred Knowledge: Psychedelics and Religious Experiences, p. 139 
(Columbia University Press: New York 2015) (from chapter titled “Psychedelic Frontiers in 
Medicine ”). 
3 
Albert Garcia-Romeu, Alan K. Davis ct al, Persisting Reductions in Cannabis, Opioid, and 
Stimulant Misuse After Naturalistic Psychedelic Use." An Online Survey, Front. Psychiatry (Jan. 
22, 2020), https://doi.org/ 10.3389/fpsyt.20l9.00955, available at 
https://wwwfrontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnsyt.2019.00955/full.
