 
 
 
 
Maine Depar tment of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissione r 
 
 
May 15, 2023  
 
Senator Craig Hickman , Chair  
Representative Laura Supica , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1 914, An Act To Enact the Maine Psilocybin Health Access  Act 
 
Dear Senator Hickman , Representative Supica , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Veterans and Legal Affairs:  
 
Maine CDC has several conce rns with the proposals in LD 1914 , An Act To Enact the Maine 
Psilocybin Services Act , and appreciates the opportunity to provide those to the Committee. The 
Department has had little time to analyze this bill and the potential impact given its late printin g. 
Without more time prior to a public hearing, the Department is commenting largely on the 
concept of  legalizing and regulating psilocybin.  We hope the committee will consider  our and 
other concerns carefully before moving any version of this bill forward  and, at minimum, carry 
this bill over for additional work in the second regular session.  
 
LD 1914 wo uld require the Department of Health and Human Services  (DHHS or the 
Department)  to develop and administer a regulatory framework for access to psilocybin  products 
by adults in Maine. In  response to  the iteration of this bill in the 130th Legislature (LD 1 582), 
Maine CDC expressed concerns  that the proposal would establish  Psilocybin Service Centers 
that would function like recreational use facilities rather than medical treatment facilities, put 
limitations on the Department’s ability to regulate safe use,  and did not incorporate sufficient 
behavioral and public health inpu t to the structure.  While we believe proponents have sought to 
address the  second and third concerns by putting this program under the authority of DHHS and 
delegating some discretion to DHHS for the program, there is still not a sufficient body of 
evidenc e available to the public , nor does Maine have the necessary capacity or expertise , to 
justify develop ing this perhaps promising but early and emerging treatment .  
 
The Department continu es to have concerns about the lack of guidance  around who can and 
should use psiloc ybin therapeutically, and what conditions it can be used to treat. During 
deliberations for LD 1582, Maine CDC expressed concern over language in the bill expressly 
prohibit ing the Department from setting parameters around the medical conditions that quali fy a 
patient to receive psilocybin. This language is also in LD 1914 (p. 5, Lines 30-31). Without 
clinical indications or oversight, Psilocybin Service Centers would functio n more like 
recreational use facilities.  
 
 
 
 While recreational use facilities could  potentially offer some aspects of harm reduction for the 
use of substances that can have harmful effects if taken in unsupervised settings, they should not 
be considered cl inical treatment. If this is indeed a clinical treatment, it would be more 
appropri ately administered in a medical office, with appropriate oversight. This bill does not 
establish a manner in which patients with mental and behavioral health conditions coul d receive 
clinical treatment for their health conditions.  
 
With respect to the  proposed Maine Psilocybin Advisory Board, the Director of Maine CDC is 
an ex officio member. While we do not support the bill, were it to move forward we strongly 
recommend that  there also be a position on the Board for someone from the Office of Behavior al 
Health.  
 
While there may be early evidence for the use of psilocybin to assist in treatment of certain 
disorders, this research is ongoing and there are not currently clinica l practice guidelines or Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) -approved treatments to ensure s afe and appropriate use of the 
therapy. That said, there is a growing body of literature on this potential therapy, and we strongly 
advise that Maine let the FDA app roval process run its course before enacting a regulatory 
structure for its administration and use in Maine .  
 
 
Sincerely,  
   
Nancy Beardsley  
Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  

