LD1914 Testimonial 
15 May 2023 
Senator Hickman, Senate Chair 
Representative Supica, House Chair _ 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
100 State House Station 
Augusta Maine 04333 
RE: LD1914 - An Act to Enact the Maine Psiiocybin Health Access Act 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished Members of the Committee. 
My name is Nicolas Hamlin. l am native to Portland Maine where l lived until ljoined the US 
Army in November 2000. I served for over a decade with multiple deployments to the Middle 
East in support of OEF/OIF. l have lead Soldiers in both garrison operations as well as missions 
down range. l stand before you today as living proof of the healing abilities Psiiocybin has to 
offer and to plead for the approval of LD1914. 
During the Vietnam War we knew it as Battle Fatigue. Before that in WWII it was known as 
Combat Stress Reaction, WWI, Shell Shock and going back further to the Civil War we rather 
beautifully called it, Soldiers Heart. Today we know this as Post Traumatic Stress Disorder or 
PTSD for short. Our knowledge about mental health has come along way since the Civil War and 
today we have the opportunity to do something that would have helped so many in the past, if 
only they had access. One Marine of past, my father, never was able to stop the war within. 
Upon honorable completion of his time in the Marines he immediately fathered two children 
almost back-to-back, yet took his life before my sister was born. He suffered in silence without 
all the support that Maine has to offer today. After completing my time in the military, l was left 
with extreme PTSD, anxiety and my own demons. l have used Psiiocybin in the past to calm my 
soul. l don't know how to clearly explain the lasting self-confidence and peaceful outlook I was 
able to achieve. This has helped me and many others maintain productive lifestyles. l wish that 
psilocybin as a treatment option be available to those that will benefit from it. 
I plead with you to please support and approve LD1914. Thank you for your time. 
v/r 
Nicolas Hamlin 
US Army Veteran 
200 Fosters Point Rd 
West Bath Maine 04033 
njhamlin@gmail.com
