 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
Neither for Nor Against  
 
LD 1 914, An Act to Enact the Maine Psilocybin Health Access Act  
 
May 15, 2023  
 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Lambert, and I am providing testimony neither for nor against  LD 1914 
on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association’s (MMA) elected 70 -member Legislative Policy Committee 
(LPC). For reference, the LPC provides direction to the advocacy team at MMA and establishes the position 
on bills of municipal interest.    
The Association’s policy committ ee has not yet taken a position on LD 1914 . However, MMA 
submitted testimony on this topic during the last legislative session  and were strongly opposed. My 
testimony presented today is neither for nor against but would likely change to  opposition  once the LPC 
has had an opportunity to discuss it at their next meeting . 
Currently, Maine is still grappling with the unresolved statutory issues in  the adult and medical use 
cannabis markets  and adding another controversially regulated business would be reckless at best. Adding 
to th e confusion, L D 1914 significantly restricts  local regulatory authority and does not offer  an option to 
opt-in to allow these business es to operate within their borders, as has been done with cannabis 
businesses.  
Before venturing down a path of legalizing a new industry, local leaders strongly recommend that 
the Legislature settle all medical and adult use cannabis issues. Given the number of proposed bills this 
session relating to cannabis, it’s clear there is still much work to be done. With the stigma surrounding its use is still alive, it might be best for  the committee to continue this work to develop a well -constructed 
cannabis market to use as a model for psilocybin in the future.  
If this measure were to pass , municipal officials would strongly urge the committee to consider the 
respect for your residents and their ability to regulate activities within municipal boundaries.  
Thank you for  your time and for  considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  
 
