7&4]/)6/ ﬁg‘ (207) s70-1_as1 _ _ 
, j j } www.riverbirdcl|n|c.com 
/‘-'!/l‘/i¢v{Al‘ \_/ﬁ'/2'0 1"‘?/11‘ 231 York St. d Portland, ME 04102 GOOD MEDICINE COLLECTIVE 
May 14, 2023 
Maine Department of Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Re: LD 1914 -An Act To Enact the Maine Psilocybin Health Access Act 
Position: In Favor 
Dear members of the Veterans & Legal Affairs Committee, 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on behalf of the Riverbird Clinic and 
the Good Medicine Collective in regards to Bill LD 1914. These two organizations have 
been offering legal psychedelic assisted therapy in Portland since 2019. We provide 
mental health services to people in Maine with conditions such as refractory depression, 
post-traumatic stress and others that have been particularly difficult for conventional 
medicine to treat. 
Before co-founding the Riverbird Clinic, l worked at the Maine Veterans Home in 
Scarborough and was acutely aware of how devastating post traumatic stress and 
opioid use disorder was for those who served our country. The pain of one younger 
veteran in particular has been with me as l worked with other compassionate healthcare 
providers to offer legal psychedelic therapy in Maine. We’ve made notable progress, 
but at this time our clinic can only offer the pharmaceutical drug Ketamine for its 
therapeutic services, which has a variety of limitations. 
We need more proven psychedelic therapy options to be legally available within Maine 
as we become increasingly aware of more Mainers who are using psilocybin 
mushrooms in underground settings to address particularly challenging conditions such 
as severe post-traumatic stress. These people who are seeking healing are afraid to 
openly discuss their illegal use of psilocybin because they fear prosecution. This fear 
propagates riskier use and even more concerning, it can further traumatization. 
As evidence continues to emerge from multiple high quality clinical research and 
epidemiological studies, it’s becoming more clear that the medical risks of psilocybin are 
minimal compared to the social risks for people who are working with these medicines 
within a legal system that penalizes their use. This emerging evidence also shows that 
the original reasons why these mushrooms were made illegal were erroneously 
based. Mushrooms are not addictive, don't cause psychosis and have a clear health 
benefit when used in settings that's aren’t operating in the shadows of fear. 
Finally, a large study of the general population within the US showed that people who 
used opioids and psychedelic mushrooms are less likely to develop opioid use disorder 
when compared to those who have only used opiates. Through my efforts to support thei
l
screening, prevention and treatment of opioid use disorder in Maine’s Federally 
Qualified Health Centers, I am particularly interested in how this bill opens an additional 
way for those who struggle with opioid use disorder to address the traumas that underlie 
the sources of their addictions and chronic pain. 
Our veterans, families and other loved ones who are struggling with conditions such as 
opioid use disorder, depression or post-traumatic stress shouldn’t also incur the 
additional burden of being incarcerated for their use of psilocybin mushrooms for 
recovery and health. Given the mental health crisis that we’re in as well as the 
increasing fatalities due to opioid overdoses, we have a responsibility to Mainers to 
move ahead and establish a legal and safe pathway for those who are suffering. 
l fully support this bill and sincerely hope that your caucus feels the same. 
Thank you for your time, 
-Selma Holden, MD MPHMS
