Vanessa Shields-Haas 
Regarding Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee LD 1914 An Act to 
Enact the Maine Psilocybin Health Access Act  
15 May 2023 
My name is Vanessa Shields-Haas, of Rockland, and I am writing in 
support of LD 1914, An Act to Enact the Maine Psilocybin Health 
Access Act. I am testifying as the daughter of David Shields, of 
Nobleboro, who lives with debilitating cluster headaches that could be 
ameliorated using medical psilocybin.  
As a Family Nurse Practitioner, I know that providers must assess 
patients presenting with cluster headaches for suicidality because of 
the excruciating pain they cause. They are chronic, little is understood 
about why they occur, treatment options are limited, and there is no 
cure. In Europe, psilocybin is used medically to treat people living 
with cluster headaches. My father is 76, he has utilized every therapy 
available via a prescription with little relief.  
While some people get months of remission in between cluster 
headache cycles, my Dad gets almost no relief. His cluster headache 
cycles can last weeks, with what are medically considered to be the 
most painful headaches, day after day. Their frequency and severity 
have only increased with time. He has been encouraged by his 
neurologist to travel out of state to obtain medical psilocybin for relief. 
My Dad has always been an optimistic, positive force. During a recent 
cluster headache cycle, my Dad told me he did not want to live 
anymore if this is what living feels like. This is when I looked up 
whether Maine had any movement on medical psilocybin and 
contacted the Office of Senator Donna Bailey in support of her bill.  
My Dad deserves to spend the last years of his life enjoying his 
grandchildren, hiking with my Mom, and sailing Penobscot Bay. You 
hold the power for him to live in less pain. Please legalize medical 
psilocybin for the sake of the many people like my Dad who would 
benefit greatly from it. 
Thank you to the Committee of Veterans and Legal Affairs for hearing 
this testimony. Thank you to Senator Bailey for your leadership on this 
important issue and to your cosponsors: Representative Theriault, 
Senators Brakey and Brenner, and Representatives Ankeles, Boyer, 
and Malon. 
