Wilder Geier
Lewiston
LD 1914
My experience with psilocybin has been the most therapeutic and transformationally 
healing experience of my life. Unfortunately, my high dose experience transpired 
without a trained guide who would be able to ensure a safe and trusting environment, 
would be able to provide therapeutic companionship during the experience, and could 
enable necessary integration of the drug experience back into my daily life for 
maximal benefit. 
Obviously, I had chosen to ingest psilocybin anyway despite being in a more 
recreational setting — this was a choice that I had made without any previous 
experience with psilocybin. (Another outcome that may have been prevented if the 
experience was accessible and legal in carefully constructed settings.)
Directly after the experience, a major takeaway I had alongside many other personal 
revelations was how much I had brazenly underestimated the vital importance of a 
trained guide for the high dose experience. They say many aspects of the experience 
are ineffable — indescribable for their foreignness to our regular experience and their 
incompatibility to be captured through language — I submit that it is likewise 
ineffable how powerful a therapeutic presence would be for this experience. I can 
begin to explain this by noting how powerful and overwhelming the emotional tidal 
wave brought forth by the experience is, and how the great power of the drug can be 
quite destabilizing and earth shattering. This is part of their benefit - psilocybin can 
provide the shake up a person needs in their neural landscape, but we need skilled, 
attentive, and loving people to help ensure that as the dust of our mind immediately 
begins resettling that it lands in more healed and supportive places rather than places 
of continued trauma. 
Thank you for your consideration of the Maine Psilocybin Health Access Act. Your 
support will mean many who have been failed by our healthcare system in about 
every other way have hope to seek reprieve for their trauma. My testimony is intended
as a personal case of why bringing psilocybin into the open of a decriminalized health
landscape will lead directly to pathways of safer healing for curious and in-need 
individuals. It is also intended to note the many in my community who have not 
submitted testimony but have expressed explicit interest in psilocybin assisted therapy
as a potential life saving treatment for various traumas and mental health issues.
