1 
 Written Testimony on 
L.D. 714, “An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That  Do Not Qualify for Immunity 
Under Maine’s Good Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug-r elated Medical 
Assistance” 
Presented by 
Deputy Chief Christopher M. Martin 
Brewer Police Department 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and  distinguished members of 
the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety : 
I am submitting testimony in support of the passage  of L.D. 714, “An Act to 
Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for I mmunity Under Maine’s Good 
Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug-related Medical Assi stance”.   
We recognize and support the intent of the Good Sam aritan Law, in an effort to 
encourage people to call for life saving resources on behalf of someone 
experiencing an overdose. 
Under our existing Good Samaritan Law there is no m echanism to deal with 
traffickers and illegal firearms offenses at an ove rdose scene.  People that are 
involved in the trafficking of dangerous drugs, lik e fentanyl, are the very same 
people that are providing drugs leading to life thr eatening overdoses.  Those 
involved with trafficking, particularly large amoun ts, are also involved in illegal 
fire arm possession.  Our Good Samaritan Law should  not provide shelter to 
those who engage in behaviors that threaten the saf ety of the public and the 
lives of those we seek to save under the Good Samar itan Law. 
The prevalence of guns in relation to drug traffick ing is alarming, and the 
increase of gun violence associated with the drug t rade has impacted Maine.  
This is true across the state, and has significantl y increased over the past 
decade. 
We must recognize that illicit drug consumption is a money-making venture, one 
that organized crime is the profiteer.  The Mexican  Cartels control every major 
distribution hub in the United States with no other  criminal organization posed to 
challenge their dominance.  All of the fentanyl, me thamphetamine, and 
cocaine that we have here in our state came from th e distribution of the 
2 
 Mexican Cartels, which has an identified presence i n New England states.  From 
there it goes to other levels of organized crime, g angs, and is further distributed 
at the street level.   
We are seeing wholesale quantity seizures of fentan yl and methamphetamine 
by patrol officers in my area.  Pounds and kilogram s are readily available, this is 
a significant change from years past. 
Our demand is at an all time high, as illustrated b y record numbers of overdoses 
and overdose deaths.   
Supply sources, gangs, are now coming to my area to  distribute drugs to meet 
the demand.  A stark contrast from years past when our consumers travelled to 
Massachusetts to procure drugs for use and sale.  T hese gang members come 
from New York, Connecticut, and Massachusetts.  Gun  involvements and 
violence are becoming more common place.  The under lying reason is because 
its about money, making money.  Criminal organizati ons profit while our citizenry 
is at risk. 
I respectfully ask for your support on this bill to  give law enforcement a much-
needed tool to combat organized crime here in Maine . 
