V 
% Recoveryi 
% ﬁtdyoseay ' 
§ Project 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 714: An Act to Expand the List of Excluded Crimes 
April 24th, 2023 
Good Morning Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Courtney Gary-Allen. I am the Organizing Director of the Maine Recovery Advocacy Project 
(ME-RAP), a grassroots bipartisan network of lawmakers, advocates, and organizations working on 
community and public policy based solutions to substance use in Maine. During the 13 lst Legislative 
Session our network was deeply involved in crafting, debating, and negotiating the expansion of the good 
samaritan law. 
When I say we negotiated this law, we really did. We worked diligently to get this law to a point that 
nearly everyone could get on board. The advocates gave up things we wanted, so did the committee 
members, members in the House and the Senate, and Govemor Mills - which is the hallmark of a good 
negotiation. 
That is why we are saddened that this session, a few naysayers are attempting to roll back key provisions 
of our law via Li) 714: An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for Immunity Under 
Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug related Medical Assistance. If LD 714 passes as written 
we will be right back at square one and people won't call 9-1-1. People will die. 
And with so many of our loved ones dying we simply do not have time to be debating or negotiating this 
law again. It’s a done deal. We agreed that if 9-l-l is called ﬁom the scene of an overdose the person who 
is overdosing and anyone who is helping that person cannot be arrested or prosecuted for most crimes, 
including all drug crimes. They also cannot be arrested on warrants or have their bail, probation, 
cormnunity conﬁnement, or deferred disposition revoked. We already agreed that the only exceptions are 
for crimes against children, sex crimes, and violent crimes. 
And in the end, together, we sent a clear message that in Maine, We value the lives of people who use 
drugs and we want them to get the help they need. We did this by calling our community to action, 
remaining true to our values, and securing a bipartisan victory in both the House and the Senate that 
ended with Govemor Mill's signing our bill into law. We put our hearts and souls into this campaign and 
we couldn't have done it without many of you sitting at this table. 
Now we need to implement it and educate people who use drugs, law enforcement, defense and district 
attorneys, and community leaders about it. And many of us have already started that work. 
Mobilize Recovery, our sister organization, is currently working on launching a canvassing project that 
will go door to door in hotspots in Kennebec County to provide Naloxone and Good Samaritan education. 
We have already printed our t-shirts, ﬂyers, and postcards. This Saturday we are going to be meeting at 
our office to handwrite 2,500 postcards about the law. OPTIONS, a state run program and PR campaign, 
is also aheady marketing the law as written. Journey Magazine is doing the same. 
Please just let us do this Work. Let us save lives. 
Sincerely, 
Courtney Gary-Allen 
Organizing Director, ME-RAP 
sourtney@recover'§/voices.con}
