Q RecoveryN 
I Advocacy 
I Project 
IN OPPOSITION TO LD714 
An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for Immunity Under Maine's 
Good Samaritan Law Concerning Drug Related Medical Assistance 
April 24, 2023 
Hello: Sponsor, Representative Campbell and Committee Chairpersons BeeBe-Center and 
Representative Salizbury, and the honorable Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. 
I am Jeanne Marquis, an organizer for the Maine Recovery Advocacy Project. I am here to 
testify in opposition to LD714: An Act to expand the List of Crimes that do not qualify for 
Immunity under Maine’s Good Samaritan Law. 
Maine’s 130th Legislative session passed the strongest Good Samaritan Law in the Nation with 
bipartisan support. We did this to stem the growing rise of preventable overdose deaths in our 
state. It was the right decision. Now, without giving this law enough time to gain awareness, this 
bill intends to roll back the immunities to the point that the Good Sam Law will be ineffective. If 
LD714 passes as written, we will lose the trust of people and they will not call 91 l. 
From what we understand, a minority of law enforcement officers requested this bill because 
they felt they lost a tool to arrest people at the scene of an overdose. So instead of living up to 
their motto “To Serve and Protect, ” apparently their ﬁrst objective at a scene of an overdose is to 
arrest, not to save a life. We know now that addiction is a brain disease. We will not save lives by 
arresting people for a symptom of their disease, nor should we arrest people who are helping to 
save a life at the scene of an overdose. 
A 2020 study by the Govemment Accountability Office, the GAO, found a nationwide pattern of 
lower opioid-related death rates among states that have enacted Good Samaritan Laws. Let’s not 
make our Good Sam Law ineffective. We need it more than ever with the rising overdose rates.I 
urge your committee to Protect our Good Sam Law and vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD714. 
Thank you for your time and consideration on this important issue. 
Jeanne Marquis 
Organizer 
Maine Recoveiy Advocacy Project 
Jeani@Recove1f\/Voicescom
