  
 
102 Bishop Street, 
Portland, ME 04103 
207.553.2575 
info@portlandrecovery.org 
 
Written Testimony of Leslie Clark, Portland Recovery Community Center 
In Opposition to LD 714: 
An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for Immunity Under Maine's Good 
Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug-related Medical Assistance 
 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 714 
 
April 24, 2023 
 
Senator Bee-Bee Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, 
 
My name is Leslie Clark I am a person in long term recovery and serve as the Executive Director of Portland 
Recovery Community Center (PRCC.) On behalf of PRCC, I am writing today in opposition to LD 714.  
 
Serving our Portland community since 2011, PRCC provides a safe haven for those seeking support and 
resources for their journey in recovery from SUD and other addictions. Although there is immense hope and 
joy found in recovery, we know all too well of the great pain and devastation experienced everyday as a result 
of the opioid crisis. Many of our community members have tragically lost their lives to fatal overdoses.  
 
Maine’s recovery community worked with lawmakers last year to update the Good Samaritan law to include 
the strongest protections in the nation. With the tragic numbers of overdoses in our state, this legislation was 
an important action to assure that individuals rendering aid at the scene of an overdose could feel safe calling 
9-1-1 without fear of arrest. This means that more people are likely to reach out for medical intervention in the 
case of emergency to save someone’s life.  
 
LD 714 seeks to undo the protections currently afforded to those rendering aid at the scene of an overdose by 
expanding the list of crimes that do not qualify for immunity under the Good Samaritan Law. With the crisis 
we are facing in Maine, we cannot roll back protections people have when they call 911 from the scene of an 
overdose. Every life is precious and worth saving. 
 
We know that recovery is possible. Each time a life is saved, there is an opportunity to find and sustain 
recovery. There are too many Mainers today, parents, siblings, children, and friends who grieve the loss of 
their loved ones and wish that the person that they love still had the chance to find recovery.  
 
Please join us in our efforts to save lives by opposing LD 714.  
 
Sincerely, 
//Leslie M. Clark// 
 
Leslie M. Clark, Executive Director 
Portland Recovery Community Center 
