My name is Lisa Thomas. I currently live in Pittsburgh, PA. but I was born and raised in Maine. For those 
wondering about my concern with Maine’s substance abuse issues and addiction community, the 
simplest explanation is that Maine will always be my home. I am a long-time recovering addict. The bulk 
of my active addiction happened in Maine. Maine is where my experience lies. I also recognize that 
individual state’s legislative/judicial initiatives affect our national conversation. None of us live in a 
vacuum.  
       I have myriad objections to the attempts to alter this life saving legislation. Foremost, my own 
experience tells me these efforts will cost lives. In 2006, I nearly joined the ranks of addicts whose lives 
were lost, because of fear of negative consequences, to interventions facing fellow active addicts. My 
older sister, a fellow drug user, found me unconscious, bleeding from the nose and the mouth, at the 
home of a mutual friend. In my situation, I hadn’t accidently overdosed on drugs of abuse. Instead, I’d 
tried to commit suicide because of the laundry list of negative addiction consequences I was facing, at 
that time. My sister was on probation, already having served multiple jail sentences, and time at MDOC.  
     Her fear of dealing with police, potentially being drug tested, and returned to jail for probation 
violation overruled her protective instinct toward me. Her own younger sister. Fortunately, she had the 
presence of mind to contact our non-addicted sister. She rushed across town when she got that call, 
finding me alone, and turning blue, in the bedroom of a stranger. Her fast response and call to 911 was 
enough to provide me with a second chance. Far too many people are not so lucky. Among them is my 
sister. The same sister whose own instinct for self-preservation might have cost me the wonderful life I 
grew to achieve after obtaining sobriety. Teresa’s death, almost 2 years ago, directly resulted from the 
fear of negative outcomes, facing her fellow users. Nobody that she shared drugs with that night dared 
call for help when she went into respiratory distress. Again, the strength of self-preservation won out. 
The cost of being a, “good Samaritan,” was just too high.  
 In continuation of my own story, upon waking up in ICU, after the removal of an intubation tube, I 
contacted the responding officer whose CPR efforts had saved my life. I wanted to thank him. Little did I 
know, he was waiting for the chance to criminally charge me with the drugs and paraphernalia found in 
the room where I almost died. Items that weren’t mine and that had nothing to do with my overdose or 
near death, intentional suicide attempt. This result is another of many unintended consequences 
attached to penalizing addicts in life jeopardizing emergencies. The wrong person may end up facing 
criminal charges attached to the first responder’s conflicting goals. The only focus should be providing 
first aid rescue efforts. Saving the overdose victim’s life, granting him that second chance, is more 
important than generating criminal charges. 
     In closing, I’d like to repeat the words of my cousin, one of the many nights we shared drugs. “If I hit 
the floor, just drag me out in the street. Don’t risk going to jail to save me.” That same cousin, after 
years of addiction, time spent in prison, separation from his children, and life living on the fringes has 
achieved sobriety, today. Consider that his concern with the consequences to others, if he overdosed, 
outweighed his own desire to be saved during the height of his addiction. It’s the flip side of those 
whose fear of retribution for intervening outweighs basic human empathy. If you expand the scope of 
people not exempted from negative consequences, too many people like me and my cousin won’t get 
the time to alter course, reestablishing themselves as parents, offspring, siblings, and productive 
citizens.  
     Thank you for the opportunity to share my experience today.  
 
 
       
