295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 714  
An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for 
Immunity Under Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning 
Drug -related Medical Assistance  
Sponsored by Representative Campbell  
4.24 .2023  
 
Good morning,  Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and 
esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety . I am Malory Shaughnessy, a Westbrook resident,  and the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. 
The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s 
safety net community -based  mental health and substance use treatment 
providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies 
and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in opposition to LD 714, 
“An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for Immunity Under 
Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug -related Medical Assistance.” 
This bill attempts to roll back Maine's Good Samaritan laws concern ing drug -
related medical assistance. Said another way, this bill attempts to reverse 
important progress that this committee has made to save lives in Maine. 
Importantly, even if this proposal wasn’t evidence -based practice already 
proven effective by other  states that have enacted it, the law in Maine hasn’t 
even had a chance to illustrate effectiveness. Proposals of this magnitude – 
with lives on the line – should be based on  data .  
 
Last session, this committee worked on this bill with all the stakeholder s. A 
compromise included the Department of Public Safety and the Chief 
Executive. I would like to share a bit of what I shared with the committee last 
year, about why these protections are so important. It’s worth repeating.  
 
If you have not yet read Chasi ng the Scream  by Johann Hari, or watched his  
TedTalk, you should. He highlights what decades of experience have  shown us 
-- we cannot arrest and punish our way out of substance use and overdose 
deaths. We know now that substance use disorder is a health condition and 
not a crime. It should be  treated as such. We need to change our drug laws to 
save lives rather than fill our jails and prisons.  
 
We know that t he threat of criminal penalties continues to instill fear in 
individuals at the scene of an overdo se, hindering them from calling for help.  
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
KidsPeace  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
The “Know Your Options” website is an initiative of the Maine Office of Behavioral Health and 
other state agencies as part of an education campaign to save lives by preventing overdose 
death. The  Alliance applau ds this initiative and has seen it work successful ly. The guidelines 
include urging  people to test drugs to make sure they know what’s in them, use drugs in the 
company of others,  not alone, and make sure people around them know what to do in case of an 
overdose.   
 
The question is simple: Do we want to save lives? If the answer is yes, then we must say no to LD 
714. We urge an Ought  Not to Pass vote on this legislation for the sake of the estimated 716 
Maine  people that died of an overdose last year alone.  
 
 
 
