Marika Marland
Portland
LD 714
Testimony in Opposition to LD714 An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not
Qualify for Immunity Under Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug-related 
Medical Assistance
Monday, April 24th 2023
Dear Senator Pinney Beebe-Center, Representative Suzanne Salisbury & Members of 
the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,
Hello, my name is Marika Marland and I am a psychiatric nurse practitioner who has 
worked in Maine for over 15 years and I am writing to testify in opposition to LD714.
I am a lifelong Mainer who grew up in Yarmouth and now lives in Portland. I have 
worked with people struggling with opiate use disorder prescribing Suboxone for over
6 years. 
The Good Samaritan law is very important to me as a member and as medical 
professional. I am concerned that the changes to this law proposed in LD 714 would 
make this law ineffective. As a medical professional, I was shocked to learn from my 
clients that they would not call 911 if someone overdosed because police would arrest
them for drug crimes. It is now common knowledge that the opiate epidemic was 
started when medical professionals over prescribed opiates based on false information
and illegal claims from drug companies. Many people who use drugs do end up 
selling (trafficking) drugs because they run out of money and don’t want to get sick 
and many will share drugs (furnishing). People who use drugs have been encouraged 
to use drugs together by harm prevention experts so they can give Narcan to someone 
if they overdose and/or call 911. Often the only people who are available to call 911 if
someone overdoses are people who use drugs and would often qualify for crimes of 
furnishing or trafficking because of their addictions. Adding furnishing and tracking 
as crimes people could be arrested for would essentially make the Good Samaritan 
law ineffective because people would once again be afraid to call 911 if someone 
overdoses. It grieves me that people would be afraid of calling for help because of 
being arrested when the root of this problem is the medical profession unknowingly 
failing our community. I am also very worried because with the rise of a veterinary 
sedative Xylazine in the fentanyl supply people may need 6 Narcan doses to be 
brought back to life. People who use together may not have 6 Narcan doses. So it’s 
critical that medical help be available. 
I also want to let you know that this bill affects me deeply on a personal level as well. 
As we know the goal is responding to overdoses quickly and effectively, to allow 
people who are using substances the chance to live another day and to recover from 
substance use. I am also a woman in my early 40’s and I am pained to think of all the 
people in my generation who have died during this epidemic and to think of their 
children who no longer have fathers and mothers. I am worried about the future of our
country and Maine with so many important people lost. Who will run our businesses, 
care for our elders, support the next generation in thriving? Every person we can save 
is another person who can contribute and support our wonderful community here in 
Maine. We can’t lose anymore Mainers than we already have.
Please support continuing the Good Samaritan law in its original form. Maine 
currently has one of the strongest Good Samaritan laws. While it may challenge some 
of our previously taught notions about the law or morality, at its heart I believe our 
Good Samaritan Act is the most true to the parable that it references. In the parable of 
the Good Samaritan we are taught that even “untouchables” can be capable of great 
charity and be seen as examples for the community. I believe that those who use 
drugs and have committed drug crimes are seen as “untouchables” and I see everyday 
the love and support they provide for others in this community. Please let everyone in 
our community help save a life by opposing LD 714 and supporting keeping the Good
Samaritan Act in its original form. 
I would like to thank the committee for your time and feel free to contact me with 
further questions,
Sincerely, 
Marika Marland, PMHNP 
