Grand Rising Senator Beebe- Center, Representative Salisbury & members of the Criminal 
Justice committee. 
My name is Marshall Meroer. l am a community organizer & advocate & Harm Reductionist. 
Someone who has suffered under the regime of the laws laid down by men & women who 
clearly have no clue what is going on in their own communities. 
I personally spent days & nights & years with the community that you lawmakers claim you 
serve. & time after time, I hear the suffering & the cries from my neighbors who are left 
dismissed because of the choices they have to make daily to ease their suffering because of the 
laws created behind these 4 walls that keep them Physically & Mentally enslaved to the 
condition they are often arrested or dismissed for. 
l remember what it was like being enslaved by the streets, by the game, by the city servants that 
policed my people. Not being even able to seek help in any direction, in fear of persecution. 
Which led me into many volatile situations that could have easily been avoided if nurturing was 
put in place of abuse by the people who are supposed to protect us, heal us, teach us! 
Many of us came together from all over Maine, we advocated, had listening sessions, collected 
data, worked with the community, worked with law enforcement, worked with different mental 
health organizations. 
Some of us have even died collecting this data so others could live. & for one moment many of 
us began to believe in the system again. Because of the changes that were being made that are 
starting to look more like smoke in mirrors in a circus. 
While my friends continue to die because they are more afraid to call for help because of not 
even knowing of a law that's already put in place, or because the police are not upholding to 
their side of the law and being allowed to operate above the law without no source of 
accountability put in place. 
Meanwhile we have people who are trying to add more restrictions to a law that’s not even being 
upheld by the very same people who are enforcing the law that’s already put in play. Just makes 
no sense to me. 
Needless to say I am here in opposition of LD 714 Because it absolutely makes no sense to me. 
Sincerely Marshall G. Mercer 
Executive Director of Hope Brokers lnc 
Hopebroker63@gmail.com 
207-242-5972 
City of Augusta
