PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444
www.aclumaine.org
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
LD 714 – Ought Not to Pass 
An Act To Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for Immunit y Under Maine’s Good 
Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug-related Medical Assistance 
Joint Standing Committee on  
Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede and I am 
Policy Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advanci ng and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
member s, I am here to testif y against LD 714, a bill that will cost lives a nd reinforce failed methods of 
addressing problematic drug use. 
Our state continues to struggle with the question of how to address problematic drug use. Despite 
herculean efforts from harm reductionists, an increased availability of naloxone, a nd state-funded 
education campaigns, people are still dying at unprecedented rates . We must do more to stem this tide of 
death. Last year, when the legislature passed the strongest Good Samaritan law in the country, lawmakers 
took a de cisive step in the right direction. Legislator s from across the political spectrum made a strong 
statement that they valued saving lives above the chance to punish people. The bill before you would roll 
back this essential work.  
Criminal punishment cannot and has not ended or even put a dent in problematic drug use or 
increasingly strong street drugs. Over the past nearly two decades, we have seen that expanding criminal 
penalties for drug possession a nd sale has done nothing to reduce drug use, dependence, or availability. 
Instead, expande d criminalization has directed valuable resource s awa y from drug treatment and social 
supports into the criminal legal system. We continue to spend exorbitant amounts of money punishing 
people for drug crimes, but for all of this investment in criminal punishment, substance use rates have not 
abated. The cost of this approach t o our rights a nd liberties—including the most essential right, the right 
to one’s life— has bee n enormous. It is time to commit t o a new way. 
In this all-hands-on-deck moment, we urge you to continue the work of the last legislature and 
make the policy decision to prioritize saving lives, even if it means exempting people from legal liability 
for actions that are otherwise illegal . This committee and this legislature heard devastating testimony last 
year that tells you exactly what will happen if you roll back the expande d Good Samarita n law: even more 
people will die. If you pass this bill, more people will face the agonizing choice of whether to call 9-1-1 
  
 
and endanger their own lives. For those who do choose to call 9 -1-1 and stay at the scene rendering aid, 
we will revert to punish ing those Good Samaritans with criminalization . 
 We must  not go back on the promise to Maine p eople that their lives are more valuable than the 
chance to punish. We urge you to  reject this bill.  
