Testimony in Opposition 
LD 714: An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for Immunity Under 
Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug related Medical Assistance 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and esteemed members of the Criminal 
Justice & Public Safety Committee. My name is Mikki Rice, I live in Freeman Township andI 
am testifying today in opposition to LD 714: An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not 
Qualify for Immunity Under Maine’s Good Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug Related Medical 
Assistance. 
Last year, thanks to grassroots Harm Reduction and Recovery organizers (including myself), 
lawmakers, and Governor Janet Mills, We expanded our Good Sam Law and made it the 
strongest in the nation. 
Expanding the Good Samaritan Law last year was a step in the right direction, but with 716 fatal 
overdoses in Maine in 2022 (up from 636 fatal overdoses in 2021) expanding the law was 
nowhere near enough. So my question is why would we want to take steps back as the number 
of Mainers dying each year increases due to preventable overdose from a contaminated supply, 
why would we want to make things worse? 
LD 714 seeks to roll back the protections of the current law. lf LD 714 passes as written it will 
add Unlawful Trafficking, Unlawful Furnishing and Possession of a firearm by a prohibited 
person to the crimes that someone can be charged with at the scene of an overdose. People 
are often charged with Trafficking or Furnishing even if they are not trafficking or furnishing to 
others, simply because of the amount of drugs they have in their possession. Even when they 
do “catch” someone selling it’s usually a “low level seller” . Especially at the scene of an 
overdose. The person selling is usually nowhere near the scene of the overdose. This bill is not 
going to do anything to decrease overdoses, or increase safety. 
The whole reason for expanding the Good Samaritan Law last year was to save lives. That is 
number one priority right now. The sad truth is that people are still scared to call 9-1-1 for an 
overdose even with the expanded law because police can and do harass people at the scene in 
other ways (such as putting their housing in jeopardy or calling child protective sen/ices). There 
is no doubt in my mind that if we allow this bill to make it into law people will be less likely to call 
for help in the event of an overdose which will undoubtedly lead to more preventable death.. 
It's 2023. We know what works to decrease overdose deaths (Harm Reduction, Naloxone 
access, decriminalizing drug use, a regulated safe supply, etc.) We know that criminalizing 
drugs doesn't lessen the number of people using them or the number of people dyinga 
preventable death, and it doesn't make anyone safer. 
l urge you to do the right thing and vote Ought Not to pass on LD 714. Our overdose rates are 
continuing to rise and we shouldn't be rolling back the protections enacted last session. 
Respectfully, 
Mikki Rice 
Harm Reduction & Recovery Advocate
