LD 714 Testimony 
April 24, 2023 
Molly Whyte 
Church of Safe Injection 
Lewiston, Maine 
Good Morning Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Criminal 
Justice committee. 
My name is Molly Whyte, I am the program manager for the Church of Safe Injection andl 
reside in Lewiston Maine. I am testifying today in opposition to LD 714. 
Last session, myself and many others stood in those hallways, spoke in these spaces and 
poured not only our own stories but also of those we loved and lost. We sat in both the Senate 
and the House and listened as many stood and explained why they were or were not for the 
expansion of Good Sam, we heard you as you heard us. A vote was cast, and I can distinctly 
remember sitting on the couch in the Senate with tears streaming down my face when we found 
out we had succeeded. Then, we made our way to the House and we got to hear it one more 
time. A win. Not just for those who didn't make it but for those who we would be able to tell with 
conﬁdence that they were safe. We stood after losing a friend two days prior with Janet Mills 
when she signed her name to this bill. And now we’re here almost a year later because we 
vehemently oppose going back. 
On April 28th 2022 I used narcan for the ﬁrst time after training others for 2 years in how to use 
it. My best friend was struggling and overdosed. I was the only one there, and I had to use the 
training I had gone through to save her life. 911 was called, she made it. That time. I cannot say 
the same for many other friends, or sadly for her as she died from an accidental overdose a 
week later. You will hear many stories of death and loss here today - and I will spare you the 
length of friends stories I too could share. 
Per last year, the bible was shouted across the ﬂoor so many times I think it would be in my best 
interest to do so. I was raised devout Catholic - my mother is Roman Catholic. (I do not stand in 
these spaces anymore, but, 15 years of Sunday School and a weekly trip mean I have reada 
few things.) 
0 HEBREWS 6:10 
- “God is not unjust; he will not forget your work and the love you have shown him as 
you have helped his people and continue to help them.” 
My favorite part of this one is that it doesn't go into detail like only if they don't use 
drugs or have the same ideals as you do. 
0 JOHN 15:12-13
- “My command is this: Love each other as l have loved you. Greater love has no one 
than this: to lay down one’s life for one’s friends." 
If you ask why we stand here - this is the key. We love and have loved people who use 
drugs. We do not take inventory of sobriety. 
0 ROMANS 12:13 
- “Share with the Lord's people who are in need. Practice hospitality." 
These are people who are in need. These people who others have 
written off as undervalued - they have people who love them. 
0 JAMES 2:14-17 
- “What good is it, my brothers and sisters, if someone claims to have faith but has no 
deeds? Can such faith save them? Suppose a brother or a sister is without clothes 
and daily food. lf one of you says to them, ‘Go in peace; keep warm and well fed,‘ but 
does nothing about their physical needs, what good is it? ln the same way, faith by 
itself, if it is not accompanied by action, is dead.” 
' ISAIAH 58:10 
-- “If you do away with the yoke of oppression, with the pointing- ﬁnger and malicious 
talk, and if you spend yourselves on behalf of the hungry and satisfy the needs of the 
oppressed, then your light will rise in the darkness, and your night will become like 
the noonday. ” 
And l will leave you with this, which l. think needs no explanation. lf those who are regularly 
looked down upon, as though their disease is not real, those who are regularly oppressed and 
marginalized in systems meant to keep them there, then who is? 
0 PROVERBS 3:27 
- “Do not withhold good from those to whom it is due, when it is in your power to act.” 
lt is within YOUR power today to act. Right now. Oppose LD 714. Let people who use 
drugs know they DO have a right to live. 
Thank you.
