4/23/2023 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 714 
Good morning Senator Bee-Bee Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable 
members of the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. l\./ly name is Nick Loscocco I 
am here today in opposition to LD 714. , 
This attempt today to weaken the strongest good Samaritan law in the entire United 
States strikes me as extremely unfortunate to say the least. in this regard, i\/laine is a national 
leader in protecting the rights of people who use drugs, those who are overdosing, and those 
who are rendering aid at the scene. We should be proud of this fact, and we should be holding 
ourselves up to the rest ofthe nation as an example of how to do the right thing. 
Instead, some individuals continue attempting to raise barriers to advocates ’ attempts 
to preserve the lives of people who use drugs. As a person who used to use drugs myself, and 
who has been at the scene of countless drug related medical emergencies, I can say from first 
hand experience that the value of having no barriers to obtaining emergency medical assistance 
for a loved one is immeasurable. 
This is where the protections of the strongest Good Samaritan Law in the nation come 
into play. A medical emergency is a medical emergency. It is not a crime, nor a crime scene. it 
is not an opportunity to gather probable cause for potential crimes to which the police would 
not otherwise be preview if not for the emergency. It is not a time for bias, stigma, politics, or 
personal beliefs. And it is certainly not an invitation to exploit a traumatic situation in order to 
fill anotherjail cell or collect undue state revenue from already suffering people. 
I work in the substance use treatment field. l have held numerous positions throughout 
my career, but through my current role as a counselor in Maine, I have heard about and spoken 
to far too many people, including law enforcement, who are still uneducated or misinformed 
about the existing Good Samaritan law and what it actually means. 
l have spoken with numerous clients and heard from many other very reliable people in 
the field that people around the state continue to be arrested or charged with crimes stemming 
from evidence gathered at the scene of a medical emergency. l have heard the argument made 
by law enforcement that, "Wel|, technically there wasn't evidence of a drug overdose or 
evidence that narcan was used so the situation doesn't fall under Good Sam.” l have heard
others say things like ”well technically the law says a person can't be arrested or prosecuted, it 
doesn't say can't be charged, so a court summons can still be issued.” The attempted 
exploitation of these technical loopholes proves to me that not everyone has even showna 
good faith effort to truly implement the current Good Sam law and to abide by its protections. l 
would hope that such a good faith effort by everyone involved from peer support and 
counselors, to law enforcement and the courts be a necessary before this legislature considers 
a revision to the current law. 
The bottom line is that this is not about protecting people who commit crimes or posea 
public safety risk. lt’s not about weakening any type of incentive to change behavior or 
removing consequences for unhealthy behavior. This is about the person experiencing a 
medical emergency and saving that person's life in that moment. Period. Nothing else is 
relevant in that situation. When people fear potential enforcement action being taken against 
them, it creates a barrier to seeking emergency medical attention for themselves or someone 
they are with. Keeping that barrier removed is paramount in our fight to keep our friends 
alive. l urge you to oppose Ld 714.
