TESTIMONY OF DIRECTOR RICHARD R. DESJARDINS 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
MAINE CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACADEMY 
(In Support) L.D. 714 
“An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for 
immunity Under Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning 
Drug-related Medical Assistance ” 
Submitted by the Department of Public Safety pursuant to Joint Rule 204. Reference to the Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered printed. 
Sponsored by: Rep. Campbell 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Hearing Date: April 24, 2023, at 9:00 a.m. in Room 436, State House 
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety. My name is Richard R. Desj ardins, and I am the Director of the Maine 
Drug Enforcement Agency, representing the Maine Department of Public Safety. 
I am here today to testify neither for nor against of LD 714, “An Act to Expand the List of 
Crimes That Do Not Qualify for Immunity Under Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning 
Drug-related Medical Assistance ” . This bill amends 17-A MRSA §1111-B, Maine's Good Samaritan 
laws concerning drug-related medical assistance by adding possession of a ﬁrearm by a prohibited 
person, unlawful trafﬁcking in scheduled drugs and unlawfully furnishing scheduled drugs to the list 
of crimes that do not qualify for immunity under the existing laws. 
The collaboration with many stake holders in the previous legislature to arrive at a compromise 
to pass the current law was at times, difﬁcult to accomplish. Passions on both sides were high but the 
goal was consistent, save lives! The previous work that created the existing law contemplated many of 
the potential outcomes of adding exceptions and the consequence with either option. 
My primary focus as I testify today regarding this bill and the one that certainly resonated with 
my colleagues, concerns the issues around ﬁrearm possession by a prohibited person. Far too many of 
our deadly encounters involving ﬁrearms, involve individuals that gained access to ﬁrearms when they 
were prohibited and use those weapons to committee the worst crimes imaginable. Any opportunity 
for law enforcement to intercede with separating a prohibited person from a ﬁrearm, regardless of the 
circumstances makes all of us safer. 
I would be happy to answer any questions you may have, either now or at any future Work 
session.
1
