Monday, April 24th, 2023 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 714: An Act to Epand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for 
Immunity Under Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug Related Medicaql Assistance 
Good Morning Senator Beebee-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Esteemed Members of 
the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee: 
My name is Rosie Boyce, lam a woman in long term, sustained recovery with 14.5 years in 
recovery from IV heroin addiction. I am an organizer with the Maine Recovery Advocacy Project 
& a Peer Navigator with the Church of Safe Injection. I live and work in Lewiston, and am the 
boots on the ground, along with so many others, at the heart of this epidemic. 
I come before you today to vehemently oppose LD 714, and I pray that you will all do the same. 
As I am sure you have already heard several times today, this bill seeks to undo some of the 
protections that were put In place last year when our Governor made a very bold move, during 
an election yeari might add, to strengthen her ﬁght to save lives and end the opioid epidemic 
this state has battled for the last several years. In an unprecedented bi-partisan vote in both the 
House & Senate, L_D 1862 was signed into law by Govenor Mills, giving Maine the most robust 
Good Samaritan law in the country. This was a historic win for not only the recovery & harm 
reduction communities, it was a win for every person that is still struggling with active substance 
use. 
The protections that the Good Sam expansion afforded those still battling active addiction are 
saving lives every day. As we speak here this morning, someone in out there is ﬁghting for their 
life. We have a bad habitof minimizing the horrors of active addiction, the penalty for which are 
often death. I would wager that No one sitting around this committee table has ever had to make 
the choice between calling 9-1-1 during an emergency and self preservation. No one here has 
ever had to wonder if the. people around them would leave them for dead at a moments notice 
to savei their own life. But I have, and so have a number of my colleagues and friends gathered 
here today. I can not express clearly enough what a hollow and horrifying feeling it is to be in the 
presence of someone that is dying and have to stop, when every second that passes is critical, 
to weigh the odds and run every possible outcome through your head. Letting various scenarios 
play out, mapping the location for potential paraphernalia or substances that the police might 
find upn arrival...it ’s chaos added to an already brutally high stress situation. 
I would like to take this committee with me, forjust a moment, back to the summer of 2006.I 
was 20 years old and at the height of my addiction. My husband and I were homeless at that 
time, with 2 small children. We ended up staying most of that summer is small shed behind my 
my friend Chuck & Patty’s house. It wasn't pretty, hardly safe for children, but it was a roof over 
our head for the time being. One afternoon Chuck returned home from work, we heard the truck 
pull in and then leave. My husband went into the house, hopeful that Chuck had returned with 
heroin, as all of us were getting to the stage of dope sickness, aka withdrawal, that is most 
painful. My husband returned and mments after with both injected our only dose for the day,we
heard a blood curdlning scream come from the house. Patty was screaming_CHuck ’s name and 
screaming for my husband to help. We ran into the main part of the house, and there was 
Chuck, lying on his back on the kitchen ﬂoor. He had overdosed. At that time, I had never 
witnessed an overdose. I froze, rapidly assessing the situation in my head: needles and spoons 
covered the table in the kitchen, just as they did on the makeshift card table we had erected in 
the shed. There was an uncapped needle on the floor a couple inches from chuckie’s hand, 
which had obviously been released from his grasp as he crossed the room before his heart 
stopped beating. 
I am grateful today for my husbands" cool head during chaotic situations. He took the lead that 
day, telling Patty to clean up the paraphernalia as he called 9-1-1, and then he looked at me and 
said “Rosie! You know CPR, breathe for the that Mother f‘***** before he dies,” I can still hear his 
stern voice in my head today. 
Chucks lips were blue almost instantly, and when I started administering CPR, they already felt 
cold. As his skin started to turn grey, I fought to breath enough oxygen through his airways to 
make his chest -rise. Unfortunately, the Redcross babysitter course I had taken when I was 15, 
did not adequately prepare me for how difﬁcult it is to perform CPR on an actual person that has 
no pulse. They also never taught me that chest compressions need to be done hard enough to 
“break ribs” . EMT’s arrived within 10 minutes and adinitered Narcan. Chuck went to the hospital 
where he was in a coma for 7 days. He survived, only to be whisked away to prison fra 
probation revocation. Chuck died up at Maine State Prison. 
In fact, in the years since, both Patty and Chris, my husband have died, from drug related 
deaths. 
Let me be clear when I say this: DEAD PEOPLE CAN’T RECOVER 8. PRISON IS NOTA 
PATHWAY TO RECOVER! It is critical that we preserve the expansions that Governor Mills 
signed into law last year, othen/vise we will undoubtedly see the overdose rates cntinue to rise 
and more people, who would othen/vise live, will die. 
I will leave you with this quote from Edmund Burke: “The only thing necessary for the triumph of 
evil is for good men to do nothing. ” for too long, we ave allowed evil to triumph by forcing the 
hand of othen/vise good people, to do nothing. 
I urge you to vote ought not to pass for LD 714. Thank you.
