'/ 
% Recovery 
‘é Advocacy 
§ ijrrzject 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 714 
An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for 
Immunity Under Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning 
Drug Related Medical Assistance 
April 24, 2023 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, 
My name is Steven Knockwood. I'm the Deputy Organizing Director for the Maine 
Recovery Advocacy Project (ME-RAP). I am a person in long term recovery with years 
of sen/ice to my indigenous communities as a Recovery Support Specialist. I am here 
today to testify in opposition to LD 714 An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not 
Qualify for Immunity Under Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning Drug Related 
Medical Assistance. 
First I want to talk about my experience last year working on the advocacy for the Good 
Sam Law that LD 714 looks to undo the very heart of. That campaign began with 
ME-RAP holding listening sessions throughout the state in a diverse set of communities 
for which we represent and work to lift the voices of. I was part of most of these 
sessions and heard as each community voiced their concerns about the tragic losses of 
loved ones from fatal opioid overdose. They demanded that we try to forge a better 
good samaritan law, one in which a person would be able to make the choice to call 911 
without having to think. 
Let me go into that a little deeper, as a person who has been at the scene where an 
individual has a loss of life experience. In that very moment you realize you are ina 
medical emergency your entire mind and body revert to its most primal state. At that 
moment a person who is at the scene of an overdose becomes torn between two of the 
most powerful primal instincts we have, self preservation and saving a human life. Our 
current Good Samaritan Law relieves an individual of that burden of having to 
consciously choose in a time when your ability to do so is clouded and obscured by the 
release of powerful chemicals during a crisis situation. 
During this campaign last year I was supporting an individual. We often held 
conversations with me about this very subject and was well informed on our current law. 
This individual experienced a recurrence of disease, during this time he was in a hotel 
room with a relative when the relative began experiencing an overdose. I recently spoke 
with this individual and this is what he said. Thank you for working to change the good
': 
@ ﬁeizmaeiry 
% Advoacxsy 
”§ §*rc>§e<Z 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 714 
An Act to Expand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualify for 
Immunity Under Maine's Good Samaritan Laws Concerning 
Drug Related Medical Assistance 
sam law. I believe my cousin is alive today because of it. l didn’t have to worry about 
getting myself or my cousin in trouble. I didn’t waste precious time thinking about it,I 
just called for help. I'm so glad that I know you and that I know about good sam. 
I also want to speak about what I felt during the voting on the Good Samaritan bill on 
the floor of the Senate last session. That day will stick with me for the rest of my life. 
The most impactful part of that day was hearing first hand as Senator after Senator 
stood before their colleges and shared about individuals who they loved that had lost 
their lives from preventable overdose deaths. Many tears were shed in those moments, 
every person who was in that room was interconnected through our pain and loss. 
Standing together in unity The Maine State Senate voted overwhelmingly to pass LD 
1862. I was told that much the same experience was felt by individuals in the gally of 
the House of Representatives. As we walked out of the Senate that day several leaders 
from our indigenous communities were standing at the door waiting to hear on a bill 
being voted on after ours. I remember one stepping forward that I happened to know, he 
shook my hand and congratulated us on winning our fight, thanking us for he believed 
what we were on our way to accomplish would save the lives of his community. Little did 
he know that day, the story above came from one of his community members. 
ME-RAP urges you to uphold our Good Samaritan Law and vote ought not to pass in 
the work session. 
Thank you and I am willing to answer any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Steven Knockwood 
Deputy Organizing Director, ME-RAP 
steven@11e.¢overyvoi;:es.com 
(207) 735-4427
