20 April 2026 
 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and esteemed members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice, my name is Dr. Tim Hughes and I 
have been a family physician in Belfast for over 40 years. Before retiring in 2021, I 
was co-director of a regional substance use treatment program with over 100 
participants in various stages of recovery. 
The Good Samaritan Law passed in the last session sent a clear message that we 
value the lives of all Maine people, including those who have suffered an overdose 
because of a substance use disorder.  
I am writing today in OPPOSITION to LD 714, a bill that would roll back 
protections for those who come to the aid of overdose victims by adding new 
crimes including trafficking and furnishing of drugs that can be charged at the 
scene of an overdose. If people can be charged with drug crimes when they call 
911, many will not call, and many more will die.  
Maine is one of 48 states and the District of Columbia that have enacted some form 
of a Good Samaritan or 911 drug immunity law. A 2020 study by the Government 
Accountability Office (GAO) found a nationwide pattern of lower opioid-related 
overdose death rates among states that have enacted Good Samaritan laws, both 
compared to death rates prior to a law’s enactment and death rates in states without 
such laws. You can download an overview of the study here or read the full study 
here. 
Substance use is first and foremost an illness, and leads to death for far too many 
Mainers every day. I urge you to vote AGAINST LD 714. 
 
Sincerely, 
Tim Hughes MD 
Belfast, Maine 
 
Tim Hughes
Belfast
LD 714
20 April 2026
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice, my name is Dr. Tim Hughes and I have 
been a family physician in Belfast for over 40 years. Before retiring in 2021, I was 
co-director of a regional substance use treatment program with over 100 participants 
in various stages of recovery.
The Good Samaritan Law passed in the last session sent a clear message that we value
the lives of all Maine people, including those who have suffered an overdose because 
of a substance use disorder. 
I am writing today in OPPOSITION to LD 714, a bill that would roll back protections
for those who come to the aid of overdose victims by adding new crimes including 
trafficking and furnishing of drugs that can be charged at the scene of an overdose. If 
people can be charged with drug crimes when they call 911, many will not call, and 
many more will die. 
Maine is one of 48 states and the District of Columbia that have enacted some form of
a Good Samaritan or 911 drug immunity law. A 2020 study by the Government 
Accountability Office (GAO) found a nationwide pattern of lower opioid-related 
overdose death rates among states that have enacted Good Samaritan laws, both 
compared to death rates prior to a law’s enactment and death rates in states without 
such laws. You can download an overview of the study here or read the full study 
here.
Substance use is first and foremost an illness, and leads to death for far too many 
Mainers every day. I urge you to vote AGAINST LD 714.
Sincerely,
Tim Hughes MD
Belfast, Maine

