  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKe e 
 
Secreta ry 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
 April 23, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
RE: LD 714 --  An Act to Ex pand the List of Crimes That Do Not Qualif y for 
Immunity Under Maine’ s Good Samaritan Laws  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice  and Pu blic Safety Committe e: 
 
MACDL oppose s LD 714. 
 
Here we go aga in. The ink is barely dry on the  law that correctly expa nded the list of 
crimes under the Good Samaritan law , and this bill comes forward . Instead of waiting 
to see how the new  law works out in saving people from overdo ses, this bill seeks to 
undo the law.  Do not do it. 
 
As it stands  now, and after vigorous  and product ive debate the last legislative  session, 
there  is a care fully cra fted list of crimes that a pers on who reports an  overdo se while  
providing assistance  cannot be prosecuted for based o n the information  derived  from 
the emergenc y response . The debate on that bill was extensive and compromise  was 
reached  and t he bill was passe d.  
 
And yet here we are n ow looking at changes already , all for no goo d reason .  If th e 
Legislature  and this Committee are serious about enactin g laws to make change, then 
it stands to reason that one might want to see what changes are made before deciding  
that the re should not have  been a law in the first place.  
 
Subtracting out drug crimes from the immunity  provision  flies in the fac e of the fact 
that this bill protects  someone  from reporting an overdo se on drugs. It is hard to 
understand a more direct crime tha n drug  crimes that should  be part of t he immunity  
provisions . These are the very crimes that cause someone  not to report an overdose , 
and can cause that person  to potentially  make the wrong decision and risk the death of 
another.  
 
Do n ot change what no one can say is not wor king, especially  given the work that was 
done in the last session  to enac t this important  bill. 
 
As always , thank you for the opportunity to address this issue.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee  
