Good Morning Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the 
Criminal Justice Committee, 
My name is Wendy Allen, l am the Young Adult Diversion Program and Policy and 
Advocacy Lead for Restorative Justice institute of Maine, and a woman in long term recovery. 
Today I am here to testify in strong opposition of LD#714 on behaif of both the 
Restorative Justice institute of Maine, and myself. 
People who use drugs don't deserve to die, and no one should die alone. The Good 
Samaritan Law as it stands today is working. People are calling 911, knowing that they are 
protected from charges and arrests. There may not be actual data put out yet, but it you listen to 
the Penobscot County scanner, people are calling in for help multiple times per day, whereas 
before, it would only be a couple times per week. Lives are being saved, 
By passing this bill, it will be taking 10 steps backwards. People will not feel safe to call 
for help, resulting in more fatal overdoses. From personal experience, When police show up to 
the scene of an overdose, like they always do, they take inventory of everyone that is at the 
scene, atthough they are protected in the moment, they are now on the radar, and monitored, 
just waiting for the opportunity for an arrest. 
Why are we even here today, again ﬁghting to keep our people alive’? lt seems to me it’s 
because it is more important that someone gets a criminal charge, then it is to save a life. Maine 
can’t arrest their way out of this substance use problem. lt doesn't stop at the jail cell doors, jail 
actually creates a much higher chance of overdose upon release. Community harm is much 
greater if people are not protected when reaching out for help. PEOPLE DlE. 
Passing this bill will prove to the people that Maine cares more about criminalizing 
people for trying to do the next right thing, then saving a life. 
lt could be someone you love and care about that needs that call to 911, and ends up 
dying alone because people present at the scene are scared and unable to trust that they won’t 
go to jail. Are the criminal charges worth losing your loved one? 
So, l am urging you to not pass LD#714, and save the lives of the people that need help. 
Thank you, 
Wendy Allen 
Restorative Justice institute of Maine 
207-291-6617
