 
 
 
March 16th, 2023  
 
Senator Tim Nangle , Senate Chair  
Representative  Holly Stover, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in SUPPO RT of L.D. 894 : An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by 
Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular Energy Sy stem or Energy Distributor  
 
Senator Nangle, Representative  Stover, and members of the committee on State and Local Government :  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is  submitting  testimony in support of L.D. 894, and we greatly appreciate 
the sponsor , Senator  Harrington for introducing this legislation , as well as S enate President Jackso n for 
cosponsoring .  
 
Over the summer months, we conducted our annual, Making Maine Work Report which is a survey we put out 
to our members every four years to learn about what issues are most important to the business community. In 
the 2022 survey,  energy was the second most important issue right behind workforce. This was the highest that 
energy had ranked on the survey since we started conducting the survey in 2010. Right now, the business 
community in Maine is dealing with unsustainable costs inc reases. We fee l it is important to make sure t hat 
companies h ave th e right to freely pick what energy  source they need,  and LD 894 preserves the right of Maine 
individuals and businesses to choose the type of energy sour ce they use, including wood, gas, oil, and 
renewable electricity.  In our opinion, the business community in Maine understand s what their b usiness  needs 
to do to lower the cost of energy, and being able to fr eely make those s elections will help lower the cost of 
energy .  
 
As drafted, LD 894 would ensure that municipalities in Maine do not pass ordinances that directly or indirectly 
prohibit a consumer from choosing their own heating or energy system. Under current law, arguably, Maine 
municipalities already have very limited – if any – authority to do this, but it is something that has arisen in 
other states.  Some cities and towns in var ious states have tried to restrict how we heat or energize our homes, 
businesses, or public buildings. These are often accomplished through changes to building codes and outright 
bans on  specific energy sources in new construction, remodels, and even ex isting housing and commercial 
buildings. LD 894 limits the ability of municipalities to enact such restrictions on fuel choice by consumers.  
 
 
 In closing, we again thank the sponsor  for bringing the legi slation forwar d and we would encourage the 
committee to vote, “ought to pass ” on L.D. 894.  I am happy to bring back any additional information for the 
work session and I will be present at the work session . Thank you for your con sideration .  
 
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
