STATE 01¢ MA1?~iE 
$5 0FF;(:F. or THE GOVERi‘€()R 
ISTATE HOFSE S’1yn‘10:\‘ 
AUGUSTA, Mr\iNE 
, 04333-0001 
JAi\*E'r TVIILLS DAN BURGESS 
Govcnnon Dmzcron or G0vERNOR ’s 
ENERGY Omen 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT COMMITTEE 
An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a 
Particular Energy System or Energy Distributor 
L.D. 894 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
March 16, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and 
Local Government: My name is Caroline Colan, and l am the Legislative Liaison for the Governor ’s Energy 
Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in opposition to L.D. 894. 
This legislation prohibits municipal governments from adopting an ordinance or regulation that prohibits 
an entity from installing a heating or energy system, or engaging the services of an energy distributor of 
their choice. Current law allows any municipality, by the adoption, amendment or repeal of ordinances 
or bylaws, to exercise any power or function which the Legislature has power to confer upon it, which is 
not denied either expressly or by clear implication, and exercise any power or function granted to the 
municipality by the Constitution of Maine, general law or charter (30-A MRSA §3001). The proposed bill 
may result in limiting the ability of a municipal government and its citizens to determine their own 
energy future through a public, locally-driven process. 
lt is understood that this legislation has been modeled closely after New Hampshire law SB 86 which 
was signed into law in 2021. Testimony in support of the legislation during public hearings in New 
Hampshire, indicated the legislation was motivated by policy supporting building electrification in other 
northeast states, particularly Vermont and Massachusetts, and with the aim of protecting heating oil 
and fuel companies in the state. 
To meet Maine's greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets, large portions of the energy used in our 
economy will need to be converted from higher emitting sources, like fossil fuels, to low carbon 
resources and electricity — a transition referred to as ”beneficial electrification ” — and this electricity 
must increasingly come from cleaner generation sources. 
Heating, cooling, and lighting of buildings are responsible for almost one-third of Maine's greenhouse 
gas emissions. Maine can reduce greenhouse gases by modernizing our buildings to use cleaner energy, 
increase energy efficiency, and utilize lower-carbon building materials. Building codes to improve energy 
efficiency, heating and cooling homes and businesses with high efficiency heat pumps and heat—pump 
water heaters, and Weatherization are among the most cost-effective ways to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions.
1
Low-income households, especially rural low-income households, often pay a higher percentage of their 
income to meet their home energy needs. To meet Maine's climate and equity goals, weatherization 
and heat-pump incentive programs should continue to expand to reach more Maine people, with special 
efforts to engage diverse communities and geographies, especially those with the greatest energy cost 
burdens. 
While the state of Maine strongly supports these objectives and actions to meet our greenhouse gas 
emissions reduction targets, it has not mandated individuals or municipalities to use a particular energy 
source for heating or cooling, but rather has worked to implement programs that make it easier and 
more cost-effective for people to make the transition to modern technologies that also reduce our 
emissions. 
The GEO closely monitors the evolution of modern, energy-efficient building codes and supports training 
on building codes to facilitate ongoing education of contractors and code-enforcement officials. The 
State of Maine, per statute, currently follows codes and standards from the 2015 international Energy 
Conservation Code (IECC), but municipal governments can choose to adopt "stretch codes” beyond the 
current state code if they choose. As these baseline codes advance and Maine communities choose to 
adopt stretch codes, this legislation could have the impact of prohibiting the direction that 
municipalities would seek to take. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
CIM-J40-4-C620-v- 
Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
