Date: March 16, 2023
To: State & Local Government Committee
From: Cole Cochrane, Maine Youth Action
Re: Testimony against LD 894,
An Act to Preserve Heating
and Ener gy
Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular
Energy System or Ener gy Distributor
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover , and the esteemed members of the State & Local
Government committee. My name is Cole Cochrane, I am from Saco, and I represent Maine
Youth Action, a statewide youth advocacy group that represents hundreds of young Mainers
from varying backgrounds. I am here today to testify in opposition to LD 894, An Act to
Preserve Heating and Ener gy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular
Energy System or Ener gy Distributor .
When I first heard about this legislation, there were a few positions that came to mind: first and
foremost, I think it needs to be clear that this bill does not serve the public’ s interest and instead
benefits the fossil fuel industry . Fossil fuel companies are facing immense pressure from fair
competition by renewable sources of ener gy, such as solar and wind. Those alternative sources of
energy are increasingly cost ef fective in comparison to fossil fuels. In fact, as of 2022, the costs
of electricity from fossil fuels ranged between 5 and 17 cents per kilowatt hour; while on the
other hand, solar ener gy only averaged between 3 and 6 cents. Furthermore, these companies
face additional pressure from municipalities, for municipal governments are working towards the
greater good by advancing initiatives to resolve the climate crisis. One of those critical initiatives
may be banning particular ener gy systems or distributors. All in all, the fossil fuel industry is
scared of losing their market share, and therefore are promoting bills such as LD 894 in order to
deter fair competition within the ener gy market, but also simultaneously impair the municipal
response to climate change.

My second position I hold is that Maine has a long standing tradition of local autonomy . It has
been a home rule state since 1969. This has empowered municipalities to take action on
important issues facing our communities. This obviously ranges widely , but I’d like to focus on
the perspective of climate action. Municipal governments have taken strong stances on their
climate responses and have committed to ambitious tar gets and plans. How are they able to meet
these tar gets if the state starts imposing restrictions on their autonomy? It might be ener gy
systems and distributors today , but I fear this will set a terrible precedent that would lead to a
domino ef fect. Preserving local autonomy and rejecting bills like LD 894 is the best course of
action in order to ensure that municipalities can continue their climate action work without
unnecessary barriers and restrictions. I would also like to add that, as a youth advocate, starting
to be involved in politics and current issues today begins at the local level. I have seen groups of
enthusiastic advocates successfully fight for ordinances, plans and investments aimed towards
promoting a sustainable community . This could not have been done without local autonomy ,
which is something that is on the line with this bill. Therefore, I hope the committee may take
into consideration my positions and vote “ought not to pass” on LD 894. Thank you for your
time and your service.
