  
 
March 1 6, 202 3 
 
TESTIMONY OF LESLIE ANDERSON                        
President and CEO of the Propane Gas Association of New England  
  
BEFORE THE MAINE  COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT  
 
In Support of  LD 894 An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from 
Prohibiting a Particular Energy System or Energy Distributor  
 
The Propane Gas Association of New England (PGANE) is pleased to have the opportunity to offer its 
comments regarding LD 894 . 
  
The Propane Gas Association of New England is a regional alternative energy trade association 
representing members of the propane industry in the six New England States. We exist to serve the 
propane industry by promoting safety, education,  and public awar eness of the uses of propane. Our 
membership includes  propane companies and suppliers, including numerous  small companies who are 
often family owned and operated, many for several generations.  
 
We strongly support  LD 894 and urge the committee to vote unanimously Ought to Pass  on this bill.   We 
all want a cleaner environment and consumers also want the right to choose what energy source works 
best for their homes and businesses.  More than 315,000 homes and businesses use  clean propane in our 
state  and th is bill protects the right of our citizens to decide which energy is right for them.  
 
Our association promote s propane because it is clean, although it is often misunderstood by local officials 
and frequently is prejudiced as a “fossil fuels” rather than a beneficial by -product . Using propane furthers 
the fundamental environmental goal to Reduce, Reuse, and Recycl e as promoted by EPA and DEP. Most 
people do not realize that propane is a biproduct of natural gas processing.  About 5% of natural gas 
processing produces propane.  If propane is not captured and beneficially used to offset another energy 
source, it is sim ply burned off.  Propane is a partner with renewable energy as it is the perfect backup for 
solar installations and wind turbines.  It is a recognized clean alternative fuel by EPA under the 1990 Clean 
Air Act, and it is an essential backup for our ever -increasing use of the electric grid.  Renewable propane is 
also a viable innovation and under development from renewable sources.  We believe propane is the 
perfect partner for solar and wind and we want Maine citizens to be able to pick propane as their energy 
source.  
 
Besides being clean, one of the many wonderful things about propane heat is that it is warm.  Our industry 
has replaced heat pumps with warm hot air propane units in numerous retirement homes, where elderly 
customers wanted hot air rather than col d heat pump air blowing on them in the winter.  Without this bill, 
these elderly customers may lose the ability to make this choice.  
 

The State of Maine has incentivized heat pumps and encouraged citizens to use these systems, but the 
state has been very s mart and has not required that people remove their existing propane or other energy 
furnaces and boilers when they install heat pumps.  This is forward thinking, because when temperatures 
drop down below freezing, heat pumps are not efficient and switch to  resistant backup strip electric 
heating to operate.  Mainer’s know that another fuel source is more efficient and less expensive during the 
coldest periods of winter.  This bill ensures that Mainer’s will have the right to make these smart choices.  
 
Heat p umps need the most energy from the grid during the times when the grid is most stressed.  When 
the grid is stressed, the electricity plants switch from using natural gas to diesel or heating oil to generate 
electricity.  Most recently, on February 4, 2023,  32% percent of the grid was running on oil and 2% was 
running on coal (see graphic from ISONE app).   This is why we need alternative energy sources to heat our 
homes during the extreme harsh winter weeks , especially when these alternative energy sources d o not 
put stress on our fragile electric grid.  
 
 
Another reason that Maine homes need additional energy sources is due to the age of our housing stock.  
Heat pumps do not work well in all homes, and from an environmental justice perspective, it is less 
expensive to continue with existing heating sources rather than retrofit to an all -electric home.  This bill 
will preserve our citizens freedom of choice to pick the energy that is right for their situation.  
 
Energy diversity is critical for energy security . Propane is the unsung energy hero of extreme wea ther 
events, and if climate change is going to increase the likelihood of these events as many predict, then we 
need to make sure that Maine  has a healthy vibrant propane industry to step in and provide energy 
security during these emergencies.  For the mo st recent reminder that propane is the portable energy 
needed during times of crisis, consider COVID – 19. During the pandemic, propane was the primary energy 
used to heat outdoor testing sites . Propane was also used for handwashing stations and hot shower s for 
the homeless, as well as a source of outdoor heating for businesses, restaurants, and testing sites 
throughout the state.   For propane companies to be able to supply all the propane generators that 
continue to grow in number each year in our state, w e need a strong robust industry.  

 
Propane is nontoxic, does not contaminate groundwater or surface water, is portable, and is already 
present across our state supporting local businesses and employees by providing green jobs. In Maine we 
have numerous smal l businesses and family -owned businesses that make up our industry. Most of our 
members are local Maine companies employing Maine citizens and contributing to their local 
communities. Utilizing propane contributes to Maine’s economy and promotes green alte rnative energy 
usage here in our State.  
 
I thank you for the opportunit y to comment before the committee  and ask you to vote Ought to Pass on 
LD 894  the freedom of choice energy bill.  
