 
 
 
March 16, 2023  
 
RE: LD 894 Support  
 
Dear Chairman Nagle  and Members of the Committee,  
 
For the record, my name is Marc Brown and I am the Executive Director, New England for Consumer 
Energy Alliance, or (CEA). CEA is a nationwide association made up of both energy consumers and 
producers working to advance all -of-the-above energy and environ mental polic ies that will lower energy 
costs for every American. CEA supports actions that thoughtfully advance our nation towards a cleaner, 
more environmentally responsible energy future. We believe that responsible policies always consider 
the needs of consumers while leveraging and supporting the development of state‐of‐the‐art 
technologies to improve our environmental stewardship, aiding in the continued reductions of all 
emissions.  
On behalf of CEA I want to thank you for the opportunity to provide th is testimony today in support of 
part LD 894 . 
This is very simple and straight -forward legislation that protects the rights of individual consumers to 
choose the manner in which they heat their home, cook their food, dry their clothes —essentially how 
they power their lives.   
While the objective of LD 894 is simple, its importance and timeliness can’t be understated. 
Unfortunately, dozens of short -sighted local mandates  and prohibitions  have  been pass ed across the 
country  that would deny families and busines ses the right to choose for themselves how they power 
their households , business operations, and even what type of appliances a contractor can install in a 
home it builds. This legislation prevents a municipality from infringing on the right of individuals  and 
busin esses  to make these choices . It should be up to consumers to decide what types of app liances they 
want not anyone else.  
Similar  bipartisan  legislation has passed in states like  New Hampshire , Kentucky, West Virginia, and 
Georgia among others to address the  aforementioned concerns.  Further, we need to have one state 
uniform energy policy rather than an unworkable patchwork of local prohibitions and rules that would 
make service and distribution almost impossible to figure out , likely at much great er cost to consumers.  
 
 
 
 
I want to reiterate and be clear – CEA wants to see a clean future with lower emissions .  However, 
misguided attempts to ban natural gas and propane service by forcing mandates onto consumers will 
lead to astronomical costs and jeo pardize energy resources that are helping our nation reduce 
emissions.  A report  requested by the City Supervisor of San Francisco found that its natural gas  ban 
could cost consumers up to $5.9 billion or potentially over $34,000 per household.  We do not want to 
repeat those mistakes here in Maine .  
On behalf of CEA I urge you to support this commonsense measure that will help shield our neighbors 
from intrus ive and unrealistic mandates as well as preserve  Maine’s  economic competitiveness.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
 
 
Marc Brown  
Executive Director, New England  
Consumer Energy Alliance  
PO Box 118  
Exeter, NH 03833 -2782  
mbrown@consumerenergyalliance.org  
 
 
 
 

