MAINE ENERGY
l
1
l
i
l
l
l
l
l
l
1
i
l
E
l 
l TESTIMONY of Megan Diver 
Vice President 
Maine Energy Marketers Association 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
In Support of LD 894 
An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a 
Particular Energy System or Energy Distributor 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the State and Local Government Committee, 
my name is Megan Diver, I am the Vice President of the Maine Energy Marketers Association (MEMA). 
MEMA is a trade association composed of approximately 300-member companies and over 5,000 direct 
and 5,000 indirect people working in energy delivery and servicing businesses delivering heating oil, 
biofuels, motor fuels, propane, pellets and kerosene and offering service and installations on the 
equipment that operates these fuels. MEMA also provides heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and 
refrigeration (HVAC-R), education and training to hundreds of Mainers each year at our Technical 
Education Center (MTEC) training facility located in Brunswick. 
lam here today to submit testimony in support of LD 894 and appreciate Senator Harrington sponsoring 
this important piece of legislation for the industry. 
In today's uncertain world, Maine consumers need an "all of the above" approach to heating 
their homes. What may look like the best, least expensive, or most versatile energy option 
today may not be the best solution tomorrow. Diversification of resources is critical to 
addressing the long—term needs of Maine people, businesses, and government. Diversification 
also ensures that we fall victim to a single point of failure — should one energy source suddenly 
become unavailable. 
Although l was much younger, l do remember quite the ”lce Storm of '98" when Maine's power 
grid was brought down and people across the state went without power — some for overa 
month. A more recent example of electricity being knocked out happened on February 2"“ of 
this year in Texas when an intense winter storm led to power outages in hundreds ofthousands 
of homes and businesses. The same situation presented itself in February 2021, when a winter 
storm pushed the power grid in Texas to the brink of collapse. 
But weather alone is not the only consideration when it comes to avoiding a single point of 
failure. In May of 2021 the Colonial Pipeline was the victim of a ransomware attack which 
infected some the pipeline's digital systems, shutting it down for several days and wreaked 
25 Greenwood Road, P.0. Box 249 Brunswick ME 01l0lle0249 l Z07-7Z9~5Z98 I ilaineEnergyl4arkeiers.com
havoc on consumers and airlines along the East Coast. The hack was even deemed a national 
security threat causing President Biden to declare a state of emergency. 
The fact is that Maine is one of the coldest states in the nation and to make it through a Maine 
winter most of us rely not on just one source of heat, but several — boiler or furnace, wood 
stove, fireplace, heat pump, and other types of space heaters. Keeping every source of energy 
and equipment as an option ensure that Mainers will always have a "backup plan" and allows 
for flexibility today and in our future and Mainers want to continue to choose how they heat 
their homes and businesses. 
ln fact, according to the Spring 2022 omnibus survey conducted by Critical Insights, 87% of 
Maine voters surveyed believe Mainers should have the right to choose how they heat their 
homes and businesses. 
I hope that this Committee will agree with the majority of Maine voters and support LD 894.
