M Mame l\/lumcnpol 
Association 
60 COMMUNITY DRIVE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04330-9486 
(207) 623-8428 
www.memun.org 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition to 
LD 620 —An Act to Promote Free Trade by Preventing Municipalities from Prohibiting the Sale of Legal 
Goods 
And 
LD 662- An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco Bans on State-licenses Tobacco Retailers 
And 
LD 894 - An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting 
a Particular Energy System or Energy Distributor 
March 15, 20223 
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony in strong opposition LD 620, 
An Act to Promote Free Trade by Preventing Municipalities from Prohibiting the Sale of Legal Goods, 
LD 662, An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco Bans on State-licenses Tobacco Retailers, and 
LD 894, An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a 
Particular Energy System or Energy Distributor, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which 
represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. 
Each one of these bills attacks the core democratic principles and removes agency from our 
residents ’ ability to shape their communities, priorities and comfort in favor of business interests that may 
or may not be local community residents. This is a slippery slope that acts against Maine voters have 
routinely acted in the best interests of their communities and lead the way in removing harmful products 
that have historically posed burdens on public safety, health and welfare. 
Laws are reactive not proactive and municipal government is the nimblest level of government to 
address localized pressures which is why Maine voters codiﬁed the importance of home rule in our 
Constitution. Just as it is nimble to adopt law, it is nimble to amend and repeal as well. The actions of one 
community that are the targets of at least one of these bills, should be addressed in that community in 
direct consultation with their residents and not roll over the rights and ability for all communities to 
address local issues. 
In 1969, a public referendum to amend the State Constitution was successfully approved by 
Maine’s voters. The resulting amendment is found in Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Maine 
Constitution and provides:
“The inhabitants of any municipality shall have the power to alter and amend their charters on all 
matters, not prohibited by Constitution or general law, which are local and municipal in character. The 
Legislature shall prescribe the procedure by which the municipality may so act.” 
The people of Maine have been clear, they value and desire for this body to allow self 
determination for what business activity is appropriate in their communities. 
It was Maine’s municipalities that rang the alarm bells for the dangers to child health and welfare 
and the burden on public safety from impacts of “legal” synthetic cannabis long before the state or federal 
governments banned the substances. In 2013, cities began banning the sale of a legal “zombie” drug that 
not only caused extreme hallucinations, acute respiratory depression and death but was also highly 
addictive and not banned at the state until three years later. Despite a now federal ban on some elements 
in the products, in 2018 manufacturers found additional legal products such as brodifacoum, a very long- 
acting anticoagulant commonly used in rat poison, and the FDA sent notice of a rise in contaminated 
blood supplies as a result. They remain illegal in Maine while continuing to poison other communities. 
V While LD 662 is born from actions in one particular municipality, it is best addressed -in that V 
municipality through council elections, not by using a state platform to strip other municipalities of their 
tools. There are also tools in existing law that provide options to challenge newly adopted ordinances if 
they interfere unjustly with business activities. The legislature was clear and speciﬁc about retaining the 
ability for municipalities to adopt such an ordinance under MRS 22 §l556 which additionally requires 
public notice and public hearing by which all residents may weigh in. While understandably frustrating 
for the sponsor, the bill suggests that the path to resolution is to roll over voter majority rather than work 
to undo it. 
Officials do not believe such action will become widespread because it is too difficult to enforce. 
LD 620 would have signiﬁcant unintended consequences of devaluing the carefully constructed 
concerns of communities who decided certain legal activities had no place in their community or should 
occur only in designated areas. For instance, while a community may have allowed an alcohol 
establishment to operate in its borders, it may not allow adult entertainment in the same area or in the 
entire municipality. As drafted, LD 620 would mean that the perfectly legal offering of adult 
entertainment under state law could not be prohibited, regardless of a local ordinance, if it occurred ina 
licensed alcohol establishment. 
Communities are best able to decide what types of activity belong in their communities and 
where. Legality of an activity or product is only one test to consider. 
LD 894 would remove the ordinance tools for communities to meet their federal environmental 
permit obligations, meet locally important climate goals by prioritizing or prohibiting certain types of 
particulate producing outdoor boilers in densely populated areas where they are least appropriate. It seeks 
to solve a problem that doesn’t exist, disrespects Mainers and their common sense approach to adopting 
local ordinances, and is part of a national effort from the oil and gas lobby to stymie local climate efforts 
and prohibit local decisions. Such bills have been introduced across the nation, initiated, in part in 
response to efforts by some local officials in Texas to ban hydraulic fracturing. 
Mainers are capable of making decisions on their own without national inﬂuence and removing 
community tools to decide how energy is received or heat is delivered are equally problematic when 
restricted by building code as when they are preempted by unnecessary law. If the sponsors are concerned
about speciﬁc activities in their own communities, officials would encourage them to engage in the 
conversation with their neighbors, join an ordinance committee, or introduce a local ballot before town 
meeting with support and signatures from their neighbors. 
Preemption of municipal home rule cuts both Ways. The difference is by protecting it, every 
individual has equal footing to enact change, and repeal past efforts with which they disagree, without 
undermining their neighboring municipalities. Ofﬁcials ask that you vote ought not to pass on all three of 
these bills.
