 
 
 
March 16 , 2023  
 
Committee on State and Local Government   
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  Augusta, ME 4333  
RE: Testimony in Opposition to LD 894, An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy 
Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular Energy System or Energy Distributor  
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Committee on State and Local 
Government,   
 
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in opposition to LD 894, An 
Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting 
a Particular Energy System or Energy Distributor.  I regret not being able to do so in 
person.  
 Conservation Law Foundation (“CLF”)  is a member -supported nonprofit advocacy 
organization working to conserve natural resources, protect public health, and build healthy 
communities in Maine and throughout New England.  I have been CLF’s Vice- President for 
Maine since 2007.  While much of our advocacy is before other committees of this Legislature such as the Environment and Natural Resources, the Energy, Utilities and Technology and the Judiciary Committees, as a former town councilor for my home of Falmouth, I have a special 
appreciation fo r the work of this Committee.  
The bill before you today conflicts with the very premise of local government  here in 
Maine, namely that communities have the right to make decisions as to how best to provide for their rights, safety, and public health.  To be sure, the state and federal government provide 
baseline thresholds in those areas but as you all are well aware, Maine communities have had the right to enact local ordinances and regulations that go beyond those thresholds to protect the public health and safety of their citizens , subject of course to meeting standards of 
procedural and substantive due process.  
LD 894 is not a surprising bill, as it has been a part of the playbook of t he oil and 
natural gas industry response to the increasing realization that the product they sell is bad for the pocketbook, bad for public health and bad for the environment.  And as consumers and communities are beginning to respond to that realization by seeking cheaper, healthier and less destructive  alternatives, th ose who have long profited from Mai ne’s ove rreliance on  oil and gas  
to he at our homes and busine sses are seeking to limit th e ability of communities and 
 
 
2 
 consumers to make those alternative choices .  LD 894 is a perfect example of the doublespeak 
employed by the oil and gas industry – what they claim is a bill to protect “ choice”  is really a 
bill to deprive communities of choice.  Indeed, by preempting local action that will benefit the 
future health and economic well -being of a community, LD 894 attempts to lock those 
communities into choices made in the past.  
 
One need only look at the success of heat pumps across Maine to understand what this bill seeks 
to accomplish.  Mainers, to the tune of thousands of households who have installed more than 100,000 heat pumps , have begun the transition from oil and gas to electric heat pumps because of 
the cost savings, the cleaner indoor air to breathe and the climate benefits.  That transition has come at the cost of the oil and gas merchants  who seek to keep people tethered to fossil fuels , 
just as tobacco companies did, and continue to do, with respect to cigarettes .  LD 894 is a cynical 
effort to make this Legislature complicit in precluding communities from exercising their long established and cherished home rule rights .  
 If towns want to adopt ordinances that are in the interest of their residents, then they should be free to do so without the Legislature pre -empting them from doing so. If the oil and gas industry 
want to oppose local actions  that impact their businesses , they are of course free to do so, but the 
Legislature should not be a party to this cynical effort to block local decision- making cloaked in 
the language of “choice” and “freedom.”   We urge this Committee to reject that effort and to 
vote Ought Not to P ass on LD 894.   
 Very truly yours,  
 
Sean Mahoney  
Senior Counsel and Vice President, CLF Maine  

