WA LIZ 8150/\/S P/?()F’A/\/E 
March 16, 2023 
TESTIMONY OF SUE WALTZ 
Owner] CFO of Waltz & Sons Propane 
BEFORE THE MAINE COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
Concerning LD 894 An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a 
Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular Energy System or Energy Distributor 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, I am pleased to have the opportunity to offer my comments regarding LD 
894 An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from 
Prohibiting a Particular Energy System or Energy Distributor. 
I, on behalf of my company, Waltz & Sons Propane, respectfully request that the 
committee vote PASS on this bill LD 894. 
We are a family owned and operated Propane company located in Buxton. We service a 
97% residential customer base in Southern Maine. Due to the diversity of our customer 
base and their various approaches to heating their homes, we feel it is imperative that 
their choices to heat and energize their homes not be restricted. We feel that our 
customers choose a solution that suits their personal heating needs, and do not need 
local or state government reducing their access to any heating source that may be best 
for them. 
All fuel sources used for Primary Heating, be it electric for a Heat Pump, Oil, K-1, Wood 
Products, Propane or Natural Gas for a furnace or boiler, have high efficiency units 
which all meet stringent efficiency guidelines. However, regardless of how efficient and 
clean burning these units are, there may be a need to use a different fuel to source 
alternative heating solutions in a home, or at least have a choice to do so. 
Many of our customers use our propane services to augment or supplement their 
primary heating system. A propane ﬁreplace or space heater will operate when the
power goes out and can heat a room quickly in the morning rather than turning on the 
central heating system. Perhaps it's a garage or space heater to service an area that 
can't be tied into the primary heating system. Most of today's homeowners are 
choosing propane to fuel their generators, which keep their primary heating units 
operational when the power goes out. If we were to allow local or state government to 
dictate our fuel choices, many of these options could go away. 
In most cases, it's the product that determines which fuel is chosen. This could be clue 
to space challenges, retrofits during renovations, or code restrictions. For instance, 
many high efficiency boilers and water heaters are wall hung and take up minimal 
space. Perhaps there is no room for an outside condenser or propane tank so that 
eliminates some choices. By having a choice of energy sources, one can look at various 
options and choose one that works best for them. 
Another key point is maintenance. By allowing energy of choice, it is also allowing the 
consumer to choose their maintenance plan. For example, Heat Pump heads require 
routine maintenance throughout the year, and in many cases, a complete cleaning 
annually which is very costly. Many of the newer high efﬁciency oil or propane boilers 
have lower, and less frequent, maintenance costs. 
Of course, we can't forget our outside spaces. If certain energy sources were banned or 
restricted, it could extend beyond our primary heating and restrict the usage of many 
lifestyle products that many have come to enjoy. I know that personally, l would miss 
my fire tables, and heat in my she shed. 
For these reasons, I, on behalf of my company, respectfully request that the committee 
vote PASS on this bill. 
Thank you for your consideration.
