Sustainability Oﬀice
Troy Moon 
Sustainability Director
To:
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the State and Local Government Committee
From:
Troy Moon, Sustainability Director
Date:  March 16, 2023
Regarding: City of Portland, Maine testimony to the State of Maine 131st Legislature’s JOINT STANDING
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES in OPPOSITION TO LD 891,
"
An
Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular
Energy System or Energy Distributor
.
"
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the City of Portland in opposition to LD 894
"
An
Act to
Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular Energy
System or Energy Distributor
."
Summary:
Decarbonizing existing buildings and ending the installation of fossil fuel infrastructure in new construction
are two important strategies described in the City’s climate action plan, One Climate Future. If LD 894 were
to be adopted, it would infringe on the City of Portland’s ability to regulate fossil fuel infrastructure and
jeopardize our ability to meet the greenhouse gas reduction targets established by the City Council. These
include Resolve 9-17/18, A Resolution Adopting a Goal to Reduce Citywide Greenhouse Gas Emissions 80%
by 2050, and Order 123-20/21, Approving the One Climate Future Climate Action and Adaptation Plan.
Discussion:
45% of Portland’s emissions are attributable to the combustion of natural gas and fuel oil in buildings.
Transitioning all buildings and most industrial processes to run on electricity instead of fossil fuels is the
foundation upon which the City’s climate action plan rests. This is possible because the State has adopted a
100% Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS), which is a statute that requires the electric grid to be powered by
80% renewable energy by 2030 and 100% renewable energy by 2050. Installation of local, behind-the-meter
solar enhances this policy and reduces overall demand on the grid. The greening grid provides an opportunity
to decarbonize buildings and transportation by adopting beneficial electrification. The wedge graph below
shows the cumulative impact of several of the decarbonization policy actions necessary to achieve our GHG
reduction goal and demonstrates the vital importance of beneficial electrification to achieve our goals.
389 Congress Street, Portland, Maine 04101 | c: 207.756.8362 | thm@portlandmaine.gov

Policies like LD 984 that protect incumbent fossil fuel infrastructure would impede beneficial
electrification and leave us far short of achieving our climate goals by 2050
.
The City’s climate action plan,
One Climate Future, has two
chapters devoted specifically to
adopting policies that limit the
expansion of fossil fuel
infrastructure deployed in the
City of Portland.
The first is BE 3.4, which calls
for transitioning existing single
family homes, multifamily
buildings, and commercial
buildings from fuel oil to all
electric heating and cooling.
The second is BE 5.6, which
explicitly calls for a phase-out
of natural gas infrastructure in
new construction.
The greenhouse gas modeling for One Climate Future shows that, to achieve One Climate Future goals,
virtually all residential and commercial buildings must be transitioned to renewable sources of heating and
cooling by 2050. Installing fossil fuel infrastructure in new buildings makes it difficult and costly to transition
buildings to renewable energy sources within the 2050 timeline. Requiring new construction and buildings
undergoing major renovations to install electric infrastructure instead of fossil fuel infrastructure helps
achieve the City’s climate goals and eliminates future expenses to decarbonizing that building.
Opposing LD 984 preserves the City’s home rule authority and maintains the City Council’s ability to adopt
policies to decarbonize buildings with clean, renewable electricity.
Sincerely,
Troy Moon
Sustainability Director
389 Congress Street, Portland, Maine 04101 | c: 207.756.8362 | thm@portlandmaine.gov

