PO Box 88  
       Belfast, ME 04915  
Phone: (207) 761 -5616  
www.sierraclub.org/maine  
 
 
 
To:  Members of the Joint Committee on State and Local Government  
From:  William Weber, Sierra Club Maine  
Date:  March 16, 2023  
Re:  Testimony in Opposition to L.D. 894: An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy  
Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular Energy 
System or Energy Distributor  
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and Members of the Joint Standin g Committee 
on State and Local Government,       
      
My name is William Weber and I am testifying on behalf of Sierra Club Maine, 
representing over 22,000 supporters and members statewide. Founded in 1892, Sierra 
Club is one of our nation’s olde st and largest environmental organizations. We work 
diligently to amplify the power of our 3.8 million members nation -wide as we work 
towards combating climate change and promoting a just and sustainable economy. To 
that end, we urge you to vote “ought not  to pass” on  L.D. 894 : An Act to Preserve 
Heating and Energy Choice by Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular 
Energy System or Energy Distributor .      
 
I am also a member of  the P ortland Climate Action Team (PCAT) , a volunteer group of 
greater Portland residents committed to addressing the current climate crisis. We 
advocate for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in Portland and promote the 
equitable transition from fossil fuels to clean renewable energy.  
 
In the last several ye ars m any municipalities have adopted greenhouse gas reduction 
goals.  L.D. 894  would  prevent many municipalities from reaching these climate goals 
set by voters and their elected local representative s and  in doing so, significantly 
weaken our ability to effectively reduce carbon pollution at the local level .      
 
To use a specific example, Portland and South Portland have adopted a common 
Climate Action Plan , One Climate Future . The Plan approved by our City Council in 
2020 sets aggressive, but achievable goals to reduce the greenhouse gasses emitted by 
our two cities, including an 80% reduction in greenhouse gasses by 2050. L.D. 894 
would not only eliminate one tool to achieve those goals, but it would also undercut 
the statutory goals presented in the Maine Won’t Wait climate action plan . These state  
goals were signed into law with bipartisan support of the Legislature in 2019.  
      
 
As you know Maine is historically a strong “ home rule state ,” which holds the 
principle that  the government, in this case the state, should not interfere with local 
democratic decisions  delegated to m unicipalities . In November 1969, an amendment 
to the Maine State Constitution  delegated broad “home rule” powers to 
municipalities. This home rule power was recognized by the legislature in 2018 when 
then Governor Paul LePage tried to override local or dinances that banned dangerous 
synthetic pesticides. Similar anti -home rule legislation was submitted time and time 
again, and the legislature rightly rejected the proposed bill s each time.            
 
Our municipalities, as well as the state, are making progress to meet  our c limate       
goals. And the provisions offered in the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) will give us more 
tools to reduce our dependence on imported oil and gas and reduce our carbon 
footprint. The IRA offers financial  incentives that will allow the state to grow our 
green work   force and domestic supply chain.  But recent history  suggests  that the 
“carrot ” offered in the IRA will only take us so far . Incentives alone  will not b e      
enough to reach our long -term emission  goals. Allowing our local governments   the 
tools to meet our community adopted goals is very much in alignment with the  
practice of home rule and important if we want to  reach a sustainable future.  
 
I expect t his won’t be the last time preempting  legislation like this will be proposed. 
We know that the oil and gas  industry has  a strong incentive and  signif icant resources 
to delay and confound a transition to a decarbonized planet. Much of this funding as a 
result of lying and distorting the true impacts of burning fossil fuels.  And each year 
that this legislation is proposed, twice, three times, maybe four  times, we should be 
reminded of the increasing impact on human health and the state we all love. Please 
don’t pass this legislation.  
      
I respectfully  urge an “ought not to pass” report on L.D. 894: An Act to Preserve 
Heating and Energy Choice by  Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular 
Energy System or Energy Distributor.  Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I 
am happy to answer any questions you may have.  
      
Sincerely,  
William Weber  
 
      
Member, Energy Team  
Sierra Club Maine  

