 
TO: Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & 
Business  
FROM: Coralie Giles, President of the Maine State Nurses Association, Vice President of National Nurses United, and resident of Brewer , Maine  
RE: Opposition to LD 1586 DATE: Mond ay, April 24, 2023 
 
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Joint Standing Com mittee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement & Business 
  
In OPPOSITION to: LD 1586, An Act to Reform the Occupational Licensing Regime by 
Including Portability and Removing Good Character Requirements  
 
Public Hearing: Tue sday, April 25, 2023, at 1:00 P M, Cross Building, Room 2 06  
 
Senator Curry , Representative Roberts  and distinguis hed members of the  Joint Standing 
Com mittee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business : 
 My name is Coralie Giles. I am a resident of Brewer  and have been a registered nurse 
for nearly 45 years. I currently serve as the  President of the Maine State Nurses 
Association  and  as a Vice -President of National Nurses United.  The Ma ine State Nurses 
Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 nurses and caregivers across the state of Maine, submits this testimony  opposing LD  1586 . 
 LD 1586 undermines occupational licensing requirements that are crucial to  ensuring  
safe, effective, and therapeutic patient care . LD 1586 is  also unfair . If this bill passes, it 
will open the door for  licensees from other states to work in our state even if licensees 
from Maine are  not allowed to work in theirs . MSNA/NNU prefers that  the committee 
vote “No” on  LD 1586 as a whole  but respectfully ask s that,  at the  very least, registered 
nurses ( RNs ) and licensed practical nurses ( LPNs ) be excluded from the bill.  Maine is a 
member of the Nurse Licensure Compact  that already allows RNs and LPNs  from  other 
states to care for patients in  Maine, including nurses from  the neighboring states of 
New Hampshire and Vermont.  
 
  
First, and most important, caring for patients can be a matter of life  and death . LD 1586 
allows licensing requirements to be weakened. Our state has established  minimum 
standards that  nurses, doctors, and other health care workers  must meet to practice in 
our state . Weakening these standards will lower the quality and safety of healthcare 
available within Maine.  
 
Second, unlike interstate licensure compacts, LD 1586 fails to require reciproci ty for 
occupational licenses  when allowing licensees from other states to work in Maine . 
Interstate licensing compacts , while problematic, at the very least  require participating 
states to meet specified requirements. Likewise, i nterstate licensing compacts  ensure 
reciprocity so that Maine nurses receive additional employment opportunities in other states in exchange for increased competition within their hom e state. The framework 
proposed by LD 1586 provides none of these protections.   
Finally, LD 1586 is duplicative of existing law . Maine is a member of the Nurse 
Licensure Compact  that provides licensing reciprocity among compact members . Thus, 
including RNs and LPNs in LD 1586 is unnecessary and would cause needless 
confusion and complication. MSNA/NNU  respectfully asks that committee members 
vote “No”  on this bill or , at the very least, that you exclude  RNs and LPNs from the bill.  
 Sincerely,   
 
Coralie Giles, RN  
President, Maine State Nurses Association  
Vice -President, National Nurses United 

Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 1586
TO: Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement
& Business
FROM: Coralie Giles, President of the Maine State Nurses Association, Vice 
President of National Nurses United, and resident of Brewer, Maine
RE: Opposition to LD 1586
DATE: Monday, April 24, 2023
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement & Business
In OPPOSITION to: LD 1586, An Act to Reform the Occupational Licensing Regime
by Including Portability and Removing Good Character Requirements
Public Hearing: Tuesday, April 25, 2023, at 1:00 PM, Cross Building, Room 206 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & 
Business:
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a resident of Brewer and have been a registered nurse 
for nearly 45 years. I currently serve as the President of the Maine State Nurses 
Association and as a Vice-President of National Nurses United. The Maine State 
Nurses Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 nurses
and caregivers across the state of Maine, submits this testimony opposing LD 1586.
LD 1586 undermines occupational licensing requirements that are crucial to ensuring 
safe, effective, and therapeutic patient care. LD 1586 is also unfair. If this bill passes, 
it will open the door for licensees from other states to work in our state even if 
licensees from Maine are not allowed to work in theirs. MSNA/NNU prefers that the 
committee vote “No” on LD 1586 as a whole but respectfully asks that, at the very 
least, registered nurses (RNs) and licensed practical nurses (LPNs) be excluded from 
the bill. Maine is a member of the Nurse Licensure Compact that already allows RNs 
and LPNs from other states to care for patients in Maine, including nurses from the 
neighboring states of New Hampshire and Vermont.
First, and most important, caring for patients can be a matter of life and death. LD 
1586 allows licensing requirements to be weakened. Our state has established 
minimum standards that nurses, doctors, and other health care workers must meet to 
practice in our state. Weakening these standards will lower the quality and safety of 
healthcare available within Maine. 
Second, unlike interstate licensure compacts, LD 1586 fails to require reciprocity for 
occupational licenses when allowing licensees from other states to work in Maine. 
Interstate licensing compacts, while problematic, at the very least  require 
participating states to meet specified requirements. Likewise, interstate licensing 
compacts ensure reciprocity so that Maine nurses receive additional employment 
opportunities in other states in exchange for increased competition within their home 
state. The framework proposed by LD 1586 provides none of these protections. 
Finally, LD 1586 is duplicative of existing law. Maine is a member of the Nurse 
Licensure Compact that provides licensing reciprocity among compact members. 
Thus, including RNs and LPNs in LD 1586 is unnecessary and would cause needless 
confusion and complication. MSNA/NNU respectfully asks that committee members 
vote “No” on this bill or, at the very least, that you exclude RNs and LPNs from the 
bill.
Sincerely, 
 
Coralie Giles, RN 
President, Maine State Nurses Association 
Vice-President, National Nurses United 

