 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health of all Maine people 
 
TO:   Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director, Communications and Government Affairs  
 
DATE:  April 25, 2023 
 
RE:   OPPOSED 
 
LD 1586 , An Act to Enable Occupational License Portability and Prohibit Use of Good Character 
Qualifications in Occupational Licensing 
 
LD 1628 , Reform the Occupational Licensing Regime by Including Portability and Removing 
Good Character Requirements 
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings.  
 
We thank the committee for accepting our comments recommended Ought Not to Pass for 
sections contained in both bills concerning the removal of character requirements for licensure. 
 
There is arguably no more important issue when providing medical care than trust. Good 
character requirements in licensing are intended to protect the public and maintain high ethical 
standards in the physician profession by ensuring that licensees show respect for the rule of law 
and conduct themselves with honesty and integrity. 
 
A majority of Maine’s physician licensing boards are comprised of practicing physicians. They 
are aware of both the clinical and personal challenges facing applicants and current licensees. 
Board members are repeatedly counseled by Board staff to consider each issue based on its 
own facts and circumstances and make decisions in that context.  
 
MMA staff consistently monitors Board meetings and is satisfied both the Board of Licensure in 
Medicine and the Board of Osteopathic Licensure considers the unique systemic and 
background factors of each person when determining whether any self-identified or reported 
issues disclosed are sufficiently serious enough to warrant further review and any potential 
impact on the safe and ethical practice of medicine. Each applicant or licensee is given the 
opportunity to provide additional information or an explanation about the issue. 
 
Thank you for considering our comments. 
