 STATE OF MAINE  
BOARD  OF  NURSING  
158  STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  04333- 0158   
JANET T. MILLS  
GOVERNOR  
 
      
 
 KIM ESQUIBEL, PHD, M.S.N., R.N. 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR   
 
  
 
 
PHONE: (207)287-1133 
  
 
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER  
  
 
 
FAX: (207) 287-1149    
 OFFICES  LOCATED  AT:  161  CAPITOL  ST.,  AUGUSTA,  ME 
www.maine.gov/ boardofnursing      
 April 19, 2023 
  Senator Chip Curry, Chair Representative Tiffany Roberts, Chair Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333-0100  RE:  LDs 1586: An  Act to Reform the Occupational Licensing Regime by Including 
Portability and Removing Good Character Requirements; and  
LD 1628: An Act to Enable Occupational License Portability and Prohibit Use of Good 
Character Qualifications in Occupational Licensing   
 Dear Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and Members of the Committee:  
 The State Board of Nursing (“Board”) licenses and regulates licensed practical nurses, registered professional nurses and advanced practice registered nurses in Maine. The Board is composed of 9 members – 5 actively practicing registered nurses, 1 actively practicing advanced practice registered nurse, 1 actively practicing licensed practical nurse and 2 public members. The Board’s mission is to protect the public by ensuring its licensees are, professional, ethical and competent.  
 The Board submits the following comments in opposition to LD s 1586 and 1628:  
 If the intent of LDs 1586 and 1628 is to allow those persons who hold occupational credentials from other states to qualify more quickly to work within their occupations or professions in Maine, please note the Board ’s existing processes:  
 
     • Licensure by Endorsement:   32 M.R.S. §2205-A & 2254-A. Licensure of persons 
 licensed by another jurisdiction. These licensure regulations authorize the Board to grant  licensure to an individual who holds an active, unencumbered, valid license in another  state or territory of the United States.  The Board provides the mechanism by which  credentials are evaluated of persons educated and licensed in U.S. jurisdictions and  territories, Canada or foreign  countries. This process involves a review of educational 
 preparation, as well as verification of appropriate testing mechanisms leading to original 
 licensure through the NURSYS database.  Public protection is accomplished by ensuring  that only nurses with appropriate preparation, licensed through nationally recognized  testing, are permitted to practice nursing in this state.   
 
 Individuals can apply for Licensure by Endorsement on-line and upload required  documents within minutes. Licenses are issued after review of applicant materials within 
 2-10 business days.  
     •     Temporary  Authorization to Practice/Temporary License:  32 M.R.S. §§2103(4) and 
 10 M.R.S. §8003(5)(G) – these licensure regulations authorize the Board to grant a  temporary authorization to practice to any individual who holds an active, valid license in  another state or jurisdiction. The temporary  authorization allows applicants to begin work 
 more quickly while their permanent license applications are being processed. A  temporary authorization to practice can be issued within hours of receipt of an online  application and on- line verification of licensure  in another state or U.S. territory.  
 The Board has the following concerns with language in LDs 1586 and 1628:  
• The requirement in the bill that an individual has held a occupational  license in the 
other state for at least one year actually creates a barrier to portability for nurses to apply for licensure in Maine and does not support the intent of the bill, if that intent is, to allow those nurses to more quickly qualify to work within their profession in Maine.  
 The Board currently does not require nurses applying for licensure by reciprocity to have held the nursing license in the other state for at least one year.  If individuals have passed an examination and met the education standards that are substantially similar to those required for nurses is Maine (as outlined in §18702, paragraph 3) they are eligible to apply for a Maine license.  
 In addition, Maine is a member of the Nurse L icensure C ompact  (NLC). If an  
applicant meets th e NLC uniform licensure requirements in his/her primary state of 
residence and is issued a multi- state license, he/she can practice on the home- state 
license in any of the 39 compact states. The NLC makes it unnecessary for a 
registered professional  nurse (RN) and licensed practical nurse (LPN) to seek 
licensure in every jurisdiction and it provides for safeguards in place to ensure that nurse licensees are providing safe, competent nursing care to the citizens of Maine.   
• The term “good standing” as defined in the bill is not broad enough to protect the public. It should be expanded to include that the individual have no “adverse licensing” or “disciplinary” actions for any similar license in any jurisdiction. Many nurses hold multiple licenses in multiple jurisdictions. This bill would remove the discretion of the Board not to issue a license when a nurse may have adverse action or disciplinary action in another jurisdiction for concerning conduct.  
• The bill includes language of n o license revocati on by any licensing board for 
negligence or intentional misconduct related to the legal occupation but there is no  inclusion of license restrictions, probation or suspension. 
 • The “decision” period of 60 days with written notification to the applicant is too restrictive and does not account for issues related to review by the Board and potential for request of additional information from an applicant. The individual may have a complaint, allegation or investigation pending in another state for 
unprofessional conduct or alleged crime. The Board may not issue or deny a license 
until the pending issues are resolved or the applicant meets Maine’s requirements. 
 • The “appeal” right following denial of an application for licensure already exists in law.  
 • The bill caps the cost of any license at $ 100 – which could potentially impact the 
Board’s finances and ability to meet its mission of protecting the public (including funding for the Board’s website and support for the Medical Professionals Health Program, Nurse Licensure Compact, etc.).  
If the intent of LD s 1586 and 1628 is to allow those persons who hold occupational credentials 
from other states to qualify more quickly to work within their occupations or professions in Maine, the Board’s existing regulations and processes accomplish that goal.   Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments on LDs 1586 and 1628.  Sincerely,  
 
Kim Esquibel, PhD, MSN, RN  
Executive Director  
 
 

