 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on  Health and Human Services   
 
In Opposition to LD 601 , An Act to Reduce the Shortage of Municipal Emergency Medical Services 
Personnel by Removing Certain Vaccination Requirements  
 
Hearing Date:  April 24, 2023   
 
Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members  of the  Joint Standing Committee on  Health and 
Human Services , my name  is Ann Farmer and I am the Associate Director of the Division of Disease 
Surveillance  at the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention at the Department of Health and 
Human Services . I am here today to provide testimony on behalf of the Maine CDC  and will be 
speaking against LD 601 , An Act to Reduce the Shortage of Municipal Emergency Medical Services 
Personnel by Removing Certain Vaccination Requirements.  
 
This bill  would  effectively ove r-rule the Maine EMS Board’s adopted rule and  allow emergency medical 
services persons to provide treatment within the scope of their licenses without having been vaccinated 
against the COVID -19 virus or the influenza virus.  
 
From a public health perspect ive, u nvaccinated  EMS personnel are at increased risk of contracting 
COVID -19 or influenza and potentially transmitting these viruses to co -workers and the vulnerable 
patients that they are responsible for protecting. Generally, when someone is providing an emergency 
response they are providing care to individuals whose health is vulnerable . It is the moral and legal 
responsibility of providers to ensure they are minimizing risk to their patients. And, patients should be 
able to expect th is prote ction from their providers. To deny the reinforcement of vaccine adherence 
amongst EMS personnel will result in harmful outcomes to both the EMS community and their patients.  
 
The most frequently cited  reasons for choosing not to be immunized include conce rns about safety and 
effectiveness, as well as concerns about vaccine side effects.  Misinformation about vaccination has 
fueled these concerns, and t he Maine CDC encourages anyone with such concerns to consider 
information  from trusted sources and review  their concerns with medical professionals  as they consider 
what is best for them .  
 
Additionally, state agencies must have access to the full range of tools to protect the public health. Rules 
related to immunization requirements have been duly adopted following public processes. In the event 
of public health emergencies, the State should not be hamstrung by statute that limits their ability to be 
responsive.   
 
 To summarize , the Maine CDC o pposes LD 601. Good public health policy is data -driven and  evidence -
based. Maine’s immunization requirements are  in place  to ensure full protection of all Mainers  from 
vaccine -preventable disease. The evidence is overwhelming, sound, and supported by the   
professional medical community . Vaccinations are proven to be  safe and effective for limiting  the 
spread of COVID -19 disease  and reducing the severity of its impact on individuals and the State’s 
healthcare system as a whole .   
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and for the opportunity to provide testimony today. I can 
address questions from  the Committee and I will be available to participate in the work session.  
 
 
 
