Testimony in Support of LD601 – James Seymour, Corinth, Maine 
 
Members of the Committee: 
 
I write to you today in support of LD 601. Since the start of the Covid-19 Pandemic, countless 
others and I have been on the front lines, responding to peoples’ homes, and transporting 
patients in the small, contained compartment of an ambulance. At the very beginning, we did 
this with a lot of unknowns: Would there be PPE for me to wear? Is this person infected with 
the virus? Am I going to get sick? Am I going to make my family sick? 
 
All of this changed on October 15th, 2021 when providers who, including myself, were fired for 
refusing the Covid Vaccine. 
 
The Board pressed the mandate forward after board members acknowledged that there was 
already a shortage of staff, and the vaccine mandate exacerbated the issue. The board agreed 
in a unanimous decision that this was an issue, and they needed to address it; yet nothing has 
been done.  
 
The state of Maine EMS is broken due to lack of staffing. Some third-party research has said 
that up to 30% of the Maine EMS community left due to the vaccine mandate. EMS services 
have closed their doors, or severely limited services as a direct effect of the mandate. Fire and 
EMS agencies across the State are losing staffing due to attrition and are unable to fill these 
positions. Removing this mandate will allow the providers who were fired back to work, and will 
have a direct, and positive change for the citizens of Maine by allowing for higher staffing at 
EMS agencies, allowing for better rested, and clear minded providers. More staffing also allows 
for more ambulances on the streets, thus allowing for faster response times and quicker care 
for medical emergencies.  
 
With evolving science, and new data that comes out every day, our society is in a place where 
we can lift our vaccine mandates. Due to this, and other reasons, the United States COVID-19 
Public Health Emergency is set to expire on May 11, 2023. The University of Maine system has 
removed their vaccine mandate. The US Military has removed their vaccine mandate.  
 
 
In closing, I ask that you think of your family: Are you comfortable with your mother, father or 
children waiting a prolonged period for medical attention in a life-threatening situation, all 
because ambulances cannot be staffed? I urge you to vote in favor of LD 601, and let qualified, 
competent, and experienced providers back to doing what they love: helping the citizens of 
Maine. 
 
James Seymour 
Firefighter/Advanced-EMT 
  
 
