 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 601, An Act to Reduce the Shortage of Municipal Emergency Medical Services Personnel by 
Removing Certain Vaccination Requirements 
 
April 24, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing on Health and Human Services, my 
name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland 
County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County 
Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in opposition  
to LD 601. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s 16 counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  Under LD 601, emergency medical services (EMS) personnel would be permitted to provide 
treatment within the scope of their licenses without having been vaccinated against the COVID-19 virus or the 
influenza virus. This would change current policy requiring EMS personnel to be vaccinated against both 
diseases. 
 
To be clear, MCCA prioritizes the health and safety of the employees and staff of county government as well as 
the health and welfare of its citizens. With this in mind, the issue of mandatory vaccinations for EMS personnel 
presents a difficult policy issue for us. 
 
As has been well-reported, there is a shortage of municipal EMS personnel, especially in rural counties across 
Maine. To the extent that this shortage may be impacted by some individuals who do not wish to be vaccinated, 
we understand and appreciate the hardships created on those citizens in need of EMS services. We further 
assume that LD 601 is intended to address this shortfall by removing the vaccination requirement. 
 
At the same time, we believe that the patients and overall public health are benefitted when EMS personnel are 
vaccinated, and for us, this policy goal is more important. For this reason, we cannot support LD 601.  
 
Leaving aside the question of vaccination, we believe the most significant part of the EMS personnel shortage is 
a lack of funding. Our Association testified in support of LD 526, An Act to Provide Funding to Emergency 
Medical Services Organizations , which would provide a one-time General Fund appropriation of $25 million in 
fiscal year 2023-24 to the Maine Department of Public Safety targeting such organizations. We also support 
other efforts to provide more funding for EMS services in Maine. We believe this direction is where our efforts 
and those of the Legislature should focus if our goal is to bolster staffing within the EMS system of this State. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 601 
April 24, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel  
