_ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES T’ 
5' 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION .5 .. 
1»~ 
.\=‘. 
. .. ,§_§ t 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 2237-1400 
Stephen Moriarty TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
12 Oak Street 
Cumberland, ME 04021 
Phone: (207) 829-5095 
Steve.Moriarty@legislature.maine.gov 
April 24, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Stephen Moriarty presenting 
LD 601, An Act to Reduce the Shortage of Municipal Emergency Medical Services Personnel by 
Removing Certain Vaccination Requirements 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Steve Moriarty and I represent House District 110, which includes the 
communities of Cumberland, Chebeague Island and Long Island. I appear before you today to present LD 601, 
An Act to Reduce the Shortage of Municipal Emergency Medical Services Personnel by Removing 
Certain Vaccination Requirements. 
The following comments lay the groundwork for LD 601. The 130th Legislature recognized the statewide 
stafﬁng crisis in EMS personnel and, in response, appointed the Blue Ribbon Cormnission to Study Emergency 
Medical Services in the State. The Commission met six times in the late summer and autumn of 2022 and issued 
its report in December. I fully acknowledge that the Commission did not address the issue of vaccination 
requirements and EMS stafﬁng shortages. However, the extracts below from the report are pertinent and helpful 
in understanding the scope of the problem. 
EMS services in Maine are at the edge of a cliff, or over it, and changes must occur to ensure that when 
someone calls with a medical emergency, EMS services are available and ready to assist (p. 18). 
Community paramedicine is an important part of the EMS system in the State and has proven to be 
impactful in reducing healthcare costs (p. 15). 
Volunteerism, however, is declining, and struggles with EMS employee recruitment and retention have 
exacerbated problems for a workforce that is already stretched too thin (p. 9). 
LD 601 focuses narrowly on EMS responders who are employed by towns and cities or who voltmteer for their 
municipalities by providing direct patient care. 
The Bureau of Emergency Medical Services, better known as Maine EMS, is a bureau within the Department of 
Public Safety. The Department has statutory rule-making authority to oversee the delivery of EMS. Last 
summer, the Department adopted a rule, later approved by the Attorney General, requiring EMS personnel to be 
District 110: Cumberland, Chebeague Island, Long Island
vaccinated against COVID and, effective November 1, 2023, against inﬂuenza. An unvaccinated responder may 
provide direct patient care for a maximum of 15 minutes - a time limit that effectively prevents a responder 
from providing any care at all. 
As a result of this rule, my hometown of Cumberland lost the services of a highly-trained paramedic who had 
decided against the COVID vaccine. The town will likely lose additional personnel when the inﬂuenza 
requirement takes effect in November. 
LD 601 simply provides that licensed EMS responders employed by municipalities, or volunteering for 
municipalities, may continue to provide treatment without having been vaccinated against either disease. This 
will greatly assist my hometown and likely others in maintaining necessary stafﬁng levels. 
In closing, I will point out what has happened since the rule was adopted. In December 2022, the U.S. Defense 
Department withdrew its previous COVID vaccination requirement. Within the past couple of months, the 
University of Maine System and the Community College System have done the same. Maine should take the 
same step on the limited scale proposed by LD 601 and assist our municipalities in achieving the appropriate 
level of stafﬁng necessary to protect their residents. 
I would be pleased to answer any questions. 
District l 10: Cumberland, Chebeague Island, Long Island
