 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 13 1st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
February 2 , 202 3 
 
Supporting:  
LD 129 , “Resolve, to Direct the University of Maine System to Study the Feasibility of 
Establishing a Public Allopathic Medical School in Penobscot County ” 
 
Sponsored by Senator Baldacci  
Senator  Rafferty , Representative  Brennan , Representative Sampson , and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on  Education and Cultural Affairs , I am Hannah Hudson , Policy and 
Communications  Manager at Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA).  
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers 
(CHCs) , also k nown as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the 
largest  independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable 
primary and preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people 
(1 in 6  Mainers ) at more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
They are at the forefront of delivering care to ru ral and underserved Maine communities . 
Community Health Centers provide all patients with these comprehensive primary care services, 
as well as a host of other services that include transportation, translation, and case management 
services. They are furthe r required to provide this care without regard to a patient’s insurance 
status or ability to pa y - which is a mandate unlike any other primary care provider.   
At the heart of each CHC is the staff that work every day to deliver innovative, high -quality care. 
Staff  at both the clinical and non -clinical levels understand the communities they serve and are 
dedicated to ensuring health care access. However, there are long standing challenges related 
to primary care recruitment and retention  in Maine . Some commonly identified issues specific 
to Maine CHCs are increased retirements due to an aging workforce; difficulty hiring, recruiting, 
and retaining clinical staff; a dire need for more primary care physicians, RNs, and behavioral 
health clinicians (such as LCSWs); wage inflation and competition; and a lack of high -quality 
training that prepares staff for employment at a CHC.  
MPCA is supportive of efforts, such as th is study, that would create  additional pathways for 
people to enter the  medical profession in Maine, especially  in more rural locations . We believe 
that it is important for this study to examine the following issues:  
• Partnerships with CHCs.  We welcome the opportunity to discuss the way s in which 
CHCs can be a partner and resource in this study .   
• Support systems  for students . When we speak with students, their number one 
concern is their ability to pay back loans. Consideration should be give n to what 
supports will be available to student s at this school , including scholarships and housing  
resources .  
 
 
 
 mepca.org  • Shortage of clinical rotation sites  in the state . Many CHCs want to take on students and 
introduce them to the innovative style of care delivery that makes health centers 
unique; however, health facilities often don’t have the capacity or preceptors  necessary 
to ensure a beneficial experience for both parties .  
 
According to the Association of American Medical Colleges, the majority of  individuals who 
completed residency training are practicing in the state where they did their training. 
Nationally, from 2012 through 2021, this was 55.2% of individuals. In Main e the rate was even 
higher at 57%.1 The study should examine how this issue may impact residents and students 
and how residency and teaching sites will be supported, perhaps through additional funding 
and formalized agreements , to encourage students to remain in the state after they complete 
their education.  
  
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments  and 
we respectfully ask that you to support this bill . Please do not hesitate to contact me directl y at 
hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager, MPCA  
 
 
1 https://www.aamc.org/data -reports/students -residents/interactive -data/report -reside[…]22/table -c6-
physician -retention -state -residency -training -state   
 
