northernlighthealth.orgThis institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer.Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 129 Resolve, to Direct the University of Maine System to Study the Feasibility of 
Establishing a Public Allopathic Medical School in Penobscot County
Testimony in Support
February 2, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, my name is Dr. James Jarvis MD, and I am the Director of Clinical 
Education at Northern Light Eastern Maine Medical Center.  I am here today providing 
testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health speaking in support of this bill.  
Northern Light Health member organizations include ten hospitals located in southern, 
central, eastern and northern Maine, eight nursing facilities, air and ground ambulance, 
behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care practices 
and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  93% of Maine’s population lives in 
the Northern Light Health service area.  Northern Light Health is also proud to be one of 
Maine’s largest employers with over 12,000 employees statewide.
Northern Light Eastern Maine Medical Center is the host site for 40-45 medical students 
for their third year of clinical rotations and provides about 35 additional rotations for 
medical students during their fourth year of training.  Most of these students are 
enrolled in the University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine.  In addition, 
Eastern Maine Medical Center sponsors residency and fellowship training programs in 
family medicine, osteopathic neuromuscular medicine and hospice and palliative care 
medicine, with a proposed psychiatry residency program under development.
Despite the work being done at EMMC and other health centers and systems across the 
state to train the next generation of physicians, the current physician workforce 
shortage is only going to become worse unless some fundamental changes are made for 
the availability of medical school and residency opportunities to Mainers interested in 
pursuing medicine as a career.  According to a 2018 report from the Center for Health 
Workforce Studies, nearly 43% of Maine’s physicians were over the age of 55.  That 
number rises to over 50% in our most rural counties.  In addition, rising costs of medical 
school education can be prohibitive to students considering entering the field or deter 
them from pursuing primary care as a specialty.  Information collected by the Education 
Data Initiative found that in 2022, while tuition varies significantly, an out of state 
student can expect to pay on average $50,000 more for their degree than their in-state 
peers.
According to the Graham Center and the American Medical Association, we know that 
more than half of practicing physicians work within 100 miles of where they trained 
either in medical school or residency.  With limited number of opportunities to train in 
the northern and western parts of the state, especially in more rural communities, 
exploring the feasibility of expanded medical education, particularly in Penobscot 
County is necessary.  The prospect of a medical school has the ability to recruit more 
academic-minded physicians. This will lead to quality-trained medical students and the 
potential for expansion or creation of more residency programs closer to areas sorely 
needing physicians, especially in primary care specialties.  It also has the potential to 
increase the availability and acceptance of clinical research sorely needed for rural 
populations.  In addition, during the pandemic, Maine led the nation as a model for 
public and private partnerships with stake holders in government, education and clinical 
care collaborating for the betterment of our population.  The same can be accomplished 
for improving our healthcare workforce.
In preparation for this bill, I had the opportunity to work with my colleagues at the 
University of Maine to discuss the structure and process for a feasibility study to 
establish a medical school.  We agreed that the study must include input from the 
University, Northern Light Eastern Maine Medical Center and key stakeholders.  To 
assist you in your discussion regarding this bill, I have attached draft language that we 
developed.  
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of this bill.  
Resolve, To Direct the University of Maine System To Study the Feasibility 
of Establishing A Public Allopathic Medical School in Penobscot County 
Sec. 1. Allopathic medical school feasibility study. Resolved: That the 
University of Maine System shall study and analyze the feasibility of establishing 
a public allopathic medical school in Penobscot County. In conducting the study, 
the University of Maine System shall examine and make recommendations 
regarding:
1.    State and national current and future physician workforce supply 
and distribution data including in primary and specialty care fields
2.    Innovative allopathic medical school models especially those that 
include partnerships between public universities and nonprofit health 
care systems
3.    School enrollment projections
4.    Program content and accreditation standards
5.    Required resources including personnel, classrooms, research 
and clinical laboratories and equipment, student housing, and 
operating expenses
6.    Capacity in the state to support residency training
7.    The costs to establish and operate a public allopathic medical 
school, and funding models that include State appropriations and 
tuition revenue
8.    University of Maine System Board of Trustee policies for creating 
new programs
9.    Impact of establishing an allopathic medical school to existing 
education and health-related training programs in the state
10.  Programs to retain graduates to pursue careers in Maine, 
especially in rural primary and specialty care with a focus on 
underserved areas and populations
11.  Other programs and partnerships to address physician workforce 
current and projected needs
12.  Opportunities to strengthen health and medical research activities 
to enhance the health and wellbeing of the citizens of Maine
In performing it duties under this section, the University of Maine System must 
coordinate with a tertiary hospital medical education program located in 
Penobscot County and additionally solicit the testimony, advice or participation of 
representatives of the following organizations:
1. The Maine Center for Workforce Research and Information
2. The Maine Department of Health and Human Services
3. The State Board of Education
4. The VA Maine Healthcare System
5. Wabanaki Public Health and Wellness
6. A statewide association representing Maine hospitals 
7. A statewide association representing Maine physicians
8. A statewide association representing Maine primary care providers
9. A medical center in the state with an education and training 
partnership with a medical school located out of the state
10. A nonprofit community health care network that includes federally 
qualified health centers
11. An osteopathic medical school based in the state
The University of Maine System is not required under this resolve to undertake 
work for which it does not have or has not received sufficient resources. 
Sec. 2. Report. Resolved: That, by December 1, 2024, the University of Maine 
System shall submit a report, including recommended legislation and 
appropriations requests, based on its study and analysis in section 1 to the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs. The committee is 
authorized to submit legislation related to the report to the First Regular Session 
of the 132nd Legislature.
Sec. 3. Appropriations and allocations. 
UNIVERSITY OF MAINE SYSTEM, BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
Education and General Activities – UMS 0031
Initiative: Provides funding for the study of the feasibility of establishing a public 
allopathic medical school in Penobscot County to serve the state of Maine. 
GENERAL FUND 2023-24 2024-25
All Other $0 UMAINE $$$
GENERAL FUND TOTAL
$0 UMAINE $$$
SUMMARY
This bill requires the University of Maine System to study the feasibility of 
establishing a public allopathic medical school in Penobscot County. It also 
provides appropriations to fund the study, which must be done in partnership with 
a tertiary hospital medical education program located in Penobscot County and 
be informed by input from a number of relevant health care and related 
organizations. 
