D UNWER5 ITY OF 1iiiil§I°§§a§§r§§§§ 
ENGLAND Biddeford, ME 
oﬁcgo/it 
INNOVATION FOR A HEALTHIER PLANET <2°7l283'°171 
Portland Campus 
716 Stevens Avenue 
Portland, ME 04103 
February 2, 2023 U-5-A 
(ZO7) 797-7261 
Tangier Campus 
Rue Abi Chouaib Doukkali 
Tangier 90000 
Morocco 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, +212 0538802400 
and members of the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, Wwwgumdu 
My name is Jane Carreiro. I am the Dean of the University of New England College of 
Osteopathic Medicine (UNE COM) and a family doctor by training. I am testifying Neither For 
Nor Against LD 129. I thank Senator Baldacci for identifying a very difficult and critical problem 
facing Maine, a lack of physicians, and indeed a lack of all healthcare professionals practicing in 
rural Maine and underserved areas of the state. 
UNE has been working closely with Northern Light, MaineHealth, Maine General, Central Maine 
Health, the Maine Hospital Association, and the Maine Primary Care Association, for many years 
on addressing the specific problems of training, attracting, and retaining physicians in health 
professional shortage areas throughout Maine. UNE’s College of Osteopathic Medicine is the 
number one provider of physicians for the state of Maine. Our graduates make up the majority 
of physicians in every health care system in Maine, with 67% of them practicing primary care 
compared with 32% of other medical school graduates practicing in the state. Progress is being 
made on the physician shortage, but there is still much work to be done. This past year we 
extended our coalition ’s efforts to all health professions, and the University of Maine system and 
the Maine Community College system joined this group in sponsoring a proposal to develop a 
mechanism to better identify opportunities to train medical students and other health 
professions students in Maine. 
Years ago, prior to moving to UNE, I had a vew busy family practice in Waterville, which I loved. 
When I first when into practice, I became very busy, very quickly. I was astonished that some of 
my patients were driving 60-90 minutes to see me because there wasn't a family doctor with an 
open practice any closer. This was early 19905, and our neighbors in rural areas were already 
dealing with a physician shortage. Since then, it has only worsened. I decided I could help more 
patients by training medical students who would want to practice in rural areas, and so I tooka 
position at UNE. Almost thirty years later I am now dean of a medical school, and I am still 
working to get more medical students to practice in rural areas. However, in those thirty yearsI 
have learned some things, and I would like to share them with you. The answer to getting more 
physicians to practice in rural areas is not simply creating more students. 
The two best predictors of where a physician will practice is where they do their clinical training, 
(years 3 and 4 of medical school and then their residency), and where their partners are from. 
BIDDEFORD AND PORTLAND, MAINE, U.S.A. I TAI\IGlER,l\/IOROCCO l ONLINE
li1N“’E"i;ii% OAN EW LD li\ii\.lO\/ATlOl\l FOR A HEALTHHZR PLANET 
After two years of mostly classroom training, medical students do 2 years of clinical training and 
then enter a residency program. Doing clinical training in community and rural—based hospitals as 
a student, increases the likelihood a physician will choose to return to those communities to 
practice. From 2012 to 2018, between 35% and 53% of UNE COM’s graduates who completed 
third year training in a Maine community hospital returned to practice in those communities, 
regardless of where they did their residency or where they were from. Likewise, medical school 
graduates who complete their residencies in rural and community-based settings are also more 
likely to practice in those settings. In Maine there are two bottlenecks to increasing our 
physician workforce: our capacity to train third- and fourth-year medical students in Maine and 
the number of residency positions that are available. The first limits how many medical students 
we can train and the second limits how many physicians we can graduate, and these both effect 
the choice to practice in Maine. 
UNE is a private university with a public mission. We understand the health care workforce 
shortage and are trying to respond in real time by increasing our medical school class. As part of 
that process, medical school accreditors require that we research the capacity to train students 
in clinical settings. Our recent analysis of Maine's capacity for training medical students 
demonstrated that the Maine health care system can accommodate an additional 35 students. 
That's it. Thus, UNE is increasing our class size by 35 students. If the healthcare system in Maine 
could accommodate more than that we would not be limiting ourselves to 35. 
What are the factors that limit capacity? Medical students need to be trained by physicians, and 
Maine has a physician shortage. Training medical students results in a loss in productivity, 
calculated at 25% nationally. Put another way, if a doctor can typically see 4 patients in an hour, 
the addition of a medical student will slow them down and only allow them to see 3. This results 
in lost revenue, and hospitals, especially our community hospitals, are struggling to keep up with 
patient loads and expenses. They do not have the personnel or financial resources to take on 
more students. There are 223 third year students enrolled in Maine-based medical schools each 
year. Our state's health care system currently trains only 120 third-year medical students — 
that 
is 70 from UNE, 45 from the Tufts Maine track program and 4-5 from Quinnipiac and Brown. 
The remaining 103 must leave the state to get their third-year clinical experiences. Thus, each 
year, the State effectively loses the opportunity to retain 103 physicians. Absent a total 
overhaul of healthcare payment in the US, we need to find ways to make up for the lost 
productivity associated with sponsoring student trainees by perhaps subsidizing hospitals, 
clinics, and/or clinicians that participate in training students. 
The second bottleneck is the limited number of residency positions in Maine. Unlike a short- 
term "rural rotation," embedded training in a rural or community-based residency program 
engages physicians with their communities and prepares graduates to practice in those 
environments. In the entire State of Maine, considering all hospitals and programs, we can only 
graduate 65 primary care physicians each year: 4 obstetricians, 7 pediatricians, 31 family 
doctors, 4 psychiatrists, 13 internal medicine, and 4 combined internal medicine-pediatrics. Each 
BHDDEFORD AND PORTLAND, t/iAli\lE,U.S.A. I TAl\iGlER.i\/iC>ROCCO i Oi\lLll\lE
UNIVERSITYOF 
NEW ENGLAND INNOVATION FOR A HEALTHIER PLANET 
year 223 medical students graduate from Maine-based medical schools, but only 65 of them can 
complete primary care residencies in Maine. Residency programs are accredited through the 
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) and supported by Center for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) funding. The ACGME accreditation process can pose 
challenges for rural community hospitals. The (CMS) payment calculation system for graduate 
medical education (GME; i.e., residencies) favors academic medical centers; places caps on 
successful rural residency programs making expansion difficult; and penalizes community 
hospitals that may have previously allowed “visiting residents ” from GME institutions. Some 
states, such as Washington and Utah, have stepped in with funding to assist and support 
community and rural hospitals with GME expansion to train and retain a larger physician 
workforce. 
Lastly, physicians in rural areas tend to see fewer but more complicated patients, and our 
reimbursement system is based on procedures and volume, not spending time teaching 
someone, for example, how to care for their diabetic mother. Physicians finishing residency are 
often overwhelmed by the difference between the debt they carry and their predicted income 
from rural practice. The Doctors for Maine’s Future program has made a significant impact on 
those students fortunate enough to receive it, and expansion of that program could help many 
more. 
Many of us in the state are working collaboratively to address our healthcare workforce crisis. 
Recently, members of the aforementioned group worked together to submit proposals to 
DHHS’s Maine Healthcare Workforce Initiative. As a result, MaineHealth received funding to 
expand resident training in rural areas, and both Northern Light and UNE were signatory 
supporters on that proposal. The larger group efforts were also extended to all health 
professions, and as I mentioned, the University of Maine system and the Maine Community 
College system joined this group to help identify opportunities to train medical students and 
other health professions students in rural Maine. 
These are all small steps, and we need to do more. Even if the University of Maine successfully 
launched a medical school, without additional clinical training slots and residencies, the result 
would be more students seeking training and placements out of state and rural Maine would 
likely continue to be underserved. 
Later this session, President Jackson will introduce legislation to expand clinical training, 
residencies, and loan repayment for health professionals to incentivize the healthcare workforce 
to train and stay in underserved areas throughout Maine. With or without a new medical school 
at the University of Maine, these opportunities and incentives are critical to retaining students in 
Maine to practice and contribute to their communities. 
Maine has been facing a growing physician shortage since I left my practice 30 years ago to help 
tackle this issue. Since that time, l have learned that increasing the number of students is the 
BlDDEFORD AND PORTLAND, l\/lAll\lE,U.S./-\. l TAl\|GlER,l\/lOROCCO I ONLll\lE
7 NEW ENGLAND UNIVERSITYOF 
lNi\lO\/ATION FOR A HEALTHIER PLANET 
easy answer, but not necessarily the most effective part of the equation. Without significantly 
increasing the number of opportunities available for students to train in rural and community 
settings, and expanding residency opportunities throughout the state, increasing the number of 
medical students will only result in more students leaving Maine to train and practice. 
Thankyou 
B3DDEFORDAND i3ORTl_Ai\1 ’D. lviAlNE.U.S./-\. i TAN<3lER, MOROCCO | omme
