‘ 
Eric Brakey 131“ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 1070, An Act to Increase Ballot Transparency 
with Blockchain Technology 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Wednesday, April 5, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Veterans and Legal 
Affairs Committee. l am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New 
Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Today, I appreciate your time and consideration asl 
present L.D. 1070, An Act to Increase Ballot Transparency with Blockchain Technology 
In 2017, I brought before this committee legislation to study the potential use of 
blockchain technology to increase transparency in our elections. Ultimately, the 
committee did not move forward with the bill, but it represented the first time in any state 
legislature that the topic was proposed for consideration. 
In the five years since, the applications of blockchain technology for secure and 
transparent elections have received increased attention. West Virginia is currently 
experimenting with a blockchain~based voting system for submitting absentee ballots 
from overseas. There are many potential applications for blockchain in voting systems. 
This legislation, however, proposes adopting only a very modest one. 
Before jumping into the details of this proposal, it helps to know a little about the nature 
of the technology proposed for utilization, so let us begin there. Blockchain is a shared, 
immutable ledger, decentralized and distributed across many devices in a network, 
which enables the secure sharing of information. The lack of a single point of failure 
makes the ledger unhackable with existing technology. Blockchain is used today to 
secure trillions of dollars in value (most commonly associated with cryptocurrencies like 
Bitcoin), but is increasingly seeing use anywhere people benefit from immediate, shared 
and "completely transparentinformation on an immutable ledger.' 
This legislation would simply require that digital images of the paper ballots are 
uploaded to a publicly viewable blockchain. For the voter, nothing would change. The 
voter would still cast a paper ballot in any of the ways they currently can. The machines 
that process those ballots already create digital images of those ballots when they are 
scanned for counting. All l am proposing is that municipal clerks, in addition to reporting 
total counts, upload the digital images to the blockchain. (This would only apply to 
municipalities that process the paper ballots by machine, not those that hand count.)
By making those paper ballots available for public viewing on an immutable digital 
ledger, we can improve public confidence in election results by adding a little radical 
transparency to our already secure system of paper ballots. This would empower any 
member of the public to count and verify the votes for themselves. Imagine that. 
Further, this should result in some cost savings to the taxpayers. By making it possible 
for the public to conduct unofficial recounts, this should reduce the demand for official 
recounts when it is clear there are not enough identifiable ballot anomalies to affect the 
election outcome. Alternatively, it should also mean that in rare circumstances when 
campaigns do identify enough anomalies on the ballots, they can request an official 
recount with a degree of confidence that they are not waiting time and taxpayer 
resources. 
There are several policy experts who have agreed to testify on this legislation. ln the 
spirit of digital blockchain, they are primarily here digitally over Zoom. l would 
encourage the committee to take advantage of their expertise with questions. That said 
l appreciate your consideration and would be happy to answer any questions you have 
to the best of my ability.
 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
ON FILE 
