John R Brakey
Tucson
LD 1070
Hi my name is John Brakey; I am here to endorse senator Eric Brakey’s election 
transparency bill. LD 1070 "An Act to Increase Ballot Transparency with Blockchain 
Technology"  
I am Senator Brakey's uncle. However, I am a lifelong liberal / Progressive Democrat.
Who grew up in the state of Maine and still have family there and have a deep 
fondness for my home state. 
I am Election transparency activists and the director of an organization that works in a
number of states called AUDIT Elections USA based out of Tucson, AZ.  
 AUDIT is an acronym. it stands for AMERICANS UNITED FOR DEMOCRACY 
INTEGRITY and Transparency. We began as AUDIT Arizona in late 2004.
 
In 2016 we expanded into a national organization; due to a lawsuit we brought in 
Pima County that led to the state preserving ballot images rather than destroying 
evidence that could prove that elections are real.
 
We are a non-partisan, non-profit, 501(c)3 organization.  
We are a group of citizens who believe elections belong to the people, not to political 
parties or corporations.  
I am very familiar with the state of Maine’s election system and have a high regard 
for how you do elections in this state of Maine.
Maine votes entirely by paper ballot on high quality voting machines made by 
election systems and software. 
So, what are ballot images? 
Well over 90% of the voting systems in use in the United States today use digital scan
technology.  
 
A digital scan voting machine takes a picture of every ballot.  
The votes are counted from the picture, not from the paper ballot itself.
 
This makes the image an important document in the chain of custody in counting 
every vote.
 
The ballot images are the basis for the final vote count.  
 
All data that is produced is from the result of the ballot images.
While much of the country is focused on election problems!
We’ve been focused on solutions, as I will begin to explain to you. 
 
Transparency in elections is essential for building trust in the democratic process.
In recent years, our election systems have become more secure due to increased 
vigilance against phishing attacks by foreign actors, particularly in the wake of the 
2016 Russian interference.
 
However, the unfortunate consequence of this heightened security has been a decrease
in transparency, which can breed mistrust.
It's important to strike a balance between security and transparency in our election 
systems to ensure that the public has faith in the legitimacy of our democratic process.
 
Why is transparency so important? Transparency = Truth, because when things are 
transparent, people can see what actually happened.  Transparency = security against 
false claims, because when people can see what actually happened then false claims 
cannot stick.
Blockchain could be another invaluable link to transparency, trust, and security.
Thank you.
John R Brakey Director and Co-founder Americans United for Democracy Integrity 
and Transparency
AUDIT USA (formerly AUDIT-AZ)  
Cell:  520-339 2696
JohnBrakey@gmail.com 
www.AUDITelectionsUSA.org 

