Arleigh Kraus
Warren
LD 1530
April 19, 2023
Arleigh Kraus
Warren
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Arleigh Kraus.  I am 
a registered cannabis caregiver with a B.S. in biochemistry, an organic farmer, and 
business owner in Warren.  I am a founding member of the Maine Craft Cannabis 
Association, a member of Seed2Health Learning Health Alliance, a board member of 
Medical Marijuana Caregivers of Maine, the Chair of the Adult and Medical Cannabis
Committee for the Town of Warren, and I am a founding member of the Cannabis 
Council of Maine.  I have been a caregiver in Maine for over 10 years.
In support of LD 1530 An Act to Support Patients by Permitting On-Site 
Consumption of Medical Cannabis and Medical Cannabis Products
There are many reasons to support the ability for patients to have a safe place to 
consume medicine they have a legal right to have under state law. 
For the medical cannabis patients unable to consume legally at home because of 
restrictions, such as those in federal housing we must provide a legal and safe 
environment for these citizens of the state to use their medicine.  For citizens of the 
state who live in federal housing and are able bodied or not the state must have an 
obligation to these people to assist them with a place to consume safely.  
For those patients visiting from outside of the state, unless staying at a private 
residence there is no place available to legally and safely consume their medicine. 
Authorized conduct for the medical use of cannabis in state statute 2423-A provides 
that caregivers may assist the qualifying patient in administration of medical 
cannabis.
Currently the lack of places for consumption of cannabis medical patients is 
burdensome and illegal in many instances.  Providing safe legal places would be a 
tremendous improvement for many state citizens and those traveling to Maine.
Please vote ought to pass LD1530
Respectfully,
Arleigh Kraus

