 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
 
In Opposition to LD 1530  An Act to Support Patients by Permitting On -site  
Consumption of Medical Cannabis and Medical Cannabis Products  
 
Hearing Date: April 19, 2023  
 
Senator  Hickman , Representative  Supica , and members  of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Veterans and Legal Affairs , my name is  Jamie Co tnoir  and I am the  Maine Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention - Division of Disease Prevention Associate Director . I am here today to 
provide testimony on behalf of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  and will be 
speaking  against LD 1530 , An Act to Support Patients by Permitting On -site Consumption of 
Medical Cannabis and Medical Cannabis Products . 
 
This bill al lows for the on -site consumption of harvested cannabis for medical use by a 
qualifying patient in a caregiver retail store, in a registered dispensary or with a registered 
caregiver.  The Department of Administrative and Financial Services (DAFS) must establish, by 
major substantive rule, the process for issuing permits for on -site consumption and the permit 
fee, which may not exceed the administrative cost of issuing the permit.  
 
The Maine CDC opposes  LD 1530 and offers the following comments for  your consideration.  
 
Maine CDC prevention programs partner with community providers, medical professionals and 
families to address emerging public health concerns related to cannabis. Short -term effects of 
cannabis products containing THC include but are not limited to difficulty with critical thinking, 
and impaired memory, judgment, and balance and coordination1. Driving is a complex task  - to 
do so safely requires full, unimpaired attention. Maine’s operating under the influence (OUI) 
laws include impai rment from substances other than alcohol, including cannabis2. While there is 
no current per se limit in Maine, driving under the influence of cannabis is still illegal and poses 
a risk to all people on the road. The Maine Office of Cannabis Policy’s (OCP ) Cannabis Markets 
and Associated Outcomes Report released in Spring 2022 reported that 28% of survey 
respondents drive while under the influence of cannabis3. Alcohol and/or drug impaired driving 
related crashes increased by over 4% between 2019 and 2021  in Maine drivers between the ages 
 
1 NIDA. 2019, December 24. Cannabis (Marijuana) DrugFacts. Retrieved from 
https://nida.nih.gov/publications/drugfacts/cannabis -marijuana on 2023, February 22  
2 Maine State Statute, Title 29 -A, Chapter 23, Subchapter 3, Article 1, Subsection 2453 -A 
https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/29 -A/title29 -Asec2453 -A.html  
3 Maine Office  of Cannabis Policy Cannabis Markets and Associated Outcomes - Survey Findings and Implications 
(Spring 2022)  
 
 of 21 -44, and next to alcohol, cannabis is the second most frequently found substance in the 
bodies of drivers involved in fatal motor vehicle accidents. Currently, t here is little reliability and 
consistency with methods  of assessing cannabis impairment during a traffic stop , as THC 
presence in biological samples do not directly reflect magnitude of impairment and remain in 
biological samples for an extended period4. In addition, cannabis products  may contain a  
combination of psychoactive substances that are not reflected by current testing methods. 
Commonly used field sobriety tests  such as one leg stand , walk and turn,  or the modified 
Romberg balance tests may not be sensitive to cannabis intoxication5.  Thes e are important  gaps 
to consider before passing legislation which would likely increase the rates of cannabis impaired 
driving in Maine.  
 
Maine’s Medical Use Cannabis caregivers, dispensaries, and caregiver retail stores sell a large 
variety of cannabis products . These p roducts have varying potencies, with  concentrates and 
edibles often being high -potency , and the  timeframe in which a product’s effects begin and end  
varies . Cannabis p roducts consumed by smoking typically have an immediate effect, which can 
last for 30min or up to two or more hours ; however, ingested products  can take up to several 
hours to take effect, as they are  first digested and meta bolized by the liver . Additionally, the 
specific effects of products differ between individuals based on their tolerance and other factors, 
such as frequency of use, sex, and biology6. Since  cannabis was legaliz ed in Colorado, the 
Department of Public Hea lth and Environment (DPHE) has been tasked with monitoring health 
concerns related to legalization  to form recommendations based on best available evidence . 
Their r ecommendations for driving after consumption  include waiting at least 6 hours after 
smoking up to 35mg THC and at least 8 hours after eating or drinking cannabis products 
containing 18 mg of THC7. This evidence suggests that in order to reduce the public risks  
associated with cannabis impairment noted in this testimony, increasing the  wait time before 
driving after consumption  is necessary8   
 
In the alcohol space, dram shop liability is a tool to help prevent and reduce harms related to 
alcohol consumption. Dram shop liability means that if a cust omer of a dram shop, which is a 
bar, tavern or similar commercial establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold, buys a 
drink, leaves the location and causes harm to person or property, the owner of the location the 
alcohol was served is legally respons ible9. A similar system of liability for the cannabis space 
 
4 Thomas R. Arkell , Tory R. Spindle , Richard C. Kevin , Ryan Vandrey & Iain S. McGregor (2021) The failings of 
perse limits to detect cannabis -induced driving impairment: Results from a simulated driving study, Traffic Injury 
Prevention, 22:2, 102 -107, DOI: 10.1080/15389588.2020.1851685  
5 National Institute of Justice, "Field Sobriety Tests and THC Levels Unreliable Indicators of Marijuana 
Intoxica tion," April 5, 2021, nij.ojp.gov:  
https://nij.ojp.gov/topics/articles/field -sobriety -tests-and-thc-levels -unreliable -indicators -marijuana -intoxication  
6 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021, September 9). What We Know About Marijuana . Centers for  
Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved February 22, 2023, from https://www.cdc.gov/marijuana/what -
we-know.html  
7  Colorado Department of Public H ealth and Environment. (n.d.). Cannabis Public Health Statements - Driving . 
Monitoring Health Concerns Related to Marijuana. Retrieved February 22, 2023, from 
https://marijuanahealthreport.colorado.gov/literature -review/public -health -statements    
8 Maine Office of Cannabis Policy Cannabis Markets and Associated Outcomes - Survey Findings and Implications 
(Spring 2022)  
9 Guide to Community Preventive Services. Alcohol Excessive Consumption: Dram Shop Liability. 
https://www.thecommunityguide.org/findings/alcohol -excessive -consumption -dram -shop -liability.html  
 
 would be important in the consideration of allowing on -premises consumption , regardless of 
whether medical  or adult use . An additional public safety consideration for this bill would be the 
requirement to verify that a qualifying patient is accompanied by a  designated safe , licensed  
driver , if they would be consuming cannabis on -site. Medical facilities use this requirement to 
ensure that patients undergoing procedures or with certain medications in their systems are not a 
safety risk to themselves or others while departing the facility. This, however, is potentially 
challenging to enforce without the addition of increased protections  and capacity .  
 
An additional tool to mitigate poten tial risks of overserving/overconsumption is the requirement 
of responsible vendor training. Maine does not currently have a requirement for retailers or 
caregivers to undergo a responsible vendor training for cannabis, nor is there currently a single 
“gold-standard” training vetted by the O CP in consultation with  Maine CDC . Responsible 
vendor trainings include components on the specific and ever -changing laws, public health 
considerations, age verification, and impairment detection to be able to comfortabl y refuse sales 
or service to an intoxicated individual. A requirement for a training such as this, along with 
increased dedicated funding to the public health field to deliver the training as well as increased 
enforcement capacity would be crucial to conti nue to prevent and reduce these harms.  
 
Another issue to consider is secondhand smoke exposure. Smoke from combustion of cannabis 
has been repeatedly found to contain many of the same toxins and cancer -causing chemicals as 
those found in tobacco smoke10. This poses a risk to other consumers or patients, as well as to 
employees, who may not choose to smoke their products as a health precaution. Maine’s current 
comprehensive smoke -free law, which prohibits smoking in all indoor areas of workplaces, 
restauran ts, and bars, has been in effect since 200911 and these public health protections should 
be upheld rather than disregarded. Smoke free laws also apply to healthcare facilities for these 
very reasons.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC has many concerns with the n egative impacts this proposed 
legislation would have on the public health and safety, and therefore opposes LD 1530.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from Committe e and I will be available to participate in the work 
session.  
 
 
 
 
 
10. Moir D, Rickert WS, Levasseur G, et al.  A comparison of mainstream and sidestream marijuana and tobacco 
cigarette smoke produced under two machine smoking conditions. external  icon Chemical Research in Toxicology . 
2008;21(2):494 -502. 
11 https://www.cdc.gov/toba cco/stateandcommunity/state -fact-
sheets/maine/index.html#:~:text=Maine%20has%20a%20comprehensive%20smoke,been%20in%20effect%20since
%202009.  
