Susan Meehan 
April 19, 2023 
In support of Id 1530 on-site consumption medical cannabis 
Senator Hickman and Representative Supica and honorable members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee, good morning and thank you for hosting this hearing. 
Non-combustible consumption ought be legal basically anywhere in Maine. What harm isa 
qualifying patient or the parent of a minir qualifying patient doing by administration of their oral 
or nasal or nebulizer type medicine? While there is no compromise to public safety by allowing 
a patient to use their non-combustible medicine where needed, there is potential harm to the 
patient by not being able to take their medicine as needed. There is potential harm to the patient 
who must sneak down a dark alley in Portland or hide in their own vehicle to take their medicine 
or delay necessary treatment with their medicine to comply with war on drugs based laws. 
To my knowledge, Cyndimae was the first person to use thc as a rescue formulation for an 
impending or occurring seizure. ln 2015, based on this need and the needs of other minor 
qualifying patients, Maine's legislature, in a veto over ride authorized administration of medical 
cannabis on school grounds. With mama by her side, Cyndimae glowed with an ear to ear smile 
proudly walking into Cony High School making history as the first student to attend school.with 
her cannabis based medicine legally by her side on October 15th, 2015. 
Combustible and non-combustible medical cannabis ought be allowed on-site at bars or social 
clubs that have an approved outdoor or open air consumption area and clearly advertise this 
designation. This is like the elephant in the room — we know people are consuming their 
medicine, we give them a card to make this legal, but we do not provide legal venues by which 
to do this and instead host the prohibition style speakeasy of don't ask and don't tell. Let's let 
our program grow up and come out of hiding. Please deem Id 1530 ought to pass. Thank you 
for your time and attention to this matter. 
Susan Meehan 
207-861-1945
