Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Committee on 
education and Cultural Affairs,  
 
My name is Brandie Rubin and I am a Registered Nurse from Scarborough. I am writing 
to testify against LD 869, LD 1148, and 1228. 
 
I attended the hearing on April 3 concerning LD 51, for which I also opposed.  What I 
heard that day made me very fearful for our future when we face another pandemic 
such as what we have experienced over the past 3 years. Through modern technology 
and the ability to receive information in real time, the world had the opportunity to see 
science play out in real time.  This is not something most people have ever actually 
witnessed.  Science is messy.  Hypotheses are thrown out and range from the practical 
to what seems impossible.  In the race to save humanity in the face of a novel virus, it 
was all hands on deck.  Scientists, Doctors, Nurses, and all other healthcare personnel, 
worked tirelessly to find treatments and ways to put a stop to the virus that was taking 
lives in a way we have never seen in the modern day.  Doctors on the frontlines were 
some of the first to see what worked and what didn’t.  Medications that had other uses 
such as Hydroxychloroquine, Ivermectin, Remdesivir, and others were tried. 
Hydroxychloroquine and Ivermectin were found to be ineffective. While Remdesivir was 
far from perfect, it was the best medication we had to fight this in the earlier days. 
 
Perhaps the best thing that came from scientists working together around the world was 
the development of the mRNA Covid vaccines. The technology already existed pre 
Covid times, but scientists had to make it work for the SARS-CoV-2. While the 
production of these vaccines were carried out quickly, none of the steps were cut out.  It 
was because healthcare workers and many others were willing to trial the vaccine, 
along with private funding, that made it possible for the trials to move faster. We are 
more than 2 years out from the vaccines, and just today, I filled out my V-Safe check in 
that I signed up for when I got my vaccine so that I can continue to be monitored for any 
potential adverse effect. I have had none.  
 
These vaccines work.  Healthcare workers couldn’t wait to get these vaccines in their 
arms.  I was one of them.  My teen daughter contracted Covid-19 at the same time I 
reached my 2 week post second dose of the vaccine.  I did not get sick.   
 
Yes, as time went on, what we knew about SARS-CoV-2 evolved. Sometimes that 
meant recommendations could change.  It was found that the vaccine really needed a 
third dose, and as new variants emerged, the original series wasn’t found to be as 
effective, so a new formulation needed to be developed.  This is how science works. 
With each discovery, we ask more questions. Sometimes we learn that previous 
information is no longer true and we need to adapt and make changes.   
 
What frustrates me, and has me terrified for the future, is how all this amazing work has 
been distorted, by some with another agenda. While LD 51 had nothing to do with the 
Covid vaccine, it was used as a platform to spread misinformation and conspiracy 
theories.  I listened as a former Ob/gyn clearly demonstrated that she didn’t understand 
how mRNA works.  Incidentally, it doesn’t alter your DNA. I heard 3 Doctors, one of 
whom admitted that she committed malpractice for lying to a pharmacist, continue to 
use dangerous doses of Ivermectin, despite the clear evidence it was ineffective, and 
even harmful to patients. The Covid vaccine began to be used as a political pawn to 
spread fear and hesitancy among the population.  Vaccine hesitation grew as people 
became confused by the information being put out by well funded anti vaccine 
organizations. Honestly, who can blame members of the general public for being 
wary?  Oftentimes, especially when searching online, it can be difficult for the general 
public to separate fact from fiction. While the vaccines aren’t perfect, they are safe, they 
have protected against serious illness and death, and the overwhelming majority of the 
scientific community supports this. The data and evidence is very clear.  
 
Any legislation that seeks to prevent ANY future vaccine, ones that we cannot even 
begin to imagine at this time, from being utilized could be a dangerous decision that 
could put thousands, or hundreds of thousands, of lives at risk. Furthermore, the 
addition, or deletion, or any vaccine from requirements should be left for the rulemaking 
process, and addressed at the time.  
 
 
