Testimony of Casey Schwarz in opposition to LD 869 - An Act to Protect Education Access by 
Prohibiting a Mandate for Schoolchildren for a COVID-19 Vaccine or a Vaccine Under an 
Emergency Use Authorization 
My name is Casey Schwarz and I live in Portland.  
Your continued careful consideration of this issue. Just over 4 years ago I, along with other 
parents, public health advocates and providers, stood before this body and asked you to protect 
children in our schools by ensuring robust uptake of vaccines to prevent childhood illnesses.   
Several things were different at that time – in addition to the obvious and societal changes as a 
result of the COVID 19 pandemic and public health emergency.  When I spoke then I said “The 
risk to my healthy two-year-old is less than others face. If she contracted one of these diseases 
she would likely recover quickly and with minimal complications. But she isn’t the whole point, 
even if she is MY whole point. She is not more important than our 80 year old neighbor or a 
classmate’s soon-to-arrive baby sister. She’s not more deserving of access to school than a child 
who is immune-compromised or allergic to a vaccine ingredient. Most Maine parents understand 
this, and vaccinate their children. This bill prevents the few who would choose not to from 
putting the rest of us at risk.” That two year old is now 6, and thriving in a public kindergarten 
classroom from which she brings home plenty of cold viruses, no measles. And I have a second 
child, a 3 year old in preschool.  
As we have all learned in the past three years, immunization affects our whole community -- 
children currently in school, their siblings, parents, neighbors and friends. This issue is personal 
to me because I am the parent of two young children.  
Things that seem to be individual health care decisions are often not really individualized. I 
see this in my work as a health policy attorney. People go to work sick and spread illness, family 
caregivers lack support and leave the workforce. The decision not to avail oneself of safe 
medicine, creating conditions ripe for epidemics similarly impacts public safety – not individual 
liberties.  
Vaccination remains an appropriate condition for participating in a particularly intimate public 
space with particularly vulnerable people. As the parent of a toddler I know just how quickly 
infectious disease spreads among children. It is amusing but frustrating in the context of colds 
and winter sniffles. It’s scary when it is croup. And it is terrifying and enraging when it is 
vaccine-preventable, potentially life threatening illnesses like measles, COVID and whooping 
cough.  
According to a legal adage often attributed to Oliver Wendell Holmes, “your right to swing your 
fist ends at my nose.” Arguments about the need for more lax vaccination policy to protect 
poorly defined and unscientific individual preferences are misguided. You can respect 
individual health care decision-making without allowing people to externalize the risks of 
that decision onto the most vulnerable in our community.  
Thank you for the opportunity to share my position on this important bill with you today. I’d be 
happy to answer any questions you might have.  
 Casey Schwarz 
