Monday April 3, 10 am  
Maine Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
 
 
 
Greetings, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs committee: 
 
My name is Elizabeth Caruso, and I live in Caratunk.  I am testifying in support of:  
 
• L.D. 51 & 1098 An Act To Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements, Rep. 
Gary Drinkwater & Rep. Barbara Bagshaw (restores exemptions) 
• L.D. 1209 An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions for Private Schools and Virtual 
Public Charter Schools, Rep. David Boyer (allows exemptions in non-public funded educational settings) 
• L.D. 869 An Act to Protect Education Access by Prohibiting a Mandate for Schoolchildren for a COVID-19 Vaccine or 
a Vaccine Under an Emergency Use Authorization, Sen. Lisa Keim (prevents adding COVID vaccine to school 
schedule) 
• L.D. 1228 An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from Requiring Vaccines Approved Under 
Emergency Use Authorization for Admission or Attendance, Rep. Katrina Smith (prevents requiring EUA vaccines)  
• L.D. 1148 An Act to Prohibit COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates for Students Enrolled in Public Institutions of Learning, 
Sen. Eric Brakey (prevents adding COVID vaccine to school schedule for public schools) 
 
 
Your support of these bills will restore equal access to Maine schools and educational equity 
and inclusion for ALL Mainers. Maine residents and taxpayers should not be prohibited from a 
state-funded school.  Taxpayer dollars go towards funding Maine’s public learning institutions, 
and no taxpayer should be denied acceptance based on their religious beliefs or medical 
conditions.  
 
Although we have always homeschooled our sons, they had played public school sports and 
utilized dual enrollment in Maine’s college system. My oldest graduated high school with a 3.9 
GPA including 33 college credits. However, because of the Covid mandate and removal of 
religious and philosophical exemptions, he was forced to leave Maine and attend an out-of-
state university, costing our family tens of thousands of dollars more. My son moving away 
didn’t just cost us – it cost Maine. The Maine system NEEDS our Maine youth – especially our 
upstanding, intelligent, creative, hardworking students to contribute to the academia, 
classroom environments and culture.  We need our youth to stay in Maine – during school and 
then in the workplace!  
 
Please support these bills and keep Mainers in Maine schools, not saddling them with 
unnecessary school debt when they could be taking advantage of Maine resident 
opportunities. 
 
My younger son, thanks to a medical exemption, was able to remain on his high school soccer 
team. But before he received the paperwork, he was a supposed danger to his teammates 
whom he had played with for years and the prior summer, not to mention the day before.  
Ridiculously, a piece of paper was all that was needed to keep his teammates safe.  Truth-be-
told, under-vaccinated students have shared teams and classrooms for their entire lives. Since 
the loss of religious & philosophical exemptions, the remaining school children were not 
endangered or sickened even though surrounded by unvaccinated school staff, bus drivers, 
teachers. Approving these bills will cease the diminishment and segregation of our youth.  
  
Bottom line: The job of public schools, colleges and universities is to educate, not to mandate. 
 
 
Regarding a Covid or EUA mandate, these vaccines are not required to collect welfare or food 
stamps, to cross the border, apply for asylum, or work. In fact, the Fifth Circuit Court of 
Appeals said that Constitution limits what the federal govt can make people do, even in 
emergencies. The Judge said it’s in the public’s interest to protect “our constitutional structure 
and” maintain “the liberty of individuals to make intensely personal decisions according to their 
own convictions – even, or perhaps particularly, when those decision frustrate government 
officials.” 
 
If a student voluntarily chooses to get a vaccine, great. But it is not the government’s job to 
mandate a vaccine, especially an EUA. No one should be forced to get a vaccine against their 
will, share personal medical information under duress, or potentially harm their body in order to 
get an education. 
 
With the rising number students leaving the school system, not all parents can homeschool. 
Throughout Covid, there were horrible situations of school age children being denied in 
classroom teaching. These children were in unsafe, unproductive environments, not fed 
properly, and desperately needed teacher and peer interaction. LD 869,1228 & 1148 will 
resolve this. 
 
Please support these bills to allow all Maine’s youth equal opportunity for a Maine education 
and without persecution and denial based on religious/philosophical beliefs or health 
conditions. 
 
Thank you for your time and your service. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Elizabeth Caruso 
Elizabeth Caruso 
Caratunk 
 
Elizabeth Caruso
Caratunk
LD 869
Testimony attached
I will be in meetings at 10 - 12:30, but I hope to be able to get on the zoom and testify
in there is an opening. Not knowing how many you will have in person and signed up,
I won't be able to get to Augusta until the mid-afternoon.  But I'm willing to pull over 
and testify if given warning. 
