 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on  
 
In Opposition to LD 869 , An Act to Protect Education Access by Prohibiting a Mandate for 
Schoolchildren for a COVID -19 Vaccine or a Vaccine Under an Emergency Use Authorization  
 
Sponsored by: Senator Keim   
Hearing Date: April 3, 2023  
 
Senator  Rafferty , Representative  Brennan , and Members  of Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs , my name is Jessica Shiminski   and I am the program director of 
the Maine Immunization Program (MIP).  I am here today to provide testimony on behalf of the 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  and will be speaking against LD 869, An Act to 
Protect Education Access by Prohibiting a Mandate for Schoolchildren for a COVID -19 Vaccine 
or a Vaccine Under an Emergency Use Authorization.  
 
This bill  prohibits the Director of the Department of Health and H uman Services, Maine Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC) from requiring by rule a vaccine approved for 
use solely under an emergency use au thorization (EUA) or a COVID 19 vaccine. Of note, 
although titled as an act to protect education access for schoolchildren, the statute referenced in 
this bill is specific to post -secondary institutions attended primarily by adults. The following 
comments are offered for your consideration.  
 
As authorized, rules promulgated by the Maine CDC specify immunization requirements 
established to ensure  a safe and healthful school environment.  The addition of diseases for which 
immunization is required is a major s ubstantive rule change, one that would require full 
legislative approval (20 -A MRSA ยง6359, sub -ยง6).  The Maine CDC has no taken no steps to add 
COVID -19 as a required vaccine for the upcoming 2023 -24 school year  for post -secondary 
schools or elementary and secondary schools . .   
 
COVID -19 vaccines are not substantively different from other vaccines and should not be 
preemptively prohibited. Maine CDC has concerns that including language to prohibit COVID -
19 or any  other emergency use authorized vaccine could prevent individual post -secondary 
schools from requiring this vaccine  for their students . The current statute  allows for colleges and 
universities to implement immunization requirements more stringent than what  is currently 
required by Maine law. Students entering into an allied health program, such as nursing, 
complete much of their schooling participating in clinical rotations? in a hospital setting, which 
may require COVID -19 or other vaccination. Schools mus t be allowed to require these students 
to show proof of COVID -19 vaccin ation  and any other vaccin ations  currently required for Maine 
healthcare workers in order for students to complete clinical work.  
 
  
In summary, the Maine CDC  opposes the proposed legisla tion and respectfully recommends it 
ought not to pass . The rulemaking authority currently exists for the Legislature to approve , on an 
individual basis,  the addition  of a disease for which the Department proposes to  require  
immunization , which will be impacted by LD 869, if enacted . Health policy currently in place  to 
protect the health of students, their schools and shared communities  is evidence -based, sound, 
and supported by the professional medical community and the American College Health 
Associati on. 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from Committee and I will be available to participate in the work 
session.  
 
 
 
