Jon  Olsen
Jefferson
LD 869
Testimony on LD 869
Dear Honorable members of Education and Cultural Affairs committee:
        Abundant evidence now exists that the damage done, including a substantial 
number of deaths, from the Covid injections, makes it clear that any mandate to 
accept them is morally untenable. Imagine if a small dose of cyanide or arsenic was 
required to attend school.Given the clinical reality of what has happened over the past
three year, this an apt analogy. The evidence is conclusive that except for a few cases 
children are not at risk of death or permanent debilitating injury from Covid, but they 
are for the injections.
As one with two degrees in philosophy, I wish to address the philosophical merits of
LD 869 as a corrective to the ill-advised LD 798 from several years ago. The historic 
bedrock principles of medical ethics are First, do no harm, and Informed Consent and 
were further enshrined after WW 2 with the Nuremberg principle which states 
unequivocally that certain rights are absolute, one of which is INFORMED 
CONSENT. To coerce people with threats of job loss or refusal of admission to 
school for choosing “No” to experimental injections is a gross violation of this 
bedrock ethical principle. 
Further, the philosophical document that founded this country was the Declaration 
of Independence from an overreaching monarchical tyranny. Among the wise 
provisions asserted was the criterion for the validity of government was “consent of 
the governed.”  The duty of government was above all to protect the “Life Liberty, 
and the Pursuit of Happiness” on the part of its citizens, among other rights that may 
be asserted. LD 798 manifests a gross violation thereof.
While there can be grounds for quarantine of people with highly contagious 
diseases, including especially self-quarantine (which is what I did when I got the 
Delta version of Covid), forcible penetration of the body of another person has a 
name. The reason that rape is a serious crime is not merely due to the potential for 
unwanted pregnancy or venereal disease, but above all due to its being an assault on 
bodily integrity. Such is exactly the case for coerced injections! You (generic “you”) 
have no right to inject a fluid (or pill, or microchip) into my body without my explicit 
permission, well informed of all foreseeable consequences, with the exception of 
saving my life if I am unconscious.
Accordingly, I support LD 869 as a partial measure toward the total repeal of LD 
798 and look forward to unanimous approval.  Thank you for your consideration. 
       Jon Olsen  

