70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Maine Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs, I am Mike McClellan, Policy Director for the 
Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic League of Maine envisions a 
state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom flourishes, families 
thrive, and life is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and 
including in governance. 
I am here to testify in favor of LD 869 - An Act to Protect Education Access by 
Prohibiting a Mandate for Schoolchildren for a COVID-19 Vaccine or a Vaccine 
Under an Emergency Use Authorization - Sen. Lisa Keim of Oxford. 
This bill prohibits the Director of the Maine Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention within the Department of Health and Human Services from requiring 
by rule a vaccine approved for use solely under an emergency use authorization 
or a COVID-19 vaccine. 
 
The Christian Civic League of Maine  believes parents, not schools, bureaucrats, or 
the FDA, should have total oversight of their children’s vaccines, especially 
vaccines approved with little testing and via an emergency use authorization by 
the Federal Government. We are still sorting out the damage and consequences 
of our national and state governments’ action during the most recent pandemic. 
Decisions were made, perhaps (or not) in good faith to act with school closings, 
public separation and within our communities that will take years to process. 
Education learning time lost, jobs taken away and our production supply chain 
impacted dramatically and we continue to see the ramifications today. Perhaps, a 
most concerning result was the stigma assigned to anyone who disagreed with 
the government/media approach. 
 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 A quick look at articles (from many diverse sources) shows that the Covid 19 
Pandemic and the responses in the education world will be reviewed for decades. 
Losses in learning, social skills and even the future earning ability of students have 
all been brought into question in the aftermath of the pandemic. This is an 
important conversation. 
 
Senator Keim’s bill simply recognizes that Maine has a solid approach to 
challenging situations. Her bill prohibits elected officials from making rash 
decisions and veering off that path in an emergency situation where mistakes can 
easily be made. It stops a situation where political agendas can trump solid 
process and our experiences. Maine has state and local processes set up to plan 
ahead for pandemics and the like. Let’s trust the process and not allow rash and 
political decisions to again lead us down the wrong path in an emergency. Let’s 
trust the process we have in place. Let’s utilize the systems and structures we pay 
for and set up locally and statewide.  Please vote Ought to Pass to LD 869. 
Thank you for your time and consideration today. Know that many are hopeful of 
your actions and are praying for you and your families. God bless, 
 
Mike    
 
Mike McClellan 
Policy Director 
Christian Civic League Maine 
 
 
 
 
 
