Testimony of Peter P. Michaud, JD, RN
in Opposition to
LD 869, An Act to Protect Education Access by Prohibiting a Mandate for School Children for a
COVID-19 Vaccine or a Vaccine Under an Emergency Use Authorization;
LD 1148, An Act to Prohibit COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates for Students Enrolled in Public Institutions
of Learning; and
LD 1228,  An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from Requiring Vaccines Approved
Under Emergency Use Authorization for Admission or Attendance.
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Cross State Office Building Room 208
April 3, 2023
Good morning Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Committee on Education
and Cultural Affairs. My name is Peter P. Michaud. I am a retired Registered Nurse and attorney and 
am a resident of Readfield, in Kennebec County. Please accept my testimony in opposition to the three 
vaccine bills noted above. Each bill proposes to prohibit the use in emergencies of  vaccines which 
have received Emergency Use Authorization from the U. S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Policy makers consult specialist experts precisely because those experts have a level of knowledge and 
understanding that policy makers cannot possibly gain in a short period of time. We all tend to do our 
own jobs much better than we can do other people's jobs. The FDA's job is to evaluate new treatments, 
vaccines, and preventive items. It evaluates both effectiveness and safety. The medical scientists at the 
FDA do their job better than we can; they have the tools and the background, and they provide 
guidance to those of us who do not have those things. The job of the Maine Center for Disease Control 
and Prevention (Maine CDC) is to use those evaluations to make policy, in the form of health 
regulations, based on statutory law promulgated by the Legislature. The trained professionals at the 
Maine CDC also have the tools and the background to do their job.
Maine has a citizen Legislature. Each member has expertise in one or more subject areas. Legislators 
have the training and background to do your job. Very few have medical expertise, regardless of how 
well you have prepared for this or any hearing. Even those with medical education, training, and 
experience are not well positioned to second-guess the specialist experts at the FDA or the Maine CDC.
Neither am I. We have a Maine CDC precisely to occupy that space in policy making between the FDA
scientists and the generalists in the Legislature.
Thus government policy makers at the Maine CDC consider things like authorizations and approvals by
FDA experts in making decisions about public health. For Maine's Legislature to enact a broad, 
sweeping prohibition against the use of guidelines and authorizations formulated by the people who 
have the necessary expertise would be to expose our population to a high level of public health risk for 
no real reason other than politics. It would remove the tools from their toolbox.
The FDA uses Emergency Use Authorizations very sparingly, and only in public health emergencies 
where quick action is necessary to save lives and where there is significant evidence of a treatment's 
efficacy and safety in light of any known and potential risks. Such Emergency Use Authorizations can 
only be applied for as long as the actual emergency exists. Furthermore, if a treatment achieves full 
FDA approval, the Emergency Use Authorization is no longer used because it is no longer necessary. 
Two COVID-19 vaccines and one COVID-19 treatment have achieved such approval.
We, the people of Maine, trust our Legislators to make our laws. That is your job, it is what you are 
good at. We ask that you, in turn, trust public servants like those at the Maine CDC and the US FDA to 
do their jobs and advise you through approvals and authorizations about the safety and effectiveness of 
the items that come before them. Do not handicap our public health officials in their efforts to protect 
Maine people by prohibiting them from using the very types of information that are designed to achieve
the best possible outcomes in emergency situations. Don't take away their tools.
Emergencies do not allow us to take the time to evaluate something exhaustively. They require split-
second decisions. The best people to make those decisions are those with expertise in the subject area. 
Sometimes, especially in the field of health care, waiting can be fatal.
Please vote “Ought Not To Pass” on LD 869, LD 1148, and LD 1228.
Respectfully submitted,
Peter P. Michaud, JD, RN
Readfield, Maine
