Regina B Creeley
Hudson
LD 869
                    TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT of L.D. 869
                          by  Regina Creeley  M. Ed. 
                                            April 3, 2023
Good Day Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of 
the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.
My name is Regina Creeley and I am testifying in support of L.D. 869.  I live in 
Hudson.  I’m a retired special education teacher.  In 2014, I was voted Special 
Education Professional of the year (by the Maine Administrators of Services for 
Children with Disabilities (MADSEC)). 
Those of us who have studied vaccine history, vaccine ingredients, and vaccine 
manufacturers for over twenty years, see Covid-19 injections in light of a long 
complicated history of profit and agency capture. As you know, agency capture is 
when a governmental agency that is supposed to regulate the safety of a business  
instead helps businesses make more profits rather than ensuring that the businesses 
are honest and safe.  There is a revolving door between the CDC, the FDA and the 
vaccine manufacturers that makes safety oversight dubious.  To compound this 
dangerous situation, the 1986 National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act took away the 
right for Americans to sue vaccine manufacturers. It was a  business marketing 
scheme made  in profit heaven. 
Why did the 1986 act take away the right for Americans to sue over vaccines?  Well 
before that,  many parents were winning so many lawsuits over the deaths and 
disabling injuries their children were suffering that the vaccine makers were going 
bankrupt and threatening to stop making vaccines altogether.  The Pentagon didn’t 
like that and negotiations occurred and the right to sue over vaccines was taken away. 
So much for the right to a trial in front of a jury of your peers! It makes it all a very 
complicated, out-of-kilter system.
It is not a simple, safe and effective system. There is a lot of money involved both on 
the side of profits and the side of potential liability.  Money and profits have a way of 
obscuring inconvenient facts.
On a more positive note, please watch this 14 minute video, Here  is a link.    
https://www.informedconsentxpress.com/videos.html    It talks about three studies. 
One group of 1,482 people had no diabetes, no arthritis, no SIDS (Sudden Infant 
Death Syndrome,  no heart disease and best of all, no childhood cancer and no adult 
cancer. Wow, these folks were healthier than most folks!  What did they have in 
common?  They were never vaccinated. They were vaccine-free and had no heart 
disease and had no cancer.  All three of these studies showed vaccine-free people are 
healthier than vaccinated people.
Reasonable people can have philosophical differences.   A child’s right to go to 
school should not be denied because of philosophical differences.
https://www.nvic.org/getmedia/ee180c42-d8d4-4e27-88bf-d622bda5ec32/CDC-Reco
mmended-Schedule-(11x17)-2.png
In 1983 before the 1986 National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act there were 22 doses 
by age 6 and now there are 52 doses by age 6.It is more than double.  In 1983 there 
were 24 doses by age 18, now it is tripled that to 72 doses.
1983:  22 doses of 7 vaccines by age 6 ; 24 doses of 7 vaccines by age 18
2023: 52 doses of 15 vaccines by age 6; 72 doses of 17 vax by age 18.
https://childrenshealthdefense.org/defender/autism-rate-increase-cdc/
One in 36 (2.8%) 8-year-old children — 4% of boys and 1% of girls — have an 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD), based on an analysis of data from 2020, published 
today by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Most autistic children were found to either have an intellectual disability (37.9%) or 
to be on the borderline for having one (23.5%). 
“But when you look at the trends, no matter how you break it down, autism is rising 
in all of these groups and it has been since they started taking the data 20 years ago. 
Environmental risk factors include metals like aluminum and mercury in vaccines, 
glyphosate exposure, use of acetaminophen during pregnancy and infancy, heavy 
metals in baby food and other organic environmental pollutants. 
Studies also link industrial chemicals, such as lead, arsenic, copper, selenium, iron 
and magnesium, to the disorder. 
Despite growing evidence that environmental factors may play a role in the 
development of ASD, the CDC did not investigate environmental exposures as a 
potential cause. 
