LD  869 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
 
My name is Samuel May and I live in Portland. I wish to testify in support of LD 869.  
 
You cannot make a right conditional on a mandate. You cannot force an injection not fully 
vetted. You have a right to an education. 
 
Coronavirus in 2020 caught many off-guard. In the rush to contain the spread of a novel 
pathogen public health officials, pharmaceutical companies, university researchers, and 
politicians scrambled to craft decrees, mandates, strategies. It was not time to employ tested 
formulas, or so was thought.  
 
Modeling predicted catastrophic deaths. Never before used “lockdowns” were implemented to 
flatten the curve. Schools and businesses were shut down, people sent home. Hospitals, 
compensated for treating covid patients, turned away cancer patients like my cousin who died 
at Mercy Hospital in August 2020.  
 
We stopped educating our young and did not consider long-term costs. We only thought of 
immediate safety. 
 
It quickly became apparent that only the aged were dying. Average age of death in Maine was 
greater than 80 and that metric held for the first year. It is now stands at 76 with 2,972 deaths 
over the last three years attributed to “with” or “of” Covid. 
 
Over the last three years five Mainers under 20 have died “with” or “of” Covid. FIVE. That 
means 1.67 Mainers under 20 died each of the last three years for an increase of ~1% in the 
death rate - about 180 per year die in Maine under 20. The infection fatality rate for a Mainer 
under 20 was 0.0068%. That is 7 thousandths of one percent! Unfortunate, for sure, but do you 
deny rights? Who are you protecting?  
 
The First Amendment lays out our inalienable rights - freedom of speech, press, religion. These 
are not “takeaway-able”. You cannot separate me from them. Our legislative, executive, and 
judicial branches should be on the lookout for breaches of inalienable rights. 
 
Our governmental response to the novel coronavirus led to the abrogation of rights due to an 
excess of fear and fear mongering. We did not make good decisions.  
 
We also made vaccination status a condition for education. Specifically, we denied education to 
students who, in consultation with their families, chose not to take an experimental use 
authorized (EUA), never-before-used, and not approved, vaccine rushed to market over six 
months. 
 
This was a novel technology never even tested to determine if it curtailed infection and 
transmission, as was admitted by Pfizer Senior Vice President  in testimony before the European 
Parliament. Not only was it not tested, it’s now known it, in fact, does not curtail infection or 
block transmission.  
 
This must never happen again. We need to protect our youth from mandated injections of 
novel drugs that operate under Emergency Use Authorization. 
 
Thank you for your time. 
 
Sam May 
100 Vaughan St 
Portland, Maine  
 
 
