Tessa Burpee
Brewer
LD 869
Testimony in Support of LD 869, LD 1148 and LD 1228.
Tessa Burpee, Brewer
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:
My name is Tessa Burpee. I live in Brewer. I request that you please support LD 869, 
LD 1148 and LD 1228.
As a born-again believer in the Lord Jesus Christ, I believe the Bible teaches that our 
bodies are the temple of the Holy Spirit. Decisions about what to eat, what to drink, 
what to use for medicine or medical treatments, are a matter of choice and prayerful 
consideration so as not to pollute or defile His temple. Many vaccines contain 
human-diploid fibroblast cell cultures. Fetal cell lines were used to produce and/or 
test all three of the COVID-19 vaccines that are currently available. I am pro-life and 
the use of these cells directly opposes my view on the value and sanctity of human 
life.
Our country’s founders recognized that we are born with certain unalienable rights 
and that we are endowed by our Creator with these rights, which include life, liberty 
and the pursuit of happiness. Unalienable means that they are impossible to take away
or give up. Life and liberty exist because we are free people and have sovereignty 
over our bodies and our choices. The US Constitution and the Maine Constitution 
reflect this belief and protect religious freedom. Further, the Maine Human Rights Act
prohibits discrimination because of race, color, sex, sexual orientation, age, physical 
or mental disability, genetic information, religion, ancestry or national origin. This is 
further protection to ensure that all people with religious convictions have freedom of 
access to education, employment and other public services.
Vaccines approved under Emergency Use Authorization by their very authorization 
require informed consent, which necessitates the option to say no. Please support 
these important bills to protect our children from being forced to have experimental 
gene therapy in order to get an education in Maine.
Please support LD 869, LD 1148 and LD 1228.
