Whitney King-Buker
Minot
LD 869
As a former healthcare worker (due to Maine Vaccine Mandate October 2021, which 
resulted in the forced termination of my career, which I loved, working with cancer 
patients), as well as a former immuno scientist and my most important profession, as 
a parent, my children's personal body safety is of the utmost priority. The same should
be for all children. 
With the recent mRNA vaccines I am highly concerned about the physiological 
risk-taking that has and continues to occur: The adult vaccine booster side effects that 
my and other patients endured were catastrophic (those that have not been of the 
populace that have died from such boosters) such that I could not justify risking my 
personal safety, as well as that of my own children. 
And as a former scientist, I know of the vital importance when it comes to long-term 
validation testing to pass or fail a substance before it is allowed to hit the market for 
general use. In this situation no long-term validation was able to occur. Thus further 
putting our children at risk with a substance being placed into their bodies.
These booster injection (Pfizer and Moderna) reactions, confirmed by medical staff in
and out of our State, have not only effected individuals via cardiac issues, internal and
external blistering, seizures, full body muscle spasms, and death.
Our children have shown to be resilient and safe throughout these past pandemic 
years with their natural immmunity.
There is lack of credible quantitative statistics and scientific data to make Covid 
vaccines a requirement for an education or that of a required childhood vaccine. Yet 
there is defined evidence of irreparable physical harm that has occurred to thousands 
after receiving the Covid vaccines that are on the market today.
We parents and healthcare workers will not allow our children to be placed in harms 
way. We will do whatever it takes to ensure their personal safety is not risked. No 
public education is worth the physical harm of our children.
