& 3' 
v~"1"*
K 
Locai Government Center 60 Community Drive Auguste, Maine 04330-9486 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Distinguished Members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public safety Committee, 
I am Chief Bill Gillespie from Liberty, Maine and the Legislative Liaison for the Maine Fire Chiefs 
Association representing more than 400 Fire Chiefs throughout the state. 
l am here today to ask for your support of LD 588: An Act to Promote Public Safety and Retain 
Essential First Responders by Funding the Maine Length of Service Award Program 
In April of 2003, the Maine Fire Services Commission commissioned an actuarial study of the 
need for a Length of Service Award Program for the State of Maine. 
ln the 127th Legislative Session, LD 164 was passed to establish the Length of Service Award 
Program at the State level. The program was designed to be a defined contribution plan where 
participants get contributions to their account on an annual basis. The Legislation approved five 
different funding sources for the program. However, it went unfunded, and a board was not 
established. 
In 2017 Governor LePage allowed the board of directors to be established and they elected me 
as their Chair. Since then, we have established and maintained a Board, created By-Laws and 
outlined the Program. 
ln the 129"‘ Legislative Session, we submitted our first request for funding. We were 
unsuccessful in receiving funding but gained a better education of the process. 
In the 130"‘ legislature we submitted a 2.5-million-dollar request and were successful in 
receiving $500,000.00 to hire a third-party administrator. This has been the groundwork to 
bringing this important program to Maine's Fire and EMS providers. in the Biannual budget 
Governor mills contributed 1 million dollars with an additional $500,000.00 coming from the 
special appropriations table. The program is built and now in need of a steady flow of revenue 
only the state can provide. 
l ask for your support of this 2.5-million-dollar request to fully fund what we feel is one of the 
key elements to solving the Recruitment and Retention issue affecting both services. lt is time 
to give back to all who have expected so little from you. 
Respectfully, 
Chief Bill Gillespie - Legislative Liaison & LOSAP Chair
