Brian Moura
Lowell
LD 588
March 18, 2023
Members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee
EMS Bills
LD 326
An Act to Improve Recruitment and Retention of First Responders
Sen. Michael Tipping of Penobscot
LD 526
An Act to Provide Funding to Emergency Medical Services Organizations
Speaker. Rachel Talbot Ross of Portland
LD 588
An Act to Promote Public Safety and Retain Essential First Responders by Funding the Maine
Length of Service Award Program
Sen. Chip Curry of Waldo
Dear Members, 
The Howland Maine Fire/EMS Department is a municipal first responder service 
within central Penobscot County, and is the contracted provider for essential 
lifesaving protections to the Town of Lowell, Maine.  Howland is championing a new
endeavor designed to ultimately provide a more effective, affordable and sustainable 
Fire/EMS model for not only its current partner and client base, but also for a larger 
area of rural Maine.  As an elected official for the Town of Lowell, Maine., I want to 
express my strongest support for this visionary effort. 
Being an active member of a recently established coalition supporting this proposal, 
we are collaboratively confronting the challenge of how to sustain these critical 
services to rural communities with a new approach. The basic premise is to form a 
fire district covering several communities, which we believe will not only improve the
level and quality of service, but will ultimately achieve significant economies of scale
through the coordinated sharing of apparatus, employees and existing facilities.  We 
further believe that by working together we will be able to eventually reduce 
operating expenses and increase revenues for the benefit of all served through the 
district model.  A final significant benefit we foresee is the creation of new job 
opportunities within the region.
 I support this innovative approach to try and solve the current fire/EMS crisis in 
Maine by working together with neighboring communities and forming partnerships.  
I now ask for your support by giving serious consideration to Howland’s application 
for the financial support needed to move this effort forward.    
Sincerely,
 Brian Moura
1st Selectboard Member
Town of Lowell, Maine.

