, A HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
‘E AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
I (207) 287-1440 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Chad R. Perkins 
POB 251 
Dover-Foxcro ﬂ, ME 04426 
Residence: (207) 279-0927 
Fax: (207) 305-4907 
Chad Perkins@legislature.maine.gov 
26 Feb 23 
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD 
SUBJECT: LD 425 An Act to Lower the Environmental Impact of Consumers, Increase 
Food Safety and Strengthen Consumer Choice by Ending the Ban on Single-use Plastic 
Shopping Bags 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, 
Thank you for allowing me to address you on LD 425, An Act to Lower the 
Environmental Impact of Consumers, Increase Food Safety and Strengthen Consumer 
Choice by Ending the Ban on Single-use Plastic Shopping Bags. 
The purpose of passing legislation is to codify and then enact the People’s Will. In 
establishing a ban on single use plastic bags, I believe that we, the Maine State 
Legislature, has failed. I come to this conclusion based on the belief that the purpose of 
the original legislation was to enact policies that encouraged consumer behaviors that 
were more environmentally and ecologically friendly While reducing the use of natural 
resources. Not only did We fail to do this, We failed to do this while simultaneously 
imposing severe inconvenience and cost on our citizens. 
To begin our conversation, we must ﬁrst dispel the myth that the plastic bags that 
Were specifically made from high-density polyethylene plastic, and referred to as light 
carrier bags or single use plastic bags (SUPBs), were most often used as ‘single use’ . For 
many people these bags were reused as bin liners for small garbage cans, as lunch bags, 
as pet waste bags, and a variety of other purposes. 
After I submitted this bill, I began taking periodic and informal polls at grocery lines, 
as several of my children worked as grocery check clerks. One of the questions I would 
ask was if people would traditionally use the single use plastic bags for other purposes. I 
found that a majority of respondents would answer in the affirmative and a large majority 
indicated that they still had a collection of the bags, years after the ban had gone into 
effect, because of their past habit of saving the bags for other uses. 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Meaford, A/filo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
The validity of this practice was conﬁrmed on Steve Innskeep ’s ‘Planet Money’ 
program on NPR in May of 2019 when interviewing Stacey Vanek Smith. During the 
program Smith conﬁrmed that the sales of heavier, manufactured small plastic bags 
available by retail rose by as much as 120% in areas where single use plastic bag bans 
had been enacted. In one sampling, according to the UN, “ 61% of the population reuse 
supermarket bags as waste bin liners” . [attachment 1, p. 20] 
According to the United Nations report ‘Life Cycle Initiative: Single-Use Plastic Bags 
and Their Altematives (2020)’ [attachment 1, p. 2], “The material type and weight ofa 
shopping bag are important characteristics for determining its environmental impacts. ” 
Therefore, the heavier retail plastic bags had a higher environmental impact than the 
banned single use plastic bags, a" point stressed in the interview. This increase in the use 
of thicker, commercially available bags was further conﬁrmed in the Journal of 
Enviromnental Economics and Management (Vol 93, Jan 2019) under the article entitled 
“Bag leakage: The effect of disposable carryout bag regulations on unregulated bags”. 
In addition to the unintended effect of shifting consumer habits to buying plastic bags 
that are notably less ecologically friendly than the bags that were banned, when the ban 
was implemented the consumer was offered a bevy of other bag options that were 
decidedly less ecologically friendly. When the law was enacted, consumers were offered 
the choice of purchasing a paper bag, receiving a ‘reusable ’ plastic bag or using a more 
durable manufactured bag. However, all of these options are contraindicative to the 
purpose and spirit of the original legislation. 
As the intent of the original legislation was to lower the environmental impact of 
consumer habits, reduce the use of natural resources and mitigate the effects of climate 
change, we must consider if the carrier packaging options available now meet those goals 
better than the pre-ban SUPBs. In order to do this we must look at the total life cycle of 
the product, not just the disposal and waste management. 
According to the United Nations Environment Program report, “The technology and 
material/energy use of production processes inﬂuence the impact of bags.” [attachment l, 
p. 2]. When looking at the ‘total life cycle’ impact of the carrier bag, from production, to 
use, to end of life, the plastic SUPBs consistently offer among the lowest environmental 
impact and lowest threat to climate change. This could not be more plainly stated than in 
the Danish report, “Life Cycle Assessment of Grocery Carrier Bags” , which stated, “In 
general with regards to production and disposal, LDPE carrier bags, which are the bags 
that are always available for purchase in Danish supermarkets, are the carriers providing 
the overall lowest environmental impacts for most environmental indicators. ” [attachment 
2, p 16] 
According to a report by the Northern Ireland Assembly, “It takes more than four times 
as much energy to manufacture a paper bag as it does to manufacture a plastic bag” and 
“Paper bags generate 70% more air and 50 times more water pollutants than plastic bags” 
(Bell/Curve, 2011). Additionally, the increase in the use of paper bags over SUPBs has 
signiﬁcantly increased methane levels (a greenhouse gas) and “landﬁlling is the least 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcro ﬁ, Lake View Plantation, Meaford, lkfilo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
preferred option for cotton, paper and biodegradable bags as degradation releases 
methane, which has a strong impact on the climate” , according to the report. 
For most SUPB alternatives, the bag needs to be reused a very high number of times to 
have a net positive ecological impact compared to a SUPB. While a lack of 
harmonization in Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) can yield a variety of results, each of the 
LCA reports included as attachments agree on that point. For paper bags that number is 
either 4 times [attachment 3, p. 59], 5.4 times [attachment l, p. 30] or 43 times 
[attachment 2, p.17]. According to the UN LCA report, “ single-use paper bags have less 
impact of littering, compared to SUPBs, but often have higher impact on most other 
environmental categories (Climate Change, Acidiﬁcation, Eutrophication, Ozone 
Depletion, Land use change)? ’ [attachment l, p. 8] 
This would not indicate that other non-SUPB options are any better. For a cotton bag, 
the carrier bag would have to be reused 20 thousand times before it had the same net 
positive effect as a SUPB when water use, land use, acidiﬁcation and all other 
enviromnental factors. This is far outside the realistic expectation of consumer behavior. 
In fact, SUPBs scored highest (most ecologically sound) in the categories of ozone 
depletion, photochemical ozone formation, ionizing radiation, particulate matter, 
terrestrial acidiﬁcation, terrestrial eutrophication, freshwater eutrophication, ecosystem 
toxicity and water resource depletion; and scored Within the top three for the remaining 
categories of Human toxicity (both cancerous and non-cancerous), marine eutrophication, 
fossil resource depletion and abiotic resource depletion [attachment 3, pp. 17f]. 
We also have to consider other things in the life cycle of the bag product, like 
transportation For example, you can transport 7 times as many SUPBs as paper bags in 
the same truck. A 20 foot cargo container that can hold 30,000 cotton bags can hold 
millions of SUPBs. Certain ‘ecologically friendly ’ options become far less so when the 
environmental cost of manufacture and transport are added to the end of life disposal 
cost. 
We also have to deal with ‘leakage’ , the fact that certain bags (SUPBs) are regulated 
While other bags made from the same material (commercially available trash bags, 
exemptions for HDPE bags at same point of retail, etc) are not which results in the 
increased consumption of the unregulated item. If one can easily replace the regulated 
item with an identical unregulated item, the beneﬁt of the regulation is severely 
overstated. 
When dealing with an ecologically sound packaging solution, it is clear that consumer 
education in recycling and reducing SUPB littering is the most enviromnentally friendly 
solution available to policy makers, not bans that include leakage and cause more harm to 
the environment than they purport to mitigate. 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcro ﬁ‘ , Lake View Plantation, Meaford, Milo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
And ﬁnally, we must consider the food safety issue of alternatives to the SUPB, 
speciﬁcally the reusable manufactured bags. There was such a concern about the 
likelihood of viruses being transported in these items that the Governor suspended the 
rules for the use of SUPBs during the Covid State of Emergency. 
While we later found out from the CDC that the Covid virus does not survive long on 
surfaces, other things do, speciﬁcally E. Coli and coliform bacteria. A study conducted 
by the University of Arizona Department of Soil, Water, and Environmental Science and 
Loma Linda University School of Public Health conducted a study on reusable grocery 
bags [attachment 4]. The study concluded that 51% of the bags contained the coliform 
bacteria and 8% contained E. Coli. This is not dissimilar from a 2011 study cited in the 
UN LCA report, which states, “ bags can host infectious bacteria such as E.coli (causes 
diarrhoea). Greene (2011) found, for example, coliform bacteria in half of the bag 
samples and 12% of the bags carried E.coli.” [attachment 1, p. 19]. The conclusion of the 
report was “A potential risk of bacterial cross—contamination is associated with use of 
reusable bags to carry groceries. ” [attachment 4, p. 513] 
Most importantly, I believe that overturning this ban Will do the will of the People. 
During my infonnal grocery checkout poll sessions, another question I would ask is, “Are 
you happy with the bag ban?” To a one, not a single person replied in the afﬁrmative. If 
We can get rid of the unnecessary and pointless inconvenience While at the same time 
following the intent of the original legislation to take the best care of our natural 
resources, that would be a Win for all Mainers. 
As lawmakers, We must be realistic and pragmatic in decisions of policy. If the ban on 
single use plastic bags is lifted, it will rely on consumer education to move forward 
toward an ecologically friendly environment, and we will never have 100% compliance. 
There will still be some SUPB litter waste, and some SUPBs will still fmd their Way into 
various ecosystems. But yet, such a repeal would still have a net positive balance both 
economically and enviromnentally than our current practice of banning plastic bags and 
replacing them with alternatives that use more natural resources and cause more 
environmental damage. 
And, while not a matter of policy, the ﬁscal note assigned to this bill indicates that there 
would be some savings to the State in the reduction of regulatory costs. 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcro ﬁ, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Illilo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
I thank you for your polite consideration in this matter and look forward to 
discussion on any of the points I brought forward in this testimony. I respectfully urge the 
committee to vote “Ought To Pass” on LD 425. 
Respectfully, 
Q;/44%,» 
Rep. Chad R. Perkins 
District 31 
CF: 
Committee Chair Senator Brenner 
Committee Chair Representative Gramlich 
Committee Members 
ATT: 
UN Environment Programme report “Single-Use Plastic Bags and Their Alternatives: 
Recommendations from Life Cycle Assessments ” 
Ministry of Food and Environment of Denmark report: “Life Cycle Assessment of 
Grocery Carrier Bags” 
UK Environment Agency report : “Life Cycle Assessment of Supermarket Carrier Bags” 
Department of Soil, Water, and Environmental Science, University of Arizona/Loma 
Linda University School of Public Health, Dept. of Environmental Health study 
“Assessment of the Potential for Cross-contamination of Food Products by Reusable 
Shopping Bags” 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Meaford, .Mil0, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
