Committee on Environment and Natural Resources
℅ Legislative Information Of fice
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
March 1, 2023
RE: LD 425,
An Act to Lower the Environmental Impact
of Consumers, Increase Food Safety
and Strengthen Consumer Choice by Ending the Ban on Single-use Plastic Shopping Bags & LD
572, An Act to Remove the 5 Cent Fee for Bags in Retail Stores
Dear Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in opposition to LD 425,
An Act to
Lower the Environmental Impact of Consumers, Increase Food Safety and Strengthen Consumer
Choice by Ending the Ban on Single-use Plastic Shopping Bags, and LD 572, An Act to Remove
the 5 Cent Fee for Bags in Retail Stores,
on behalf
of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members
and supporters.
Maine Audubon opposes these bills because they would weaken or repeal Maine’ s
nation-leading, strong plastic bag policy , which is a vital strategy (among many other strategies)
to reduce plastic pollution.
Plastic pollution causes significant harm to wildlife, especially seabirds. Scientists have
been tracking plastic ingestion by seabirds for decades. In 1960, plastic was found in the
stomachs of fewer than five percent of birds and by 1980 that number had jumped to 80 percent.
Plastic found inside birds includes bags, bottle caps, synthetic fibers from clothing, and
“microplastics”—plastic that has been broken down by the sun and waves over time.
Scientists are still unearthing the far -ranging damages of accumulating microplastics in
wildlife. A recently published study demonstrated how microplastics in fish changed their
behavior . The study demonstrated that, compared to controls, fish treated by microplastics had
weakened feeding activity . Microplastic treated-fish had reduced swimming speed and range of
movement, demonstrating that microplastics could have negative ef fects on hunting behavior .
Furthermore, microplastics accumulate in the gills and intestine of the fish, causing significant
changes to the gallbladder and liver , leading to lower growth, protein, and lipid contents. Fish are

eaten by birds, other wildlife, and humans, meaning that the known impacts of microplastic
ingestion is not isolated to fish.
Other work has established reduced foraging, survival, and reproduction as a result of
microplastics in marine zooplankton, an or ganism that is the foundation of marine ecosystems.
Researchers have also documented that plastic loads in seabird chicks translate to poorer body
condition, making them more susceptible to disease and/or predation. Undoubtedly ,
microplastics are ubiquitous, and their impacts on people, fish, and wildlife, and the environment
are endless.
Wildlife ingest far more than microplastics. Wildlife such as sea turtles and whales often
mistake plastic bags for jellyfish, a primary food source. Once ingested, plastic bags cannot be
digested or passed by these animals. This can prevent food digestion and can lead to a very slow
and painful death. Marine life can also become entangled in plastic bags, causing suf focation,
starvation, drowning, exhaustion, infection, and increased vulnerability to predators.
Scientists say that by 2050, there will be more plastic in the ocean than fish, ton for ton.
Globally , about 1 million plastic shopping bags are distributed
per minute
and only 1% are
recycled. We urge the Committee to oppose LD 425 and LD 572, because both bills would be a
step backward in progress toward confronting Maine’ s, our nation’ s, and the world’ s plastic
problem.
Sincerely ,
Eliza Donoghue, Esq.
Director of Advocacy

