1 
 
LD 425 An Act to Lower the Environmental Impact of Consumers, Increase Food Safety 
and Strengthen Consumer Choice by Ending the Ban on Single -use Plastic Shopping 
Bags  
And 
LD  572 An Act to Remove the 5 Cent Fee for Bags in Retail Stores  
Joint Committee on E nvironment  and Natural Resources  
Testimony I N OPPOSITION  
Public Hearing  
March 1 , 2023  
 
Chair Senator Brenner; Chair Representative Gramlich; and Honorable Committee Members:  
 
 Thank you for the opportunity to present testimony IN OPPOSITION t o LD 425 and LD 
572.  My name is Jacquelyn Elliott. I live in Waterboro where I retired more than a decade 
ago from my native New Hampshire. For nearly three decades I have been actively 
engaged as an environmental health and justice advocate. That work ha s had the primary 
focus of developing waste policy that protects public health and the environment; 
promotes environmental justice for communities impacted by waste processing and 
disposal facilities; reduces the toxicity of waste generated; furthers reuse , diversion, and 
recycling of valuable resources; and decreases the quantity of discards requiring disposal. 
Waste is a verb. It is something we choose to do. We can make better choices.  
  
Maine’s motto is: DIRIGO. I lead. Maine has had one of the most effective bottle 
bills in the nation. And there are efforts to improve it . The State has been a leader passing 
EPR (Extended Producer Responsibility) legislation that puts the cost of processing and 
disposal for waste onto the  producers of that waste and relieving taxpayers of that 
burden.  That legislation is currently going through the rules process to establish an 
effectual framework for implementation. Last session, the Legislature passed a bill that 
2 
 
addresses the problem o f out -of-state waste consuming  disposal capacity reserved for 
Maine -generated waste at the State -owned JRL (Juniper Ridge Landfill).  
  
Maine is stepping up to the challenge of developing sustainable polices across 
various  sectors to address  environmental injustice , climate disruption , and waste 
management. Approach ing decision making from  a holistic view  of interconnected 
systems and synergistic  impacts  is prudent . With the horror of PFAS contamination 
unfolding before us, we are hopefully beginning to app reciate the value of considering  
the choices we make from the perspective of  precaution and prevention of harm. We are 
painfully learning hard and expensive lesson s that some damages  may not be successfully 
remediated. What may have appeared as a “savings”  is manifesting in payments due  
beyond comprehension. Costs incurred  include  the incalculable loss to human health ; a 
forever poisoned and degraded environment ; and economic devaluation.  
 
 Maine took some essential  steps when they chose to tackle the problem of toxic 
pollution from single -use plastic bags. A ban may seem like an inconvenient  and 
unnecessary action, but if assessed  from  a protracted  view, the importance becomes 
apparent. Single -use plastic bags are a  serious and menacing problem in Maine and world -
wide.  They litter our landscape s; choke our oceans and foul our shores; they endanger 
the survival of our marine and other wild life; they contribute to the still un certain  hazards 
posed by  micro and nano pl astics; they hamper efforts to recycle valuable  resources; and 
they perpetuate the unsustainable cycle of extraction of finite fossil resources to produce  
new plastics . Plastics  are toxic throughout their lifecycle – from extraction, production, 
use, and disposal. Plastic s present a substantial  threat to survival.  
 
Taking steps to ameliorate that threat with a ban on single -use plastic bags, 
constitutes an action representing low -hanging fruit to get to a better place for us all. 
Suggesting that putting single -use plastic bags back into the economy is somehow going 
to lower environmental impacts seems misguided . And to couple that with the assertion 
3 
 
it is a matter of protecting co nsumer choice is unconvincing .  A 5-cent fee for a bag that 
is more sustainable is a cost that can be easily avoided with the use of reusable bags and 
totes.  Why we would want to overturn such an important accomplishment, defies logic .  
Please see:  
https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/plastic -peril -oceans -pollution -fs.pdf   
https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/choked -plastic -pollution -marine -life-fs.pdf   
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jpc.15777   
https://www.webmd.com/a -to-z-guides/news/20221028/microplastics -health -risks -what -do-
we-really -know   
 
 
 
A Better Way:  
 "Zero waste is a philosophy and a design principle for the 21st Century; it is not 
simply about putting an end to landfilling. Aiming for zero waste is not an end -of-pipe 
solution. That is why it heralds fun damental change. Aiming for zero waste means 
designing products and packaging with reuse and recycling in mind. It means ending 
subsidies for wasting. It means closing the gap between landfill prices and their true costs. 
It means making manufacturers take  responsibility for the entire lifecycle of their products 
and packaging. Zero waste efforts, just like recycling efforts before, will change the face 
of solid waste management in the future. Instead of managing wastes, we will manage 
resources and strive to eliminate waste ."  Institute for Local Self Reliance (Washington, 
DC) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Thank you for considering my comments. I ask that the Committee vote OUGHT 
NOT TO PASS on LD 424 and LD 572.  
 
Jacquelyn C. Elliott  
148 West Road  
Waterboro, ME 04087 -3210  
(207) 247 -0103  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com   
 

