 
64 Blueberry Road Portland, Maine 04102  
Testimony of Matt Grondin, Director of Communications & Public Affairs,  
ecomaine  
before the Environment & Natural Resources  Committee in Opposition to  
LD 425, An Act to Lower the Environmental Impact of Consumers, Increase Food 
Safety and Strengthen Consumer Choice by Ending the Ban on Single -use Plastic 
Shopping Bags  
March 1 , 202 3 
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and distinguished members of the 
Joint Committee on the Environment & Natural Reso urces , thank you for the 
opportunity to testify on this legislation. My name is Matt Grondin , and I represent 
ecomaine as  the Director of Communications and Public Affairs . We are a quasi -
municipal organization with more than 70 member communities in Maine. We own 
and operate  Maine’s largest recycling plant, a food waste recovery program, a 
waste -to-energy facility,  and a landfill.   
 
Through our mission  statement , ecomaine closely aligns its policies  with the 
solid waste management hier archy that is clearly defined in State Statute . This 
gives all of us a  sound plan on how to best manage waste materials.  
 
I am pleased to submit this testimony on LD 425; just as we testified in 2019, 
ecomaine remains opposed to the broad use of single use plastic bags, and it is 
our testimony that the current ban ought to remain in place.  Fundamentally, as 
we adhere to the solid waste hier archy, and as this Committee knows, reduction 
and reuse  are at the very top rungs of the hierarchy, followed by recycling.  Given 
this guidance from the EPA and the Maine DEP, ecomaine supports the 
deployment  of reusable bags ahead of recyclable bags, and recyclable bags 
ahead of single -use plastic ones . 
 
Beyond the issues related to the waste hierarchy or the environmental reasons 
for decreasing use of single -use plastic bags, this material  also represent s a real 
cost to ecomaine  and recyclers like us  – bags and films can and do get wrapped 
around our sorting equipment, making it operate less efficient ly.  As a result,  we 
must spend time and staff power to go in and cut them out, resulting in down 
time, and lost sorting capacity.   Anecdotally, ecomaine has seen fewer bags 
entering our materials recovery facility since this ban took effect.  There are still 

challenges associated with films and bags, but it appears that the legislation has 
helped to some degree.  
 
Though there is the argument that single -use plastic bags are recyclable  – and 
there is, indeed, and industry to do so – the rate of participation in returning 
plastic bags to store drop -off locations hovers around 4%.  This is not a viable 
solution to a challenging material.  
 
In the opinion of ecomaine, the ban on single -use plastic bags is the correct step, 
in line with both the best practices that the waste hierarchy provides us, but also 
in terms of what we observe each day in our material recovery facility.  I urge the 
Committee to oppose LD 425 and to leave the ban in place.  Thank you for your 
consideration and service.  
