Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health
In Opposition of LD 425, “An Act to Lower the Environmental Impact of Consumers, Increase 
Food Safety and Strengthen Consumer Choice by Ending the Ban on Single-use Plastic 
Shopping Bags”, and LD 572 “An Act to Remove the 5 Cent Fee for Bags in Retail Stores”
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee
March 1, 2023
Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment 
and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Sarah Woodbury. I am the director of Advocacy 
for Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health’s mission is the make sure that everyone has equal 
access to safe food and drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-free and 
climate friendly.  Please accept Defend’s testimony in opposition to LD 425 and LD 572.
When the 129th legislature passed LD 1532, banning single-use plastic bags, it did so with 
overwhelming public support along with support from industries that were impacted by this law. 
Environmental groups worked with the hospitality and grocery store industries to pass a 
common-sense law with bipartisan support.  The reasons for the passage of this law haven’t 
changed. Plastics still pollute our environment. We have all seen the photos of plastics, 
including plastic bags, washing up on our shores. By 2050, ton for ton there will be more 
plastics than fish in the ocean. Countless whales, sea turtles, and birds suffer slow, painful 
deaths and injuries from plastic bag pollution when they mistake the bags for food or get 
entangled. This is even more concerning for Maine because so much of our way of life depends 
upon the ocean.
Not only do plastic bags continue to harm our environment and kill our wildlife, there is also 
increasing evidence that the use of plastics are causing harm to human health as well. Fish and 
other marine life ingest these plastics and then we, in turn, ingest them. However, studying 
these health effects is challenging. Scientists “remain concerned about the human-health 
impacts of marine plastics because, again, they are ubiquitous and they eventually will degrade 
and fragment into nanoplastics, which measure less than 100 billionths of a meter—in other 
words, they are invisible. Alarmingly these tiny plastics can penetrate cells and move into 
tissues and organs. But because researchers lack analytical methods to identify nanoplastics in 
food, they don’t have any data on their occurrence or absorption by humans.”1   Moreover, 
research has shown that even seemingly benign plastics like high-density polyethylene (HDPE) 
can break down in the environment to leach estrogenic chemicals that can be harmful to both 
fetuses and young children. 2
1 Royte E. We Know Plastic is Harming Marine Life. What About Us? National Geographic 2018 
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2018/06/plastic-planet-health-pollution-waste-microplastics/
2 Yang CZ, Yaniger SI, Jordan VC, Klein DJ, Bittner GD. Most plastic products release estrogenic chemicals: a 
potential health problem that can be solved. Environ Health Perspect. 2011;119(7):989–996. 
doi:10.1289/ehp.1003220
It isn’t only the products themselves that can harm human health, but the production of these 
plastics, including plastic bags. A report by the Center for International Environmental Law 
highlights the human health effects throughout the life-cycle of the product. From the air and 
water pollution due to fossil fuels used in the production of these products to the harmful 
chemicals that can leach into soil, water, and the human body from the products themselves, 
the potential for human harm is present over the lifespan of these products.3
The 5-cent fee assessed on plastic bags is meant to encourage movement away from plastic 
bags and to reusable bags. A person does not have to purchase reusable bags to avoid the fee.  
People that don’t want to pay the fee can bring their own bags or boxes to the store or choose 
to not use a bag at all. 
Many towns in Maine still have local ordinances in place to ban the use of plastic bags and 
reusable options are readily available. LD 1532 created a commonsense, statewide, uniform 
policy to the health and environment of all Mainers. It makes absolutely no sense to go 
backwards on this issue. Therefore, Defend Our Health strongly urges the committee to 
unanimously vote “ought not to pass” vote on LD 425 and LD 572.
Thank you for your time
3 Center for International Environmental Law. Plastic and Health. The Hidden Costs of a Plastic Planet. 
https://www.ciel.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Plastic-and-Health-The-Hidden-Costs-of-a-Plastic-Planet-February-
2019.pdf Published February 2019. Accessed April 21, 2019
