g STATE or MAINE 
,2 DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE, CoNsERvATIoN & FORESTRY 
? BUREAU or PARKS AND LANDS 
22 STATE HoUsE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
AMANDA E. BEAL 
JANET T, MILLS COMMISSIONER 
GOVERNOR . 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
OPPOSED TO LD 1218 
An Act Establishing a System to Appeal Administrative Actions or 
Management Plans of the Bureau of Parks and Lands 
April 5, 2023 
Senator Ingwerson, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Bill Patterson, and I am the Deputy Director 
of the Bureau of Parks and Lands (BPL). I am speaking on behalf of the Department of 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DACF) in opposition to LD 1218, An Act Establishing a 
System to Appeal Administrative Actions or Management Plans of the Bureau of Parks and 
Lands. 
The Department is opposed to introducing an additional and potentially costly appeals process 
because existing statutes, Department policy, and the professional staff within BPL already 
strongly support a robust public process for public input with an emphasis on dialogue where 
disagreement exists. The Bureau’s planning and land management process works well, and if 
needed, appeals can already be made under the Maine Administrative Procedure Act for judicial 
review of ﬁnal agency action (See 5 Maine Revised Statutes §§ 11001-11008). 
BPL is guided in all decisions and actions by statute and a thorough management planning 
framework anchored by its Integrated Resource Policy coupled with area-speci ﬁc unit 
management plans. The Bureau regularly seeks and receives public input through the 
management planning process. All management plans are subject to public review on a rotating 
ﬁve-year schedule. During both the development of management plans and plan reviews, we 
commonly receive and document input on contentious topics, with sometimes widely differing 
perspectives expressed by various stakeholders. BPL staff strive to make well-founded 
management decisions that balance these interests with the protection and sustainable 
management of natural resources while providing for the public use and enjoyment of lands 
managed by the Bureau. 
DEPAR'TMENT or __ 
HARLOW BUILDING A ncuuure PHONE. (207) 287 3200
_ 
. 1 g 18 ELKINSLANE conservation 
AUGUSTA, MAINE . ?1i?'i 
&Fm.eSt,-Y FAX! (207)287-2400
Staff at all levels of BPL are also available to discuss areas of concern with management plans 
and actions at no cost to the public through meetings with staff (in person, phone, or virtual), the 
Bureau Director, or the Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry. 
BPL staff engage the public in varied and nearly constant informal dialogue as well as structured 
planning and management processes. The current system provides an effective means of hearing 
and responding to public interests and concerns. Introducing an additional and hard to predict 
appeals process will likely cause delays in everything from timber harvests to management plan 
approvals and actions. Such delays may put loggers, guides, or others out of work or delay and 
increase the costs of infrastructure projects for trails, campsites, and roads. With the existence of 
a readily accessible process by which the public may appeal BPL management decisions and 
actions, the Department opposes the potentially costly and time-consuming creation of an 
additional (and umiecessary) appeals process.
