5 
Maine Sporting Camp Association (MSCA) 
126 Western Avenue, Box 153 * Augusta, lVlaine 04330 * 207-888-3931 
info@mainesportingcamps.com 
Testimony ln Support of 
L.D. 1218 
"An Act Establishing a System to Appeal Administrative Actions or 
Management Plans of the Bureau of Parks and Lands" 
Before the 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry (ACF) 
Wednesday, April 5, 2023, at 1:00 PM 
Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry (ACF), my name is Dana Valleau, and lam Director of 
Associate Memberships for the l\/laine Sporting Camp Association (l\/lSCA), a wildlife biologist 
and l\/laine Guide. Established in 1986, MSCA represents commercial sporting lodges from 
Rangeley Lakes Region to Lubec and from Belgrade to Allagash, and camp lot leaseholders can 
join as associate members. 
According to l\/larch numbers from the Bureau of Parks and Lands, 289 residential / 
recreational and commercial leases are active in the woods of l\/laine. Bureau of Parks and 
Lands ”l\/lanagement Plans" and administrative actions can dramatically impact these lodges 
and leases. 
L.D. 1218 will establish an independent appeal process available to lodges and leaseholders to 
deal with Bureau decisions affecting wildlife, recreation, historical traditions, and harvesting. 
Such a process is now critical because the 5-year backlog in the courts effectively eliminates 
constitutional checks-and-balances, otherwise available should Bureau decisions be made in 
conflict with Statute or Bureau policy. With such a delay, the damage inflicted by a bad 
decision may be irreparable. Also, some aggrieved parties may find going to court too 
expensive, thus leaving administrative power unchecked. An appeal process is common among 
large organizations, and it is required by certain forestry certification organizations. 
During the last few sessions multiple Bills have been introduced surrounding Bureau 
accountability. Where there's smoke there's fire. The MSCA has heard from quite a few who 
are frustrated by some Bureau decisions. Conflict sometimes goes unreported as it may
..,3 
involve a single party who just gives up. Also, it is a multiple-day trip from Augusta for the 
Director to learn the facts of a problem firsthand. Thus, a dependance on career staffers with 
personal viewpoints, who may be part of the problem. 
Whether a panel or an individual to arbitrate, independence from the Bureau and special 
interest groups is critical. Also, since small businesses involved in recreation and promoting 
wildlife and Maine's historical traditions are likely to be a party to a dispute, good business 
judgment skills should be a prerequisite for staffing. The cost to administer needs to be 
weighed against the unmeasured losses of tax revenues, tourism dollars, and compromised 
wildlife. 
Recreational camp lot leases are in Maine's remote wilderness areas. Quite a few are off-the- 
grid with challenging access. Lodges and residential camp leases are part of the 150-year 
lvlaine wilderness tradition. Together, they are among the first responders for tourists in need 
of emergency assistance, be it a flat tire, gasoline, or a medical emergency. They also provide a 
critical infrastructure and economic stimulus in l\/laine ’s rural areas through employment and 
investments. 
The MSCA hopes you can support lodges and lease holders with this program. 
Thank you. 
Dana Valleau, Director of Associate l\/lemberships 
Maine Sporting Camp Association 
Cell Phone: 207-888-3931 x4 
Email: info@mainesportingcamps.com 
The Maine Sporting Camp Association (MSCA) was founded in I 98 7 by a group of camp owners to preserve the 
sporting camp ’s uniqueness in the State of Maine. By working closely with other groups and exchanging ideas 
and information, the members of MSCA continue the tradition of providing high quality recreational 
experiences to individuals and their families, a quality experience that visitors will remember long after they 
return home. The MSCA is a 5 0] C (6) non-proﬁt organization that is led by a board of directors. Maine 
Sporting Camp Association 126 Western Avenue, Box 1 5 3, Augusta, Maine 04330, 
info@mainesportingcamps. com, Phone: (207) 888-3931
2 
Maine Sporting Camp Association, 126 Western Avenue, Box 153, Augusta, Maine 04330
