April 5, 2023 
Hi 
We are Frank and Karl Hilton and have an incident to tell you about. 
The Hilton family camp is in township 30 Washington County off from the "CCC" road. Camp 
was built by Franks grand father Ralph Billings in 1942. Ralph was a member and foreman of the 
”CCC” group who built the road connecting Route 9 and the Stud Mill Road. The first lease was 
with St. Regis Paper Company for 100 years and passed on to Great Northern Paper Company. 
Due to high regulations land abutting any body of water was given back to the State of Maine 
by Great Northern. The lease ls now with the State of Maine and how things have changed. For 
example, all roads now managed by Bureau of Parks and Lands are posted not allowing ATV 
USE. 
Camp is a popular fishing spot where the Machias and Crooked River meet and has a lot of use 
during the spring. The Fall of 2022 we brought our equipment to fill the ruts and potholes in the 
camp road. Arriving at the gravel pit just off the end of camp road to start off our day we were 
met by a forest ranger. We talked for a minute and the ranger asked if we had a permit for the 
gravel? I said why? We have never had a permit in the past. The ranger said to wait here, and 
he would try to contact someone for permission. A half hour passed, and he returned. The 
ranger could not reach anyone from the Bureau of Parks and Lands and gave me the number 
for me to try myself. The ranger explained he could not allow us to proceed without the 
permission and l agreed. i called the number and left a message hoping someone would return 
my call. I received a call back from someone who said they are in charge of the area. l explained 
the location and what we were trying to do. He said he spoke with the ranger and new the area. 
Further commented that we could not work on the road prior to his review and need to make 
an appointment tomeet with him on site in the spring. At that time if he deemed it necessary, 
he would hire a contractor to fix the road. I told him I'm here now and it will not cost the statea 
penny. He said no, then made the comment that if we did take gravel from that pit, it would be 
theft and the ranger would issue me a summons and arrest me. The phone call ended. 
Something needs to be done. 
a;:ax.a/we 
Frank and Karl Hilton
