Jeannine Dickey
Sandy River Plantation 
LD 1218
Hello Committee Members,
(Reference please to L.D. 1218 & L.D. 1219)
 
I, Jeannine Dickey of Sandy River Plantation, strongly oppose the above referenced 
legislative documents because they unreasonably expand the “Leased Land Program” 
outside the scope of its original intention. It is my understanding that Leased Land 
Program was started as a way for Mainers without the means of purchasing camp lots 
to have access to leased parcels, mostly on the waterfront, on a “camp” idea basis.
 
My husband and I have had a “leased lot” in Sandy River Plantation for many years, 
directly abutting our primary residence. Typically, lease fees are paid annually and 
are accompanied by terms of agreement between the State and Lessor. Therefore, the 
Lessors know EXACTLY what their rights are in the land and their limited rights as a
“leaseholder.” Otherwise, the Bureau of Parks and Land will answer any outstanding 
questions regarding allowed use of the leased lots.
 
At the forefront of leased land rights is an understanding that the land itself is not the 
real property of the Lessor. This ideology, in place since the commencement of the 
Leased Land Program, is threatened by expanded rights under the legislative bill. That
is evidenced by this organized group of lessors lobbying to expand their rights 
through the proposed legislation.  This so called “Bill of Rights” would unduly 
expand the authority granted to leaseholders on public lands.
 
I have already been personally affected by the leaseholder’s entitlement from the 
Leased Land Program and this bill will only increase pre-existing issues. In Sandy 
River Plantation, a group of leaseholders have created a private waterfront enclave 
and group with their four leased lot cluster. These leaseholders have continuously 
threatened expanded rights by illegally accessing their leased lots over private land. I 
approached these leaseholders in attempt to provide permission but was met with a 
letter from their attorney threatening expensive litigation and further legal action. I 
was forced to spend money hiring my own attorney to protect my property from these 
leaseholders and better understand my rights. We have been forced to choose between
litigation and permissive use based on the program and fear expanding leaseholder 
rights will only further these property disputes.
 
The proposed bill allows leaseholders to further threaten private property and 
development those public lands retained for the public at large. The Leased Lot 
Program was never meant to allow substantial residential improvements or private 
property rights, but only to permit an alternative to purchasing expensive land on 
Maine’s waterfront. The bill seems to be the first step in expanding the program 
beyond its intent of providing limited property rights on leased camp lots and taking a
large step towards degradation and privatization of public lands.
 
The more “development” and “private property” components the leaseholders demand
(i.e., wells, septic, construction infrastructure, etc.), the more these become “Private 
Properties” outside the scope of the Leased Land Program.
 
Thank you for listening,
 
Jeannine Dickey
