Mary-Gene Rumery
Norridgewock
LD 785
LD 785 
“An Act to Create Accountability within the Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office of Child and Family Service and Child Protective Services”
Health & Human Services Committee 
Testimony of:
Mary-Gene Rumery
26 Wilder Hill Road
Norridgewock, Maine 04957
Good afternoon esteemed members of committee, first let me apologize for my 
appearance. I was at Head Start goes to the park with my children and was unaware 
today was the day of public testimony on LD 785. I have hastily come up here and 
handwritten my testimony but would like to email you a well put together version of 
my testimony.
My name is Mary-Gene Rumery, I am an adoptive and foster mother from 
Norridgewock. I believe LD 785 should be passed due to my own experiences with 
reporting concerns regarding employees of the department. Recently I reported a case 
worker to her supervisor for placing respite children in my home with no placement 
letter and for mis-handling the children’s case. First let me tell you without a 
placement letter effectively I have no power to medically treat in the case of an 
emergency, I have no legal right to have the children in my home. The supervisor 
emailed me a placement letter and notified the physicians office I would be making an
appointment. However, she never addressed any of my other concerns. If you wish to 
know more about the other concerns I have I am willing to discuss it privately as I do 
not wish to make the caseworker or her supervisor publicly known. I have been told I 
will probably not be asked to do respite again by the department. That is retaliation 
against a good, solid foster home. I will tell you that after five years, four adoptions 
and countless positive and negative interactions with the department I am preparing 
myself to terminate the abusive and mentally draining relationship with DHHS. I once
believed the relationship was toxic because of the district I was working with but after
the above incident I have come to the realization that it does not matter what district I 
deal with the relationship will just never be an equal and healthy one because I 
believe the department could be doing better, the resource parents could be doing 
better and ultimately this system should be a whole family approach including the 
resource family in the whole family picture.
We need a board that is not directly attached to the department to reduce the rate of 
retaliation or blacklisting as it is also known. A board that includes resource parents 
as we often know many of the rules, regulations, and laws as well or better than some 
of our caseworkers. A board that would be empowered to investigate allegations 
against caseworkers, supervisors, resource parents and abuse allegations to be 
forwarded on to the department. The board would be required to report back to the 
ombudsman and provide data to all interested parties. I would like to think the 
separate boards per county or district would also have virtual meetings to support one 
another and to discuss trends they are seeing. 
I am asking you today to support LD 785 and let Maine be a leader in making change 
to our child welfare system, give Maine a safer and accountable way to express 
concerns about the department and allow the board the chance to make a real 
difference to a system we all know is broken. I am asking you to support LD 785 so 
my family and all the families like mine can have a safer, better way forward.
Thank you for allowing me to speak with you today.

