Melanie Blair  
5 Old Meadow Road Lisbon, Maine 
 
Health and Human Services Committee 
Regarding LD 785: An act to create accountability within the 
Department of Health and Human Service 
 
Thank you honorable member of The Health and Human Services Committee for the opportunity 
to share testimony on LD 785,  
SUMMARY This bill establishes an Accountability Board for Child Welfare within each county. The 
county commissioners and sheriff of each county shall jointly appoint an Executive Director and three 
assistant directors. The boards are to provide a forum for any person to report concerns regarding any 
employee of the Department of Health and Human Services with responsibilities relating to the Child and 
Family Services and Child Protection Act or in any way working in the child welfare system or concerns 
with any program relating to child protection and child welfare and concerns from caseworkers regarding 
other employees, supervisors or management within the department related to child welfare. 
 
1- To develop a formal process to receive complaints and inquiries from any person  under the 
Child Protection Act, any program related to child protection and child welfare run by the 
department or in the county area including a lack of availability of services for children in state 
custody, and complaints from caseworkers who have concerns about the operations of the 
department related to child protection and child welfare. 
 
This is needed because as it currently stands, there is no outside agency that is not connected to the 
department free from department influence or retribution. We all- foster parents, educators, 
caseworkers, and other providers do not have an outlet to do this. Services from AFFM and The 
Ombudsmans’ Office are not sufficient to alleviate serious concerns we have. 
       
 2- The board shall be able to verify that the report has been investigated by the department, and the 
department shall provide this information to the board upon request. 
There is an overwhelming number of report that  mandated reporters call into the hotline that are 
not being followed up on. This is a practice that is practiced in other states ONLINE where a 
response is generated on each call within ten days by mail to let the complainant know the report 
was looked into. ( Reporting Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of Adult and Child - Prevention and 
Protection Services (ks.gov)  ) 
      
 3- Advocate to the department for improvements to the child welfare system. 
One would think that with all the services in place that this would not be needed, but it is. What is 
in existence currently is one statewide system to utelize. When a person has attempted resolution 
this way and been unsuccessful, or worse, there is no where else to go.  There is no grievance policy 
procedure.  A county board puts some control locally where those serving those municipalities 
know their area, their resources, etc.. Certainly a Sherriff is more than qualified in safety practices.  
 
The issue of funding: Yes, you will need to increase funding to local counties to fund these positions. 
However, with a budget increase such as the recent proposal from the governor, I see no reason why these 
positions could not be funded in this way.  
 
To conclude, the addition of a local county board of accountability would not only give more support to 
citizens with concerns, but also to the department who is stretched very thin. Another layer of eyes with a 
safety focus could only benefit everyone involved, espeially considering the states ranking number one in 
child maltreatment.  Maine can and needs to do better, and funding should not be a reason not to pursue 
this.    
  
Melanie Blair
Lisbon
LD 785
Melanie Blair  
5 Old Meadow Road Lisbon, Maine 
 
Health and Human Services Committee 
Regarding LD 785: An act to create accountability within the Department of Health 
and Human Service 
 
Thank you honorable member of The Health and Human Services Committee for the 
opportunity to share testimony on LD 785,  
SUMMARY This bill establishes an Accountability Board for Child Welfare within 
each county. The county commissioners and sheriff of each county shall jointly 
appoint an Executive Director and three assistant directors. The boards are to provide 
a forum for any person to report concerns regarding any employee of the Department 
of Health and Human Services with responsibilities relating to the Child and Family 
Services and Child Protection Act or in any way working in the child welfare system 
or concerns with any program relating to child protection and child welfare and 
concerns from caseworkers regarding other employees, supervisors or management 
within the department related to child welfare. 
 
To develop a formal process to receive complaints and inquiries from any person  
under the Child Protection Act, any program related to child protection and child 
welfare run by the department or in the county area including a lack of availability of 
services for children in state custody, and complaints from caseworkers who have 
concerns about the operations of the department related to child protection and child 
welfare. 
 
This is needed because as it currently stands, there is no outside agency that is not 
connected to the department free from department influence or retribution. We all- 
foster parents, educators, caseworkers, and other providers do not have an outlet to do
this. Services from AFFM and The Ombudsmans’ Office are not sufficient to alleviate
serious concerns we have. 
       
 2- The board shall be able to verify that the report has been investigated by the 
department, and the department shall provide this information to the board upon 
request. 
There is an overwhelming number of report that  mandated reporters call into the 
hotline that are not being followed up on. This is a practice that is practiced in other 
states ONLINE where a response is generated on each call within ten days by mail to 
let the complainant know the report was looked into. (Reporting Abuse, Neglect and 
Exploitation of Adult and Child - Prevention and Protection Services (ks.gov) ) 
      
 3- Advocate to the department for improvements to the child welfare system. 
One would think that with all the services in place that this would not be needed, but 
it is. What is in existence currently is one statewide system to utelize. When a person 
has attempted resolution this way and been unsuccessful, or worse, there is no where 
else to go.  There is no grievance policy procedure.  A county board puts some control
locally where those serving those municipalities know their area, their resources, etc.. 
Certainly a Sherriff is more than qualified in safety practices.  
 
The issue of funding: Yes, you will need to increase funding to local counties to fund 
these positions. However, with a budget increase such as the recent proposal from the 
governor, I see no reason why these positions could not be funded in this way.  
 
To conclude, the addition of a local county board of accountability would not only 
give more support to citizens with concerns, but also to the department who is 
stretched very thin. Another layer of eyes with a safety focus could only benefit 
everyone involved, espeially considering the states ranking number one in child 
maltreatment.  Maine can and needs to do better, and funding should not be a reason 
not to pursue this.    
  
