TESTIMONY OF 
Deirdre Gilbert 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
ln Support of 
LD 16 An Act To Make Technical Changes to Maine's Marine Resources Laws 
Before the Committee on Marine Resources 
Sponsored by Representative Hepler 
Date of Hearing: May 4, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine 
Resources, my name is Deirdre Gilbert, Director of State Marine Policy at the Department of 
Marine Resources, and I am testifying on behalf of the Department in support of LD 16. Thisa 
Department bill, and the Department is grateful to Representative Hepler for sponsoring it on 
our behalf. 
This bill represents the Department's efforts to identify legislative changes that are necessary to 
clarify or correct existing laws. As such, it is a disparate assortment of items, with no common 
connection other than being clean-up in their nature. For that reason, l will address each 
proposal section by section. 
The first three sections of the bill are all amendments to existing definitions. Section 1 of the 
bill amends "scallop" to include bay scallops, in addition to the current and more familiar sea 
scallops. While there is no wild bay scallop resource in Maine (the closest commercial fishery is 
in Massachusetts) some aquaculturists include bay scallops as a species on their leases. Asa 
form of shellﬁsh subject to the National Shellfish Sanitation Program (NSSP) Model Ordinance, 
it is important that bay scallops are included in any regulations the Department may need to 
implement to protect public health. Similarly, the definition of "shellﬁsh" is proposed to be 
amended to include scallops, because scallops in any form other than just the adductor muscle 
(and shell) are included in the Model Ordinance. Finally, the definition of whole scallop is 
proposed to be amended to include not just the adductor muscle, but also the adductor muscle 
on the shell. There has been some interest by commercial scallop fishermen and growers to 
sell the muscle on the shell, which may add value to the product, but which is currently 
prohibited. 
Sections 4-6 of the bill amend the statutes governing the licensing of marine resources by the 
four federally recognized tribes, to clarify that the tribes have the authority to specify what 
constitutes completion of the lobster apprenticeship program for tribal members. Like other 
commercial lobster license holders, tribal members must complete a lobster apprenticeship 
program in order to become eligible for a commercial license, but the Department has deferred 
to tribal leadership regarding what that should entailfor the licenses that are issued by the
tribe. This proposed change codifies what has been practice in recent years when a new 
lobster license is issued by one of the tribes. 
Sections 7-11 all make the same reference correction in the statutes governing the 
Department's administrative suspension process. Specifically, when the administrative license 
suspension process was created in 2011 and prior to 2017, the only types of violations that the 
administrative suspension process applied to were violations of marine resources laws and 
rules. in 2017, new types of violations were added (violations of law in Title 17-A, and setting 
fire to/sinking a lobster vessel), subsection 4 was created, and a new reference to that was 
added throughout to show that the admin process applied to violations of marine resources 
laws and regs, OR everything in subsection 4. However, subsection 3 includes all the 
violations, so the reference to subsection 4 is not actually needed and is currently only creating 
confusion within this section. 
Sections 12-14 were all provisions of law related to the new halibut license that was created 
during the last legislative session, but which were inadvertently eliminated during the 
amendment process. They are very standard provisions associated with each of our licenses, 
including the provision for noncommercial take without a license, a violation for taking halibut 
commercially without a license, and the authority to adopt rules to implement this section of 
law. 
Finally, sections 15-17 add "aquaculture license holder" to the list of license holders from 
whom shellstock may be purchased by an enhanced retail license holder. Prior to the creation 
of the aquaculture license, individuals selling shellstock from their lease site had to holda 
shellfish license. When the aquaculture license was created specifically for aquaculturists, it 
was inadvertently omitted from this section. 
In addition to the changes presented in the printed bill, there have been a number of other 
technical issues identified since drafting this bill last fall. For this reason, additional language is 
attached for your consideration and described in the remaining testimony. 
The first additional change is a request from the Shellfish Advisory Council to remove the office 
of secretary for the Council. Minutes are kept by Department staff, and the Council has been 
unable to fill the position of secretary with a Council member for approximately ten years. 
The next change pertains to reporting requirements for experimental leases. Under the 
existing law, holders of experimental leases for both scientiﬁc and commercial purposes must 
annually submit both the results of their research, as well as a harvesting and seeding report. 
Research results for commercial purposes must be held confidential by the Department. Since 
these requirements were established, reporting on harvesting from aquaculture leases has 
been moved from the Aquaculture Division to the Department's Landings Program. While it is 
appropriate for the Department to receive the results of the scientific research, the reports on 
the commercial leases have no utility to the Department, especially since landings information 
is provided. Similarly, harvesting and seeding reports have no particular value to DMR.
Because experimental leases are only for three years and those that are not held for scientific 
purposes may not be renewed, the applications contain sufficient information regarding their 
plans for the lease site over its duration. 
In addition to the amendments to the references in the administrative suspension process 
mentioned above, DMR would also like to propose an additional change.‘ Under the existing 
law, the issues of the hearing are limited to whether or not the individual holds a license, and 
whether or not a violation of a marine resources law or regulation has occurred. However, 
there are situations where someone may not hold a license at the time of their violation, where 
a suspension of their right to obtain a license would be warranted. This change would clarify 
that a suspension of either an existing license or the right to obtain a license could be imposed, 
regardless of whether the individual currently holds a license. 
Finally, during the 130th Legislature, LD 106 changed the licensed activities for holders of 
Limited Purpose Aquaculture licenses such that after January 1, 2024, license holders must 
provide direct supervision of the individuals who are identified as helpers on their license. The 
effective date of this legislation was specified in unallocated language in LD 106, and the 
Department is proposing that this effective date be amended to January 1, 2025. As you 
have heard, there has been significant transition within the Aquaculture Division and providing 
this additional time will allow staff to focus on other programmatic priorities, and additional 
time for license holders to plan for this change to their current practices. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I would be happy to answer any questions you might 
have.
DMR Proposed Additions to LD 16 
§6038. Shellﬁsh Advisory Council 
4. Oﬁicers. The ofﬁcers of the council are the chair, and vice-chan . The term of the 
ofﬁcers is one year. The council shall elect a member of the council for each ofﬁcer position at the first 
regular meeting of each year. 
§6072-A. Limited-purpose lease for commercial or scientiﬁc research 
17—A. Notiﬁcation of granted leases. After the granting of a limited-purpose lease: 
A. The department shall notify all riparian owners, intervenors and the municipality in which the 
lease is located that a lease has been granted. The notice must include a description of the area and 
how a copy of the lease may be obtained; 
B. The lessee shall mark the leased area in a manner prescribed by the commissioner; 
C. 513he—lessee The holder of a limited-purpose lease for scientiﬁc research shall armually submit to 
the commissioner a report for the past year on results of the scientiﬁc research e 
¥% undertaken at the lease site and a plan for the coming year. Upon written 
request, the commissioner shall provide a copy of the report to the municipality or municipalities 
in which or adjacent to which the lease is located. — Re 
hA+wd 
§6374. Procedure for suspending without criminal conviction or civil adjudication 
2. Hearing. A hearing requested under subsection l must be held within 30 business days after 
receipt by the commissioner of a request for hearing except that a hearing may be held more than 30 
business days after the request if the delay is requested by the person requesting the hearing. If the 
hearing is continued, it must be held no later than 60 days after the original notice, and any further 
continuance must be with the consent of both parties. The hearing must be held in accordance with the 
Maine Administrative Procedure Act, except that: 
A. Notwithstanding Title 5, section 9057, th __e issues of the hearing are is limited to whether the 
person requesting the hearing committed a 
violation of marine resources law or conduct described in section 6371, subsection 4; and 
B. Notwithstanding Title 5, section 9061, the decision of the presiding officer under Title 5, section 
9062 must be made not more than 10 business days after completion of the hearing. 
If the presiding officer of the hearing finds that a violation of marine resources law or conduct described 
in section 6371, subsection 4 has been committed, the presiding ofﬁcer shall immediately notify the 
commissioner of the fmding. 
Sec. 21. Effective dates. That section of this Act that amends the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 12, 
section 6072-C, subsection 6 takes effect January 1, 2022. Those sections of this Act that amend Title 
12, section 6072-C, subsection 2 and enact Title 12, section 6072-C, subsection 2-B take effect January 
1, 2(-)24—2Q5_. 
Generated §6374. Procedure for suspending without criminal conviction or civil 
10 04,2022 adjudication I1            
 
