 
 
 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209 
 Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 1887 
 An Act to Clarify the Review and Procurement Process for Nonwires Alternatives 
May 16, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and I am here 
today on behalf of Versant Power neither for nor against LD 1887.  
 
Versant Power recognizes that the transformation and modernization of our electric grid will be critical to 
facilitate the State’s ambitious energy and climate goals while maintaining customer affordability. We know that 
nonwires alternatives will play a role in meeting these challenges, and, as such, understand the value of reviewing 
and refining this policy to ensure it delivers the most effective solutions at the lowest cost results for our 
customers. 
 
Versant Power believes that holistic long-term planning is the best way to facilitate the energy transitions 
efficiently and cost-effectively. Versant began a grid planning effort in our Maine Public District before passage 
of LD 1959 in the last Legislature and now is deeply engaged with stakeholders as part of that regulatory process. 
 
The NWA program appropriately fits hand-in-glove with the integrated grid planning (IGP) process. First, 
consensus assumptions, forecasts and evaluations mechanisms are developed, including with ongoing stakeholder 
input. Next, the utilities test their systems to discover vulnerabilities that would emerge under these assumptions 
and forecasts. At this point, solutions to these vulnerabilities are proposed by stakeholders and the utilities. NWAs 
are explicitly identified as among the solutions that must be evaluated, and Versant Power expects such projects 
to be valuable in meeting certain identified grid needs. Finally, utilizing the previously agreed-upon evaluation 
framework and criteria, solutions are selected that most effectively solve projected challenges at the least cost to 
customers. 
 
The IGP process will allow all stakeholders – from utilities and developers to policymakers, communities, and 
advocates – to contribute to designing the blueprint our state will use to meet our goals. It is for this reason that 
we question whether now is the appropriate time to make the threshold adjustments proposed in LD 1887, or 
whether it might be more prudent to allow that process to finish course so that we can be sure that no unnecessary 
barriers are put in front of desired transformational changes. 
 
Versant Power believes that current statute appropriately encourages parties to seek out nonwire solutions when 
such solutions can meet grid needs more cost-effectively than traditional alternatives. This applies to utilities as 
well. Section 14 part 2 of LD 1887 proposes to eliminate this provision for utilities, which we believe may be at 
cross purposes with the way in which the Legislature has directed utilities to behave when it comes to 
identification and proposal of nonwires alternatives. 
 
We would be happy to provide more information as requested at the work session. Thank you for your 
consideration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209 
  
 
