 
Internal Use 
       
 
 
Kathleen Newman, Director of Government Affairs 
LD 1887, An Act to Clarify the Review and Procurement Process for Nonwires Alternatives 
 
May 16, 2023 
 
Testifying: Neither for nor against 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology, my name is Kathleen Newman, presenting testimony on behalf of 
Central Maine Power company neither for nor against portions of LD 1887, An Act to Clarify the 
Review and Procurement Process for Nonwires Alternatives.   
As currently drafted, CMP does not support the expansion of the nonwires alternative program 
proposed in this legislation, and instead suggests possible exclusion criteria (see below). CMP has 
significant concerns with adding broad categories like “substation component” to the MPUC and 
NWA review process as many times substation upgrades are due to emergent issues or 
unforeseen loading changes in high peak times of the year, thus these upgrades are often very 
time sensitive. Requiring NWA and MPUC review for “substation components” will result in 
unacceptable and unmanageable delays to time sensitive substation upgrades that are needed 
for reliability and load growth and thus, the legislation written as is will result in additional costs 
for CMP customers. For example, should an emergent substation upgrade need to undergo NWA 
and MPUC review, CMP would then need to implement costly interim solutions- such as mobile 
substations for long periods of times which can take away from the fleet of mobiles used to 
perform substation maintenance and increase costs. Another complexity we have recently seen 
with the expansion of Distributed Generation (“DG”) is not being able to allow DG’s to be in-
service when mobile substations are in service due to reverse power protection concerns.  
Other planned substation upgrades that are not driven from emergent issues are not typically 
good NWA candidates. These projects are either being required to address asset condition, N-1 
back-up redundancy or capacity constraints. NWA solutions are not viable alternatives to address 
asset condition or N-1 redundancy driven upgrades. Regarding capacity constraints, traditional 
wires upgrades generally provide considerable headroom which will be needed to accommodate 
future load increases expected from beneficial electrification. NWA solutions do not provide a 
comparable level of margin to the system which would require a re-evaluation, and likely 
additional upgrades, when spot load growth occurs. CMP is seeing a substantial amount of spot 
load growth requests across its’ entire service territory from EV chargers and heat pump 
additions to Cannabis growing facilities. Planned upgrades due to asset conditions can also 
quickly become emergent triggering the issues discussed above.  

 
Internal UseIt is important to also note that CMP reviews all substation projects for potential NWA solutions 
as part of its internal review process. For example, CMP identified two possible substation NWA 
projects to address loading constraints (Lovell and Limerick Substations). These projects were 
brought forward to the NWAC for review but were ultimately found not to be good NWA 
candidates. 
While CMP recognizes that certain substation component projects are excluded under 35-A 
M.R.S. §3132-B, CMP’s concerns above remain true for all substation component projects 
regardless of cost and therefore, CMP urges the Committee to amend the current language of 
35-A M.R.S. §3132-A to include the similar exclusion criteria as included in §3132-B. The 
proposed exclusion language would read:  
  Excluded Projects; criteria: The Commission, by rule, shall develop criteria to exclude 
from investigation by the nonwires alternative coordinator and MPUC review substation and 
‘substation component’ projects under this rule best suited to transmission and distribution 
investments, including but not limited to projects that are:   
 A. Necessary for redundant supply to a radial load; 
 B. Necessary to address maintenance, asset condition or safety needs;  
 C. Necessary to address stability or short circuit problems; or  
 D. Required to be in service within one year based on the controlling load forecast.  
CMP adds in MPUC review into this exclusion, unlike the current criteria of §3132-B, as parties 
have experienced with dockets like Section 31, Section 80, and recently Section 1, these 
approvals take time and often stay open at the Commission for over six months. As discussed 
above, these project upgrades are often time sensitive and waiting for NWA and then MPUC 
approval for such upgrades will result in extra costs for CMP customers while temporary 
solutions are deployed.  
We appreciate your consideration of our position and will be available at the work session. 
 
 
