Scott Ouellette 
Bowdoinham 
LD 1635
Honorable members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Committee. Thank you for accepting this testimony in favor of ld 1635. My name is 
Scotty Ouellette and I am a caregiver for the last 9 years and i operate a 
manufacturing facilty in the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Program in 
Bowdoinham. I am a Board member of the Maine Cannabis Coalition and a member 
of the Maine Cannabis Coalition, both large advocacy groups representing the over 
100,000 patients and 2200 caregivers in the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Program.
2021 to 2021 was the first decline of caregivers in the program -- Maine lost over 
1000 small businesses in this largest agricultural crop in Maine industry in one year. 
This quarter billion dollar industry deserves access to fair and reasonable banking. In 
May 2021 our access to banking was compromised with an action by Cport Credit 
Union that stemmed from FinCen guidance.  Cannabis is legal in Maine, and so to 
should banking in this industry be legal. Forcing businesses back to cash only is 
forcing businesses to close their doors and encourages development of an entirely 
new free market aka black market. This is not good for Maine economically nor per 
citizen safety. Pushing legal businesses pushes people back to dark alleys. 
We were an essential business through the pandemic carrying Maine's economy in 
many ways. Yet, we struggle to find a bank, make debit card transactions or even pay 
the regulatory body with electronic payments.  (The Office of Cannabis Policy refuses
to accept business checks or electronic payments from our businesses.) The Maine 
Revenue Services have no problem accepting our electronic sales tax submissions. 
The industry 2ould love to market commemorative coins from a Maine State Bank, 
and we would proudly support a State Bank. 
Please support Representative Brakey's and the other sponsors intent to form this 
State Bank. This is good for Maine on so many levels and in so many ways. We can 
support a legal industry, commemorate important Maine events and traditions, and 
create jobs and income for our citizens.
