1 Written Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
In Opposition to L.D. 1635 
An Act to Charter a Maine State Bank That Accepts Deposits and Issues Gold 
Currency Celebrating Maine's Heritage 
May 2, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am 
submitting this written testimony in opposition to L.D. 1635, An Act to Charter a Maine 
State Bank That Accepts Deposits and Issues Gold Currency Celebrating Maine's 
Heritage. 
FAME is a quasi-independent state agency that develops and administers 
programs related to the financing of both higher education and business in the state of 
Maine. We expand business and educational opportunities through our willingness to 
invest at greater risk based on public benefit. Our mission is to provide innovative 
financial solutions to help Maine citizens pursue business and educational opportunities. 
This bill would establish a Maine State Bank and authorize such a bank to:  
1. Accept deposits of funds in all lawful forms of currency, including but not 
limited to United States dollars, internationally recognized money issued by 
foreign governments, gold and silver bullion issued by recognized mints and 
blockchain-based cryptocurrency;  
2. Process exchanges between all currencies accepted for deposit;  
3. Issue gold coinage and bullion minted by the state celebrating the state's 
heritage in various denominations by weight;  
4. Issue blockchain-based cryptocurrency in tokens as long as the bank holds 
100% reserves in the form of gold coinage and bullion minted by the state;  
5. Accept deposits from and transact business with any person legally authorized 
under the laws of the state to conduct business in the state, including but not 
limited to cannabis businesses; and  

2 6. Assess fees on transactions and storage to cover the costs of operations. 
Over the years, numerous state bank bills have come before this committee and 
met unsuccessful fates. FAME has raised concerns regarding all of these proposals, 
believing them to be unnecessary and costly. A variety of studies in other states, as well 
as one by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, have studied the matter and largely 
concluded that a state bank is unnecessary and extremely expensive.  
We at FAME are proud of our record in meeting our mission to provide access to 
capital by partnering with Maine’s various lenders and other economic development 
agencies for the public benefit. FAME offers a variety of flexible, well-established 
programs that can be tailored to meet the needs of a variety of potential borrowers. We 
partner well with Maine governmental entities and financial institutions and help to create 
and retain Maine businesses and jobs.  
Maine currently benefits from a wide array of economic development and access-
to-capital entities. In addition to FAME, these include the Maine Department of 
Economic and Community Development, the Maine Technology Institute, the Maine 
Venture Fund, Maine Housing Authority, the Maine Municipal Bond Bank, Maine’s 
lending institutions (banks and credit unions), numerous regional economic development 
agencies, Coastal Enterprises, Inc., as well as the United States Small Business 
Administration and the United States Department of Agriculture, Office of Rural 
Development. 
Thank you for your consideration of my comments. 
