/ 
)> 
_ 
HoUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
‘gr AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Cheryl A. Golek TTY1 MAINE RELAY 711 
9 Vicarage Lane 
Harpswell, ME 04079 
Phone: (207) 535-9857 
Chervl.golek@legislature.maine.gov 
' 
Testimony of Rep. Cheryl Golek introducing 
LD 62, An Act to Require Antipinch Sensors on School Bus Doors 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished members of the Transportation 
Committee, my name is Cheryl Golek, and I represent House District 99, which consists of the 
Town of Harpswell and part of Brunswick. I come before you today to ask for your support of 
LD 62, An Act to Require Antipinch Sensors on School Bus Doors. 
LD 62 would require school buses to be equipped with certain technology to prevent a school 
bus door from closing on a person's limb or another body part. 
Maine recently had two school bus dragging incidents in 2022, one in Buxton where a 6-year-old 
boy's backpack was caught in the bus door as he exited and was dragged nearly 700 feet downa 
road before the bus stopped again.‘ Then again, that same year in Aubum, a ten-year-old boy’s 
ann was caught in the door of his school bus as he attempted to exit, and he was dragged 
between 50 to 60 feet. before the bus ﬁnally came to a stop at a stop sign and he was released.2 
As a mother, I understand the fear felt by a parent that witnesses their child in an accident. Years 
ago, my son was caught on the front bumper of his school bus, which led him to be dragged 
down a road and run over by his school bus. I am fortunate he is still alive today after this near- 
tragic incident. I am sharing this small snapshot of a personal story with you today to show that 
good can be created out of a tragedy, and lives can be saved. Years after my son’s accident in 
2019, LD 19 was introduced in the 129th Legislature by the Honorable Jay McCreight and was 
signed into law by Governor Mills. Now, all Maine school buses are required to have crossing 
arms on them. 
1 
WMTW. (May 13, 2022) Maine Kindergartener Dragged by School Bus. Retrieved from 
https://www.wmtw.com/article/maine-kindergartenstudent-dragged-school-bus/39989865 _
2 
. Sampson, Katie, (October 1, 2022). Auburn student dragged by school bus after getting arm caught in door. 
CBSI3 News. Retrieved from https://wgme.com/news/local/studentgets-caught-in-door-of-moving-school-bus 
District 99: Brunswick (Part), Harpswell
Today, we have an opportunity to prevent children from being caught when exiting their school 
buses by placing a simple piece of technology on the school bus doors called an anti-pinch 
sensor. 
Most recent data shows that in the United States, over 100,000 children are injured in bus-related 
accidents, many involving a child being pinched or dragged.3 In the country, there have also been 
other documented incidents that have questioned how we can improve bus safety.4 By installing 
sensors that stop movement when an object is detected, we can prevent these types of accidents 
from happening. 
Maine is not new to adding things to our school buses to protect our children and prevent 
avoidable accidents. We have added cameras, swing-out stop signs, ﬂashing lights and crossing 
arms. Adding sensors on school bus doors will add to the safety and protection of our children. 
I urge the Committee to recommend an Ought to Pass report on LD 62. I am happy to answer 
any questions you have for me at this time or during the work session. 
3 Ascencione. Child dragged by School bus while the driver drives Q[f— STOP with Smart Close. (n.d). Retrieved 
from https://ascencione.com/bov-girl-child-kid-dragged-school-bus-doors/ 
4 Peter M. Lawrence, Kathleen F urneaux, Dragging Threat ~ Nearly 20 Years Later." Students Trapped in Doors —A 
Five Second Cure to Eliminate this Threat. (n.d) Retrieved from 
https://www.p12.nysed.gov/schoolbus/documents/pdf/school_busJ)upil_safety;pdf 
District 99: Brunswick (Pait), Haipswell
