 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY REGARDING  
 
L.D. 62 
 
AN ACT TO REQUIRE ANTIPINCH SENSORS ON SCHOOL BUS DOORS  
 
Senator Chipman , Representative Williams  and members of the Transportation  Committee.  I am Victoria 
Wallack , director of communications and government relations for  Maine School Management Associa tion, 
testifying on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School 
Superintendents Association  regar ding L.D. 62 – MSBA is neither for nor against and MSSA is in support . 
 
School  buses are one of the safest way s for children to get to and from school, but accidents can still happen. 
Every year, there are numerous injuries and unfortunately deaths that occur involving school  transportation -
related accidents, according to the Nation al Highway Traffic Safety Admini stration (NHTSA).  
 
Antipinch sensors are designed to monitor for safety and alert drivers when the opening isn’t safe. One such 
common accident is a child becoming  stuck in a bus door. If a child’s finger, arm, or ba ckpack becomes 
trapped in the door, the  driver may not be aware and drive off potentially causing serious injury. As soon as a 
finger or any other object is detected, the sensor stops the closing movement of the door, prevents the bus 
from moving forward and help s to avoid a serious  injury.  Antipinch sensors will stop such accidents from 
happening.  
 
The concerns our organizations have are two -fold:   if this passes , will it become an unfunded mandate and 
need to be included on all future purchases for buses ; and i s the intent of the bill to provide these safety 
devices on newly purchased buses or to retrofit all buses?  Further clarification is needed.  We encourage the 
sponsors to seek appropriate means of funding this bill so all schools can install the sensors wit hout financial 
hardship.  
