  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
Presid ent-Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattso n 
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil P rendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
May 2, 2023  
 
 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matt Moonen  
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State Ho use Station, Room 438  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1870 --  An Act to Require the Payment of Ch ild Support by an 
Intoxicat ed Driver who Kills a Parent  
        
Dear Sen ator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 1870 . 
 
As noted in MACDL ’s testimony  in opposi tion to LD 1512, a  child whose parent is  
killed by a drunk driver suffers  deeply, both emotionally and financially. Maine has 
an adequ ate and robust civil justice system that provides for a civil cause of action 
that allows for recover y for emotional distress and pecuniary losses.  Maine ’s civil  
trial bar has been consistent in pursuing justice for victims in operating under the  
influence cases that result  in the  death of anot her. 
 
Adding this new , unch arted set of damages in a criminal restitution award is 
inappropriate and duplicative.  It woul d create a whole host of new , complex and 
time-consuming litigation  in criminal cases to set an appropriate  restitution amount.  
In civil wrongful death cases, litigation  over damages can sometimes last months or 
even ye ars and involve countless hours by a ttorneys in the course of that litigation. 
The expense alone of the mere litigation  in a criminal restitution case would be 
immense.   
 
Additionally , collection of restitution  as it stands now is a very difficult process for 
clerks’ offices,  prosecutors, a nd the Department of Corrections.  Adding a new type of 
restitution that could amount to hundreds of thousands of dollars would add an 
additional , unn ecessary burden . It is especially unnecessary when the  civil justice 
proce ss already fully and fairly allo ws the rights of the victims of operating under the 
influence accidents to obtain financial recovery.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this issue.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legislative Committee  
 
 
  

