 
 
Ford Motor Company Testimony in support of  LD 1911  
(An Act Concerning Automotive Right to Repair ) 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Development and 
Business  
Tuesday, May 23 , 2023  
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  my name is Andy Cashman. I 
am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent Ford Motor Company.   
 
Ford Motor Company  is an American multinational automobile manufacturer  with 
approximately 200,000 employees in 125 countries . However, we are first and foremost an 
American company. We have over 86,000 employees in the U.S.,  and we assemble more 
vehicles in the U.S. than any other auto manufacturer.  
 
Ford supports 1911 . This bill requires auto manufacturers to provide the same vehicle diagnostic 
and repair information it provides to dealers  to independent repair facilities  and vehicle owners , 
which is important for customer choice . This bill codifies  a framework we voluntarily put in to 
place with independent repair facilities more than a decade  ago, and we continue to enhance  as 
vehicle systems and information evolve over time.  
 
Ford is committed to the customer’s right to repair  vehicles  anywhere they choose . Today, as has 
been true for decades, Ford ’s customers , including in Maine,  have access to the information 
needed  to repair their vehicles as well as  the ability to take them to a service provider of their 
choice to be diagnosed and repaired . LD 1911 would protect th eir right to repair  without  
weaken ing or putting their  vehicle  and its systems  at risk . 
 
This bill continue s the  unrestricted access to the various tools, information, and data needed to 
repair vehicles  for independent repair facilities . It requires a manufacturer of automobiles to 
make available  to the owner of an automobile and independent repair facilities, the same 
diagnostic and repair  information  that the manufacturer makes available to its  dealers through an 
online or other electronically accessible manufacturer ’s diagnostic and  repair informat ion 
system.   
 
LD 1911 details a necessarily robust process for providing access to the  information required to 
repair a vehicle, while also providing  for the necessary safety and security protocols required for 
auto manufacturers to meet federal safety standards. This is a critical component of the law. It 
protects safety critical systems , especially against cybersecurity risks . These are important to 
help protect  the driver and every one that shares the open road.  
 
In addition, t his law provides for a  support and  dispute resolution process, where an independent  
repair facility or owner who is having trouble finding information or believes they’re not 
receiving the information they need to repair a vehicle can seek th at information from the 
manufacturer . It also provides for an enforcement mechanism through the A ttorney General  if 
that information is not provided . For these reasons, we support LD 1911 and respectfully urge 
you to vote Ought to Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration.  
