May 19, 2023 
 
Chris Bither 
Poland, Maine 
LD 1911 
 
To: Members of the 131st Maine Legislature Committee for Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business 
 
I am writing to express my support for LD number 1911, An Act Concerning Automotive Right to 
Repair.  Before relocating to Maine a few years ago, I worked for and retired from a domestic 
automotive OEM as a Product Development Engineer where I was located at the corporation’s 
Michigan proving grounds.  My primary responsibilities included development for key product 
characteristics of chassis and suspension components/systems for multiple product lines over 
several decades.  Included in this was development of software and calibrations for electrical 
power steering controllers, electronic brake controls, and integration of those controllers with 
additional controllers dependent upon each other to transmit and receive messages on the 
vehicle’s controller area network (CAN) bus. In my career I worked with four generations of 
corporate template CAN architectures, where the latest is still used in production today.  
Additional responsibilities included assessing and benchmarking like vehicles from competitive 
manufacturers.  Most new vehicles operate with multiple CAN buses; high speed, low speed, 
and single wire for examples. 
 
LD 1911 essentially describes the CAN diagnostic service physical and virtual tools made 
available to OEM affiliated dealers, OEM affiliated fleet service, and non OEM affiliated service 
entities by automotive OEMs that I worked for or analyzed.  Reference Attachment 1 for an 
example of one OEM’s service programing and diagnostic software descriptions and how to 
obtain.  Reference Attachment 2 for an example of an OEM specific CAN interface tool for 
vehicle diagnostics and service programming of control modules.  There should to be an 
analysis of the LD 1911 wording though in regards to service providers since there are 
numerous fleets (rental, law enforcement, telecommunication, leasing, etc.) which have 
contractual agreements with OEMs to provide their own service, warranty, and recall work 
without use of an OEM franchised dealer, and there is currently one specific domestic OEM 
which does not have franchised dealers and coordinates warranty and recall service for 
customers themselves. 
 
Automotive service entities not affiliated with an OEM have options to use 3rd party subscription 
service providers to pool resources and make CAN diagnostic and service programing work 
more cost effective to themselves and relieve the burden of single entity costs for subscription to 
multiple OEM diagnostic software packages.  Reference Attachment 3 for an example. 
 
In reference to verbiage in LD 1677 and testimony asserting there are OEMs that use only 
telematics to transmit and receive messages for CAN diagnostics and service programing to the 
OEM, primarily due to systems or a complete vehicle which does not need to be OBD-II 
compliant per Federal EPA, that is a false narrative.  Vehicle CAN networks have hardwired 
connectivity.  There are access ports for each CAN bus to obtain transmitted and received 
messages for each control module.  There are some sensors such as tire pressure, keyless 
remote, and object detection which operate intra vehicle wirelessly, but their related in vehicle 
control modules are hardwired within their specific operating CAN.  The access ports may not 
be what is referred to as the traditional OBD-II port near steering column, also known as ALDL 
(assembly line diagnostic link), rather a manufacturer specific connector in a non-standard 
Chris Bither 
Poland, Maine 
LD 1911, continued 
 
pg. 2 
 location.  Example, connection to high speed CAN in a Tesla is a manufacture specific 
connector located in center of forward dash behind a removable panel. 
 
If access to any of the vehicle’s CAN systems were only via telematics to some remote location 
and there was a failure within the system for communication, then there would be no means to 
perform any service diagnostics.  There is no specific need to perform service diagnostics and 
programing via remote telematics other than convenience.  To attempt to create standardized 
CAN architectures for vehicle OEMs mandated by a single state as described in LD 1677 is not 
realistic.  All vehicles do not have common system components, control modules, and suppliers.  
OEM’s spend years and untold amounts of capital to engineer, develop, and validate vehicles 
using thousands of engineers, technicians, multiple suppliers, and prototype hardware which no 
state would logically have resources to oversee.  Standardized CAN architectures between 
OEMs and unrestrained remote telematics access to the vehicle’s CAN networks would enable 
a 3rd party to unlock control modules via a seed and key which would be easily obtained,  
“crack” manufacturer validated software and calibrations for various control modules and 
circumnavigate federal safety and emission compliance via non VIN specific flashing of control 
modules. 
 
If LD 1677 or equivalent citizen referendum were to pass into law rather than this competing LD 
1911 there would certainly be litigation against the State of Maine over the remote telematics 
standardization and access, and if it were to survive the likely litigation a few likely OEM 
reaction scenarios are: 
A. No new motor vehicles would be sold in the State of Maine having services that rely on 
remote telematics. No GPS service, no remote start or door locks, no safe and secure 
monitoring for air bag deployment or theft.  No remote service programing to avoid trips 
to and time spent at a dealer.  Reference recent Subaru sales and delivery in State of 
Massachusetts where an identical referendum was passed and currently in litigation.  
Several fleets I have worked with need the OEM telematics system for Fleet 
Management. 
B. New motor vehicle dealers in Maine that are part of multi state operations would devise 
systems to consider a new vehicle as delivered and sold elsewhere before being 
transported to Maine at buyer’s direction.  OEMs will end some of their franchise 
contracts with dealers in Maine. 
C. Some OEM’s will bypass the use of new car dealers and dealer service centers in Maine 
and use the Tesla model for sales delivery and service. 
 
 
Thank you, 
Chris Bither 
Poland, Maine  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chris Bither 
Poland, Maine 
LD 1911, continued 
 
pg. 3 
 Attachment 1 
 
 
 
Chris Bither 
Poland, Maine 
LD 1911, continued 
 
pg. 4 
 Attachment 2 
 
 
 
Chris Bither 
Poland, Maine 
LD 1911, continued 
 
pg. 5 
 Attachment 3 
 
