 
      
 
A Non Governmental Organization in Special Consultative Status with the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations  
 333 West Wacker Drive, Suite 810  
Chicago, Illinois, 60606  
Phone/Fax: (312) 929 -1970  
www.truckandenginemanufacturers.org  
 
 
 
Testimony of the Truck and Engine Manufacturers Association  
By 
Patricia Hanz  
 
LD 1911/HB 1227, An Act Regarding Automotive Right to Repair  
 
Public Hearing of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business  
May 23, 2023  
Members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business : 
I write to you today on behalf of the Truck and Engine Manufacturers Association (EMA), 
regarding our concerns with Maine LD 1 911/HB 1227 , “An Act Regarding Automotive Right to 
Repair .”  EMA represents the world’s leading manufacturers of commercial vehicles and on - and 
off-road engines used in several applications, including:  trucks; buses; construction and farm 
equipment; locomotives; marine vessels; lawn and garden equipment; and stationary generators.  
EMA previously sent a letter and filed written testimony objecting to LD 1677 , a bill with a very  
broad scope , applying to a ll motor vehicles  – including commercial vehicles  – requiring  the 
standardization of  on-board diagnostic systems  and providing access  to such systems by owners 
and independent repair facilities without requiring the authorization of the manufacturer  except 
under limited conditions  in addition to requir ing the Attorney General  to designate an independent 
entity to establish and administer  access to that data  and applies to  vehicles manufacture d as early 
as 2002  (attached for your convenience) .  EMA continues to believe that LD 1677 is not 
implementable.    
However  LD 1911/HB 1227  addresses many of the concerns expressed by EMA by excluding 
vehicles greater than 14,000 pounds  in recognition that t hose products are  not typical  consumer 
goods and  are already covered by existing state and federal laws and manufacturer commitments.  
EMA believes that  this exclusion recognizes the  complex and specialized  nature of the  engines, 
vehicles and equipment that control critical safety, emissions, and performance systems  of these 
products  as described in our letter objecting to LD 1 677. 
EMA continues to  actively monitor  digital repair legislation , and notes that LD 1911/HB1227 is 
consistent with action taken in other states recogniz ing the significant adverse unintended 
consequences that would be created in including commercial vehicles and heavy machinery in 
such legislation  by exclud ing commercial  motor vehicles and off  road equipment.  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide our comments.  I would be happy to answer any questions 
following the hearting at: (312) 929 -1979.  
 
A Non Governmental Organization in Special Consultative Status with the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations333 West Wacker Drive, Suite 810
Chicago, Illinois, 60606
Phone/Fax: (312) 929-1970
www.truckandenginemanufacturers.org 
Testimony of the Truck and Engine Manufacturers Association
By
Patricia Hanz
LD 1677, An Act Regarding Automotive Right to Repair
Public Hearing of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business
Members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business:
I write to you today on behalf of the Truck and Engine Manufacturers Association (EMA), 
regarding our concerns with Maine LD 1677, “An Act Regarding Automotive Right to Repair.”  
EMA represents the world’s leading manufacturers of commercial vehicles and on- and off-road 
engines used in several applications, including: trucks; buses; construction and farm equipment; 
locomotives; marine vessels; lawn and garden equipment; and stationary generators.
The bill has a very broad scope, applying to all motor vehicles – including commercial vehicles – 
requiring the standardization of on-board diagnostic systems and providing access to such systems 
by owners and independent repair facilities without requiring the authorization of the manufacturer 
except as specified in the legislation. In addition, the legislation requires the Attorney General to 
designate an independent entity to establish and administer access to that data and applies to 
vehicles manufacturer as early as 2002.  The inclusion of large, complex vehicles and equipment 
such as commercial vehicles will create unnecessary confusion, complications, burdens, and risks 
for Maine users and manufacturers alike.  As such, EMA respectfully requests that any 
automotive right to repair legislation be amended to expressly exclude all on- and off-
highway commercial vehicles and equipment and the engines or motors that power them.  
Those products are not typical consumer goods, and are already covered by existing state and 
federal laws and manufacturer commitments.  Further, their inclusion will lead to significant 
adverse safety, environmental, and security impacts.
As currently written, the bill would allow independent service providers and owners to access and 
change the microprocessors on engines, vehicles and equipment that control critical safety, 
emissions, and performance systems.  Such digital right to repair legislation simply is not needed 
for commercial vehicles or agricultural or construction equipment, and creates a solution in search 
of a problem.
Allowing open, unfettered access to service and diagnostic information will undermine the 
integrity of the equipment and allow for safety features on heavy equipment – such as braking 
systems and electronic stability (anti-rollover) controls – to be altered and compromised.  
Unfettered access also will increase the likelihood that federally mandated emission control 
systems could intentionally, or unintentionally, (and illegally) be altered or disabled.  Such illegal 
tampering is increasingly occurring today, especially on off-highway equipment and commercial 
2vehicles, and the U.S. EPA has undertaken a National Compliance Initiative to respond to the 
numerous instances of tampering across the country, some of which include the use of software to 
alter or disable digitally controlled emission technologies. Tampering contributes substantial 
excess pollution that harms public health and air quality.
The bill also fails to contain any meaningful safeguards or restrictions that would prevent or 
mitigate the risk of cybersecurity incidents.  The creation of an independent entity charged with 
managing cyber-secure access is simply not adequate and may increase the impacts of a breach by 
consolidating the information into a single system.  Widespread and unfettered access to service 
information increases the opportunity for hackers to improperly obtain or tamper with such 
information – creating enormous cybersecurity risks.  This legislation will simply make those 
efforts easier.
EMA is actively monitoring digital repair legislation, and notes that other states have recognized 
the significant adverse unintended consequences that would be created in including commercial 
vehicles and heavy machinery in such legislation and have amended it to exclude commercial 
motor vehicles and off road equipment.
Lastly, we note that at least some provisions of the legislation appear to apply to vehicles and 
products manufactured as early as 2002.  EMA members believe that these provisions may be not 
just impractical to implement but may be simply infeasible and is why it is rare for legislation to 
apply retroactively.  In addition, the one year lead time for manufacturers to equip new vehicles 
with the as yet to be defined standardized platform is infeasible. 
For all these reasons, EMA requests that any automotive right to repair legislation be amended to 
expressly exclude all on- and off-highway commercial vehicles, and agricultural and construction 
equipment and the engines and motors that power.  Maine LD 1677 will otherwise create enormous 
safety, environmental, and security risks and liability exposure for owners and the general public.  
Finally, the bill will limit the availability – and/or increase the costs – of products sold in Maine, 
as those products will be forced to have unique characteristics.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide our comments.  I would be happy to answer any questions 
following the hearting at: (312) 929-1979.
