 
 
1235 South Clark Street, Suite 600, Arlington, VA 22202   PH: (703) 416 -0444   FAX: (703) 416 -2269      
 
 
May 15, 2023
The Honorable Chip Curry  
Chair, Jt. IDEA  Committee  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0003  
 
 
 The Honorable Tiffany Roberts  
Chair, Jt. IDEA Committee  
2 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0002  
 
 
RE: Exclude  Motorcycles and Off-Highway Vehicles  from LD 1911  
 
Dear Chair Curry and Chair Roberts :  
 
The Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC)1, the Specialty Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA)2, and 
the Recreational Off -Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA)3 represent several hundred 
companies in the powersports industry.  We urge that you follow the lead of Massachusetts and 
New York by amending  LD 1911  to specifically exclude motorcycles  and off -highway vehicles  
from the scope of the provisions . In the absence of an amendment our organizations oppose the 
bill. 
 
Our member companies have several pr oblems and concerns with LD 1911 : 
1. Not all m otorcycles , ATVs or ROVs  have the prescribed SAE  or ISO  interfaces.   
2. Franch ised dealers, which are Maine  small businesses, will be economically harmed 
by your legislation .  
3. Non-factory trained technicians working on motorcycle s is a serious safety concern as 
is the litigation risk of untrained individuals performing work on such vehicles.  
4. Without a specific exclusion, motorcycles and off -highway vehicles may no longer be 
sold in Maine . 
 
Not all m otorcycles , ATVs or ROVs  have the prescribed  SAE or ISO interfaces. These interfaces 
were developed for the United S tates EPA emission standards mandate for cars and trucks 
equipped with on -board diagnostic (OBD) systems. On-highway m otorcycles are not subject to 
EPA  requirements for on-board diagnostic system s. The SAE J1962 (connector standard) 
mandated by J2534 for “ diagnostic connector” specifically applies to passenger cars, light and 
medium duty trucks, and heavy trucks. This standard does not apply to motorcycles  and 
compliance would require major engineering changes for motorcycles, both software and 
                                                      
1 The Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC) is a not -for-profit, national trade association representing several hundred 
manufacturers, distributors, dealers and retailers of motorcycles, scooters, motorcycle parts, accessories and related 
goods, and allied tra des. 
2 The Specialty Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA) is the national not -for-profit trade association representing 
manufacturers, dealers, and distributors of all -terrain vehicles (ATVs) in the United States.  SVIA’s primary goal is 
to promote safe and  responsible use of ATVs.  
3 The Recreational Off -Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA) is a national, not -for-profit trade association formed 
to promote the safe and responsible use of recreational off -highway vehicles (ROVs – sometimes referred to as side -
by-sides or UTVs) manufactured or distributed in North America.  ROHVA is also accredited by the American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI) to serve as the Standards Developing Organization for ROVs .  More information 
on the standard can be found at https://rohva.org/ansi -standard/ . 

 hardware , and would take several years to implement (unlike autos which already have the 
connectors) . Off-highway motorcycles, ATVs and ROVs are not required to have the prescribed 
adaptors.  
 
LD 1911  would harm economically Maine  small business franchised dealers.  Dealers have 
invested heavily in training, special tooling, and equipment to service vehicles.  Franchised dealers 
sign a dealer agreement giving them  access to service information, technical expertise, and special 
tools required to diagnose and repair ori ginal equipment products. This investment is substantial 
in terms of a monetary commitment. If tools and technical information are provided to customer s 
and unauthorized independent repair shops, the franchised dealer’s investment is compromised.  
 
In addi tion to lost service revenue, if motorcycle manufacturers are unable to com ply with the 
mandates of LD 1911 , motorcycles would not be able to  be offered for sale in Maine . This would 
cause franchised dealers to lose all new motorcycle sales and income a nd force Maine  residents to 
purchase new motorcycles in neighboring states  – further harming the Maine  economy . In 2022, 
the value of the powersports retail marketplace in Maine was $351  million with an estimated 
10,500  new powersports  retail sales in the sta te.4 
 
We have serious safety concerns relating to the inherent danger of allowing non -factory trained 
technicians, untrained mechanics, and owners to perform certain work on motorcycles and off-
highway vehicles  if they are captured under right to repair legislation. Manipulating  of powersports  
emissions or safety controls, whether intentionally or unintentionally, could lead to  clean air 
violations,  product failure , and possibly  cause injury  or death . Manufactur ers require dealers to 
attend two technical training programs per year to instruct them on how to use the website and 
specialty tools and receive highly technical training. This training and knowledge is extensive and 
vital to ensure the correct repair of the product line.  
 
Litigation risk is a nother concern associated with allowing non -factory trained technicians to 
perform certain work on motorcycles and off-highway vehicles . Environmental or safety override 
attempts could result  in clean air violations, destruction of property , injury, or death, and 
manufacturers are likely to be swept up in lawsuits, regardless of who may be liable for such 
damage and injuries.  
 
Massachusetts enacted similar right to repair legislation and recognize d the need for an exclusion 
for motorcycles.5  As a result, motorcycles and off -highway vehicles such as dirt bikes, all -terrain 
vehicles, and recreat ional off -highway vehicles are not subject to the right to repair provisions in 
the Massachusetts right to  repair law or the automobile Memorandum of Understanding . New 
York also recently passed Right to Repair legislation which specifically excluded motorcycles, 
ATVs and off -highway vehicles . We urge Maine  to follow the lead of Massachusetts and New 
York by exclud ing motorcycles and off -highway vehicles from the provisions of LD 1911  as 
follows:  
                                                      
4 2022 Motorcycle Industry Council “Economic Impact of the Powersports Industry”  
5 The definition of motor vehicle in digital right to repair legislation appears to be drawn from  state legislation that 
deals specifically with motor vehicle “right to repair” (originating in Massachusetts as part of their motor vehicle right 
to repair law which has been used as a model for other states and for a national Memorandum of Understanding) . 
Motorcycles were ultimately excluded from the Massachusetts right to repair law (and automobile MOU) because 
they are different than automobiles in terms of the diagnostic connector standard mandated by motor vehicle right to 
repair laws. Motorcycles can not comply with provisions typically included in motor vehicle right to repair legislation. 
Therefore, Massachusetts legislators specifically excluded motorcycles from the definition of motor vehicle for 
purposes of the right to repair law.  Off -highway ve hicles are also excluded from the Massachusetts law because it 
applies only to on -highway motor vehicles.  
 
  
1. “Automobile ” has the  same  meaning as in section 101, subsection 7, but does not 
include:  
A. A motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight over 14,000 pounds; or 
B. A recreational vehicle or a motor vehicle originally designed or permanently 
altered and equipped for human habitation that is not used to transport 
property other than that property used for human habitation or camping 
purposes ; or  
C. A motorcycle, motoriz ed bicycle, all -terrain vehicle, and off -highway 
recreational vehicle.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. Should you have any questions, please contact 
me at 703 -416-0444 ext. 3202.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Scott P. Schloegel  
Senior Vice President, Government Relations  
 
cc: Jt. Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business Committee Members  
 

