Katie Shannon
Caribou
LD 1140
A letter in support of bill LD 1140
Dear Senator Chipman and committee members,
   Thank you for your consideration and time on LD 1140.  We appreciate your 
committee taking the time to read our letter.  Our names are, Kelli Goughan Michaud,
Kristi Goughan and Katie Goughan Shannon of Goughan's Farm in Caribou.  For the 
last 45 yeas, the Goughan Family has been working toward the ultimate goal of 
creating an extraordinary destination point for families to enjoy and experience a 
working farm.  Goughan's Berry Farm located in Caribou is a family owned and 
operated, diversified farming operation.  Goughan's Berry Farm is an experienced and
reputable business, offering a variety of products and family activities for the local 
market during the spring, summer, fall and early winter months.  Our goal is to have 
patrons rely on Goughan's Berry Farm for quality products and services from tapping 
maple trees during the spring season, to the last crop of Christmas trees and wreath 
production.  Some of our farm products include: 1200 taps for maple production, 
theater style evaporation room, farm-made ice cream using farm fresh ingredients, 
bedding plant greenhouse operation, animal barn for kids, fruit and vegetable 
offerings, including participating in the Maine Senior Farm share and WIC programs, 
pick- your- own strawberry, raspberry and blueberry operations, a 6 acre corn maze 
with agricultural themes, pumpkin fields, and a merry-go-round free to kids of all 
ages. Also included are a working sawmill, and an 18-hole agricultural mini golf 
course, food trailer and 8 acres of Christmas tree and wreath production. The motive 
through the years of planning has been to capture the agricultural tradition of 
Aroostook County, while providing family fun in a safe, worry free, clean and 
affordable atmosphere.  Goughans Berry Farm continues the Deveopment of creating 
an Agri-tourism facility.  A facility that generates crossover sales from the amusement
and educational assets to the fruit, vegetable and service investment of the farm.  
Goughans Berry Farm has been trying to develop an ATV trail to our facility on route
161, south of Caribou.  This trail would allow our facility to connect to the Aroostook
Valley Trail System.  In our local area, Goughans Berry Farm and neighboring 
landowners are very accommodating with their land for use in creating snowmobile 
trails, a trial system with national recognition. Our neighboring farmers have concerns
with the ATV trails with their seed potato operations. The Goughan family 
understands and supports those concerns.  To allow the use of this proposed trail 
would allow our small family farm to capture another revenue source, helping make 
our farm more sustainable today and into the future.
   Once again, thank you for your time and consideration and your service to the State 
of Maine.
   Sincerely,
   The Goughan Family.
