 
 
 
March  29, 2023 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
Senator Ben jamin  Chipman, Chair  
C/O Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 Re: Letter of Support for LD 1140, Directing the Department of Transportation to Allow All -
terrain Vehicle Traffic on a Section of Trail in the City of Caribou  
 
Dear Senator Chipman and distinguished committee members:  
 My letter today is to ask for your help with solving a problem. Caribou is  a small  city with an 
agricultur al heritage and a reputation as the home to four -season recreational trails. One 
challenge that Caribou faces is hav ing safe recreational trail connectivity to all valued 
businesses while preserving the disease -free fields required f or Caribou ’s certified seed potato 
growers. It is my hope that your  committee  will support this proposed solution  that provides  
economic development for both the agriculture and tourism industries . 
 Goughan ’s Berry Farm located at 875 Fort Fairfield Road in Caribou offers a diver se range of 
agri-tourism activities which starts in the spring with maple syrup , berry picking and flowers in 
the summer, fresh vegetables and a cor n maze in autumn  and wr aps up with live  trees and 
wreaths at the holiday season. Always l ooking to diversify , they have mini-golf, homemade ice 
cream, a lunch counter  and now a short-term rental property. What they do not have is 
access to the ATV trai l – something that would help both the business and outdoor recreation 
enthusiasts visiting the area.  
 The intended solution would be to  have trail access on the paved shoulder of the Fort Fairfield 
Road for approximately 3.1 miles to Goughan ’s Berry Farm . This would keep riders safe by 
staying off dirt shoulders on secondary r oads which are at ris k of erosion. It will also keep 
operator s clear of the fields in the area bounded by the East Presque Isle Road, Presque Isle 
town line, Fort Fairfield town line and the Fort Fairfield road where the Blackstone Seed Farms, Golden eye Seed Farms , Robert Shaw & Son , and other s produce certified seed to 
plant in Aroostook County and beyond. Any route entering  this vulnerable  area is impractical.   
 The City of Caribou has always  worked to have a good working relationship with all state of 
Maine governmental agencies  to establish trails to reach  our businesses  to honor our mission 
of local business retention and  expansion . Just last  year, staff cut a recreational trail  (at 
significant cost) to the Caribou Inn and Convention Center and Northern M aine Brewing 
Company o n south Main  Street through the woods because we were asked to keep ATVs off 
the roadway. I truly hope we can work together to connect Goughan ’s Berry Farm with 
potential cus tomers by providing trail access.  Please reach out anytime with questions: (207) 
493 – 5961 (my direct number) or pthompson@cariboumaine.org . 
 Sincerely,  
 
Penny Thompson, City Manager  CITY OF CARIBOU, MAINE               Phone:   (207) 493 -5961 
                 Fax:   (207) 498-3954 
 
   Office of the City Manager  Municipal Building  
25 High Street  
Caribou, M e 04736  
