MAINE 5% I‘ A 133 
cHAzyiB ER 
it ftiitfiik/il?.l%i(I?t%l 
'2¥z<.t* WJ¢;C7i’Q,/‘fl/11('?1:/It “ i>rt.s'é;:te.st',> ’ 
February 15"‘ , 2023 
Hon. Senator Stacy Brenner, Senate Chair 
Hon. Representative Lori Gramlich, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
RE: MSCC Testimony Neither For Nor Against L.D. 242: An Act to Clarzﬁ» That Animal Health Products Are 
Exempt from the Perﬂuoroalkyl and P0l)ﬂu0r0alkyl Substances Reporting Law ~ 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee: 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting this testimony Neither For Nor Against L.D. 242. 
This is the first of many bills this legislative sessions dealing with the newly enacted PFAS in products law 
which passed in the 130"‘ Legislative Session. As I have previously indicated to this committee, since this law 
was enacted, our offices have received thousands of requests from member companies seeking guidance on how 
they are impacted and how they can comply with this law. The PFAS in products law is the top issue for the 
Chamber right now, and we have been actively involved in the regulatory proceedings over the past year. We 
will continue to engage on this issue as is works through the legislative and regulatory process. 
We certainly want to thank the Sponsor of L.D. 242 for his leadership on this issue, and we look forward to 
working with Senator Baldacci and this committee as these pieces of legislation move through the committee 
process. Any time before the Chamber engages PFAS Policy, I find it important to note that we understand the 
concerns around PFAS. We understand the sensitivity of the topic and that it is an emotionally charged issue, 
We feel it is critical to be engaged on every policy conversation dealing with PFAS to help address the PFAS 
crisis and the health concerns, but make sure it is done in a way that protects Maine businesses, our economy, 
and Maine jobs. 
Regarding L.D. 242, to be clear — we do think there needs to be improvements made to the PFAS in products 
law. The impact of the legislation we believe were far broader than anyone anticipated when this legislation was 
passed, it has been problematic for the business community, and it is a problem that needs to be fixed. However, 
the State Chamber is not able to support specific exemptions. We understand and respect that specific industries 
I20 State Street, Suite l0l ' 
Augusta, Maine 04330-5630 ' 
tel (207) 6234568 ~ 
far (207) 622-7723 ' 
welisitcz www.1ininecha1nbcr.0rg ' e-mail; info@z1iait1ccl1a1i1bcr.brg
I
1 
have the right to bring forward an exemption, but all sectors of our membership, and all sectors of Maine’s 
economy are impacted by this law. Every type of business is impacted by this law -- from our smallest 
downtown businesses to our largest manufacturers and retail shops -- every sector of the economy is impacted, 
and different exemptions don’t help the entire business community. 
We feel there needs to be a better solution. One that seeks to make improvements to all our members, while also 
keeping in mind what the original intent of this legislation was. Which is to limit the amount of human exposure 
to PFAS and eliminate PFAS from making its way into the waste stream through food, water, farmlands, and 
other resources. We do believe there will be a vehicle for this committee to do that, and we have been working 
closely with Senator Baldacci on his other piece of legislation which will make significant improvements. 
To conclude, we hope the committee will recognize the challenges of this law on the business community. The 
Chamber stands ready to be a resource for this committee. We have been active on this issue, we will continue 
to be active on this issue, and we feel we are well positioned to help all interested parties and will continue to 
lead on this issue. As I previously said, we want to help find a solution to the PFAS crisis, help the farmers who 
have been devested by PFAS, but make sure policy is enacted in a way that protects Maine jobs, our economy, 
and our business community. Thank you — I will be happy to answer any questions and I will be available for 
the work session. 
Sincerely, 
Benjamin R. Lucas 
Senior Government Relations Specialist 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org
