Joe Baldacci 
Bangor/Hermon 
LD 242 _ 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Committee: 
I am Senator Joseph Baldacci and I represent Senate District 9 .... .._ 
I am pleased to present ,L.D. 242, “An Act to Clarify That Animal Health Products 
Are Exempt from the Perfluoroalkyl and Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances Reporting Law.” 
The PFAS statute that was enacted in 2021 requires manufacturers of products 
containing PFAS to report the amount of PFAS contained in the product as of January 
l, 2023, immediately bans the sale of such products that are not reported by January 
1, 2023, and ﬁnally bans the sale of such products in Maine as of January 1, 2030. 
The statute provides an exemption from those requirements for those products for 
which the addition of PFAS is detennined by the Department to be “an unavoidable 
use,” and those products “-for which federal law governs the presence of PFAS in the 
product in a manner that preempts state authority. ”, 
As those who will follow me today in testimony will explain in greater detail, animal health 
products clearly meet the “unavoidable use" standard. These products include medicines that 
are vital to animal health, as well as, in many instances, to human health through the 
prevention of the spreading of disease from animals to humans. 
But the matter of determining what constitutes an “unavoidable use" is, as l said, to be 
determined by the Department, and that determination will be made through major - 
substantive rulemaking which has yet to occur. In the meantime, the statute's reporting 
requirement came into effect as of January 1 of_ this year, and applies to products that may 
later be exempted from the statute by the DEP. Simply put, this process puts the cart before 
the horse. . 
As I referenced earlier, the PFAS statute contains a separate exemption from the 
reporting requirement, and from the ban provision, for products “for which federal 
law governs the presence of PFAS in the product in a manner that preempts state 
authority. ” Animal health products undergo stringent review and regulation by three 
separate federal entities, and that review includes a risk analysis pertaining to the use 
of PFAS in those products. According to the DEP, however, the exemption language 
that I just read does not operate to exempt animal health products (or any other 
products) from Maine’s statute. 
When I voted on LD 1503 in the 130th legislature, it was my understanding that 
essential products such as the animal health products at issue here would be exempt. I 
know that many other legislators have also been surprised to learn of the breadth of 
the PFAS statute. I have another bill that has not yet been printed that addresses theA 
problem of the scope and effect of Maine’s PFAS law more broadly and that is critical 
to many businesses. But the problem that the statute creates for the continued 
availability of animal health products is a particularly acute and glaring example that 
needs to be addressed whether that be through this bill or my broader bill to follow. In 
closing, I would note that the Califomia State Legislature recognized the importance 
of exempting animal products from its similar PFAS legislation. The language in LD 
242 is identical to the language in the California bill that Was ultimately vetoed by 
Govemor Newsome.i 
For all of these reasons, I urge the committee to provide its unanimous support of this critical 
legislation.
