CONTRIBUTORSDETAILS
All downloadable National Academies titles are free to be used for personal and/or non-commercial
academic use. Users may also freely post links to our titles on this website; non-commercial academicusers are encouraged to link to the version on this website rather than distribute a downloaded PDFto ensure that all users are accessing the latest authoritative version of the work. All other uses requirewritten permission.  (Request Permission)
This PDF is protected by copyright and owned by the National Academy of Sciences; unless otherwise
indicated, the National Academy of Sciences retains copyright to all materials in this PDF with all rightsreserved.Visit the National Academies Press at nap.edu and login or register to get:
–  Access to free PDF downloads of thousands of publications
– 10% off the price of print publications– Email or social media notiﬁcations of new titles related to your interests– Special offers and discountsSUGGESTED CITATIONBUY THIS BOOK
FIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at http://nap.naptionalacademies.org/26156
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and
Clinical Follow-Up (2022)
298 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACK
ISBN 978-0-309-48244-8 | DOI 10.17226/26156
Committee on the Guidance on PFAS Testing and Health Outcomes; Board on
Environmental Studies and Toxicology; Board on Population Health and Public
Health Practice; Division on Earth and Life Studies; Health and Medicine
Division; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2022. Guidance on
PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/26156.
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Consensus Study Report Committee on the Guidance on
PFAS Testing and Health Outcom es
Board on Environmental Studies
and Toxicology
Division on Earth and Life Studies
Board on Population Health and
Public Health Practice
Health and Medicine DivisionGuidance on PFAS Exposure,
Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
PREPUBLICATION COPY—Uncorrected Proofs
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATI ONAL A
CADEMIES PRESS 500 Fift h Street, NW Washington, DC 20001 
This project has been funded with federal fu nds from the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention under contract number 200-2011-38807, task order number 75D30121F00099; 
National Institutes of Environmental Health Scie nces, National Institutes of Health, and U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, under Contract No. HHSN2632018000291 task 
order number 75N98020F00012. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations 
expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of any organization or agency 
that provided support for the project. 
International Standard Book Nu mber-13: 978-0-309-XXXXX-X 
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-XXXXX-X  
Digital Object Identifier: h ttps://doi.org/10.17226/26156 
Library of Congress Catalog Number: 2022XXXXXX This publication is available from the National  Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 
360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334- 3313; http://www.nap.edu.  
Copyright 2022 by the National Academy of Sciences. National Ac ademies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine and National Academ ies Press and the graphical logos for each are 
all trademarks of the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America. 
Suggested citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2022. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Te sting, and Clinical Follow-Up . Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press. https://d oi.org/10.17226/26156. 
Prepublication Copy
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences was established in 1863 by an Act of Congress, signed by 
President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmenta l institution to advise the nation on issues 
related to science and technology. Members are elected by their peers for outstanding 
contributions to research. Dr. Marcia McNutt is president. 
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964 under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences to bring the practices of engineering to advising the nation. 
Members are elected by their peers for extraordin ary contributions to engineering. Dr. John L. 
Anderson is president. 
The National Academy of Medicine  (formerly the Institute of Medicine) was established in 
1970 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences to advise the nation on medical and 
health issues. Members are elected by their peer s for distinguished contributions to medicine 
and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau is president. 
The three Academies work together as the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine  to provide independent, objective analysis and advice to the nation and conduct 
other activities to solve complex problems and inform public policy decisions. The National 
Academies also encourage education and research, recognize outstanding contributions to 
knowledge, and increase public un derstanding in matters of scienc e, engineering, and medicine. 
Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine at 
www.nationalacademies.org.  
Prepublication Copy
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Co
nsensus Study Reports published by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine document the evidence-based consen sus on the study’s statement of task by an 
authoring committee of experts. Reports typically include findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations based on information gathered by the committee and the committee’s deliberations. Each report has been subjecte d to a rigorous and independent peer-review 
process and it represents the position of the National Academies on the statement of task. 
Proceedings  published by the National Academ ies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop, symposium, or 
other event convened by the National Academies. The statements and opinions contained in 
proceedings are those of the participants and are not endorsed by other participants, the planning committee, or the National Academies. 
Rapid Expert Consultations  published by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine are authored by subject-matter experts on narrowly focused topics that can be 
supported by a body of evidence. The discussion s contained in rapid expert consultations are 
considered those of the authors and do not contain policy recommendations. Rapid expert 
consultations are reviewed by the institution before release. 
For information about other products and activities of the National Academies, please 
visit www.nationalacademies.org/about/whatwedo.   
Prepublication Copy
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Prepublicatio
n Copy v COMMITTEE ON THE GUIDANCE ON PFA S TESTING AND HEALTH OUTCOMES 
BRUCE N. CALONGE (Chair ), University of Colorado School of  Medicine and School of Public 
Health 
LAURA ANDERKO, Mid-Atlantic Center for Children’s Hea lth and the Environment, M. Fitzpatrick 
College of Nursing, Villanova University 
DANA BOYD BARR , Emory University Rollins School of Public Health  
ERIN BELL , School of Public Health, University at Albany 
KEVIN ELLIOTT , Michigan State University  
MELISSA GONZALES , Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine 
ERIN HAYNES , University of Kentucky College of Public Health 
JANE HOPPIN , North Carolina State University 
TAMARRA JAMES-TODD , Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health  
ALEX KEMPER , The Ohio State University College of Medicine; Nationwide Children’s Hospital  
BRIAN LINDE , Yale School of Medicine  
MARC-ANDRÉ VERNER , Université de Montréal 
VERONICA VIEIRA, University of California, Irvine 
XIAOBIN WANG,  Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Pub lic Health and School of Medicine 
CHRIS WIANT , Caring for Colorado Foundation  
Health and Medicine Division Staff 
ELIZABETH BARKSDALE BOYLE , Study Director 
ALEXIS WOJTOWICZ , Associate Program Officer  
ALEXANDRA M CKAY , Senior Program Assistant  
ROSE MARIE MARTINEZ , Senior Board Director, Board on Population Health and Public 
Health Practice 
Division on Earth and Life Studies Staff 
MARILEE SHELTON-DAVENPORT , Senior Program Officer (until March 2022) 
KATE GUYTON , Senior Program Officer 
KALEY BEINS , Program Officer 
CLIFFORD DUKE , Board Director, Board on Environmental Studies and Toxicology 
Consultants 
ALLIE BOMAN, Briere Associates, Inc.  
RONA BRIERE , Briere Associates, Inc.  
CARY HAVER , ICF Resources, LLC  
JORDAN KUIPER , Johns Hopkins University  
JUDY L AKIND , LaKind Associates 
KATE MARQUESS, Johns Hopkins University  
MELISSA MILLER , ICF Resources, LLC  
JOSH NAIMAN , LaKind Associates 
ANNA RUTH ROBUCK , Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai  
MARGARET SHANDLING, Briere Associates, Inc.  
LAUREN TOBIAS , Maven Messaging 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
vi  Prepublication Copy Community Liaisons 
 
LAURENE ALLEN , Merrimack Citizens for Clean Water 
ANDREA AMICO , Testing for Pease  
STEL BAILEY , Fight for Zero 
KYLA BENNETT , Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility  
KAREN BLONDEL, Public Housing Civic Association, Inc. 
PHIL BROWN , Northeastern University  
ALBERTO J. CABAN-MARTINEZ , University of Miami 
CHERYL CAIL , South Carolina Indian Affairs Commission/SC Idle No More  
COURTNEY CARIGNAN , Michigan State University 
TRACY CARLUCCIO , Delaware Riverkeeper Network  
JAMIE D EWITT , East Carolina University 
EMILY DONOVAN , Clean Cape Fear 
ALAN DUCATMAN , West Virginia University 
PATRICK ELDER , Military Poisons 
TERESA GERADE , Don’t Undermine Memphremagog’s Purity  
HOPE GROSSE , Buxmont Coalition for Safe Water 
LOREEN HACKETT , PFOA Project New York 
AYESHA KHAN , Nantucket PFAS Action Group 
RAINER LOHMANN , University of Rhode Island Superfund Research Center 
SAMRAA LUQMAN , Concerned Residents for South Dearborn 
BETH MARKESINO , North Carolina Stop Gen-X In Our Water 
AARON MARUZZO , University of California, Berkeley 
TOBYN MCNAUGHTON , Resident of Belmont, Michigan 
KRISTEN MELLO , Westfield Residents Advocating for Themselves  
ELIZABETH NEARY , Wisconsin Environmental Health Network 
LAURA OLAH , Citizens for Safe Water Around Badger  
JACOB PARK , University of Johannesburg, Castleton University 
SUE PHELAN1, GreenCAPE 
ANDREA RICH , Save Our Water  
DANA SARGENT , Cape Fear River Watch  
LAUREL SCHAIDER , Silent Spring Institute 
LINDA SHOSIE , Mothers for Safe Air & Safe Water  
LENNY SIEGEL , Center for Public Environmental Oversight 
MIKE WATTERS , Gray’s Creek Residents United Against PFAS in our Wells and Rivers 
LA’MESHIA WHITTINGTON , Meredith College/North Carolina Black Alliance 
ALAN WOOLF , Harvard Medical School 
CATHY WUSTERBARTH , Need Our Water 
SANDY WYNN-STELT , Great Lakes PFAS Action Network 
 
                                                           
1 Deceased January 2022. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
Prepublication Copy  vii Reviewers 
 
This Consensus Study Report was reviewed in draf t form by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and 
critical comments that will assist the National Academ ies of Sciences, Engineer ing, and Medicine in 
making each published report as sound as possible and to  ensure that it meets the institutional standards 
for quality, objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft 
manuscript remain confidential to protect th e integrity of the deliberative process.  
We thank the following individuals for their review of this report:  
 
Andrea Amico , Testing for Pease 
Dean Baker , University of California, Irvine  
Linda Birnbaum , National Institute of Environmental H ealth Sciences and National Toxicology 
Program (retired)  
Julia Brody , Silent Spring Institute  
Courtney Carignan , Michigan State University  
Ellen Chang , Center for Health Sciences at Exponent, Inc. 
Nicholas Chartres , University of California, San Francisco  
Alan Ducatman , West Virginia University School of Public Health and School of Medicine 
Baruch Fischhoff , Howard Heinz University 
Philippe Grandjean , Harvard University 
Alex John London , Carnegie Mellon University  
Donald Mattison , University of South Carolina 
Joseph V. Rodricks , Ramboll  
Carlos Santos-Burgoa , The George Washington University  
Susan L. Santos , Veterans Biomedical Research Institute  
Annie St-Amand , Health Canada  
Heather M. Stapleton , Duke University 
John Washington , U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Although the reviewers listed above provided ma ny constructive comments and suggestions, they 
were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recomme ndations of this report, nor did they see the final 
draft before its release. The revi ew of this report was overseen by Joshua  Sharfstein, Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, and Susan Brantley,  The Pennsylvania State University. They were 
responsible for making certain that an independent  examination of this report was carried out in 
accordance with the standards of the National Academ ies and that all review comments were carefully 
considered. Responsibility for the final content r ests entirely with the authoring committee and the 
National Academies.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
Prepublication Copy  ix Acknowledgments  
 
Many people were critical in helping the committee accomplish its charge. The committee 
gratefully acknowledges the work of the community liaisons who provided insight and viewpoints 
pertinent to planning for our public meetings. In particular, we thank Andr ea Amico, Emily Donovan, 
Patrick Elder, Ayesha Khan, Kristen Mello, and La ura Olah, who provided helpful insights on the 
perspectives and experiences of their communities th at informed our community engagement methods. 
This engagement ensured that our public meetings  would include the relevant perspectives, which 
allowed us to learn about the social, environmental,  public health, and medical challenges central to our 
charge. In addition, we found the information and perspectives provided by the presentations and 
discussions at our public meetings immensely helpfu l in informing our deliberations (see Appendix C).  
The committee’s work was enhan ced by the technical expertise; writing contributions; data 
evaluation, visualization, and extraction; and other support provided by Cary Haver, Jordan Kuiper, Judy 
Lakind, Kate Marquess, Melissa Miller, Josh Naim an, Anna Ruth Robuck, and Lauren Tobias, who 
served as consultants. We would also like to acknow ledge the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s 
Office of Water and Office of Research and Developmen t for sharing publicly available abstracted data 
from some of the epidemiologic studies included in ou r literature review, as well as Scott M. Bartell and 
Nicholas Cuvelier from the University of California, Irvine for calculating percentiles of PFAS exposure.  
Importantly, the committee heard from a number of individuals who shared their personal stories 
about and experiences with PFAS exposure, testing, and clinical follow-up. These discussions helped 
ground our work in the lived experiences of the comple x issues that had to be tackled in this report, and 
we are extremely grateful for their courage in  sharing those experiences in a public forum.  
The committee thanks the staff of the Nationa l Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine who contributed to produc ing this report, especially the extraordinary, creative, and tireless 
study staff: Kaley Beins, Elizabeth Boyle, Cli fford Duke, Kathryn Guyton, Rose Marie Martinez, 
Alexandra McKay, Marilee Shelton-Davenport, and Alex is Wojtowicz. Thanks as well go to other staff in 
the Division on Earth and Life Studies who provided additional support, including Tamara Dawson, Eric 
Edkin, Elizabeth Eide, Lauren Everett, Nancy Huddl eston, Radiah Rose, and Maggie Walser. This project 
also received important assistance from Megan Lowr y (Office of News and Public Information) and 
Matthew Anderson (Office of Financial Administrati on). Valuable research assistance was provided by 
Christopher Lao-Scott, senior research librarian in the National Academies Research Center. Finally, a 
thank you is extended to Rona Br iere and Allison Boman, who assis ted the committee with editing the 
report. 
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
Prepublication Copy  xi Preface 
 
The creation of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970 signaled public 
recognition of industrial impacts on the environmen t. The government subsequently acknowledged that 
three elements essential for life—air, water, and f ood—could be contaminated by industrial activity and 
threaten human health. In 1980, two steps were ta ken in response to their concern: passage of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,  and Liability Act and creation of the Agency 
for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR).  
The mission of ATSDR is to prevent or mitig ate the adverse impacts on human health and 
diminished quality of life resulting from exposure to  hazardous substances in the environment. The 
earliest contaminants of concern included pesticides;  heavy metals from mining; asbestos; munitions and 
their manufacturing by-products (including radioactiv e substances); petrochemicals, including solvents; 
and products and by-products associated with oil an d gas extraction, refinement, and use. Over time, 
additional industrial products with significant potential to affect the population’s health have been 
identified, including the class of chemicals known as per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, or PFAS. 
PFAS have useful properties, such as oil and wate r repellency, temperature resistance, and friction 
reduction. For decades, they have been used in numer ous applications and products, such as firefighting; 
chrome-plating; lubricants; insecticides; and coati ngs and treatments for such surfaces as carpeting, 
packaging, and cookware. As a result of the produc tion and use of PFAS, many sites across the country 
are contaminated with PFAS, which in turn can r esult in contamination of soils and drinking water. 
ATSDR faces a critical challenge in protecting people from the potential health impacts of PFAS 
exposures. Data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey show that nearly 100 percent 
of people in the United States are exposed to at least one PFAS, but at what level of exposure do harms to 
human health occur? What PFAS-associated health outcomes might benefit from clinical follow-up or 
care? Would there be any benefit in testing people to know their PFAS exposure level? What clinical 
follow-up can help protect people from PFAS-associated harms? 
Answering these questions requires bridging appr oaches used for chemical hazard assessments, 
such as those carried out by the EPA; public and commun ity health benefits, such as those laid out in the 
Community Guide to Preventive Services; and medical care health benefit assessments, such as those of 
the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Chemi cal hazard assessments are conducted to determine 
whether a chemical exposure causes harm; public  health assessments address the impact on and 
interventions to mitigate threats to the health of a population or community; and medical care health 
benefit assessments evaluate the effects of medical in terventions, including their beneficial effects and 
potential adverse outcomes. One challenge with blen ding these different approaches is that in medical 
care health benefit assessments, the “gold standard” for informing clinical risk/benefit decisions for 
medical interventions is the randomized controlled tr ial (RCT). However, RCTs are typically impossible 
for chemical hazard assessments, for both ethical and practical reasons. For example, most environmental chemicals are not developed to improve human health , making intentional exposures in an RCT unethical. 
Chemical exposures also vary and may or may not be significant depending on the agent’s toxicity, which sometimes makes controlled trials infeasible. And public health assessments, in which comparative 
studies are still required to support evidence-based re commendations, usually require many years of data 
and are challenged by the long-standing and often-lame nted separation of health care and public health.  
In 2010, researchers Stephen Rappaport and Mart yn Smith reported that “70 to 90% of disease 
risks are probably due to differences in environmen ts,” and made the case for a more comprehensive 
approach to evaluating environmental exposures in or der to understand the causes of and contributors to 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface 
xii  Prepublication Copy chronic disease.2 Such an approach has, as in the case of l ead, and will, for chemicals such as PFAS, 
ultimately depend on breaking down the barriers between  environmental public health and the clinical 
care setting. These two health sectors have had some limited success in bridging the gap for infectious 
disease outbreaks and epidemics. Identifying environm ental exposures, measuring exposure levels in 
patients, and providing indicated medical follow-up ar e elements of a critical frontier that could and 
should bring the two disciplines closer together to improve the health of those in the nation’s communities.  
Another challenge for the study committee was the critical need to include community voices in 
the study process as an important a nd credible source of evidence to inform guidance recommendations. 
To meet that challenge, this study included the test imony of more than 30 people who live in or work 
with a community impacted by PFAS contaminati on. Community members provided the committee with 
much needed data based on their lived experiences with PFAS contamination, and moved the committee’s 
work from an academic exercise to a personal r eality. The committee used the presentations of 
community members to inform framewo rks within the report and to gain  an understanding of the social 
context that the committee’s recommendations will inform.  
Atmospheric chemist Susan Solomon has suggested that successfully addressing environmental 
challenges requires making the problem personal, pe rceptible, and practical. The voices of affected 
individuals in contaminated communities make the PF AS issue personal, while the scientists researching 
the associations with human health make the impacts of PFAS exposure perceptible. In this report, the 
committee has endeavored to provid e practical recommendations that can aid policy makers, state and 
federal environmental and public hea lth agencies, clinicians, and concer ned individuals in addressing this 
important health problem.  
Bruce N. Calonge, Chair  
Committee on the Guidance on PFAS Testing and 
Health Outcomes 
 
                                                           
2 Rappaport, S., and M. Smith. 2010. Science  330(6003):460–461. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1192603. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
Prepublication Copy  xiii Contents 
 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  ............................................................................................... xvii 
 
SUMMARY  .............................................................................................................................. ................... 1 
 
1 INTRODUCTION  ............................................................................................................................ 17 
Sociohistorical Timeline of PFAS, 18 Environmental Justice, 21 
PFAS Contamination and Routes of Exposure, 26 Policies That Could Reduce Exposure to PFAS, 28 Providing Clinical Advice in Communities Exposed to PFAS, 29 Committee’s Task and Approach, 30 Organization of the Report, 35 
References, 35 
 
2 PRINCIPLES FOR DECISION MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY  ..................................... 41 
Development of the Committee’s Principles, 41 
Principles Put Forward by the Committee, 42 
Committee’s Considerations in Developing Its Principles, 47 
Conclusion, 52 References, 53 
 
3 POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS OF PFAS  .............................................................................. 56 
Overview of Evidence Review Approach, 57 
Committee’s Conclusions, 61 Summary and Rationale for the Committee’s C onclusions by Human Health Outcomes, 62 
Evidence Gaps, 85 References, 87 
 
4 PFAS EXPOSURE REDUCTION  ................................................................................................ 101 
Sources and Routes of Exposure to PFAS, 102 
Approach to Determining Advice on PFAS Exposure Reduction, 103 
Contribution of Individual Exposure Sources to Human Exposure, 103 Medical Interventions for Potentially Reducing PFAS Body Burden, 106 
Existing Advice on PFAS Exposure Reduction, 108 
PFAS-REACH, 108 Findings and Recommendations, 110 References, 111 
 
5 PFAS TESTING AND CONCENTRATIONS TO INFORM CLINICAL CARE  
OF EXPOSED PATIENTS  ........................................................................................................... 118 
Options and Considerations to Guide Decision Making for PFAS Testing, 118 
Strategies for Interpreting Biomonitoring Data, 126 Conclusion, 136 References, 136 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents 
xiv  Prepublication Copy  
6 GUIDANCE FOR CLINICIANS ON EXPOSURE DETERMINATION, PFAS  
TESTING, AND CLINICAL FOLLOW-UP  ............................................................................... 141 
Criteria for Screening, 141 
PFAS-Associated Health Outcomes, 142 Recommendations for Patient Follow-Up, 147 Applying the Committee’s Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up Recommendations, 148 
Conclusion, 150 
References, 150 
 
7 REVISING ATSDR’S PFAS CLINICAL GUIDANCE  ............................................................. 152 
Recommendations for Changes to ATSDR’S Clinical Guidance, 152 
Writing and Design of ATSDR’S Clinical Guidance, 154 
Disseminating and Implementing ATSDR’S Clinical Guidance, 154 
Conclusion, 156 References, 156 
 
8 IMPLEMENTING THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS TO  
IMPROVE PUBLIC HEALTH  .................................................................................................... 158 
Biomonitoring and Surveillance, 158 
Environmental Health Education, 159 Barriers to Implementation, 162 Moving Forward, 163 References, 164 
 
APPENDIXES 
 
A COMMITTEE MEMBER, STAFF, AND COMMUNITY LIAISON BIOGRAPHIES  ..... 166 
 
B SUMMARY OF THE COMMITTEE’S TOWN HALLS  ...................................................... 183 
 C PUBLIC MEETING AGENDAS  .............................................................................................. 213 
 D EVIDENCE REVIEW: METHODS AND APPROACH  ....................................................... 221 
 
E WHITE PAPER: REVIEW OF THE PFAS PERSONAL INTERVENTION 
LITERATURE  ........................................................................................................................... 238 
 
BOXES, FIGURES, AND TABLES 
 
BOXES 
 
S-1  Principles for Decision Making Under Uncertainty Used in This Report, 6 S-2  Potential Harms and Bene fits of PFAS Testing, 10 
 1-1   What Are PFAS?, 17 
1-2   The C-8 Science Panel and the C-8 Medical Panel, 30 
1-3   Statement of Task, 31 
 
2-1   Principles for Decision Making Under Uncertainty Used in This Report, 42  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents 
Prepublication Copy  xv 3-1   PFAS Exposure and Risk of SARS-CoV-2 Infection, 66 
 
5-1   Total Organofluorine Testing, 120 
5-2   Potential Harms and Be nefits of PFAS Testing, 124 
5-3   Considerations for Frequency of PFAS Testing, 126 5-4  Clinical Use of Reference Ranges, 127 5-5  PFAS Serum Levels Are Not Directly Co mparable to PFAS Drinking Water Levels, 131 
 
D-1  AMSTAR-2 Critical Domains and Overall Confidence in the Results, 227 
D-2  Critical Domains Used by the Co mmittee to Assess Risk of Bias, 233 
D-3  Bradford Hill Considerations, 234 
 
FIGURES 
 
S-1 Brief history of PFAS manufacturing, regulation, and community exposure, 2 S-2 PFAS contamination across the United States, 3 S-3 Blood (serum) levels of PFAS, United States, 2000–2016, 3 S-4 The committee’s approach to th e Statement of Task and the chapters and appendixes where the 
topics are discussed, 5 
S-5 Categories of association used in this report, 7 S-6 Clinical guidance for follow-up with patients after PFAS testing, 12 S-7 Flow chart showing how the committee’s recommendations work together in a  
clinical setting, 14 
S-8 Suggested framework for updating the Agency  for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry’s 
(ATSDR’s) clinical guidance based on new evidence, 16 
 1-1 Brief history of PFAS manufacturing, regulation, and community exposure, 19 1-2  PFAS contamination across the United States, 20 1-3 Blood (serum) levels of PFAS, United States, 2000–2016, 21 
1-4 Pellow’s Environmental Justice Framework, 22 
1-5 Serum PFAS concentrations (unadjusted ge ometric means) from the National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999–2016, by race/ethnicity, age, and income-to-poverty ratio, 24 
1-6 Serum PFAS concentrations (unadjusted ge ometric means) from the National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 1999–201 6, by race/ethnicity, for PFOA, PFOS, 
PFHxS, and PFNA, 26 
1-7 Examples of how PFAS enter the environment, 27 1-8 The committee’s approach to th e Statement of Task and the chapters and appendixes where the 
topics are discussed, 32 
1-9 The committee’s approach to  community engagement, 33 
1-10 Hierarchy of controls and health impact pyramid, 34 
 2-1  U.S. Preventive Services Task Force’s (USPSTF’ s) generic analytic framework for a screening 
preventive service, 49 
2-2  Visual representation of the seven component s of the evidence framework for genetic testing 
developed by the National Academies of Sc iences, Engineering, and Medicine, 51 
 
3-1 Evidence map describing the number of studi es found, by PFAS, for each health outcome 
category, 60 
3-2 Categories of association used in this report, 61 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents 
xvi  Prepublication Copy 3-3 Regression coefficients for changes in i mmunoglobulin (IgG) concen trations per 1-log10 
nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) increase in PFAS serum level, 63 
3-4 Regression coefficients for regression coefficients percent difference in measles antibody 
response per doubling of log10 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) serum PFOS, 64 
3-5 Regression coefficients for percent change in hand, foot, and mouth disease antibody response 
per doubling of natural logarithm (ln)-nanogr ams per milliliter (ng/mL) sum of PFAS, 65 
3-6 Regression coefficients for changes in total cholesterol in adults, 68 
3-7 Regression coefficients for total cholesterol per interquartile range (IQR) increase in PFAS 
exposure in children, 69 
3-8 Kidney cancer adjusted rate ratios and 95% confidence intervals by study and PFOA exposure 
category, 74 
3-9 Testicular cancer adjusted rate ratios an d 95% confidence intervals by study and PFOA 
exposure category, 74 
3-10 Breast cancer adjusted rate ratios and 95% confidence intervals by study and PFOS exposure 
category, 76 
3-11 Adjusted risk estimates for preeclampsia, gestational hypertension (hypertension without 
preeclampsia), and hypertensive disorders of pr egnancy and 95% confidence intervals by study 
and PFAS PFOS exposure category, 77 
3-12 Adjusted risk estimates for preeclampsia, gestational hypertension (hypertension without 
preeclampsia), and hypertensive disorders of pr egnancy and 95% confidence intervals by study 
and PFOA exposure category, 78 
3-13 Adjusted risk estimates for preeclampsia, gestational hypertension (hypertension without 
preeclampsia), and hypertensive disorders of pr egnancy and 95% confidence intervals by study 
and PFuDA and PFDA exposure category, 79 
3-14 Adjusted risk estimates for preeclampsia, gestational hypertension (hypertension without 
preeclampsia), and hypertensive disorders of pr egnancy and 95% confidence intervals by study 
and PFHxS exposure category, 80 
3-15 Adjusted risk estimates for preeclampsia, gestational hypertension (hypertension without 
preeclampsia) and hypertensive disorders of pr egnancy and 95% confidence intervals by study 
and PFNA exposure category, 81 
 4-1 Conceptual model for PFAS exposure reduction, 101 4-2 Blood (serum) levels of PFAS, United States, 2000–2016, 102 4-3 Measured and estimated breast milk concentr ations of per- and poly fluoroalkyl substances 
(PFAS) in the United States and Canada, in comparison with children’s drinking water 
screening values, 107 
4-4 Recommendations for reducing PFAS exposure available through the PFAS Exchange, 108 
4-5 PFAS Project Lab map showing PFAS contaminati on sites in the continental United States, 109 
 5-1 Simplified flow chart of classes of biomarkers, 119 
5-2 Distribution of biomarker concentrations  in a generic reference population, 127 
5-3 Geometric means of PFAS in blood from east metro St. Paul biomonitoring, in nanograms per 
milliliter (ng/mL), 130 
5-4 Reference- and risk-based serum PFOS and PFOA concentrations that could inform clinical 
assessments, 134 
5-5 Graphical display of the levels of PFAS to inform clinical care for the sum of MeFOSAA, 
PFHxS, PFOA (linear and branched isomers), PFDA, PFUnDA, PFOS (linear and branched 
isomers), and PFN in serum or plasma, 136 
 6-1 Clinical guidance for follow-up with patients after PFAS testing, 147 6-2 Flow chart on how the committee’s recommendati ons work together in a clinical setting, 149 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents 
Prepublication Copy  xvii  
7-1 Suggested framework for updating the Agency  for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry’s 
(ATSDR’s) clinical guidance based on new evidence, 155 
 8-1 Recommended approach to mitigating PFAS exposure and adverse health outcomes, 164 
 D-1 Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) diagram for the 
committee’s review of reviews on health effects of PFAS, 226 
D-2 Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) diagram for the 
committee’s reviews on the hea lth effects of PFAS, 231 
D-3 Evidence map describing the number of st udies found by PFAS for each health outcome 
category, 232 
 
E-1 Human PFAS exposure pathways, 244 
E-2 Examples of PFAS content (micrograms per kilogram [ μg/kg] wet weight [ww]) in raw and 
steamed seafood samples and percentages of  PFAS content increase (+) and decrease ( −) after 
steaming (mean ± standard deviation [SD]), 248 
E-3 Examples of inconsistent changes in selected  PFAS concentrations after fish and shellfish 
preparation, 251 
E-4 Variation in PFAS levels a bove the method reporting limit in drinking water in the United 
States, 257 
E-5 PFAS levels above and below the method reporting limit in drinking water in the United  
States, 258 
E-6 Limited data on PFAS levels in  breast milk and infant formula in the United States show general 
overlapping concentrations, which also overlap w ith PFAS concentrations in drinking water that 
could be used to reconstitute formula, 260 
E-7 Relative contribution percentiles for vari ous pathways of exposure to PFOA, 265 
E-8 Relative contribution percentiles for vari ous pathways of exposure to PFOS, 265 
E-9 Estimated pathway-specific intakes of PFOA under a typical environmental exposure scenario 
for young children, and adults, 266 
E-10 Estimated pathway-specific intakes for adu lts of PFOS under a typical environmental exposure 
scenario, and PFOS under a highly contaminated environment scenario, 266 
E-11 Estimated daily intakes for male a dults and relative source contributions, 268 
E-12 Summary of numbers of studies iden tified for each PFAS exposure source, 270 
 TABLES 
 
S-1 PFAS Species Currently Included in the Ce nters for Disease Control and Prevention’s 
(CDC’s) National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals , 6 
 
1-1 PFAS Species Currently Included in the Ce nters for Disease Control and Prevention’s 
(CDC’s) National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals , 34 
 2-1  Evidence-to-Decision Frameworks Review ed by Norris and Colleagues (2021), 48 
2-2 U.S. Preventive Services Task  Force’s Recommendation Grid, 50 
2-3 Criteria for Reasonableness of Precautionary Measures, 52 
 
3-1 PFAS Species Currently Included in the Ce nters for Disease Control and Prevention’s 
(CDC’s) National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals , 56 
3-2 Categories of Health Effects Mentioned by Speakers at the Committee’s Town Halls, 57 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents 
xviii  Prepublication Copy 3-3 Effect Estimates Change in Birthweight per Change in PFAS, from Studies Rated as Having 
Low Risk of Bias, 71 
Annex 3-1  Health Effects of PFAS by Category, 97 
 5-1 Distributions of Serum PFAS Concentration (nanograms per milliliter [ng/mL]) in Four 
Cycles of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 2011–2018, 129 
 
6-1 An Overview of Screening Recommendations  for the Health Effects Associated with 
Exposure to PFAS, 144 
 7-1 Description of PFAS Clinical Guidance Documents, 153  
D-1 Authoritative Reviews Found by the Committee, 222 
 E-1 Summary of Results of Studies Examining the Effect of Food Preparation on PFAS  
Levels, 252 
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
Prepublication Copy  xvii Acronyms and Abbreviations 
 
AAFP American Academy of Family Physicians  
AAP American Academy of Pediatrics  
ACOEM American College of Occupa tional and Environmental Medicine 
ACOG American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists  
ALT alanine aminotransferase  AST  aspartate aminotransferase  
ASTHO  Association of State and Territorial Health Officials 
ATSDR  Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry   BE  biomonitoring equivalent BMI  body mass index  
CAS  Chemical Abstract Services  
CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  CERCLA  Comprehensive Environmental Res ponse, Compensation, and Liability Act  
CI  confidence interval  CPG  clinical practice guideline 
 
DNA  deoxyribonucleic acid  DOD  U.S. Department of Defense   EFSA  European Food Safety Authority  
EPA  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
EVIDEM  Evidence and Value in Decision Making  EWG  Environmental Working Group   FDA  U.S. Food and Drug Administration  FOSA  perfluorooctane sulfonamide 
 
HBM  human biomonitoring  HDL high-density lipoprotein  HHS  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services HMB  German Human Biomonitoring Commission  
 
IARC  International Agency for Research on Cancer   LDL  low-density lipoprotein  LOD  limit of detection   
MCDA  multiple criteria decision analysis  
MCL  maximum contaminant level  MeFOSAA  methylperfluorooc tane sulfonamidoacetic acid 
 NAS  National Academy of Sciences  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acronyms and Abbreviations 
xviii  Prepublication Copy NHANES  National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey  
NIEHS National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 
NIOSH  National Institute for O ccupational Safety and Health 
NIST-SRM  National Institute of Standards a nd Technology Standard Reference Material  
NOAEL  no-observed-adverse-effect level NPL  National Priorities List NRC   National Research Council NTP   National Toxicology Program 
 
OECD   Organisation for Economic  Co-operation and Development  
OR   odds ratio OSHA  Occupational Safety and Health Administration  
PBPK  physiologically based pharmacokinetic 
PEHSU   Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit PFAS-REACH PFAS Research, Education, and Action for Community Health PFBA   perfluorobutanoic acid PFBS   perfluorobutane sulfonic acid 
PFCA   perfluorinated aliphatic carboxylic acid 
PFDA   perfluorodecanoic acid PFDoDA   perfluorododecanoic acid PFHpA   perfluoroheptanoic acid PFHpS  Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid PFHxA   perfluorohexanoic acid 
PFHxS   perfluorohexane sulfonic acid 
PFNA   perfluorononanoic acid PFOA   perfluorooctanoic acid PFOS   perfluorooctane sulfonic acid PFUnA   perfluoroundecanoic acid 
PFUnDA  Perfluoroundecanoic acid 
 QA  Quality Assurance  QC   Quality Control   RfD   reference dose 
 
SD   standard deviation SSEHRI   Social Science Environmental Health Research Institute   TSCA  Toxic Substances Control Act  
 
USDA  U.S. Department of Agriculture USPSTF  U.S. Preventive Services Task Force   WHO   World Health Organization 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
Prepublication Copy 1 Summary1 
 
Perfluoroalkyl and pol yfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a class of chemicals that includes more 
than 12,0002 different compounds with various chemical properties. PFAS are commonly used in 
thousands of products, from nonstick cookware to firefighting foams and protective gear, because they 
have desirable chemical properties that impart oil and water repellency, friction reduction, and 
temperature resistance. PFAS as a class have a wide variety of distinct chemical properties and toxicities; for example, some PFAS can bioaccumulate and pers ist in the human body and the environment, while 
others transform relatively quickly. The PFAS that do transform, however, will become one or more other 
PFAS because the carbon–fluorine bond they contain does not break naturally. It is for this reason that 
PFAS are termed “forever chemicals.”  
STUDY CONTEXT 
 
 Public concern about the impact of PFAS cont amination on human health and the environment 
began in the late 1990s when perfluorooctanoic aci d (PFOA) water contamination was identified in 
Parkersburg, West Virginia. As a result, 3M, a primary PFAS manufacturer initiated a voluntary phase-
out of some PFAS (PFOA, perfluorooctanesulfonic acid [PFOS], and perfluorohexanesulfonic acid [PFHxS]). The contamination in Parkersburg also le d to a class action lawsuit that identified several 
health effects related to PFAS expos ure and led to the establishment of a medical monitoring program in 
2013. Shortly thereafter, the U.S. Environmenta l Protection Agency (EPA) began requiring all 
community water systems serving more than 10,000 people to test for certain PFAS, which led to more communities learning that their water was contaminated. In 2016, researchers found that the drinking water supply for Wilmington, North Carolina, was c ontaminated with a chemical called “GenX,” a PFOA 
replacement. This finding led to public concern a bout the potential health effects of replacement PFAS 
(see Figure S-1).  
Organizations such as the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IA RC), the Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), and the EPA have linked exposure to PFAS 
(particularly PFOA and PFOS) to multiple cancers, th yroid dysfunction, small changes in birthweight, 
and high cholesterol. Gaining a complete picture of the threat can be difficult, however, because of the 
chemical and toxicological differences among individu al PFAS and uncertainty about the exposure level 
at which their adverse effects may occur. In additio n, many of the chronic diseases associated with PFAS 
exposure have myriad causes. 
An estimated 2,854 U.S. locations (in all 50 stat es and two territories) have some level of PFAS 
contamination (see Figure S-2). Although not all of the contamination represents exceedances of health 
advisories, the pervasiveness of the contamination is  alarming. Furthermore, almost 100 percent of the 
U.S. population is exposed to at least one PFAS. Although exposures to the phased-out PFAS have been 
decreasing (see Figure S-3), people are still exposed to  those PFAS from site contamination, occupational 
uses of stored products, and breakdown of PFAS polymer  products that are found in homes. Carpeting, 
for example, is often treated with fluorotelomer-bas ed polymers that can biodegrade to form phased-out 
PFAS, such as PFOA. Exposures also occur to the PFAS  chemicals used to replace those that have been 
                                                 
1 No references are included in this Summary. References to the content he rein are provided in the respective 
chapters of the main text. 
2 EPA Comptox Dashboard (https://com ptox.epa.gov/das hboard/chemical-lists/pfasmaster [accessed May 25, 
2022]). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  phased out. Although the harms of the replacement PFAS are less well understood, they may have 
comparable or more serious toxicity than the PFA S they have replaced. The state of New Jersey, for 
example, recently set a groundwater standard for a re placement PFAS that is an order of magnitude lower 
than drinking water standards for other PFAS. The New Jersey maximum contaminant levels of 
perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA), PFOA, and PFOS in drinking water are 13, 14, and 13 nanograms per 
liter (ng/L), respectively,3 while the groundwater standard for the replacement PFAS, 
chloroperfluoropolyether carboxylates, is 2 ng/L.4 
 
 
FIGURE S-1 Brief history of PFAS manufacturing regulation and community exposure. 
NOTE: ATSDR = Agency for Toxic Su bstances and Disease Registry; EP A = U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency; ng/L = nanograms per liter; NHANES = National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. SOURCE: Committee generated based on slides included by  Patrick N. Breysse in a presentation to the committee 
on February 4, 2021. 
                                                 
3 See https://www.nj.gov/he alth/ceohs/documents/pfas_ drinking%20water.pdf ( accessed June 8, 2022). 
4 See https://www.nj.gov/dep/st andards/ClPFPECA_Standard.pd f (accessed June 8, 2022). 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary 3 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE S-2 PFAS contamination across the United States.  
NOTES: According to the Environmental Working Grou p (EWG), “locations represented on the map are 
approximate and intended to portray the general area of a contamination site or a community water system. Locations were mapped using the best data available from official records, including data provided by tests of public 
drinking water systems, the Safe Drinking Water Information System and the Department of Defense report 
Addressing Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) and Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) , and Department of Defense 
public records, among others. Data on contaminated industrial and military sites was current as of October 2021.” 
Furthermore, “EWG has worked to ensure the accuracy of  the information provided in this map. The map is 
dynamic. This contaminant site, results, suspected sources and other information in the database may change based 
on evolving science, new information or other factors. Please be advised that this information frequently relies on 
data obtained from many sources, and accordingly, EWG ca nnot guarantee the accuracy of  the information provided 
or any analysis based thereon.” 
SOURCE: See https://www.ewg.org/inter active-maps/pfas_contamination/map (accessed May 11, 2022). Copyright 
© Environmental Working Group, www.ewg.org. Reproduced with permission. 
 
 
 
FIGURE S-3 Blood (serum) levels of PFAS, United States, 2000–2016. 
NOTE: Average = geometric mean. 
SOURCE: Patrick N. Breysse’s presentation to the commit tee on February 4, 2021. DATA SOURCE: Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (2019, January). Fourth Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals , 
updated tables. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  The people who live, work, and play in e nvironments where PFAS contamination exceeds 
standards do not know how to protect themselves from the health risks of exposure. Many have been 
exposed to PFAS for decades and may continue to  be exposed in their homes or workplaces. Some 
members of communities that have discovered that their exposures exceed health advisory levels are 
calling for a medical program to prevent, lead to early  detection of, or treat diseases related to the health 
risks they may face. Developing such a program is challenging, however, because of the uncertainties 
about the health effects of PFAS a nd potential harms from additional me dical treatments; moreover, many 
of these diseases are not preventable or  even treatable, and many clinicians lack information about what 
they can and should do for these patients. 
To help clinicians5 respond to patient concerns a bout PFAS exposure, ATSDR published PFAS: 
An Overview of the Science and Guidance for C linicians on Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances.6 This 
guidance summarizes general information about PFAS and PFAS health studies and suggests answers to 
example patient questions. However, the ATSDR gui dance does not provide specific recommendations on 
when to test for PFAS, how to order the tests, how to interpret the results, or what clinical follow-up 
based on PFAS exposure might look like. Interpretation of PFAS blood  or urine results is challenging 
because the specific level of exposure at which ha rms may occur is unknown, and the science on the 
potential health effects of exposure to PFAS is adva ncing quickly, making it difficult to provide advice to 
clinicians about what follow-up tests might be helpful.  
 
STUDY CHARGE AND APPROACH 
 
ATSDR and the National Institute of Environmen tal Health Sciences (NIEHS) asked the National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine  to form an ad hoc committee to advise on PFAS 
testing and clinical care for patients exposed to PFA S. The Statement of Task asked the committee to 
 
 develop principles for biological testing and clin ical evaluation, given substantial scientific 
uncertainty about the health effects or the value of such measures in informing care,  
 review the human health literature fo r the health effects of PFAS, and 
 characterize human exposure pathways and de velop principles for exposure reduction. 
 The Statement of Task asked  the committee to recommend 
 
 options and considerations to guide decision making for PFAS testing in a patient’s blood or 
urine, 
 PFAS concentrations that could inform clinical care of exposed patients, and 
 appropriate patient follow-up and care specific to  PFAS-associated health endpoints for those 
patients known or suspected to be exposed to PFAS.  
 The committee also was asked to provide advice on changes to ATSDR’s clinical guidance. The 
committee was not asked for communi ty prevention guidance or advice on policies that would reduce 
exposure to PFAS.  
Figure S-4 summarizes the committee’ s approach to the Statement of Task. A critical component 
of the approach was community engagement because  people who live with potentially harmful exposures 
have knowledge from experiential learning that pr ecedes scientific findings. The study’s community 
                                                 
5 The committee uses “clinician” throughout this report  to refer to “a healthcare professional qualified in the 
clinical practice of medicine. Clinicians may be physicians, nurses, pharmacists, or other allied health professionals” 
as defined by the Centers for Me dicare & Medicaid Services (https://w ww.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-
Patient-Assessment-Instruments/MMS/QMY-C linicians [accessed June 14, 2022]). 
6 See https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/pfas/docs/clinical-g uidance-12-20-2019.pdf ( accessed June 14, 2022).  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary 5 
Prepublication Copy  engagement consisted of a panel of community liais ons, three town halls (summarized in Appendix B), 
community speakers at every public committee meeting,  open sign-up for public testimony at every 
public meeting, and encouragement for written testim ony throughout the data collection phase of the 
study. The following sections provide descriptions of  the remaining components of the study approach 
and the committee’s associated recommendations.  
COMMITTEE’S PRINCIPLES FOR DECISION MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 
 
Providing clear advice to clinicians on clin ical follow-up for PFAS-exposed patients is 
challenging. The questions in the Statement of Task a ll have some degree of uncertainty. First, clinicians 
need to know what the health consequences of PFAS exposure are. If everyone is exposed, what exposure 
level warrants follow-up? What actions can be taken to reduce exposure or prevent disease? What are the 
harms of those actions? Answering all of these ques tions requires making ethical judgments. Building on 
the work of other experts and evidence-to-decision frameworks, the committee developed five principles 
to guide decision making under uncertainty for use throughout this report and by ATSDR when updating 
the guidance for clinicians: proportionality, justice, autonomy, feasibility, and adaptability (see Box S-1). 
In the clinical setting, these principles converge under the principle of autonomy ; thus, shared, informed 
decision making between clinician and patient is the practical way to incorporate the principles into a 
clinical encounter. 
  
 
FIGURE S-4  The committee’s approach to the Statement of Task and the chapters and appendixes where the topics 
are discussed.  
NOTE: ATSDR = Agency of Toxic Subs tances and Disease Registry; CDC = Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. 
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  BOX S-1  
Principles for Decision Making Und er Uncertainty Used in This Report 
 
Proportionality:  Decisions should balance plausible harms and benefits proportionally, meaning that the harms 
and benefits are considered together and weighed based on a qualitative assessment of their potential likelihoods 
and magnitudes. 
 
Justice:  Decisions should be informed by an emphasis on promoting justice, including by balancing benefits and 
harms fairly across the population of at-risk individuals, advancing health equity, and respecting human rights. In 
addition, justice requires consideration of sociohistorical context, stakehol ders, existing structural inequalities, 
and issues of agency (the power a community  has to advocate for itself in conflicts). 
 
Autonomy:  Decisions should be based on informed decision making by individuals and reflect respect for their 
values. 
 
Feasibility:  Decisions should take into account resource availability, including follow-up services. 
 
Adaptability:  Decisions should respond to new information about harms, benefits, and other relevant 
considerations (e.g., health equity and feasibility). 
 
 
POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECTS OF PFAS 
 
To recommend PFAS levels that should inform c linical care, the committee conducted a literature 
review to determine health effects or conditions associ ated with PFAS. The Statement of Task limited this 
review to human studies of those PFAS included in  the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s 
(CDC’s) National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals  (see Table S-1). Other PFAS 
may also cause harm, though they do not all have the same biological persistence and toxicity. Most 
people are exposed to mixtures of PFAS such that speci fic effects are difficult to disentangle. Considering 
these issues, and recognizing that some PFAS are infrequently measured, the committee provided one 
strength-of-evidence determination for all PFAS for each health effect, recognizing that providing one 
conclusion across PFAS may not account for the distinct  physical, chemical, and toxicological properties 
of each type of PFAS. 
 
 
TABLE S-1  PFAS Species Currently Included in the Ce nters for Disease Control and Prevention’s 
(CDC’s) National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals   
Abbreviated Name  Full Name  CAS Registry No.  
MeFOSAA Methylperfluorooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid 2355-31-9 
PFHxS Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid 
perfluorohexane sulfonic acid 355-46-4 
n-PFOA (linear isomer), Sb-PFOA 
(branched isomers) Perfluorooctanoic acid 335-67-1* 
PFDA Perfluorodecanoic acid 335-76-2 
PFUnDA Perfluoroundecanoic acid 2058-94-8 
n-PFOS (linear isomer), Sm-PFOS (branched isomers) Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid 
1763-23-1* 
PFNA Perfluorononanoic acid 375-95-1 
NOTES: CAS = Chemical Abstracts Service. * = CAS number refers to linear isomer only. Previous survey years 
have also included perfluorobutane sulfonic acid (PFBS), perfluoropentanoic acid (PFpA), perfluorododecanoic acid (PFDoDA), perfluorooctane sulfonamide  (FOSA), and 2-(N-ethyl-perfluoro octane sulfonamido)acetate (EtFOSAA), 
according to Patrick N. Breysse’s presentatio n to the committee on February 4, 2021. 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary 7 
Prepublication Copy  The committee began its review by identifying d ecisions of other authoritative bodies regarding 
PFAS exposure and any human health effects. The co mmittee then considered mo re recent human studies, 
both systematic reviews and published epidemiologic r esearch articles, that could inform updates to those 
decisions. This approach improved efficiency while minimizing the risk of excluding scientific findings 
that could inform the committee’s conclusions.  
The committee considered animal  studies discussed in ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for 
Perfluoroalkyls  and in systematic reviews to aid in its in terpretation of the human studies. The committee 
synthesized the available evidence in to four categories of association used by other National Academies 
committees: sufficient evidence of an association, limited suggestiv e evidence of an association, 
inadequate or insufficient eviden ce of an association, and limited suggestive evidence of no association 
(see Figure S-5). All associations between PFAS and a health outcome were considered inadequate or 
insufficient by default unless ava ilable evidence from all aspects of the committee’s review warranted 
placing the evidence in another category of association.  
 
 
 
FIGURE S-5 Categories of association used in this report. 
NOTES:  The categories of association only describe how strong the evidence is between PFAS and the health 
outcome. The risk of developing an outcome from exposure to PFAS for things in the same category can vastly 
differ and are dependent on whether an individual has other risk factors for developing the outcome.   
 
The committee found sufficient evidence of an  association for the following diseases and 
health outcomes:  
 decreased antibody response (in adults and children), 
 dyslipidemia (in adults and children), 
 decreased infant and fetal growth, and 
 increased risk of kidney cancer (in adults). 
 
The committee found limited or suggestive evid ence of an association for the following 
diseases and health outcomes:  
 increased risk of breast cancer (in adults), 
 liver enzyme alterations (in adults and children), 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   increased risk of pregnancy-induced hyp ertension (gestational hypertension and 
preeclampsia), 
 increased risk of testicular cancer (in adults), 
 thyroid disease and dysfunction (in adults), and 
 increased risk of ulcerative colitis (in adults). 
 
The committee observed gaps in the evidence, rende ring the evidence inadequate or insufficient, 
for many health effects including the following: 
 
 immune effects other than reduced an tibody response, and ulcerative colitis; 
 cardiovascular outcomes other than dyslipidemia; 
 developmental outcomes other than small reductions in birthweight; 
 cancers other than kidney, breast, and testicular; 
 reproductive effects other than hypertensive disorders of pregnancy; 
 hepatic effects other than liver enzyme levels; 
 endocrine disorders other than those involving thyroid hormone levels; 
 respiratory effects; 
 hematological effects; 
 musculoskeletal effects, such as effects on bone mineral density; 
 renal effects, such as renal disease; and 
 neurological effects. 
 
For some outcome categories, the research spanned many different tests or measures of effect, all 
of which assessed slightly different health outcomes,  making the evidence difficult to synthesize and use 
to draw strong conclusions. The committee found this issue most apparent when reviewing the literature 
on neurodevelopmental effects, such as effects on lear ning and behavior. Another research issue is that 
most studies reviewed by the committee were not conducted among people know n to have high exposures 
to PFAS, indicating a gap in understanding the effects of PFAS among those highly exposed.  
 
PFAS EXPOSURE REDUCTION 
 
Some people may be interested in reducing their exposure to PFAS. The primary route to PFAS 
in nonoccupational settings is likely ingestion, which may include drinking contaminated water; eating 
seafood from contaminated water; or consuming other c ontaminated foods, such as vegetables, game, or 
dairy products. PFAS are often used in materials th at come in contact with  food, such as microwave 
popcorn bags or packaging used for fast foods or  processed foods. Exposure may also occur when dust 
containing PFAS is ingested. Inhalation is the most common route in occupational settings, and is a route 
of exposure for people living near fluorochemical plants  or incinerators. PFAS transfer to the fetus during 
pregnancy and in early life during lactati on. Dermal exposure is understudied.  
If PFAS are in drinking water, switching to c onsumption of water lower in PFAS will reduce 
exposure. In general, however, it is difficult to reduce exposure to PFAS th rough personal behavior 
modifications.  
For clinicians, based on its review of the evidence on PFAS exposure reduction, the committee 
makes the following recommendations:  
 
Recommendation 4-17: Clinicians advising patients on PFAS exposure reduction should 
begin with a conversation aimed at first dete rmining how they might be exposed to PFAS 
                                                 
7 The committee’s recommendations are numbered according to the chapter of the main text in which they 
appear. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary 9 
Prepublication Copy  (sometimes called an environmental exposu re assessment) and what  exposures they are 
interested in reducing. This exposure assessm ent should include questions about current 
occupational exposures to PFAS (such as work with fluorochemicals or firefighting) and 
exposures to PFAS through the environment.  Known environmental exposures to PFAS 
include living in a community with PFAS-contaminated drinking water, living near industries that use fluorochemicals, serving in the military, and consuming fish and game 
from areas with known or potential contamination. 
 
Recommendation 4-2: If patients may be expo sed occupationally, such as by working with 
fluorochemicals or as a firefighter, clinicians should consult with occupational health and 
safety professionals knowledgeable about the workplace practices to determine the most 
feasible ways to reduce that exposure.   
Recommendation 4-3: Clinicians should advise patients with elevated PFAS in their 
drinking water that they can filter their wa ter to reduce their exposure. Drinking water 
filters are rated by NSF International, an i ndependent organization that develops public 
health standards for products. The NSF data base can be searched online for PFOA to find 
filters that reduce the PFAS in drinking water included in the committee’s charge. 
Individuals who cannot filter their water can use another source of water for drinking. 
 
Recommendation 4-4: In areas with known PFA S contamination, clinicians should advise 
patients that PFAS can be present in fish, wildlife, meat, and dairy products and direct 
them to any local consumption advisories. 
 There are fewer evidence-based exposure-reducti on recommendations for patients without known 
sources of exposure: 
 
Recommendation 4-5: Clinicians should direct patients interested in learning more about 
PFAS to authoritative sources of informatio n on how PFAS exposure occurs and what 
mitigating actions they can take. Authoritativ e sources include the Pediatric Environmental 
Health Specialty Units (PEHSUs), the Agency  for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 
(ATSDR), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).   Recommendation 4-6: When clinicians are co unseling parents of infants on PFAS exposure, 
they should discuss infant feeding and steps that can be taken to lower sources of PFAS 
exposure. The benefits of breastfeedin g are well known; the American Academy of 
Pediatrics, the American Academy of Family  Physicians, and the American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists support and recommend breastfeeding for infants, with 
rare exceptions. Clinicians should explain th at PFAS can pass through breast milk from a 
mother to her baby. PFAS may also be present in  other foods, such as the water used to 
reconstitute formula and infant food, and potent ially in packaged formula and baby food. It 
is not yet clear what types and levels of ex posure to PFAS are of concern for child health 
and development. 
 
Additionally, there is a critical need for more da ta to understand PFAS exposure among breastfed infants: 
 
Recommendation 4-7: Federal environmental health agencies should conduct research to 
evaluate PFAS transfer to and concentrations in  breast milk and formula to generate data 
that can help parents and clinicians make sh ared, informed decisions about breastfeeding. 
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  PFAS TESTING AND CONCENTRATIONS TO INFORM  
CLINICAL CARE OF EXPOSED PATIENTS 
 
Decisions about PFAS testing require shared informed decision making between patient and 
clinician. Clinicians should expl ain that exposure biomonitoring ma y provide important information 
about an individual’s exposure levels that might guide clinical follow-up. At the same time, this 
information cannot indicate or predict the likelihood th at an individual will end up with a particular 
condition. Allowing people the oppor tunity to determine whether they  will undergo PFAS testing shows 
respect for patient values. Discussions about PFAS te sting should always include information about how 
PFAS exposure occurs, potential health effects of PFAS, limitations of PFAS testi ng, and the benefits and 
harms of the testing (see Box S-2).  
 
 
BOX S-2  
Potential Harms and Benefits of PFAS Testing 
 
Potential Harms  
 Fear of blood draw 
 Small risk of injury or infection at draw site 
 Difficulties in interpreting results 
 Stress or concern about the health effects of exposure 
 Decreased property values  resulting from identifying property contamination 
 Social isolation 
 Clinical consequences from medical follow-up as a result of exposure 
 
Potential Benefits 
 Increased awareness of exposure so it can be reduced 
 Empowerment of communities to respond to contamination 
 Relief from the stress of not knowing one’s exposure level 
 Identification of the potential risk for health co nditions associated with PFAS exposure, informing 
subsequent preventive care 
 Help in monitoring whether efforts to reduce exposure are working through the conduct of baseline and 
follow-up tests 
 
 
The German Human Biomonitoring Commission has risk-based guidance levels for two PFAS 
chemicals—PFOS and PFOA. The European Food Safety  Authority has one guidance level for the sum of 
PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA. No individual values are available for PFHxS and PFNA, and the committee could find no values for methylperfluor ooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid (MeFOSAA), PFDA, 
and perfluoroundecanoic acid (PFUnDA). Based on its review of the evidence for PFAS testing, the 
committee recommends: 
 
Recommendation 5-1: As communities with  PFAS exposure are identified, government 
entities (e.g., Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]/Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry [ATSDR], public health departments) should support 
clinicians with educational materials about PFA S testing so they can discuss testing with 
their patients. These educational materials sh ould include the following information: 
 
 How people can be exposed to PFAS: Exposure routes include occupational 
exposures and work with fluorochemicals or as a firefighter; consumption of 
contaminated drinking water in comm unities that obtain their water from 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary 11 
Prepublication Copy  sources near commercial airports, military  bases, fluorochemical manufacturing 
plants, wastewater treatment plants, landfills, or incinerators where PFAS-
containing waste may have been disposed of or farms where sewage sludge may 
have been used; and consumption of contaminated fish or game if fishing or hunting occurs in contaminated areas. I ndividuals living near fluorochemical 
plants may also be exposed via inhalation of air emissions. 
 Potential health effects of PFAS exposu re and strategies for reducing exposure. 
 Limitations of PFAS blood testing: PFAS blood testing does not identify the 
sources of exposure or predict future he alth outcomes; it only assesses body 
burden at the time of sample collection. For example, a person with low blood levels today may have had higher levels in the past.  
 The benefits and harms of PFAS testing. 
 
Recommendation 5-2: Clinicians should offer PFAS testing to patients likely to have a 
history of elevated exposure. In all discussions of PFAS testing, clinicians should describe 
the potential benefits and harms of the testin g and the potential clinical consequences (such 
as additional follow-up), related social implicat ions, and limitations of the testing so patient 
and clinician can make a shared, informed de cision. Patients who are likely to have a 
history of elevated exposure to PFAS include those who have 
 
 had occupational exposure to PFAS (such as those who have worked with 
fluorochemicals or served as a firefighter); 
 lived in communities where environmental and public health authorities 
(Centers for Disease Control and Prev ention [CDC], Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry [ATSDR], U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency [EPA], state and local environmenta l or health authorities), or academic 
researchers have documented PFAS contamination; or 
 lived in areas where PFAS contamination may have occurred, such as near 
facilities that use or have used fluorochemicals, commercial airports, military 
bases, wastewater treatment plants, farms where sewage sludge may have been 
used, or landfills or incinerators that have received PFAS-containing waste. 
 
Recommendation 5-3: Clinicians should use serum or plasma concentrations of the 
sum of PFAS* to inform clinical care of exposed patients, using the following 
guidelines for interpretation:  
 Adverse health effects related to PFAS ex posure are not expected at less than 2 
nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL).  
 There is a potential for adverse effects,  especially in sensitive populations, 
between 2 and 20 ng/mL.  
 There is an increased risk of adverse effects above 20 ng/mL.  
 * Simple additive sum of MeFOSAA, PFH xS, PFOA (linear and branched isomers), 
PFDA, PFUnDA, PFOS (linear and branched isomers), and PFNA in serum or plasma. Caution is warranted when using capillary blood measurements as levels 
may differ from serum or plasma levels.  
 
The cutoff levels should be updated as additional information becomes ava ilable. The committee 
also noted that children younger than 12 are not routinely included in the National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals , nor are pregnant people included in large numbers. More 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  reference- and risk-based values are needed, for other PFAS and other biological matrices, but given the 
expansiveness of the class, this gap can best be addr essed with relative potency factor approaches rather 
than the development of risk-based levels for each PFAS.  
 
Recommendation 5-4: The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
should begin collecting and sharing more data on children younger than 12 years of age and pregnant people to generate reference populations for those groups. 
 
Testing for PFAS, although expensive, offers an opportunity to identify people who may need to 
reduce their PFAS exposure and are at increased risk of certain health outcomes. It is important to 
recognize, however, that race, age, and other so cial and demographic characteristics already have 
disadvantaged many patients with respect to accessing clinical preventive services, such as PFAS testing. 
The disadvantage would be compounded as PFAS testing services should be linked to counseling on steps 
to mitigate exposure and its impacts. Therefore, encouraging testing primarily among people with 
relatively stable access to care could have the unintende d effect of aggravating disparities in exposure to 
PFAS absent a funded, national PFAS testing program with a counseling component.  
 
APPLICATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S PRINCIPLES TO PATIENT FOLLOW-UP  
FOR PFAS-ASSOCIATED HEALTH EFFECTS  
 
Many health outcomes or conditions that th e committee found to be associated with PFAS 
exposure are common in the general population. A ll have multiple known risk factors. The committee 
categorized the strength of the evidence for an asso ciation between PFAS and various health outcomes, 
and concluded that all conditions with an adequate ly supported association should be considered for 
patient follow-up. The committee then used its establi shed cutoff levels to determine appropriate follow-
up based on PFAS exposure level. Risks from PFAS likel y increase with exposure, and PFAS levels of 3 
ng/mL and 19 ng/mL do not represent the same risk even though they are listed in the same category. Clinical providers should use judgment and shar ed, informed decision making in making follow-up 
decisions based on PFAS exposure and other risk factor s. Figure S-6 suggests that clinicians engage in 
shared decision making with their patients rega rding follow-up care for PFAS-associated health 
endpoints.  
 
 
 
FIGURE S-6 Clinical guidance for follow-up with patients after PFAS testing.  PFAS Exposure:  Clinical Follow‐Up
•Clinicians  should offer PFAS testing to patients who are likely to have a history of elevated exposure.  In all 
discussions  of PFAS testing, clinicians should describe the potential benefits and harms of PFAS testing and the 
potential clinical consequences  (such as additional  follow‐up), related social implications,  and limitations  of the 
testing so patient and clinician can make a shared, informed decision. 
•If testing is done the clinician should compare its results with the chart below and discuss treatment  accordingly.
Encourage  PFAS exposure reduction  if a source has been 
identified,  especially  for pregnant persons. 
Within the usual standard of care clinicians should: 
•Prioritize screening  for dyslipidemia  with a lipid panel 
(once between 9 and 11 years of age, and once every 4 to 
6 years over age 20) as recommended  by the American  
Academy of Pediatrics  (AAP) and American  Heart 
Association  (AHA). 
•Screen for hypertensive  disorders  of pregnancy  at all 
prenatal visits per the American  College of Obstetricians  
and Gynecologists  (ACOG). 
•Screen for breast cancer based on clinical practice 
guidelines  based on age and other risk factors such as 
those recommended  by US Preventive  Services Task Force 
(USPSTF).  Encourage  PFAS exposure reduction  if a source of exposure is 
identified,  especially  for pregnant persons. 
In addition to the usual standard of care, clinicians should: 
•Prioritize screening  for dyslipidemia  with a lipid panel (for 
patients over age 2) following AAP recommendations  for high‐risk 
children and AHA guidance for high‐risk adults.  
•At all well visits:
•Conduct thyroid function testing (for patients over age 18) 
with serum thyroid stimulating  hormone (TSH),
•Assess for signs and symptoms  of kidney cancer (for 
patients over age 45), including with urinalysis,  and
•For patients over age 15, assess for signs and symptoms  of 
testicular  cancer and ulcerative  colitis.Provide usual 
standard of care.
* Simple additive sum of MeFOSAA,  PFHxS, PFOA (linear and branched  isomers), PFDA, PFUnDA, PFOS (linear and branched  isomers), and PFNA  in serum or plasma
2–<20 (ng/mL) PFAS* ≥20 (ng/mL) PFAS* <2 (ng/mL) PFAS*
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary 13 
Prepublication Copy  Recommendation 6-1: Clinicians should treat patients with serum PFAS 
concentration below 2 nanograms per millilit er (ng/mL) with the usual standard of 
care.  
 Recommendation 6-2: For patients with serum PFAS concentration of 2 nanograms per milliliter (2 ng/mL) or higher and less than 20 ng/mL, clinicians should encourage PFAS exposure reduction if a sou rce of exposure is identified, especially 
for pregnant persons. Within the usual standard of care clinicians should:  
 
 Prioritize screening for dyslipidemia with a lipid panel (once between 9 and 11 
years of age, and once every 4 to 6 years over age 20) as recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the American Heart Association (AHA).  
 Screen for hypertensive disorders of preg nancy at all prenatal visits per the 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).  
 Screen for breast cancer based on clinic al practice guidelines based on age and 
other risk factors such as those recomm ended by the U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force (USPSTF).  
 Recommendation 6-3: For patients with serum PFAS concentration of 20 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) or higher,  clinicians should encourage PFAS 
exposure reduction if a source of exposure is identified, especially for pregnant 
persons. In addition to the usual sta ndard of care, clinicians should:  
 
 Prioritize screening for dyslipidemia with  a lipid panel (for patients over age 2) 
following American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) guidelines for high-risk children and American Heart Association (AHA) guidance for high-risk adults.   
 At all well visits: 
o conduct thyroid function testing (for patients over age 18) with serum 
thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH),  
o assess for signs and symptoms of ki dney cancer (for patients over 45), 
including with urinalysis, and 
o for patients over 15, assess for signs a nd symptoms of testicular cancer and 
ulcerative colitis. 
 
APPLYING THE COMMITTEE’S EXPOSURE, TESTING, AND CLINICAL  
FOLLOW-UP RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The committee created a flow chart summari zing PFAS education, exposure assessment, and 
clinical follow-up (see Figure S-7). In communities where PFAS exposure has been identified, ATSDR 
and other government entities should support local c linicians with educati onal materials about PFAS 
exposure and testing. Clinicians s hould then determine whether a partic ular patient is likely to have a 
history of elevated exposure to PFAS. If so, the c linician should offer PFAS testing and make a shared, 
informed decision on that testing. If testing is chosen, the labs should be  ordered (Test Code 39307 
Current Procedural Terminology [C PT] code 82542). Test results should be interpreted by summing the 
concentrations of MeFOSAA, PFHxS, PFOA (linear and branched isomers), PFDA, PFUnDA, PFOS (linear and branched isomers), and PFNA. The laborat ory may not report results for all PFAS considered 
by the committee or may include different PFAS in their panel. In that case, the sum of PFAS should 
include only the PFAS in the analyte list that the committee considered. Fo r example, if the lab tests for 
PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, PFNA, and PFBS, the summation should include PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  PFNA. Differing analytes lists may cause some variation in response. Still, as long as PFOA, PFOS, 
PFHxS, and PFNA are included in the analyte list, th e results may not vary too greatly as these four 
analytes are most commonly detected in the United St ates. If any analyte is below the limit of detection, 
the clinician should calculate the analyte limit of detec tion divided by the square root of 2 and use this 
value in the summation. The sum thus derived should be compared against Figure S-6 to determine an 
appropriate clinical follow-up plan based on shar ed, informed decision making between patient and 
clinician. 
 
 
 
FIGURE S-7  Flow chart showing how the committee’s recommenda tions work together in a clinical setting. 
NOTE: ATSDR = Agency for Toxic Su bstances and Disease Registry. 
  In communities where PFAS exposure has been identified, ATSDR and other 
governmental entities should support local clin icians with educational materials about 
PFAS exposure and PFAS testing (Rec. 5-1). 
Clinical providers determine whet her the patient is likely to 
have a history of elevated exposure to PFAS (Rec. 4-1 
and 5-2)
If decision is to test patient, 
order PFAS serum or plasma 
test from a laboratory that 
meets standards that support 
quality and integrity of results
Sum concentrations of MeFOSAA, PFHxS, PFOA (linear and branched 
isomers), PFDA, PFUnDA, PFOS 
(linear and branched isomers), and PFNA (Rec. 5-3)
Provide appropriate clinical follow-
up based on test result (Rec. 6-1–3)
Counsel patient on PFAS exposure 
reduction (rec 4-1–6)If decision is not to test 
patient, engage in shared 
informed decision making on 
PFAS exposure reduction and 
clinical follow-up If patient is unlikely to have a history of 
elevated exposure, 
discuss usual standard of care with patient
Consider 
retesting if: 
•I n i t i a l  r e s u l t  
seems too low or too 
high based 
on potential 
exposure 
history
• Exposure 
changes
If serum or 
plasma 
exposure is low 
and exposure 
should not 
have changed, 
retesting is of 
no or limited 
valueIf elevated exposure to PFAS: 
• Determine how patient is exposed and 
what exposures the patient is interested 
in reducing (Rec. 4-1). 
• Engage in shared informed decision 
making about PFAS testing (Rec. 5-2)
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary 15 
Prepublication Copy  REVISING ATSDR’S PFAS CLINICAL GUIDANCE 
 
The committee recommends several changes to ATSDR’s guidance to ensure consistency with 
the findings, conclusions, and recommendations pres ented in this report and improve the guidance’s 
writing, design, dissemination, and implementation:  
 
Recommendation 7-1: The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) should update its PFAS clinical guidance to make it more succinct and 
accord with the review of PFAS-associat ed health effects, exposure reduction 
considerations, PFAS testing recommendations and interpretation, and recommendations for clinical follow-up presen ted in this report. When describing 
the health effects of PFAS, ATSDR should avoid using terms typically used to categorize toxicants, such as “endocrine disrupter” or “neurotoxin,” because they 
are vague and not necessarily clinically mean ingful. When discussing the strength of 
the association between PFAS and a health  outcome, ATSDR should use standard 
categories of association (such as sufficien t evidence of an association, limited 
suggestive evidence of an association, in adequate or insufficient evidence of an 
association, and limited suggestiv e evidence of no association).  
 
Recommendation 7-2: The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 
(ATSDR) should incorporate a reader-centered approach when developing its guidance, with the knowledge that many di fferent audiences will turn to its clinical 
guidance document to prepare for discussi ons with their clinicians. ATSDR should 
also solicit feedback on the guidance from a variety of stakeholders, such as 
community groups, practicing clinicians, and medical associations. In addition, 
ATSDR should encourage clinicians to use evidence-based organizational health literacy strategies to support shared, info rmed decision making; patient-centered 
care; cultural humility; and accessible langua ge when communicating with patients 
about potential health risks. 
 Evidence on the health effects of PFAS should be updated every 2 years, and the clinical 
guidance should be updated at least every 5 years. In that process, ATSDR should strive to ensure that its 
clinical guidance follows criteria for making guidelines trustworthy when possible. Figure S-8 provides an overview of how the process used by this comm ittee could be applied by ATSDR to improve its 
clinical guidance.  
 
Recommendation 7-3: The Agency for T oxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) 
should develop a process for updating its PFAS guidance that adheres to criteria for making guidelines trustworthy, such as being based on a thorough, transparent, unbiased review of the evidence and being developed by a knowledgeable panel of experts free from 
strong biases and conflicts of interest. A review of  the evidence on the health effects of PFAS 
should be completed by an authoritative ne utral party every 2 years, and the clinical 
guidance should be updated every 5 years or sooner if warranted by the evidence on the 
health effects of PFAS. Clinicians and members of communities with elevated PFAS exposure should be engaged to inform the problem and review updated guidance. 
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE S-8  Suggested framework for updating the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry’s 
(ATSDR’s) clinical guidance based on new evidence. 
 
 
IMPLEMENTING THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS TO  
IMPROVE PUBLIC HEALTH 
 
Public health requires the use of multifaceted  approaches to emerging health issues. In 
environmental health—the subset of public health  focused on environmental factors—mitigation of 
potential harms associated with chemical exposures is often complicated because there is no exposure 
surveillance system for most chemicals. The comm ittee’s recommendations will best protect the public 
health if they are part of a national effort focused  on increased biomonitoring, exposure surveillance, and 
education of clinicians and public health professionals on e nvironmental health issues: 
 
Recommendation 8-1: Laboratories conducting  PFAS testing of serum or plasma should 
report the results to state public health author ities, following the respective states’ statutes 
and reporting regulations. This reporting wo uld improve PFAS exposure surveillance; it 
could be linked with the Centers for Di sease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) 
environmental public health tracking network and help build capacity for improvements in 
the state-based national biomonitoring network. 
 
The people and communities with high exposures to PFAS need to be identified. As the 
committee looks forward, it sees a pressing need for a robust environmental health infrastructure to 
continue to respond to PFAS and address other complex emerging and persistent environmental 
challenges. 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Prepublication Copy 17 1 
 
Introduction 
 
More than a decade ago, the United Nations General Assembly passed Resolution 64/292, 
recognizing that safe and clean drinking water is a human right and is essential to realizing all human 
rights. Yet today, drinking water in thousands of  communities across the United States is contaminated 
with chemicals known as perfluoroalkyl and polyfluor oalkyl substances (PFAS) (Hu et al., 2016) (see 
Box 1-1). PFAS do not occur in nature and are manuf actured for a wide range of purposes, from nonstick 
cookware, to stain-resistant fabrics and carpets, to firefighting foams and protective gear. PFAS constitute 
a large class of up to 12,000 different chemicals ( EPA, 2020). They are commonly used in thousands of 
products because they have desirable chemical proper ties that impart oil and water repellency, friction 
reduction, and temperature resistance (ITRC, 2017). PFAS as a class have a wide variety of distinct 
chemical properties and toxicities; for example, some PFAS can accumulate and persist in the human body and the environment, while others transfor m relatively quickly. The PFAS that do transform, 
however, will become one or more other PFAS, b ecause the carbon–fluorine bond they contain does not 
break naturally. It is for this reason that  PFAS are termed “forever chemicals.”  
In the most rudimentary sense, PFAS can be thought of as either polymer or nonpolymer. 
Nonpolymer PFAS, such as polyfluroalkyl acids (PFAAs), are more commonly detected in the environment, and are often considered highly persis tent and mobile (Blum et al., 2015; ITRC, 2021). By 
contrast, many polymer PFAS, such as polytetrafluor oethylene (PTFE), are insoluble, less bioavailable 
and are often considered less direct concern, with r espect to human or ecological health (Lohmann et al., 
2020; ITRC, 2021). Nonetheless, the production of fluor opolymers requires other PFAS chemicals, such 
as perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs). For example, the nonpolymer PFAS perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) was used as a surfactant in the emulsi on polymerization of fluoropolymers.
1  
 
 
BOX 1-1  
What Are PFAS? 
 
What are PFAS? A consensus definition does not exist. Buck and colleagues (2011) define PFAS as fluorinated 
substances that “contain 1 or more C atoms on which all the H substituents (present in the nonfluorinated 
analogues from which they are notionally derived) have been replaced by F atoms, in such a manner that they 
contain the perfluoroalkyl moiety CnF2n+1 −” (p. 513). 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines PFAS as “fluorinated 
substances that contain at least one fully fluorinated methyl or methylen e carbon atom (without any H/Cl/Br/I 
atom attached to it), that is, with a few noted exceptions , any chemical with at leas t a perfluorinated methyl 
group (–CF3) or a perfluorinated methylene group (–CF2–) is a PFAS” (OECD, 2021, p. 7).  
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) (2020) CompTox Chemicals Dashboard includes all 
substances that contain a specific set of substructural elements. The Dashboar d says that “there is no precisely 
clear definition of what constitutes a PFAS substance” and PFAS lists include  “partially fluorinated substances, 
polymers, and ill-defined reaction products” (EPA, 2020, para. 1).  
continued 
                                                           
1 See https://www.acs.o rg/content/acs/en/mol ecule-of-the-week/archive/p/perfl uorooctanoic-acid. html (accessed 
June 22, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
BOX 1-1 continued  
 
What are PFAS used for?  PFAS have desirable chemical properties such as oil and water repellency, 
temperature resistance, and friction reduction. Since th e late 1940s, PFAS have been used in numerous 
applications, such as firefighting, chrome-plating, lubricants, and insecticides, as well as coating and treating of 
such surfaces as carpeting, packagin g, and cookware (A TSDR, 2021).  
How long do PFAS stay in the human body following exposure?  PFAS levels in people’s bodies will persist 
unless exposure ceases, and will continue to persist even  after exposure ends. Half-life estimates based on 
repeated serum measurements range from days (e.g., PFBA)  to years (e.g., PFOA, PFOS). It is generally assumed 
that it takes five half-lives to eliminate PF AS after exposure has ceased (ATSDR, 2021).  
What are the potent ial hazards of PFAS?  Health effects associated with  PFAS include altered immune 
function, elevated cholesterol, thyroid disease, hypertension during pregnancy, testicular cancer, and kidney 
cancer (ATSDR, 2021; Fenton et al.,  2021; Steenland et al., 2020).  
 
 
SOCIOHISTORICAL TIMELINE OF PFAS 
 
Public concern about the impact of PFAS cont amination on human health and the environment 
began in the late 1990s when PFOA water contaminati on was identified in Parkersburg, West Virginia.2 
In response, 3M, a primary PFAS manufacturer, in itiated a voluntary phase-out of some PFAS (PFOA, 
perfluorooctanesulfonic acid [PFOS], and perfluorohexanesulfonic acid [PFHxS)]) (ITRC, 2017). The contamination in Parkersburg also led to a class action lawsuit that identified several health effects related 
to PFAS exposure and led to the establishment of a medical monitoring program (see Box 1-2). Shortly 
thereafter, the U.S. Environmental Protection Ag ency (EPA) began requiring all community water 
systems serving more than 10,000 people to test for certain PFAS, which led to more communities 
learning that their water was contaminated.
3 In 2016, researchers found that the drinking water supply for 
Wilmington, North Carolina, was contaminated w ith a chemical called “GenX,” a PFOA replacement.4 
This finding led to public concern about  the potential health effects of re placement PFAS (see Figure 1-1).  
An estimated 2,854 U.S. locations (in all 50 stat es and two territories) have some level of PFAS 
contamination (see Figure 1-2). Although not all of the contamination represents exceedances of health 
advisories, the pervasiveness of the contamination is  alarming. Furthermore, almost 100 percent of the 
U.S. population is exposed to at least one PFAS. Although exposures to the phased-out PFAS have been 
decreasing (see Figure 1-3), people are still exposed to  those PFAS from site contamination, occupational 
uses of stored products, and breakdown of PFAS polymer  products that are found in homes. Carpeting, 
for example, is often treated with fluorotelomer-bas ed polymers that can biodegrade to form phased-out 
PFAS, such as PFOA (Washington and Jenkins, 2015). Exposures also occur to the PFAS chemicals used 
to replace those that have been phased out. Althou gh the harms of the replacement PFAS are less well 
understood, they may have comparable or more se rious toxicity than the PFAS they have replaced 
(Kwiatkowski et al., 2020). The state of New Jersey, fo r example, recently set a groundwater standard for 
a replacement PFAS (chloroperfluoropolyether carboxylat es) that is an order of magnitude lower than 
drinking water standards for other PFAS. Th e New Jersey maximum contaminant levels of 
perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA), PFOA, and PFOS in drinking water are 13, 14, and 13 nanograms per 
liter (ng/L), respectively,5 while the groundwater standard for the replacement PFAS, 
chloroperfluoropolyether carboxylates, is 2 ng/L.6  
                                                           
2 See https://pfasproject.com/parkersburg-w est-virginia (accessed June 16, 2022). 
3 See https://www.epa.gov/sites/defa ult/files/2016-05/documents /ucmr3-factsheet-list1.p df (accessed June 16, 
2022). 
4 See https://news.ncsu.edu/2018/04/fi nding-genx (accessed June 16, 2022). 
5 See https://www.nj.gov/health/ce ohs/documents/pfas_drinking%20wat er.pdf (accessed June 8, 2022). 
6 See https://www.nj.gov/dep/st andards/ClPFPECA_Standard.pd f (accessed June 8, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 19 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 1-1 Brief history of PFAS manufacturing regulation and community exposure. 
NOTE: ATSDR = Agency for Toxic Su bstances and Disease Registry; EP A = U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency; ng/L = nanograms per liter; NHANES = National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. SOURCE: Committee generated based on slides included by  Patrick N. Breysse in a presentation to the committee 
on February 4, 2021. 
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  A reason PFAS contamination became well known only recently, after decades of their use, is 
that they can be difficult to detect. The physical a nd chemical properties that make PFAS persistent and 
mobile in the environment also make them partic ularly challenging to analyze (Guelfo et al., 2021). 
Analytical methods sensitive enough to detect envir onmentally relevant concentrations became widely 
available in the early 2010s. Although analyte lists continue to expand, currently available methods still 
allow identification of only a small fraction of the th ousands of PFAS that have reportedly been created 
and used since the 1950s. As existing analytical me thods improve, additional PFA S and new release sites 
will likely be identified (De Silva et al., 2021; Guelfo et al., 2021). 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1-2 PFAS contamination across the United States. 
NOTES: According to the Environmental Working Grou p (EWG), “locations represented on the map are 
approximate and intended to portray the general area of a contamination site or a community water system. 
Locations were mapped using the best data available from official records, including data provided by tests of public drinking water systems, the Safe Drinking Water Information System and the Department of Defense report 
Addressing Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) and Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) , and Department of Defense 
public records, among others. Data on contaminated industrial and military sites was current as of October 2021.” Furthermore, “EWG has worked to ensure the accuracy of  the information provided in this map. The map is 
dynamic. This contaminant site, results, suspected sources and other information in the database may change based 
on evolving science, new information or other factors. Please be advised that this information frequently relies on data obtained from many sources, and accordingly, EWG cannot guarantee the accuracy of the information provided 
or any analysis based thereon.” 
SOURCE: See https://www.ewg.org/inter active-maps/pfas_contamination/map (accessed May 11, 2022). Copyright 
© Environmental Working Group, www.ewg.org. Reproduced with permission. 
 
The people who live, work, and play in e nvironments where PFAS contamination exceeds 
standards often do not know how to protect themselv es from the health risks of exposure. Many have 
been exposed to PFAS for decades and may continue to  be exposed in their homes or workplaces. Some 
members of communities with documented exposure re port feeling violated and concerned about the 
health and well-being of their families, friends, a nd loved ones (Raponi et al., 2021; Rizzuto, 2021). Many 
in these exposed communities who have discovered that their exposure exceeds health advisory levels are 
calling for a medical program to prevent, lead to early  detection of, or treat any diseases related to the  
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 21 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 1-3 Blood (serum) levels of PFAS, United States, 2000–2016. 
NOTE: Average = geometric mean. 
SOURCE: Patrick N. Breysse’s presentation to the committee on February 4, 2021. DATA SOURCE:  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2019, January). Fourth Report on Human Ex posure to Environmental 
Chemicals , updated tables. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 
 
 health risks they may face (Raponi et al., 2021;  Rizzuto, 2021). Developing such a program is 
challenging, however, because of the uncertainties about  the health effects of PFAS and potential harms 
from additional medical treatments; moreover, man y of these diseases are not preventable or even 
treatable once exposures have occurred (Wones et al ., 2009). Accordingly, clinicians generally do not 
know how to respond to patient s’ concerns about PFAS.  
 
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE 
 
Compounding the challenge of responding clini cally to PFAS contamination are issues of 
environmental justice and systemic racism in medical care. It is well established that environmental risks 
are not distributed uniformly across populations. Race, ethnicity, poverty, age, life stage, and other social factors can place people at disproportionately high ri sk for diseases with environmental causes as a result 
of hazardous exposures at increased levels compared  to the general population (Gochfeld and Burger, 
2011). While environmental justice research specific to PFAS contaminants has been limited, place-based 
factors that may put individuals at greater risk of e xposure (siting of chemical companies, refineries, and 
industrial sites), coupled with insufficient access to e nvironmental screening, in formation, and adequate 
health care, have disproportionate impacts on Black , Hispanic, and Indigenous communities, as well as 
low-income populations. A special report from Scientific American  called this a “triple whammy of race, 
poverty, and environment converging nationwide to  create communities near pollution sources where 
nobody else wants to live” (Kay and Katz, 2012, para. 12). 
According to a 2014 paper by the Environmenta l Justice Health Allia nce for Chemical Policy 
Reform, more than 134 million Americans live within th e “vulnerability zones” of industrial facilities that 
store or use highly hazardous chemicals (Orum et  al., 2014). The companies themselves define these 
vulnerability zones, determined by guidance from the EPA,
7 as areas that could be affected by the release 
                                                           
7 See https://www.epa.gov/rmp/for ms/vulnerable-zone-i ndicator-system (acce ssed June 16, 2022). 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  of toxic chemicals. The scope of the research on wh ich this paper was based was broad, but included 
industries with known PFAS contamination, such as waste management and chemical manufacturing. The 
authors found that, relative to the U.S. averag e, communities within the vulnerability zones are 
disproportionately African American or Latinx; are more  likely to live in poverty; and have lower housing 
values, incomes, and education levels. As the exte nt of contamination becomes known, housing values 
have been shown to decrease, and those with the mean s to move are more likely to do so, leaving behind 
those with the fewest resources and options (Harclerode et al., 2021).  
When considering environmental justice, it is  important to think beyond exposure disparities 
(Mohai et al., 2009); core environmental justice i ssues relevant to PFAS also include rural health, 
industrial siting, and access to environmental exposur e reduction (Bullard, 1996) and clinical care. A 
framework is needed that allows consideration of structural factors beyond race, ethnicity, and 
socioeconomic status and accounts for how individua ls and communities are impacted by decisions made 
at the local, state, and policy levels by governmen t, industry, and health care professionals. Pellow’s 
Environmental Justice Framework accounts for the comple xity of relationships and decisions that impact 
PFAS exposure and associated health outcomes (Pello w, 2004) (see Figure 1-4). Sze and London (2008) 
advance this argument by incorporating negotiati on at the stakeholder level, as well as problem 
identification at the level of sociohistorical and stru ctural factors, and then solution-oriented approaches 
reflecting considerations of sustainability and safety. 
A first consideration in addressing environmental justice with respect to PFAS is understanding 
the sociohistorical context rather than a particular discrete event that has cont ributed to the presence of 
PFAS in certain communities. For example, PFAS cont amination did not just randomly occur in rural 
communities serviced by well water that happened to be  near industrial sites. Rather, the locating of 
certain industrial sites and decisions to dispose of PFAS with limited regard for the surrounding 
community’s access to safe water ar e rooted in the relationship and history of these industries and 
communities. The disposal of these chemicals did not o ccur as single events lacking context, but reflected 
a pattern of decisions made over time. Understanding the historical and social context influencing how 
and where PFAS are distributed is an essential part of identifying effective mitigation strategies.  
 
 
 
FIGURE 1-4 Pellow’s Environmental Justice Framework. 
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 23 
Prepublication Copy  Second, Pellow’s Environmental Justice Fram ework emphasizes the complex roles of the 
stakeholders involved. In the case of PFAS, envi ronmental inequality can affect many different 
stakeholders, ranging from industry, to workers,  to community members and organizations, to 
government entities such as local departments of public health. The complexity of  these roles means there 
can exist synergistic and contradictory allegiances that  impact what is valued, how resources are accessed 
and distributed, who has power, and what is consid ered profitable. With PFAS, industry’s power and 
profit motive may trump a community’s access to inform ation and ability to test for and reduce exposure. 
Likewise, key health information for clinicians is gov erned by boards that decide about the content of 
medical education and training. Clinicians’ lack of knowledge about environmental exposures such as 
PFAS, particularly in highly contaminated communiti es, can be particularly deleterious for the least-
advantaged stakeholder groups. 
A third consideration is the effects of social inequalities on exposure to PFAS, as relevant social 
stratification that affects exposure is not always clear  or easy to study. Rural and urban disparities, for 
example, can be analyzed using National Health and Nutrition Examination Study (NHANES) data (with 
appropriate clearance), and living in a rural versus an urban area can definitely affect PFAS exposure, 
often through exposure to well water that is common  in rural areas. Other, less obviously measurable 
influences can also drive exposures, however. Food insecurity, for example, even if only temporary, 
increases subsistence fishing (Quimby et al., 2020) , which may cause people to fish for food in 
contaminated lakes or rivers. These structural and so cial factors put people at risk of exposure and can 
contribute to inequality. In short, even though relatively affluent areas can be heavily contaminated with 
PFAS, and non-Hispanic Whites are exposed to some of the highest PFAS concentrations (see below), 
solving the larger problem of PFAS contamination will still require attention to persistent social 
inequities. Otherwise, action to mitigate PFAS e xposure could aggravate existing (or create new) 
environmental health disparities. 
Fourth is the need to consider the role of agency—specifically, the power a community has to 
advocate for itself in conflicts. PFAS provide a uniqu e example. PFAS contamination rose to national 
prominence partly because of exposures among well- educated, high-income, and mainly White 
communities. With PFAS, as with many social problems, power matters. At the same time, PFAS exposure varies regionally. In some parts of the country, the highest exposures are borne by less 
advantaged communities, making their relative ability to advocate for testing and responsive health care 
or to demand effective mitigation fro m their government somewhat tenuous.  
While research on disparities in PFAS exposure is  limited, several studies suggest that no 
differences exist by race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status (Buekers et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2020; 
Sagiv et al., 2015). If one looks at time-aggregated estimates of PFAS exposure for the U.S. population, 
non-Hispanic Whites, older adults, and people of higher  socioeconomic status have higher concentrations 
of these chemicals (see Figure 1-5). However, time-aggr egated exposures present an incomplete picture. 
Looking at PFAS exposure by year stratified by race orethnicity suggests that in 2000, before the voluntary phase-out of PFOS andrelated chemicals, t hose in the racial group other non-Hispanic had the 
highest exposure to PFOS and PFHxS (see Figure 1-6). The implication of this finding is that widespread 
policy changes—such as the phase out of certain types of PFAS—greatly reduced exposure disparities. 
Because there are no national estimates of biomonitoring data for replacement PFAS, however, it is 
unknown whether the disparities observed with PFOS,  PFHxS, and PFNA exist today for other PFAS. 
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1-5 Serum PFAS concentrations (unadjusted geometric means) from the National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey, 1999– 2016, by race/ethnicity (panel a), age (panel b), and income-t o-poverty ratio (panel c).  
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 25 
Prepublication Copy   
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 1-6 Serum PFAS concentrations (unadjusted geometric means) from the National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey (NHANES) , 1999–2016, by race/ethnicity, for PFOA (panel a), PFOS (panel b), PFHxS (panel 
c), and PFNA (panel d).  
 
 
PFAS CONTAMINATION AND ROUTES OF EXPOSURE 
 
PFAS contamination is global. PFAS have been detected in regions with little human activity, 
including the atmosphere of remote locations (S hoeib et al., 2010), the Arctic and Antarctic seas 
(Armitage et al., 2006), and remote soils of every continent (Rankin et al., 2015). Environmental 
contamination with PFAS occurs in countless ways . Fluorochemical manufacturing sites release PFAS 
into water as well as into the air, fro m which they can settle into both soil and water. At military sites and 
commercial airports PFAS-containing foams are used in training exercises for firefighting. PFAS also can leak from landfills where PFAS-containing wastes are dis posed, and can be released into the environment 
by PFAS-containing wastewater from wastewater treatme nt plants (Evich et al., 2022; Gomez et al., 2021; 
Sunderland et al., 2019) (see Figure 1-7). PFAS-treat ed consumer products have been implicated as 
sources of exposure in indoor settings (Harrad et al ., 2010), and fluorotelomer products used to treat a 
wide range of consumer household and occupational products have been  shown to degrade to form PFAS 
(Washington and Jenkins, 2015).  
PFAS in the environment can contaminate dri nking water when the chemicals reach public 
drinking water systems and private wells (Hu et al ., 2016). PFAS can bioaccumulate in fish, shellfish, 
livestock, dairy, and game animals that contact them through contaminated food or water (De Silva et al., 
2021; Death et al., 2021; Domingo and Nadal, 2017). Produ ce also can be contaminated if it is grown 
with contaminated drinking water or PFAS-contaminat ed compost or biosolids (Blaine et al., 2013; Scher 
et al., 2018).  
Certain occupations may lead to increased PFAS e xposures. They include, for example, jobs in 
facilities used to manufacture fluorochemicals or to  produce PFAS-containing products, such as textiles 
or food contact materials. Other jobs with a known increased risk of exposure to PFAS include 
electroplating, painting, carpet installation and treatme nt, and jobs that require prolonged work with ski 
wax; increased exposures also occur among military and civilian firefighters who use PFAS-containing 
foams in training exercises and wear PFAS-impregna ted gear (ATSDR, 2021). In addition, food workers 
and others in the hospitality industry may have el evated exposure if they handle PFAS-containing food 
packaging as part of their job (Carnero et al., 2021; Curtzwiler et al., 2021; Schaider et al., 2017). 
  
(d) 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 27 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 1-7  Examples of how PFAS enter the environment.  
SOURCE:  Evich et al., 2022.  
 
 
Ingestion is the most well-studied route of e xposure to PFAS in nonoccupational settings (Trudel 
et al., 2008). PFAS can be ingested by drinking cont aminated water or by eating contaminated seafood or 
other contaminated foods, such as vegetables, game, or dairy products (Bao et al., 2019, 2020; Death et 
al., 2021; Domingo and Nadal, 2017; Herzke et al., 2013; Li et al., 2019). PFAS are often used in 
cookware and food contact materials, such as microwav e popcorn bags and packaging of fast foods and 
processed foods (Carnero et al., 2021; Curtzwiler et al ., 2021; Schaider et al., 2017). Exposure can also 
occur through accidental ingestion of PFAS-contai ning dusts (Fraser et al., 2013). PFAS cross the 
placenta, and PFAS from the mother’s body burden can be  passed on to her developing fetus (Gao et al., 
2019; Manzano-Salgado et al., 2015); PFAS can also  pass from mother to child through breast milk 
(Serrano et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2021). 
Inhalation and transdermal absorption are less well studied. Inhalation is well documented in 
occupational settings that use aerosolized PFAS (G illiland, 1992). Volatile PFAS have been detected 
indoors (Fromme et al., 2015; Morales-McDevitt et al ., 2021), while inhalation near factory emissions 
and incinerators contributes to exposures in near by communities (Fenton et al., 2021). Inhalation from 
showering in contaminated water is an active area of research, but there are as yet no data formally evaluating this route.  
PFAS are used in thousands of products (e.g., water- and stain-resistant clothing) and personal 
care products (e.g., sunscreen, makeup, dental floss). They also are used in such products as paint, 
textiles, firefighting foam, electroplating materials, a mmunition, climbing ropes, guitar strings, artificial 
turf, and soil remediation substances (Glüge et al., 20 20). The extent to which the use of such products 
contributes to human exposures remains unclear, how ever, because the relative contribution of PFAS 
exposures from sources other than food or water is  not well characterized (DeLuca et al., 2021).  
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  POLICIES THAT COULD REDUCE EXPOSURE TO PFAS 
 
The EPA’s major policy levers for reducing harm ful exposures to PFAS are the Toxic Substances 
Control Act (TSCA), which limits chemicals in commerce; the Safe Drinking Water Act; and the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensati on, and Liability Act (CERCLA, commonly known 
as the “Superfund”), which designates hazardous sites for cleanup.  
In 2000, the 3M Company (Maplewood, Minnesota), the primary U.S. manufacturer of PFOS, 
began a voluntary phase-out of perfluorooctanyl ch emicals and related precursors, including PFOS, 
PFHxS, and PFOA8 (ITRC, 2017). Between 2002 and 2013, the EPA issued four Significant New Use 
Rules under the TSCA that prevented others from manufacturing the chemicals 3M had voluntarily phased out (Richter et al., 2021) and required notifyi ng the agency prior to any manufacture, use, or 
import of 271 other PFAS.
9 In 2006, the EPA encouraged eight leading PFAS manufacturers to join a 
global stewardship program focused on phasing out and ending the production of PFOA. At the same 
time, the TSCA allows some industries (including p hotographic imaging, semiconductors, etching, metal 
plating, and aviation) to conti nue using banned PFAS at low levels, and these industries are exempted 
from the provision requiring that the EPA be notified of any new use of banned PFAS (ITRC, 2017). Furthermore, these bans apply only to a handful of chemicals, most of which could easily be substituted 
for by other PFAS. And other PFAS not yet banned re main in use by industry while undergoing further 
biologic profiling and toxicity evaluation (Houck et al., 2021).  
If PFAS were designated as hazardous substances,  CERCLA could be used to lower exposures 
from contaminated sites, giving the EPA more authority  to investigate and remediate those waste sites. 
The agency has not yet designated PFOS or PFAS as hazardous, however. And the Safe Drinking Water 
Act would be more protective if the standards were enforceable. 
10  
Policy changes that could reduce PFAS exposur es may be forthcoming. Recently, the EPA 
established an EPA Council on PFAS charged with build ing on the agency’s ongoing work to understand 
better and ultimately reduce the potential risks posed by these chemicals. A PFAS Strategic Roadmap also 
was released, committing the agency to action. In ad dition, the EPA released for review by a science 
advisory board draft documents that will inform an enforceable National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulation for PFOA and PFOS.11 
The EPA is not alone in its lack of action. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has 
delayed limiting PFAS in bottled water,12 but has revoked regulations that allowed for long-chain PFAS 
(such as PFOA and PFOS) in food packaging in 2016,13 and reached an agreement to phase out PFAS 
substances containing 6:2 fluorotelomer alcohol (H ahn, 2020). The Occupati onal Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) has set no occupational exposure limits.  
The lack of federal standards has left states a nd communities responsible for creating policies to 
reduce exposures to these chemicals in the interest of protecting public health (Brennan et al., 2021). 
There is no consistency in these po licies and not all states have the authority to set standards more 
protective than those of the federal government (E COS, 2020). Furthermore, leaving policy making to 
                                                           
8 See https://archive.epa.gov/epapages/newsroom_a rchive/newsreleases/33aa946e6cb11f35852568e10052 
46b4.html (accessed June 16, 2022). 
9 See https://www.epa.gov/assessing-and-managing-chem icals-under-tsca/risk-management-and-polyfluoroalkyl-
substances-pfas (accessed June 16, 2022). 
10 See https://www.epa.gov/pfas/epa-actions -address-pfas (accessed June 16, 2022). 
11 See https://www.epa.gov/pfas/pfas-s trategic-roadmap-epas-commitments- action-2021-2024 ( accessed June 16, 
2022). 
12 See https://www.consumerreports.org/bottled-water/ fda-delays-setting-limits-on-pfas-in-bottled-water-
a8292013869 (accessed June 30, 2022). 
13 See https://www.fda.gov/food/chemical-contaminants -food/authorized-uses-pfas -food-contact-applications 
(accessed June 16, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 29 
Prepublication Copy  state governments encourages a confusing patchwork of ru les and advice. Health inequities thrive in such 
chaotic circumstances. 
 
PROVIDING CLINICAL ADVICE IN COMMUNITIES EXPOSED TO PFAS 
 
To help clinicians14 respond to patient concerns about PFAS exposure, the Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) published PFAS: An Overview of the Science and Guidance 
for Clinicians on Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances.15 This guidance summarizes general information 
about PFAS and PFAS health studies and suggests answ ers to example patient questions. However, the 
ATSDR guidance does not provide specific recommendations  on when to test for PFAS, how to order the 
tests, how to interpret the results, or what clin ical follow-up based on PFAS exposure might look like. 
Interpretation of PFAS blood or urine results is ch allenging because the specific level of exposure at 
which harms may occur is unknown, and the science on the potential health effects of exposure to PFAS 
is advancing quickly, making it difficult to advise clinic ians about what follow-up tests might be helpful.  
ATSDR has the legal authority to issue guidance to clinicians in its “Criteria for Determining the 
Appropriateness of a Medical Monitoring Program  under Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA),”16 promulgated in 1995 (42 USC 9604[i][9]). Under the 
criteria, the purpose of medical monitoring is to detect individuals with exposures to hazardous 
substances and refer them to medical care for further evaluation and treatment. The criteria recommends 
actions that clinicians can take, such as early detec tion, treatment, or other interventions that interrupts 
“the progress to symptomatic disease, improve the prognosis of disease, improve the quality of life of the affected individual, or address diseases that are amen able to primary prevention” (42 USC 9604[i][14], p. 
38842). Medical monitoring under the criteria is not  a research mechanism, and suggests that other 
epidemiologic studies be carried out to further investigate the cause–effect relationship between 
exposures and health outcomes. ATSDR’s authority to issue guidance to clinicians comes from a different 
section in the same law (42 USC 9604[i][14]), which gran ts the agency the authority to develop education 
materials on medical surveillance, screening, and me thods of diagnosing and treating injury or disease 
related to exposure to hazardous substances.  
The first well-documented case of community water contamination with PFAS resulted in 
recommendations for medical monitoring (see Box 1-2). Releases of PFOA-contaminated drinking water 
from the DuPont Washington Works facility near Parkers burg, West Virginia, were detected in the local 
area and a few nearby communities across the Oh io River. A class action lawsuit was filed— Jack W. 
Leach et al. v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company  (no. 01-C-608 W.Va., Wood County Circuit Court, 
filed April 10, 2002). The lawsuit resulted in a me dical monitoring program that included suggested 
screenings for high cholesterol, thyroid disease, ul cerative colitis, testicular cancer, kidney cancer, 
pregnancy-induced hypertension, and blood testing for PFOA (Frisbee et al., 2009). The medical 
monitoring guidance generated by this high-profile case has led some community members to believe that 
the ATSDR guidance should provide recommendations for clinical follow-up, and advocates in many 
PFAS-exposed communities are working to establis h medical monitoring programs (Rizzuto, 2021).  
The absence of recommendations on testing and follow-up in ATSDR’s PFAS clinical guidance 
is aligned with standard medical practice, as clinic ians are expected to order tests only when how to 
interpret and act on the results is known. In addition,  reporting of levels of PFAS in blood and urine to 
patients raises ethical questions, such as whether to  report results in the absence of established health 
guidelines.  
                                                           
14 The committee uses “clinician” throughout this report  to refer to “a healthcare professional qualified in the 
clinical practice of medicine. Clinicians may be physicians, nurses, pharmacists, or other allied health professionals” 
as defined by the Centers for Me dicare & Medicaid Services (https://w ww.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-
Patient-Assessment-Instruments/MMS/QMY-Clinicians [accessed June 16, 2022], para 2). 
15 See https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/pfas/docs/clinical-g uidance-12-20-2019.pdf (accessed June 16, 2022). 
16 See https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1995-07-2 8/pdf/FR-1995-07-28.pdf (accessed June 16, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  BOX 1-2  
The C-8 Science Panel and the C-8 Medical Panel 
 
Background:  In the early 2000s, contamination of drinking wa ter with PFOA (also known as C-8 for the eight 
carbons in its chemical structure) was di scovered in six water districts in tw o states near the DuPont Washington 
Works facility near Parkersburg, West Virg inia. As a result, a class action lawsuit, Jack W. Leach, et al. v. E.I. du 
Pont de Nemours & Company  (no. 01-C-608 W.Va., Wood County Circuit Court, filed April 10, 2002), was 
filed. The lawsuit resulted in the formation of the C- 8 Science Panel to determine “probable link conditions” 
associated with PFOA-contaminated drinking water. The settlement agreement defined “probable link” to mean 
that, based on the weight of the availa ble scientific evidence, it is more likely than not that there is a link between 
exposure to PFOA and a particular human disease (F risbee et al., 2009). The settlement also called for the 
formation of a separate medical panel “to develop genera l guidelines for medical monitoring related to the human 
diseases for which the science panel delivered a probable link finding and is different from what would otherwise 
be prescribed” if exposure to PFOA were absent. 
 
Science Panel Findings:  The science panel identified pregnancy-indu ced hypertension (including preeclampsia), 
kidney cancer, testicular cancer, thyroid disease, ulcera tive colitis, and high cholesterol (hypercholesterolemia) as 
probable linked conditions (C-8 Medical Panel, 2013).  
 
Medical Panel Findings:  The medical panel recommended screenings for high cholesterol, thyroid disease, 
ulcerative colitis, testicular cancer, kidney cancer, pre gnancy-induced hypertension, and blood testing for PFOA 
(C-8 Medical Panel, 2013).  
 
 
At a workshop on PFAS exposure that occurred more than 1 year before the present study began, 
however, Andrea Amico, a member of a PFAS-impacted community in Pease, New Hampshire, traveled 
to Washington, DC, to represent her community’s vi ews on PFAS testing. She said that people in her 
community  
 
were exposed … without their consent, and now  they have to fight tooth and nail to get 
a blood test result to know how much exposur e they had? It just seems incredibly 
wrong…. We don’t have all the answers yet, but not testing them is not the right answer.  
 
Amico also argued for more access to testing despite the knowledge gaps regardi ng the interpretation of 
test results. She believes PFAS exposure testing would a llow people to compare their levels with those of 
others in highly exposed communities, which could help them understand their potential health risks 
(NASEM, 2020). As it stands now, clinicians in comm unities with known PFAS contamination are left to 
make their own decisions about whether to test patie nts for PFAS exposure, which PFAS to test for, how 
to interpret the results, what health effects are asso ciated with PFAS, and how to determine appropriate 
follow-up care for exposed patients. Pressed for time in c linic visits, clinicians may dismiss interest in 
PFAS testing or avoid recommending specific medical follow-up, and they may not even be clear on 
when or how to order a test.   
COMMITTEE’S TASK AND APPROACH 
 
Prompted by the tension between people in PFAS-exposed communities wanting preventive care 
for their exposure and clinicians not knowing what  care should be provided, ATSDR and the National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIE HS) asked the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine to form an ad hoc comm ittee to provide advice on clinical care for patients 
exposed to PFAS. The committee included experts in  epidemiology, toxicol ogy, preventive medicine, 
pediatrics, nursing, public health, environmental medi cine, philosophy, ethics, exposure science, and risk 
communication (see Appendix A for biographical information on the committee members). The 
committee’s Statement of Task is provided in Box 1-3. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 31 
Prepublication Copy  BOX 1-3  
Statement of Task 
 
An ad hoc committee appointed by the National Academ ies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (the 
National Academies) will consider curr ent evidence regarding human health effects of the most widely studied 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). The Na tional Academies will provide the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention and the Agency for Toxic Subs tances and Disease Registry (CDC/ATSDR) and the 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (N IEHS) an objective and authoritative review of current 
evidence regarding human health effects of those PFAS being monitored in the CDC’s National Report on 
Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals. The Na tional Academies will also provide recommendations 
regarding potential changes to CDC/ATSDR PFAS clinical guidance including: 
 
 Options and considerations to guide decision making for PFAS testing in a patient’s blood or urine.  
 PFAS concentrations that could inform clinical care of exposed patients.  
 Appropriate patient follow-up and care specific to PFAS-associated health endpoints for those patients 
known or suspected to be exposed to PFAS.  
 
This information will be used to inform how communities and individuals exposed to PFAS could be best 
served by clinicians. Specifically, the committee will undertake the following tasks: 
 
1. Assess the strength of evidence for the spectrum of putative health effects su ggested by human studies 
(including immune response, lipid metabolism, kidney function, thyroid disease, liver disease, glycemic 
parameters and diabetes, cancer, and fetal and child development) to establish a basis for prioritized 
clinical surveillance or monitoring of PFAS health  effects. This assessment should characterize the 
likelihood of those health effects occurring (qualitative probability) given real world human exposures 
and identify the human populations at most risk (con sider life stage, health status, exposure level). 
Data/evidence gaps that contribute to uncertainty about health effects of most concern should be 
annotated. 
2. Develop general principles for clinical evaluation or biological testing given substantial scientific 
uncertainty about health effects or the value of such measures in info rming care. These principles should 
address reasons for testing (e.g., opportunities to re duce morbidity and mortality), when to test, who to 
test, how to test, what to test for, risks of testing, and the related social and ethical implications of 
testing. 
3. Review current knowledge about the contribution of PFAS exposure sources (i.e., drinking water, diet, 
the indoor environment, etc.) to human exposure and develop principles clinicians can use to advise 
patients on exposure reduction. 
4. Advise whether changes to current CDC/ATSDR clinical guidance/recommendations on PFAS blood or 
urine testing are needed given the committee’s genera l principles and assessment of the associations 
between PFAS exposure and clinically relevant heal th outcomes. Ultimately, the goal is to provide 
guidance on how clinicians can advise patients on PFAS testing and health outcomes that may be 
associated with PFAS as well as what to advise patients regarding standard medical or preventive care 
and exposure reduction. 
5. Outline a process by which the CDC/ATSDR PFAS clin ical guidance can be effectively reviewed and 
revised over the next decade. 
 
 
Figure 1-8 provides an overview of the steps in the committee’s approach to its charge: problem 
formulation and engagement with communities, de velopment of principles for decision making under 
substantial scientific uncertainty, determination of strategies for reduc ing exposure to PFAS, development 
of advice for PFAS testing and levels of PFAS in blood or  urine that could inform clinical care of exposed 
patients, determination of the health effects of PFA S, appropriate follow-up care of exposed patients, and 
advice on whether changes are needed with r espect to ATSDR’s PFAS clinical guidance. 
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 1-8  The committee’s approach to the Statement of Task and the chapters and appendixes where the topics 
are discussed.  
NOTE: ATSDR = Agency of Toxic Subs tances and Disease Registry; CDC = Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.  
 
Problem Formulation and Community Engagement  
 
The committee held six public meetings between  February 4 and August 12, 2021 (see Appendix 
C for the agendas of these public meetings). Leadi ng up to its first meeting, the committee began to 
receive public input on the study. The testimony prov ided at the first public meeting revealed that many 
members of the public feel ignored or dismissed by  clinicians and the medical community, and have 
assumed the role of community scientists, beco ming experts in their communities’ illnesses and 
experiences. People who live with potentially harmfu l exposures can have knowle dge that is inaccessible 
to scientists as their experiential learning provides essential context for scientific findings (Brown, 1992). 
To incorporate this knowledge into the study, the committee, National Academies staff, and the study 
sponsors developed a community engagement plan. To aid in this process, the committee considered the 
Jemez Principles for Democratic Organizing, a set of recommendations developed to serve as a foundation on which diverse coalitions can together make justice-based decisions specifically weighing 
on inclusivity, as well as letting people speak for th emselves (Solís and Union, 1997). Ultimately, the 
committee’s community engagement plan consiste d of several key elements (see Figure 1-9): 
 
 a panel of community liaisons; 
 three 2021 town halls (April 7, Eastern Town Hall; May 6, Middle Town Hall; May 25, 
Western Town Hall); 
 community speakers from PFAS-impacted communities at every public meeting; 
 open sign-up for public testimony to the committee at every public meeting; and 
 encouragement for providing written testimony  to the committee throughout the data-
collection phase of the study. 
 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 33 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 1-9  The committee’s approach to community engagement. 
 
 
The community liaisons were solicited through a nom ination process similar to that used for 
National Academies committees. The community liaisons were intended to be an inclusive group; all 
nominees who appeared to be genuinely interested  or had experience working with PFAS or similar 
environmental contamination issues were asked to join  the group. National Academies staff held several 
meetings with the liaisons throughout the study process. The first call with the liaisons clearly described 
the mission of the National Academies, the goals of th e study, what the study would not address, and the 
study timeline.  
The role of the community liaisons was to pr ovide input to the committee on behalf of PFAS-
impacted communities. The liaisons aided the study process by suggesting speakers, topics, and 
discussion questions for the public meetings, and by answering questions to inform the report or the 
committee’s work. They also  prepared letters to the committee pr oviding consensus opinions related to 
the Statement of Task and suggested reviewers for the report for consideration by National Academies 
staff.  
Health Effects Associated with PFAS Exposure  
 
The committee carefully considered the purpose of the literature review of putative health effects 
prescribed in its Statement of Task: to establish a basis for prioritized clinical surveillance or monitoring 
of PFAS health effects. Accordingly, the committee’s review was focused on determining a set of health 
effects that may be associated with PFAS, whic h could then be used for preventive medicine 
recommendations and decisions. The Statement of Task  limited the review to those PFAS included in 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) National Report on Human Exposure to 
Environmental Chemicals  (see Table 1-1).  
Although the committee believes that studies on h ealth effects in humans will most likely be 
limited to those PFAS in Table 1-1 because they ar e the most commonly studied in humans, other PFAS 
may cause harm because of similarities in biological persistence and toxicities (Kwiatkowski et al., 2020). 
Moreover, while different PFAS have distinct physical , chemical, and toxicological properties, people are 
exposed to more than a single PFAS. As a result, exposures are often to mixtures of PFAS such that 
specific effects are difficult to disentangle. Consid ering these issues and recognizing that some PFAS are 
less frequently measured than others, the committee ultimately decided to provide one strength-of-
evidence determination for all PFAS for each health effect. Further d escription of the methods used for 
the committee’s review is provided in Appendix D.  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  TABLE 1-1  PFAS Species Currently Included in the Ce nters for Disease Control and Prevention’s 
(CDC’s) National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals   
Abbreviated Name  Full Name  CAS Registry No.  
MeFOSAA Methylperfluorooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid 2355-31-9 
PFHxS Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid 
perfluorohexane sulfonic acid 355-46-4 
n-PFOA (linear isomer), Sb-PFOA 
(branched isomers) Perfluorooctanoic acid 335-67-1* 
PFDA Perfluorodecanoic acid 335-76-2 
PFUnDA Perfluoroundecanoic acid 2058-94-8 
n-PFOS (linear isomer), Sm-PFOS (branched isomers) Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid 
1763-23-1* 
PFNA Perfluorononanoic acid 375-95-1 
NOTES: CAS = Chemical Abstracts Service. * = CAS number refers to linear isomer only. Previous survey years 
have also included perfluorobutane sulfonic acid (PFBS), perfluoropentanoic acid (PFpA), perfluorododecanoic acid 
(PFDoDA), perfluorooctane sulfonamide  (FOSA), and 2-(N-ethyl-perfluoro octane sulfonamido)acetate (EtFOSAA), 
according to Patrick N. Breysse’s presentatio n to the committee on February 4, 2021. 
 
 
Reducing Exposure to PFAS 
 
This report does not review EPA policy actions, which are beyond the scope of the committee’s 
task. A review of individual-level exposure reducti on strategies is presented in Appendix E. Chapter 4 
provides an overview of that literature and medical  interventions to reduce PFAS body burden. The report 
reviews these individual-level strategies because the task calls for them; however, the committee does not 
believe that people should be responsible for pr otecting themselves from harmful chemicals. Well-
established exposure prevention frameworks, such as th e hierarchy of controls and the health impact 
pyramid, dictate that individuals should not be r esponsible for making such decisions (Frieden, 2010). 
Systems approaches to exposure reduction, such as setting an enforceable water standard, regulating 
PFAS from nonessential uses, and cleaning up hazardous waste sites, will be far more effective at 
reducing population-level e xposures (see Figure 1-10). 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1-10  Hierarchy of controls. 
SOURCE: See https://www.cdc.gov /niosh/topics/hierarchy/default. html (accessed June 16, 2022). 
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 35 
Prepublication Copy  Advice on PFAS Testing and Levels That Could Inform Clinical Care 
 
The committee’s approach to pr oviding advice on PFAS testing and clinical care included a 
review of the harms and benefits of  testing. To determine the levels of PFAS exposure that could inform 
clinical care of exposed patients, the committee did not complete dose-response modeling to determine a 
tolerable risk level. Instead, the committee re viewed various strategies for interpreting PFAS 
concentrations, such as use of reference ranges for co mparison, and levels of ri sk determined by other 
agencies.  
 
Follow-Up Care for Patients Known or  Suspected to Be Exposed to PFAS 
 
 The committee considered relevant for patient follow-up recommendations each condition that its 
review found had suggestive or limited suggestive ev idence of an association with PFAS exposure. The 
committee believed that while it was important to cate gorize the strength of the evidence, all conditions 
with an association should be considered for patient  follow-up since acknowledging the potential risk may 
make clinicians and patients more  likely to prioritize screenings. 
 
ORGANIZATION OF THE REPORT  
 
This report is organized into eight chapters  and five appendixes. Chapter 2 presents the 
committee’s general principles for decision making u nder substantial scientific uncertainty. Chapter 3 
presents the committee’s assessment of  the health effects of PFAS. Chapter 4 reviews strategies for 
reducing exposure to PFAS. Chapter 5 provides reco mmendations for PFAS testing and concentrations in 
blood or urine that could inform clinical care. Chapter 6 presents the committee’s specific 
recommendations for patient follow-up. Chapter 7 addresses suggested changes to the ATSDR PFAS 
clinical guidance. Finally, Chapter 8 considers th e implementation of the committee’s recommendations. 
Appendix A provides biographical information on the committee members, National Academies staff, and 
the community liaisons; Appendix B provides a summary  of the town halls; Appendix C contains the 
agendas of the committee’s public me etings; Appendix D is a summary of the methods used in the 
committee’s literature review; and Appendix E is a wh ite paper describing a revi ew of the PFAS personal 
intervention literature.   
REFERENCES 
 
Armitage, J., I.T. Cousins, R.C. Buck, K. Prevedouros, M.H. Russell, M. MacLeod, and S.H. 
Korzeniowski. 2006. Modeling global-scale fate and transport of perfluorooctanoate emitted from 
direct sources. Environmental Science & Technology  40(22):6969–6975. 
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/es0614870. 
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). 2021. Toxicological profile for 
perfluoroalkyls . Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp200.pdf (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Bao, J., W. J. Yu, Y. Liu, X. Wang, Y. H. Jin,  and G. H. Dong. 2019. Pe rfluoroalkyl substances in 
groundwater and home-produced vegetables and e ggs around a fluorochemical industrial park in 
China. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety  171:199. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.12.086. 
Bao, J., C. L. Li, Y. Liu, X. Wang, W. J. Yu, Z. Q.  Liu, L. X. Shao, and Y. H. Jin. 2020. Bioaccumulation 
of Perfluoroalkyl substances in greenhouse vegeta bles with long-term groundwater irrigation near 
fluorochemical plants in Fuxin, China. Environmental Research  188:109751. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.109751. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Blaine, A. C., C. D. Rich, L. S. Hundal, C. Lau, M. A. Mills, K. M. Harris, and C. P. Higgins. 2013. 
Uptake of perfluoroalkyl acids into edible crops  via land applied biosolids: Field and greenhouse 
studies. Environmental Science and Technology  47:14062. https://doi.org/10.1021/es403094q  
Blum, A., S. Balan, M. Scheringer, X. Trier, G. Go ldenman, I. Cousins, M. Diamond, T. Fletcher, C. 
Higgins, and A. Lindeman. 2015. The Madrid st atement on poly- and pe rfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFASs). Environmental Health Perspectives  123(5):A107–A111. 
https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1509934. 
Brown, P. 1992. Popular epidemiology and toxic waste contamination: Lay and professional ways of 
knowing. Journal of Health and Social Behavior  33(3):267–281. https://doi.org/10.2307/2137356  
Buck, R. C., J. Franklin, U. Berger, J. M. Conder, I. T. Cousins, P. D. Voogt, A. A. Jensen, K. Kannan, S. 
A. Mabury, and S. P. J. van Leeuwen. 2011. Perfl uoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances in the 
environment: Terminology, classification, and origins. Integrated Environmental Assessment and 
Management  7(4):513–541. https://d oi.org/10.1002/ieam.258. 
Buekers, J., A. Colles, C. Cornelis, B. Morrens, E. Govarts, and G. Schoe ters. 2018. Socio-economic 
status and health: Evaluation of human bi omonitored chemical exposure to per- and 
polyfluorinated substances across status. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health  15(12):2818. https://doi.o rg/10.3390/ijerph15122818.  
Bullard, R. D. 1996. Environmental justice:  It’s more than waste facility siting. Social Science Quarterly  
77(3):493–499. https://www.j stor.org/stable/42863495. 
Brennan, N. M., A. T. Evans, M. K. Fritz, S. A. P eak, and H. E. von Holst. 2021. Trends in the regulation 
of per- and polyfluoroalkyl subs tances (PFAS): A scoping review. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health 18(20):10900. 
https://doi.org/10. 3390/ijerph182010900. 
C-8 Medical Panel 2013. C-8 Medical Panel Report . https://www.hpcbd.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/ 
1601601/2021/01/Medical-Panel-Report-2013-05- 24.pdf (accessed March 24, 2021). 
Carnero, A. R., A. Lestido-Cardama, P. V. Loureiro , L. Barbosa-Pereira, A. R. B. de Quirós, and R. 
Sendón. 2021. Presence of perfluoroalkyl and polyflu oroalkyl substances (PFAS) in food contact 
materials (FCM) and its migration to food. Foods  10(7). https://doi.org/10.3390/foods10071443.  
Curtzwiler, G. W., P. Silva, A. Hall, A. Ivey, and K. Vorst. 2021. Significance of perfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) in food packaging. Integrated Environmenta l Assessment and Management  
17(1):7–12. https://doi.o rg/10.1002/ieam.4346. 
De Silva, A. O., J. M. Armitage, T. A. Bruton, C. Dassuncao, W. Heiger-Bernays, X. C. Hu, A. Kärrman, 
B. Kelly, C. Ng, A. Robuck, M. Sun, T. F. We bster, and E. M. Sunderland. 2021. PFAS exposure 
pathways for humans and wildlife: A synth esis of current knowledge and key gaps in 
understanding. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  40(3):631–657. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.4935. 
Death, C., C. Bell, D. Champness, C. Milne, S. Re ichman, and T. Hagen. 2021.  Per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) in livestock and game species: A review. Science of the Total Environment  
774:144795. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144795. 
DeLuca, N. M., M. Angrish, A. Wilkins, K. Thay er, and E. A. Cohen Hubal. 2021. Human exposure 
pathways to poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) from indoor media: A systematic review 
protocol. Environment International  146:106308. https://doi.org/1 0.1016/j.envint.2020.106308. 
Domingo, J. L., and M. Nadal. 2017. Per- and polyfl uoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in food and human 
dietary intake: A review of the recent scientific literature. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry  65(3):533–543. https://doi .org/10.1021/acs.jafc.6b04683. 
ECOS (Environmental Council of the States). 2020. Processes and considerations for setting state PFAS 
standards.  https://www.ecos.org/wp-content/uploads /2020/02/Standards-White-Paper-FINAL-
February-2020.pdf (accessed March 25, 2020). 
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 2020. EPA CompTox chemicals dashboard. 
https://comptox.epa.gov/dashboard/chemical- lists/pfasmaster (accessed June 16, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 37 
Prepublication Copy  Evich, M. G., M. J. B. Davis, J. P. McCord, B. Acrey, J. A. Awkerman, D. R. U. Knappe, A. B. 
Lindstrom, T. F. Speth, C. Tebes-Stevens, M. J. Strynar, Z. Wang, E. J. Weber, W. M. 
Henderson, and J. W. Washington. 2022. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in the environment. 
Science  375(6580):eabg9065. https:// doi.org/10.1126/science.abg9065. 
Fenton, S. E., A. Ducatman, A. Boobis, J. C. DeWitt, C.  Lau, C. Ng, J. S. Smith, and S. M. Roberts. 2021. 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substance toxicity and human health review: Current state of knowledge 
and strategies for informing future research. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  
40(3):606–630. https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.4890. 
Fraser, A. J., T. F. Webster, D. J. Watkins, M. J. Stry nar, K. Kato, A. M. Calafat, V. M. Vieira, and M. D. 
McClean. 2013. Polyfluorinated compounds in dust from homes, offices, and vehicles as predictors of concentrations in office workers’ serum. Environment International  60:128–136. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2013.08.012. 
Frieden, T. R. 2010. A framework for public health action: the health impact pyramid. American Journal 
of Public Health  100(4):590–595. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2009.185652. 
Frisbee, S. J., A. P. Brooks, Jr., A. Maher, P. Flensbor g, S. Arnold, T. Fletcher, K. Steenland, A. Shankar, 
S. S. Knox, C. Pollard, J. A. Halverson, V. M. Vieira, C. Jin, K. M. Leyden, and A. M. 
Ducatman. 2009. The C-8 health projec t: Design, methods, and participants. Environmental 
Health Perspectives  117(12):1873–1882. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0800379. 
Fromme, H., S. Dietrich, L. Fembacher, T. Lahrz,  and W. Völkel. 2015. Neutral polyfluorinated 
compounds in indoor air in Germany—The LUPE 4 study. Chemosphere  139:572–578. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.07.024. 
Gao, K., T. Zhuang, X. Liu, J. Fu, J. Zhang, J. Fu, L. Wang, A. Zhang, Y. Liang, M. Song, and G. Jiang. 
2019. Prenatal exposure to per- and polyfluoroalk yl substances (PFASs) and association between 
the placental transfer efficiencies and dissociation constant of serum proteins-PFAS complexes. 
Environmental Science & Technology  53(1):6529–6538. https:// doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b00715. 
Gilliland, F. D. 1992. Fluorocarbons and human health: Studies in an occupational cohort.  Thesis. 
University of Minnesota. https://static.ewg .org/reports/2019/pfa- timeline/1992_1-46-Gilliland-
Thesis.pdf (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Glüge, J., M. Scheringer, I. T. Cousins, J. C. DeWitt,  G. Goldenman, D. Herzke, R. Lohmann, C. A. Ng, 
X. Trier, and Z. Wang. 2020. An overview of the uses of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFAS). Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts  22(12):2345–2373. 
Gochfeld, M., and J. Burger. 2011. Disproportiona te exposures in environmental justice and other 
populations: The importance of outliers. American Journal of Public Health  101(Suppl 1):S53–
S63. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300121. 
Gomez, J. A., D. Raynes, T. Doriss, L. Andersen, A. C.  Capaccio, C. K. Gilbert, R. P. Johnson, and D. C. 
Royer. 2021. Man-made chemicals and potential he alth risks: EPA has completed some 
regulatory related actions for PFAS . Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office. 
https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-21-37.pdf (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Guelfo, J. L., S. Korzeniowski, M. A. Mills, J. Anderson, R. H. Anderson, J. A. Arblaster, J. M. Conder, 
I. T. Cousins, K. Dasu, and B. J. Henry. 2021. Environmental sources,  chemistry, fate, and 
transport of per ‐ and polyfluoroalkyl substances: State of the science, key knowledge gaps, and 
recommendations presented at the August 2019 SETAC Focus Topic Meeting. Environmental 
Toxicology and Chemistry  40(12):3234–3260. 
Hahn, S. M. 2020. FDA announces voluntary agreement with m anufacturers to phase out certain short-
chain PFAS used in food packaging . Silver Spring, MD: U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announ cements/fda-announces-voluntary-agreement-
manufacturers-phase-out-certain-short-chain-pfas-used-food (accessed June 30, 2022). 
Harclerode, M., S. Baryluk, H. Lanza, and J. Fr angos. 2021. Preparing for effective, adaptive risk 
communication about per- a nd polyfluoroalkyl  substances in drinking water. American Water 
Works Association Water Science  3(5):e1236. https://doi.org/10.1002/aws2.1236. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Harrad, S., C. A. de Wit, M. Abou-Elwafa Abdallah, C. Bergh, J. A. Bjorklund, A. Covaci, P. P. O. 
Darnerud, J. de Boer, M. Diamond, and S. Huber. 2010. Indoor contamination with 
hexabromocyclododecanes, polybrominated dipheny l ethers, and perfluoroalkyl compounds: An 
important exposure pathway for people? Environmental Science & Technology  44(9):3221–3231. 
Herzke, D., S. Huber, L. Bervoets , W. D’Hollander, J. Hajslova, J. Pulkrabova, G. Brambilla, S. P. De 
Filippis, S. Klenow, G. Heinemeyer, and P. De Voogt. 2013. Perfluorinat ed alkylated substances 
in vegetables collected in four european count ries: Occurrence and human exposure estimations. 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research  20:7930. 
Houck, K. A., G. Patlewicz, A. M. Richard, A. J. W illiams, M. A. Shobair, M. Smeltz, M. S. Clifton, B. 
Wetmore, A. Medvedev, and S. Ma karov. 2021. Bioactivity profi ling of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) identifies potential toxicity pathways related to molecular structure. 
Toxicology  457:152789. 
Hu, X. C., D. Q. Andrews, A. B. Lindstrom, T. A. Bruton, L. A. Schaider, P. Grandjean, R. Lohmann, C. 
C. Carignan, A. Blum, S. A. Balan, C. P. Hi ggins, and E. M. Sunderland. 2016. Detection of 
poly- and perfluoroalkyl substan ces (PFASs) in U.S. drinking water linked to industrial sites, 
military fire training areas, and wastewater treatment plants. Environmental Science and 
Technology Letters  3(10):344–350. https://doi .org/10.1021/acs.estlett.6b00260. 
ITRC (Interstate Technology and Research Council). 2017. History and use of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS). https://pfas-1.itrcweb.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/pfas_fact_sheet_ 
history_and_use__11_13_17.pdf (accessed March 25, 2020). 
ITRC. 2021. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances technical and regulatory guidance.  https://pfas-
1.itrcweb.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/ PFAS-Full-PDF-December-2021-Update.pdf 
(accessed May 25, 2022).  
Kay, J., and C. Katz. 2012. Pollution, poverty and people of color: Living with industry. Scientific 
American. http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/ pollution-poverty-people-color-living-
industry (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Kwiatkowski, C. F., D. Q. Andrews, L. S. Birnbaum, T. A. Bruton, J. C. DeWitt, D. R. U. Knappe, M. V. 
Maffini, M. F. Miller, K. E. Pelch, A. Reade, A.  Soehl, X. Trier, M. Venier, C. C. Wagner, Z. 
Wang, and A. Blum. 2020. Scientific basi s for managing PFAS as a chemical class. 
Environmental Science & Technology Letters  7(8):532–543. 
https://doi.org/10. 1021/acs.estlett.0c00255. 
Li, P., X. Oyang, Y. Zhao, T. Tu, X. Tian, L. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Li, and Z. Xiao. 2019. Occurrence of 
perfluorinated compounds in agricultural envir onment, vegetables, and fruits in regions 
influenced by a fluorine-chemical industrial park in China. Chemosphere  225:659. 
Lohmann, R., I. T. Cousins, J. C. DeWitt, J. Glüge , G. Goldenman, D. Herzke, A.B. Lindstrom, M. F. 
Miller, C. A. Ng, S. Patton, M. Scheringer, X. Trier, and Z. Wang. 2020. Are fluoropolymers 
really of low concern for human and envir onmental health and separate from other PFAS? 
Environmental Science and Technology  54(20):12820–12828. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c03244. 
Manzano-Salgado, C. B., M. Casas, M. J. Lopez-Espinosa, F. Ballester, M. Basterrechea, J. O. Grimalt, 
A. M. Jiménez, T. Kraus, T. Schettgen, J.  Sunyer, and M. Vrijheid. 2015. Transfer of 
perfluoroalkyl substances from mother to fetus in a Spanish birth cohort. Environmental Research  
142:471–478. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.envres.2015.07.020. 
Mohai, P., D. Pellow, and J. Timmons Roberts. 2009. Environmental justice. Annual Review of 
Environment and Resources  34(1):405–430. https://doi.org /10.1146/annurev-environ-082508-
094348. 
Morales-McDevitt, M. E., J. Becanova, A. Blum, T. A. Bruton, S. Vojta, M. Woodward, and R. 
Lohmann. 2021. The air that we breathe: Neutral and volatile PFAS in indoor air. Environmental 
Science & Technology Letters  8(10):897–902. https://doi.o rg/10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00481. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introduction 39 
Prepublication Copy  NASEM (National Academies of Sciences , Engineering, and Medicine). 2020. Understanding, 
controlling, and preventing exposure to PFAS : Proceedings of a workshop—in brief . 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/25856. 
Nguyen, V. K., A. Kahana, J. Heidt, K. Polemi, J.  Kvasnicka, O. Jolliet, and J. A. Colacino. 2020. A 
comprehensive analysis of racial disparities in  chemical biomarker concentrations in United 
States women, 1999–2014. Environment International  137:105496. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.105496. 
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development). 2021. Reconciling terminology of 
the universe of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substan ces: Recommendations and practical guidance . 
Series on Risk Management, no. 61 . Paris: OECD. https://www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/ 
publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=E NV/CBC/MONO(2021)25&docLanguage=En.  
Orum, P., R. Moore, M. Roberts, and J. Sanchez. 2014, May. Who’s in danger? Race, poverty, and 
chemical disasters.  Brattleboro, VT: Environmental Justi ce and Health Alliance for Chemical 
Policy Reform. https://comingcleaninc.org/ assets/media/images/Reports/Who%27s%20in%20 
Danger%20Report%20FINAL.pdf (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Pellow, D. 2004. The politics of illegal dumpi ng: An environmental justice framework. Qualitative 
Sociology  27(4):511–525. https://doi.org /10.1023/B:QUAS.00000 49245.55208.4b. 
Quimby, B., S. E. S. Crook, K. M. Miller, J. Ruiz, and D. Lopez-Carr. 2020. Identifying, defining and 
exploring angling as urban subsistence: Pier  fishing in Santa Barbara, California. Marine Policy  
121:104197. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104197. 
Rankin, K., S. A. Mabury, T. M. Jenkins, and J. W. Washington. 2016. A North American and global 
survey of perfluoroalkyl substances in su rface soils: Distribution patterns and mode of 
occurrence. Chemosphere  161:333. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2016.06.109. 
Raponi, I., P. Brown, and A. Cordner. 2021. Impr oved medical screening in PFAS-impacted communities 
to identify early disease. Environmental Health News . https://www.ehn.org/pfas-testing-
2653577444.html (accessed November 22, 2021). 
Richter, L., A. Cordner, and P. Brown. 2021. Pr oducing ignorance through regulatory structure: The case 
of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). Sociological Perspectives  64(4):631–656. 
Rizzuto, P. 2021. The doctor will see the PFAS-exposed plaintiff now. Bloomberg Law: Energy and 
Environment Report . https://news.bloomberglaw.com/e nvironment-and-energy/the-doctor-will-
see-the-pfas-exposed-plaintiff-now (accessed November 22, 2021). 
Sagiv, S. K., S. L. Rifas-Shiman, T. F. Webster, A. M. Mora, M. H. Harris, A. M. Calafat, X. Ye, M. W. 
Gillman, and E. Oken. 2015. Sociodemographic a nd perinatal predictors of early pregnancy per- 
and polyfluoroalkyl substan ce (PFAS) concentrations. Environmental Science & Technology  
49(19):11849–11858. 
Schaider, L. A., S. A. Balan, A. Blum, D. Q. Andrews, M. J. Strynar, M. E. Dickinson, D. M. 
Lunderberg, J. R. Lang, and G. F. Peaslee. 2017. Fluorinated compounds in U.S. fast food 
packaging. Environmental Science & Technology Letters  4(3):105–111. 
https://doi.org/10. 1021/acs.estlett.6b00435. 
Scher, D. P., J. E. Kelly, C. A. Huset, K. M. Barry , R. W. Hoffbeck, V. L. Yingling, and R. B. Messing. 
2018. Occurrence of perfluoroalkyl substances (PFA S) in garden produce at homes with a history 
of PFAS-contaminated drinking water. Chemosphere  196:548. 
Serrano, L., L. M. Iribarne-Durán, B. Suárez, F. Art acho-Cordón, F. Vela-Soria, M. Peña-Caballero, J. A. 
Hurtado, N. Olea, M. F. Fernández, and C. Fr eire. 2021. Concentrations of perfluoroalkyl 
substances in donor breast milk in Southern  Spain and their potential determinants. International 
Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health  236:113796. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2021.113796. 
Shoeib, M., P. Vlahos, T. Harner, A. Peters, M.  Graustein, and J. Narayan. 2010. Survey of 
polyfluorinated chemicals (PFCs) in the at mosphere over the northeast Atlantic Ocean. 
Atmospheric Environment  44(24):2887–2893. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Solís, R., and Southwest Public Workers Union. 1997 , April. Jemez principles for democratic organizing. 
SouthWest Organizing Project. https://nation.mothersoutfront.org/jemez_principles_for_ 
democratic_organizing (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Steenland, K., T. Fletcher, C. R. Stein, S. M. Barte ll, L. Darrow, M. J. Lopez-Espinosa, P. Barry Ryan, 
and D. A. Savitz. 2020. Review: Evolution of evidence on PFOA and health following the assessments of the C-8 Science Panel. Environment International  145. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106125. 
Sunderland, E. M., X. C. Hu, C. Dassuncao, A. K. Tokranov, C. C. Wagner, a nd J. G. Allen. 2019. A 
review of the pathways of human exposure to poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) and 
present understanding of health effects. Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental 
Epidemiology 29:131. 
Sze, J., and J. K. London. 2008. Environmental justice at the crossroads. Sociology Compass  2(4):1331–
1354. 
Trudel, D., L. Horowitz, M. Wormuth, M. Scheri nger, I. T. Cousins, and K. Hungerbühler. 2008. 
Estimating consumer exposure to PFOS and PFOA. Risk Analysis  28(2):251–269. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2008.01017.x. 
Washington, J. W., and T. M. Jenkins. 2015. Abiotic hydrolysis of fluorotelomer-based polymers as a 
source of perfluorocarboxylates at the global scale. Environmental Science & Technology  
49(24):14129–14135. https:// doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b03686. 
Wones, R., S. M. Pinney, J. M. Buckholz, C. D eck-Tebbe, R. Freyberg, and A. Pesce. 2009. Medical 
monitoring: A beneficial remedy for resident s living near an environmental hazard site. Journal 
of Occupational and Environmental Medici ne/American College of Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine  51(12):1374. 
Zheng, G., E. Schreder, J. C. Dempsey, N. Uding,  V. Chu, G. Andres, S. Sathyanarayana, and A. 
Salamova. 2021. Per- and polyfluor oalkyl substances (PFAS) in breast milk: Concerning trends 
for current-use PFAS. Environmental Science & Technology  55(11):7510–7520. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
Prepublication Copy  41  2 
 
Principles for Decision Making Under Uncertainty 
 
Given that there is some degree of uncertainty in all science, science-based decision making also 
involves uncertainty (Fischhoff and Davis, 2014). This uncertainty can arise from many different factors, 
including lack of available evidence, statistical variability, model uncertainty, and “deep” uncertainty 
about the fundamental scientific processes relevant  to a decision (IOM, 2013). Yet, despite this 
uncertainty, when evidence exists, it helps predict what may happen when a decision is made (Fischhoff 
and Davis, 2014). Values also influence how scientific  evidence is gathered and interpreted, thereby 
influencing how uncertainty is characterized and what decisions are made on the basis of that particular 
interpretation of the evidence (Douglas, 2009; Elliott, 2017; IOM et al., 1995). Thus, it is important to 
consider uncertainty in the broader context of th e decision to be made and the values underlying the 
decision-making process (IOM, 2013).  
In response to uncertainty, some public health professionals may wish to avoid acting as soon as 
science determines the risks of an exposure for fear th at the association is not a true one and that acting 
too quickly could lead to inappropriate and costly public health measures (Boffetta et al., 2008). On the 
other hand, some may fear that if society waits fo r more certain evidence, meaningful action will be 
delayed (Blair et al., 2009). As a group of scientists  with different backgroun ds and perspectives, the 
committee grappled with both of these potential outco mes of its decisions. The committee established the 
principles in this chapter to help accomplish its char ge, but also believes they may be useful to support 
ATSDR in making decisions about medical follow- up and advice to communities exposed to PFAS or 
other chemicals with uncertain effects. 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE COMMITTEE’S PRINCIPLES 
 
In its effort to identify principles for decisi on making under uncertainty, the committee solicited 
input from members of PFAS-impacted communities th rough its virtual town halls (see Chapter 1). The 
committee also reviewed decision-making frameworks, including a review paper (Norris et al., 2021), the 
criteria used by the U.S. Preventiv e Services Task Force (USPSTF) (Krist et al., 2018; Sawaya et al., 
2007), GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment , Development and Evaluation) (Moberg et 
al., 2018), a National Academies evidence framework for decisions regarding genetic testing (NASEM, 
2017), the Evidence and Value: Impact on DEcision-Making (EVIDEM) framework (Goetghebeur et al., 
2008), the principles used by the C-8 Medical Panel (C-8 Medical Panel, 2013), the ethical principles 
from the Belmont Report (HHS, 1979), and principles for precautionary reasoning (Resnik, 2021). A brief 
overview of these sources is included below. 
The existing principles and frameworks the committe e reviewed were not entirely satisfactory for 
the purposes of this study. Most of the existing frameworks were not designed to address situations 
characterized by limited evidence and substantial sci entific uncertainty—the contexts the committee was 
charged to address. The committee understood that when evidence is incomplete, dangers can be 
associated both with taking action and with failing to act (Douglas, 2009; Elliott and Richards, 2017). 
Therefore, the committee adapted the principles and fra meworks it reviewed to develop a set of principles 
appropriate for decision making under substantial scientific uncertainty. 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  PRINCIPLES PUT FORWARD BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
The committee decided to use the ethical principl es proposed in the Belmont Report (HHS, 1979) 
and developed by Beauchamp and Childress (2001)  as a foundation for its approach. Although these 
principles (nonmaleficence, beneficence, autonomy, an d justice) were not initially proposed for decision 
making under uncertainty, they provide an ethical starting point for addressing such situations. In addition, they encompass many of the criteria and concepts included in other frameworks, such as 
considerations of benef its, harms, health equity, and human rights. The committee combined the 
principles of nonmaleficence and beneficence into a principle of proportionality—drawing on the Resnik 
(2021) framework for precautionary reasoning in res ponse to uncertainty. The committee also added two 
other principles included in other decision-making frameworks but not captured by the principles from the Belmont Report. One is the principle of feasibility , found in several of the frameworks reviewed by 
Norris and colleagues (2021), including GRADE. It captures the importance of considering the 
capabilities of the current medical system and the ways  it might need to develop to respond to decision 
needs. The other is the principle of adaptability, wh ich builds on the call for review and revision in the 
National Academies framework for genetic tes ting and the emphasis in the USPSTF framework on 
revising recommendations in response to emerging scien tific information. Box 2-1 briefly describes the 
committee’s resulting five principles for exposure biom onitoring and patient foll ow-up under substantial 
scientific uncertainty about the health effects of PFA S exposure. Each of these principles is discussed in 
turn below.  
Proportionality 
 
The committee’s first principle, proportionality,  is adapted from Resnik’s recommendations for 
precautionary decision making under uncertainty (Resnik, 2021, p. 81): 
 
Proportionality:  Decisions should balance plausible harms and benefits proportionally, 
meaning that the harms and benefits are c onsidered together and weighed based on a 
qualitative assessment of their potential likelihoods and magnitudes. 
 
 
BOX 2-1  
Principles for Decision Making Und er Uncertainty Used in This Report 
 
Proportionality:  Decisions should balance plausible harms and benefits proportionally, meaning that the harms 
and benefits are considered together and weighed based on a qualitative assessment of their potential likelihoods 
and magnitudes. 
 
Justice:  Decisions should be informed by an emphasis on promoting justice, including by balancing benefits and 
harms fairly across the population of at-risk individuals, advancing health equity, and respecting human rights. In 
addition, justice requires consideration of sociohistorical context, stakehol ders, existing structural inequalities, 
and issues of agency (the power a community  has to advocate for itself in conflicts). 
 
Autonomy:  Decisions should be based on informed decision making by individuals and reflect respect for their 
values. 
 
Feasibility:  Decisions should take into account resource availability, including follow-up services. 
 
Adaptability:  Decisions should respond to new information about harms, benefits, and other relevant 
considerations (e.g., health equity and feasibility). 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles for Decision Making Under Uncertainty  43 
Prepublication Copy  This principle draws on a common theme that cuts  across most frameworks the committee considered: 
balancing harms and benefits. For example, the USPSTF states that in determining the benefits of a 
preventive services framework, one sh ould consider evidence about the accuracy of screening, harms of 
early-intervention treatment and not treating, and th e treatment benefits and harms of a particular 
preventive service. The USPSTF framework also consid ers the accuracy of a screening test and its 
relationship to the clinical health effect, and th e harms associated with the screening for the health 
condition and treatment of the condition.  
The principle of proportionality addresses harms and be nefits in situations of substantial scientific 
uncertainty. To balance harms and bene fits proportionally is to consider them together such that, all else 
being equal, policies with fewer or less severe harms (assessed in terms of their likelihood and 
magnitude) can be justified based on lesser benefits  relative to policies with increased harms. This 
principle is particularly relevant for decision making under uncertainty because it can justify taking actions to realize potentially significant benefits even  when the evidence for tho se benefits is limited, as 
long as the potential harms associated with the actions are minimal.  
Proportionality provides an altern ative to probability-based decision principles that require 
numerical ranking of the probabilities or utilities associated with effects. Although applying the principle of proportionality calls for considering the likelihood and magnitude of benefits and harms in some form, 
it does not require assigning numerical rankings to their likelihoods or magnitudes. Because of the 
qualitative nature of this principle, reasonable d ecision makers can potentially disagree about how to 
apply it in specific situations because judgments are required to weigh harms and benefits. Especially 
when the benefits associated with two policies are similar, and the likelihood and the magnitude of their 
harms cannot be estimated precisely, the principle of proportionality may not offer decisive guidance. 
Instead, this principle provides a general way of r easoning compatible with a range of more specific 
strategies for balancing harms a nd benefits under different forms of uncertainty (Douglas, 2009; 
Workman et al., 2020). It affirms that both harms and bene fits need to be considered and that they need to 
be weighed against one another when making decisions (Resnik, 2021).  
For this report, the harms of a decision could incl ude physical effects, psychological effects, and 
opportunity costs (Harris et al., 2014). The committee do es not consider the financial costs of paying for 
tests or treatment a harm. Costs could be considered under the principle of feasibility, but the committee 
excluded costs from feasibility as well. The reason for excluding costs is that, although a certain test or 
treatment may be expensive today, costs typically decrease over time if demand for the test or treatment increases. Many other organizations, such as th e USPSTF, do not consider financial costs when 
formulating recommendations based on assessment of health benefits and harms, and the committee 
followed this approach. The committee did consider as potential harm the loss of income or financial 
damage incurred as a result of decisions (e.g., decreased property values caused by a community’s 
learning about chemical contamination). 
The principle of proportionality calls for consider ing benefits and harms that are plausible. The 
concept of plausibility provides a minimal threshol d for determining which be nefits and harms should 
even be considered. Resnik (2021, pp. 80–81) defines a scientific statement as plausible “if it is consistent 
with well-established scientific facts, hypotheses, la ws, models, or theories”—a lower standard of 
evidence than is typically required for even weak scientific confirmation. Instead, this definition is 
designed to rule out “armchair speculation” about pot ential harms and benefits. If a harm or benefit is 
judged to be plausible, it can be considered in th e overall assessment of proportionality. Nevertheless, 
harms and benefits deemed to ha ve a reasonably low level of evid ential support might still be given 
relatively little weight in proportionality assessment unless their potential magnitudes were estimated to 
be exceptionally high.  
In situations of substantial scientific uncertainty, it is generally unrealistic to expect more than a 
qualitative assessment of the likelihoods and magnitud es of harms and benefits. This assessment may be 
informed by evidence, including epidemiological stud ies, toxicological studies (both animal models and 
mechanistic studies), modeling, and support from analogy. It should be guided by norms for the responsible acquisition and utilization of evidence,  knowledge, and expertise. Still, the appropriate 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  standards of evidence for drawing tentative conclu sions about potential likelihoods and magnitudes may 
be much lower than would apply in other scientific  contexts (Douglas, 2009; Elliott and Richards, 2017; 
Ginsberg et al., 2019). 
 
Justice 
 
Justice is the second principle for decision maki ng in situations of substantial scientific 
uncertainty: 
 
Justice:  Decisions should be informed by an em phasis on promoting justice, including by 
balancing benefits and harms fairly across th e population of at-risk individuals, advancing 
health equity, and respecting human rights. In  addition, justice requires consideration of 
sociohistorical context, stakeholders, existing structural inequalities, and issues of agency 
(the power a community has to advocate for itself in conflicts).  
 
Justice is central to the Belmont Report and Beauchamp and Childress’s framework for 
biomedical ethics (Beauchamp and Childress, 2001; HHS, 1979), and elements of justice are included in many of the frameworks discussed in the review by Norris and colleagues (2021). Beauchamp and 
Childress (2001, p. 226) describe justice as “fair, equita ble, and appropriate treatment in light of what is 
due or owed to persons.” Thus, an injustice i nvolves “a wrongful act or omission that denies people 
benefits to which they have a right or distributes burdens unfairly.” 
In this report, the focus is on three elements of justice: fairness, equity, and human rights. Resnik 
(2001) emphasizes that decisions under uncertainty should be handled in a manner that is procedurally 
and distributively fair: the process  for making decisions should be fair in the sense of incorporating all 
relevant stakeholders and employing tran sparent and accountable procedures, and the endpoints  of the 
decisions should also be fair.  
In the health care setting, the second element of  justice—equity—calls for promoting health 
equity. Health equity is “the state in which everyone has the opportunity to attain full health potential, and 
no one is disadvantaged from achieving this potential because of social position or any other socially 
defined circumstance” (NASEM, 2017, p. 32). Promo ting health equity is not the same as achieving 
similar health outcomes for everyone. Instead, promoting health equity in the context of this report means 
designing approaches that enable people to lead full, h ealthy lives regardless of th eir social circumstances, 
such as race, socioeconomic status, and geographic loca tion. Health equity is a particularly important 
element of justice because it establishes the positive responsibility to provide the conditions necessary for 
people to lead healthy lives regardless of their soci al circumstances; without this positive responsibility, 
some ethicists have argued that the principle of ju stice does not provide significant guidance beyond what 
is already found in other bioethical principles, such as proportionality or autonomy (London, 2022).  
Finally, justice involves respect for human right s. The committee’s conception of human rights is 
drawn from the World Health Organization (WHO)-In tegrate evidence-to-decision framework (Rehfuess 
et al., 2019), which emphasizes rights related to the av ailability and accessibility of health care and such 
general rights as nondiscrimination.  
In cases of environmental pollution such as PFAS cont amination, it is crucial to incorporate the 
concept of environmental justice into efforts to promote fairness, health equity, and human rights. 
According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Ag ency (EPA), “Environmental justice is the fair 
treatment and meaningful involvement of all people re gardless of race, color, national origin, or income, 
concerning the development, implementation, and en forcement of environmenta l laws, regulations, and 
policies. This goal will be ach ieved when everyone enjoys: 
 
 The same degree of protection from environmental and health hazards, and 
 Equal access to the decision-making pro cess to have a healthy environment.”1 
                                                      
1 See https://www.epa.gov/environmentalj ustice (accessed September 17, 2021).  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles for Decision Making Under Uncertainty  45 
Prepublication Copy  The environmental justice movement in the Un ited States arose in recent decades out of the 
realization that communities of color, which already faced other social disadvantages, were also exposed 
to disproportionately high levels of environmenta l pollution (Bullard, 2018; Shrader-Frechette, 2002). 
Many places where PFAS contamination has been identif ied are rural and served by private well water, 
and they face other environmental and social challe nges, such as co-occurrences of other contaminants; 
occupational exposures; and health inequities, such as less access to health care and a lack of economic 
resources with which to mitigate exposures. These less -advantaged rural communities may be also have 
structural and agency-related factors that can impact  their ability to minimize their exposure, as well as to 
seek and access adequate health care linked to expo sures. Promoting environmental justice requires 
addressing these inequities, such as by taking steps to eliminate disproportionate lack of access to health 
care, exposure biomonitoring, patient follow-up for PF AS-associated health effects, and environmental 
remediation and mitigation. Required as well is addr essing the needs of vulnerable populations, such as 
pregnant and nursing women, young children , and those who are immunocompromised.  
 
Autonomy 
 
The committee’s third principle is autonomy: 
 
Autonomy:  Decisions should be based on informed decision making by individuals and 
reflect respect for their values. 
 
The Belmont Report emphasizes the importance of  respecting individuals’ autonomy and ability 
to make judgments; it also warns against withholding  information that would enable them to judge. 
Beauchamp and Childress (2001) likewise emphasize th at respect for autonomy requires eliminating 
constraints on individuals’ decision making and fost ering their self-determination. In practice, this 
principle has often been operationalized by focusi ng on obtaining individuals’ informed consent to 
medical treatments or research experiments, but its im plications are much broader. In the context of this 
report, the principle of autonomy calls for health care services to provide individuals with information and 
collaborate with them to facilitate d ecisions that accord with their values.  This approach is fundamental in 
situations of substantial scientific uncertainty, when  difficult decisions need to be made about how to 
weigh harms and benefits given lim ited information about their likelihoods and magnitudes. Different 
individuals can reasonably approach such situations  in different ways. Therefore, the principle of 
autonomy affirms that patients should play a role in making these decisions. 
In addition to fostering decisions that accord with patient values, the principle of autonomy 
supports other steps to empower patients and their co mmunities. To facilitate patients’ self-determination, 
health care providers and researchers should take steps to  report information back to patients in ways that 
facilitate their future informed decision making. When  patients are tested for exposure to potentially toxic 
substances, it is essential to provide them with (Brody et al., 2014; Morello-Frosch et al., 2009) 
 
 information about their exposure level; 
 a description of the potential health impacts,  as well as the related signs and symptoms; 
 how their exposure level compares with those of  others in their area and across the country; 
 the potential significance of their exposure level; and 
 how they can reduce future risk, either of the e xposure itself or its potential health impact(s). 
 
The PFAS-REACH research project is an example of an effort to provide accessible information 
to community members about how to interpret e xposure biomonitoring results and what follow-up 
activities could be warranted to address PFAS-associated health effects (Boronow et al., 2017). It is also 
essential to respect the decision of some individuals no t to be tested. Some individuals may not want to 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  have information that increases their uncertainty or coul d lead to future medical monitoring that might not 
improve their health outcomes.   
The principle of autonomy can also guide actions  taken at the community level to help foster 
decision making by individuals. For example, there is growing recognition that community organizations 
and advocacy groups can generate important inform ation about public hea lth threats and develop 
actionable solutions (Corburn 2005; Elliott, 2017; Wandersman, 2003). Thus, health care providers and 
public health institutions can foster individuals’ au tonomy by collaborating with these organizations that 
can help facilitate informed patient decision making. 
 
Feasibility 
 
The committee’s fourth principle for maki ng decisions under substantial scientific 
uncertainty is feasibility: 
 
Feasibility:  Decisions should into take account resource availability, including follow-up 
services. 
 
Feasibility, included in many evidence-to-deci sion frameworks reviewed by Norris and 
colleagues (2021), denotes the ability to conduct testing,  clinical evaluation, and follow-up activities. An 
assessment of feasibility encompass es the infrastructure and resources currently available and whether 
they are sufficient to achieve the goals of a decision.  In the context of PFAS exposure biomonitoring, for 
example, feasibility could include such considera tions as the time and knowledge providers have 
available to facilitate environmental exposure assess ments or their access to environmental occupational 
health physicians. Feasibility assessments may also in clude consideration of whether an action or policy 
is sustainable over time and it entails important legal,  ethical, or bureaucratic barriers (Moberg et al., 
2018). At the same time, however, it is crucial to recognize that feasibility assessments are relative to a 
particular point in time, and inputs and outputs can ch ange. In some cases, a particular policy may not be 
feasible immediately because of a lack of resources or other institutional barriers, but those barriers may 
reflect past or present injustices that need to be remedied. Thus, for example, a feasibility assessment can 
guide policy makers to allocate additional resources when exposure biomonitoring or follow-up services 
are likely to have benefits or are needed to promote a just health care system. Therefore, the principle of 
feasibility needs to be considered alongside the principl e of justice so it can guide future investments and 
institutional changes instead of detracting from effort s to address inequities and promote just outcomes. 
Unfortunately, the lack of a coordinated health syst em in the United States complicates any assessment of 
feasibility that goes beyond the requirements imposed on public health agencies. Individuals must rely on 
insurance or self-pay for many follow-up services, and access to high-quality primary care and specialty 
care services can be fraught with challenges.  
Adaptability 
 
The fifth and final principle is adaptability: 
 
Adaptability:  Decisions should respond to new info rmation about harm s, benefits, and 
other relevant considerations (e.g ., health equity and feasibility). 
 The National Academies evidence fra mework for decisions regarding genetic testing (NASEM, 2017) 
emphasizes that adaptability is important in decisi on contexts in which scientific information changes 
rapidly, as is the case with genetic t esting. The USPSTF also emphasizes that its evaluation of the benefits 
and harms of preventive services is a process that need s to be revisited in light of new advances in 
research, testing, and treatment capabilities (Sawaya et al., 2007). This responsiveness to new information 
is especially important in situations of substantia l scientific uncertainty, such as the decision context 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles for Decision Making Under Uncertainty  47 
Prepublication Copy  surrounding PFAS. In such situations, it is often necessary to develop plans for acting even without 
decisive information about what course of action is b est, and the harms associated with failing to act when 
warranted can often be more severe than the harms asso ciated with taking actions that ultimately turn out 
to be unwarranted. When actions are taken without compelling information, how ever, it is crucial to 
reexamine regularly the state of the evidence and th e consequences of the actions taken to reassess the 
best course of action. The adaptive management m ovement in environmental policy exemplifies this 
commitment to an ongoing process of learning and reevaluation. According to a National Research 
Council report on managing water resources, “Adaptiv e management promotes flexible decision-making 
that can be adjusted in the face of uncertainties as endpoints from mana gement actions and other events 
become better understood” (NRC, 2004, pp. 1–2).   
COMMITTEE’S CONSIDERATIONS IN DEVELOPING ITS PRINCIPLES 
 
Among the committee’s considerations in devel oping its principles for decision making under 
substantial scientific uncertainty were input from contaminated communities and a number of previously 
published evidence-to-decision frameworks.   
Community Input from Town Halls  
 
During its three town halls, the committee obtaine d perspectives from people living in or working 
with communities with PFAS contamination during its three Town Halls (see Appendix B). The 
committee recognizes that the views expressed at the town halls do not necessarily represent the views of 
all affected communities or all individuals within those communities; nonetheless, they provided input for 
the committee to consider. Important themes releva nt to the development of principles for decision 
making under substantial scientific uncertainty included the following: 
 
 Community members shared that they had to e ducate their clinicians about the exposures in 
their communities and the potential health effects that could result. They stated further that 
clinicians do not know how to provide advice on patient follow-up following PFAS exposure, 
whether PFAS exposure biomonitoring should be  provided, or how to interpret PFAS 
exposure biomonitoring results if shared by the patient. 
 Community members expressed the view that PFAS exposure biomonitoring should be 
available through traditional clinical care to all individuals. In addition, given that PFAS are 
ubiquitous in the environment and that many of the contamination sites have not been 
identified, exposure biomonitoring shou ld be more widely available.  
 Significant harms were not associated with exposure biomonitoring for PFAS. Community 
members understand that PFAS exposure biomonitori ng may not directly inform their health, 
but they wish to have knowledge of their exposure levels as a first step.  
 Speakers stated that PFAS exposure informati on could inform health care decisions and 
patient follow-up related to potential adverse hea lth effects associated with PFAS exposure.  
 
Evidence-to-Decision Frameworks Considered by the Committee 
 
Norris and colleagues recently conducted a review  of evidence-to-decision frameworks to inform 
the development of a new framework for recommending interventions to prevent or mitigate the harmful 
effects of adverse environmental exposures (Norris et al., 2021). The authors reviewed 18 frameworks 
and compared the criteria they used to justify d ecisions. Those criteria included the priority of the 
problem and several considerations re lated to benefits and harms, incl uding desirable effects, undesirable 
effects, the certainty of evidence re garding desirable and undesirable effects, and the balance of effects. 
Other criteria included values, resources, equity, accepta bility, feasibility, and human rights. Briefly, the 
frameworks reviewed by Norris and coll eagues are summarized in Table 2-1. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  TABLE 2-1  Evidence-to-Decision Frameworks Reviewed by Norris and Colleagues (2021) 
 
NOTES: ACP = Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices; BCPP = Breast Cancer Prevention Partners; 
CalEPA = California Environmental Protection Agency ; CalEPA AA = California Environmental Protection 
Agency, Alternative Assessments; EV IDEM = Evidence and Value: Imp act on DEcision-Making; GRADE = 
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; GCPS = Guide to Community Preventive Services; ICER = Institute for clinical and economic review; ISPOR = International Society for Pharmacoeconomics 
and Outcomes Research; NICE = National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; SIGN = Scottish Intercollegiate 
Guidelines Network; USPSTF = U.S. Preventive Servi ces Task Force; WHO = Wo rld Health Organization. 
SOURCE: Norris et al., 20 21. Creative Commons CC BY. 
 
 
GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) 
 
GRADE has become the dominant evidence-to -decision framework over the past 15 years, 
including for clinical decision making and public hea lth (Guyatt et al., 2008; Moberg et al., 2018; Norris 
et al., 2021). It includes evidence fra meworks for several different deci sion contexts including clinical 
recommendations, individual perspective; clinical recommendations, population perspective; coverage 
decisions; and health system and public health r ecommendations or decisions. According to Norris and 
colleagues (2021), all applications of GRADE  include roughly the same considerations: 
 
 Is the problem a priority? 
 How substantial are the desi rable anticipated effects? 
 How substantial are the undesi rable anticipated effects? 
 What is the overall certainty of the evidence of effects? 
 Does the balance between desirable and unde sirable effects favor the intervention or 
the comparison? 
 Is there important uncertainty about, or variability in, how mu ch people value the 
main outcomes?  
 How large are the resource requirements (costs)? 
 What is the certainty of the evidence of resource requirements (costs)?  
 Does the cost-effectiveness of the interventi on (the out-of-pocket cost relative to the 
net desirable effect) favor the intervention or the comparison? 
 
It is important to recognize that GRADE emphasizes financial considerations, equity, acceptability, and 
feasibility more for health systems and public health d ecisions than for individual decisions (Norris et al., 
2021).  
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles for Decision Making Under Uncertainty  49 
Prepublication Copy  U.S. Preventive Services Task Force  
 
The USPSTF is an independent panel of primary care, prevention, and evidence-based medicine 
experts. It uses an analytic framework (see Figure 2-1)  to evaluate systematically the benefits and harms 
of a particular preventive service. In evaluati ng evidence concerning the benefits and harms of 
widespread implementation, both the evidence’s certain ty and the magnitude of the benefits and harms 
are assessed. As shown in Table 2-2, the USPSTF assigns a letter grade to each preventive service 
signifying its recommendation about the service’s provision (Sawaya et al., 2007). It is important to note 
that the USPSTF does not consider cost when determining a letter grade.2 If evidence is not available, the 
USPSTF considers the “chain of indirect evidence, including evidence about the accuracy of screening 
tests, the efficiency and harms of early treatment, and the association between changes in intermediate 
endpoints due to treatment and changes in health endpoints” (Mabry-Hernandez et al., 2018). As Table 2-
2 indicates, when the certainty, based  on the evidence, for the net bene fit of screening is rated low, the 
USPSTF considers the evidence in sufficient to make a recommendation. The USPSTF views its 
evaluation of the benefits and harms of a preventiv e service as a process, and continually revisits and 
reevaluates based on new advances in research, testi ng, and treatment capabilities (Sawaya et al., 2007).  
  
 
FIGURE 2-1 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force’s (USPSTF’s) generic anal ytic framework for a screening 
preventive service.  SOURCE: Mabry-Hernandez et al ., 2018. CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. 
  
                                                      
2 See https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/us pstf/about-uspstf/task-force-resources/uspstf-and-cost-
considerations (accessed September 16, 2021). 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  TABLE 2-2  U.S. Preventive Services Task Force’s (USPSTF’s) Recommendation Grid  
Certainty   
of Net  
Benefit Magnitude  of Net Benefit 
Substantial   Moderate   Small Zero/  
Negative 
High  A  B  C  D 
Moderate   B  B  C  D 
Low  Insufficient  
 A, B, C, D , and Insufficient  represent the letter grades of recommendatio n or statement of insufficient evidence 
assigned by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force after assessing certainty and magnitude of the net benefit of the 
service.  
SOURCE: Sawaya et al., 2007. 
 
 
Evidence and Value: Impact on DEcision-Making (EVIDEM) Framework 
 
Goetghebeur and colleagues (2008) developed this framework to facilitate health care decision 
making. They conducted an extensiv e review and analysis of the lite rature and determined that a 
framework for addressing the value judgments relate d to assessing health care interventions should be 
able to do the following: “1) disentangle intrinsic a nd extrinsic value components; 2) develop a simple 
and rigorous system that applies multiple criteria d ecision analysis (MCDA) from a pragmatic standpoint 
based on actual thought processes; 3) provide practi cal access to the evidence on which value judgments 
are based; and 4) provide a practical method for deci sion-makers to provide feedback to data producers 
and all other stakeholders” (Goetghe beur et al., 2008, p. 273). Based on these needs, the authors built the 
EVIDEM framework, tailored to provide a “comprehe nsive, transparent structure grounded in global 
standards and local needs” (Goetghebeur et al., 2008,  p. 283). The framework aims to consider all 
perspectives, values, and rationales related to the decision at hand. 
 National Academies Evidence Framework for Genetic Testing 
 
In 2017, a National Academies committee develope d an evidence framework for genetic testing 
that calls for a clear definition of the genetic scenar io being considered and a triage process for evaluating 
whether the purpose of a test is worthwhile and an expedited provisional decision can be made (see 
Figure 2-2). In addition, given the ra pidly advancing nature of the field of genetic testing, the framework 
includes the opportunity for review and revisions (NASEM, 2017).   
C-8 Medical Panel  
 
In February 2005, the West Virginia Ci rcuit Court approved a class action settlement 
agreement in a lawsuit resulting from contamina tion of drinking water with perfluorooctanoic acid 
(PFOA, also known as C-8) from DuPont’s Washington Works facility in Wood County, West Virginia (see Box 1-2 in Chapter 1). The agre ement included establishing a science panel which 
conducted epidemiologic evaluations to determine probable link conditions associated with exposure 
to PFOA, and a separate medical panel which defi ned medical monitoring for members of the class 
(C-8 Medical Panel, 2013). The settlement agreement st ated that the medical pa nel needed to consider 
the following factors in developing the medical monitoring protocol:  
 
Increased risk—that the Class Member has a si gnificantly increased risk of contracting 
the particular diseases relative to th e risk in the absence of exposure;  
Necessity of Diagnostic Testing – that the Class Member should undergo specific 
periodic diagnostic testing that would not be required in the absen ce of exposure to C-
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles for Decision Making Under Uncertainty  51 
Prepublication Copy  8. The Settlement further specified that the desires of Class Members for reassurance 
that they did not have a probable link condition was a sufficient rationale for testing, 
and factors such as financial cost and th e frequency of testing need not be given 
significant weight in assessing the need for testing; and  Existence of Monitoring Procedures – that testing procedures must exist that it is not necessary to show that detection and treatment in a pre-symptomatic state reduces the burden of the probable link condition
. (C-8 Medical Panel, 2013, p. 1) 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2-2 Visual representation of the seven components of the evidence framework for genetic testing 
developed by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. SOURCE: NASEM, 2017. 
 
 
Belmont Report  
 
The Belmont Report (HHS, 1979) was developed as a set of guidelines for protecting research 
participants. This seminal report on ethics and hea lth care research outlines basic ethical principles and 
guidelines meant to assist in resolving ethical pr oblems surrounding the conduct of research with human 
subjects. The three main principles are resp ect for persons, beneficence, and justice.  
 
 Respect for persons  requires that people be considered  autonomous. Autonomous individuals 
can consider their personal goals and make their own decisions. To respect persons is to give 
weight to their opinions and choices while refraining from obstr ucting their actions or choices 
unless detrimental to others. Conversely, a lack of respect for persons or autonomous agents 
is to refuse to accept or validate their judg ments, deny them the freedom to act on their 
judgments, or withhold information necessary to make a judgment.  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   Beneficence  is an obligation to respect individuals and their decisions and protect them from 
harm. Two general rules guide the committ ee’s understanding of beneficence: (1) do no 
harm, and (2) maximize possible benefits and minimize harms. The Hippocratic Oath 
requires physicians to make medical recomme ndations and decisions that benefit their 
patients “according to their best judgment.” Th e committee recognizes that zero harm or risk 
may not be possible, but medical decisions need  to consider when the benefits outweigh the 
risks.  
 Justice refers to “fairness in distribution.” In the pr esent context, it means that PFAS research 
should have a fair distribution such that a certain group of people is not selected for the 
research to the exclusion of others. An injus tice occurs when some individuals benefit from 
the research or intervention or are denied th at benefit without good, ethical reason.  
 
Beauchamp and Childress (2001) have developed these principles further in the established 
textbook Principles of Biomedical Ethics  to guide biomedical decision making beyond the context of 
research ethics. For example, these authors refer to re spect for autonomy instead of respect for persons 
and divide the principle of beneficence into nonm aleficence (avoiding harm) and beneficence (providing 
benefits).   
Precautionary Reasoning  
 
An extensive body of scholarship in medical a nd environmental decision making is devoted to 
precautionary reasoning and the precautionary principl e. This work can inform decision making under 
substantial scientific uncertainty. Resnik (2021) pr oposes four criteria for assessing the reasonableness of 
precautionary measures, as shown in Table 2-3.  
CONCLUSION 
 
Building on the work of other experts and evidence-to-decision frame works, the committee 
developed five principles to guide decision making under uncertainty for use throughout this report: 
proportionality, justice, autonomy, feasibility, and adap tability. The principles of proportionality, justice, 
and autonomy build on the ethical principles outlin ed in the Belmont Report (HHS, 1979) and developed 
further by Beauchamp and Childress (2001). These princi ples affirm that decision making in response to 
PFAS should weigh plausible benefits  and harms proportionally while treating all individuals fairly, 
promoting health equity, respecting human right s, and supporting informed decision making by 
individuals in accordance with their values. The prin ciples of feasibility and ad aptability affirm that 
decisions should be responsive to emerging informati on about harms, benefits, and other considerations. 
 
 
TABLE 2-3 Criteria for Reasonableness of Precautionary Measures  
Proportionality Reasonable measures balance plausible risks and possible benefits 
proportionally 
Fairness Reasonable measures are based on a fair balancing of risks and benefits; 
fairness includes distributive and procedural fairness 
Epistemic Responsibility Reasonable measures comply  with norms for the responsible acquisition and 
utilization of evidence, knowledge, and expertise 
Consistency Reasonable measures are based on a consistent rationale for decision making 
SOURCE: Resnik, 2021.  
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles for Decision Making Under Uncertainty  53 
Prepublication Copy  In the clinical setting, the comm ittee’s five principles converge under the principle of autonomy and 
shared decision making3 between patient and clinician. For this  reason, shared decision making is likely 
to be the practical way a clinician can incorpor ate the principles into the clinical encounter. 
The committee’s principles may pr ovide a framework that ATSDR can use when writing clinical 
guidance for environmental exposures. Despite findings  of associations between adverse health effects 
and chemical exposures, substantial scientific uncertainty exists about the causal role of environmental 
chemicals in many health outcomes. Regulatory agenci es, public health agencies, and clinicians need to 
make thoughtful decisions about how to act in response to this uncertainty. The principles of 
proportionality, justice (particularly environmental justice), autonomy, feasibility, and adaptability can 
play a central role in these decisions.   
REFERENCES 
 Barry, M. J., and S. Edgman-Levitan. 2012. Shared  decision making—pinnacle of patient-centered care. 
New England Journal of Medicine . 366(9):780–781. https://doi .org/10.1056/NEJMp1109283.  
Beauchamp, T. L., and J. F. Childress. 2001. Principles of biomedical ethics . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Blair, A., R. Saracci, P. Vineis, P. Cocco, F. Foras tiere, P. Grandjean, M. Kogevinas, D. Kriebel, A. 
McMichael, N. Pearce, M. Porta, J. Samet, D. P. Sandler, A. S. Costantini, and H. Vainio. 2009. 
Epidemiology, public health, and the rhetoric of false positives. Environmental Health 
Perspectives  117(12):1809–1813. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0901194. 
Boffetta, P., J. K. McLaughlin, C. La Vecchia, R. E. Tarone, L. Lipworth, and W. J. Blot. 2008. False-
positive results in cancer epidemiology: A plea for epistemological modesty. Journal of the 
National Cancer Institute  100(14):988–995. https://doi .org/10.1093/jnci/djn191. 
Boronow, K. E., H. P. Susmann, K. Z. Gajos, R. A. Rudel, K. C. Arnold, P. Brown, R. Morello-Frosch, 
Laurie Havas, and J. Green Brody. 2017. DE RBI: A digital method to help researchers offer 
“right-to-know” personal exposure results. Environmental Health Perspectives  125(2):A27–A33. 
Brody, J. G., S. C. Dunagan, R. Morello-Frosch, P. Brown, S. Patton, and R. A. Rudel. 2014. Reporting 
individual results for biomonitoring and environmental exposures: Lessons learned from 
environmental communication case studies. Environmental Health  13:40. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069x-13-40. 
Bullard, R. D. 2018. Dumping in Dixie: Race, class, and environmental quality . New York: Routledge. 
C-8 Medical Panel. 2013. C-8 Medical Panel report. https://www.hpcbd.com/wp-content/uploads/ 
sites/1603732/2021/01/Medical-Panel-Report-2013-05-24.pdf (accessed June 15, 2022). 
Charles, C., A. Gafni, and T. Whelan. 1997. Shared  decision-making in the medical encounter: What does 
it mean? (or it takes at least two to tango). Socoilogical Science in Medicine  44:681–692. 
https://doi.org.10.1016/s0277-9536(96)00221-3. 
Corburn, J. 2005. Street science: Community knowledg e and environmental health justice . Berkeley, CA: 
Department of City and Regional Planning,  University of California, Berkeley.  
https://doi.org/10.5070/BP31911296. 
Douglas, H. E. 2009. Science, policy, and the value-free ideal . Pittsburg, PA: University of Pittsburgh 
Press. 
                                                      
3 Barry and Edgman-Levitan (2012) builds on concepts in Ch arles (1997) and the Institute of Medicine’s (2001) 
Crossing the Quality Chasm: a New Health System for the 21st Century  and describes shared decision making as the 
pinnacle of patient-centered care: “The process by which the optimal decision may be reached ... is called shared 
decision-making and involves, at minimu m, a clinician and the patient.... In shared decision-making, both parties 
share information: the clinician offers options and describes their risks and benefits, and the patient expresses his or 
her preferences and values. Each participant is thus armed with a better understanding of the relevant factors and 
shares responsibility in the decision about how to proceed” (p. 780).   
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Elliott, K. C. 2017. A tapestry of values: An intr oduction to values in science . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Elliott, K. C., and T. Richards. 2017. Exploring inductive risk: Case studies of values in science . New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
Fischhoff, B., and A. L. Davis. 2014. Communicating scientific uncertainty. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  111(Suppl 4):13664–13671. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1317504111. 
Ginsberg, G. L., K. Pullen Fedinick, G. M. Solomon, K.  C. Elliott, J. J. Vandenberg, S. Barone, Jr., and J. 
R. Bucher. 2019. New toxicology tools and the em erging paradigm shift in environmental health 
decision-making. Environmental Health Perspectives  127(12):125002. 
Goetghebeur, M. M., M. Wagner, H. Khoury, R. J.  Levitt, L. J. Erickson, and D. Rindress. 2008. 
Evidence and value: Impact on DEcisionMa king—the EVIDEM framework and potential 
applications. BMC Health Services Research  8(1):1–16. 
Guyatt, G. H., A. D. Oxman, G. E. Vist, R. K unz, Y. Falck-Ytter, P. Alonso-Coello, and H. J. 
Schünemann. 2008. GRADE: An emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. British Medicial Journal  336(7650):924–926. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.39489.470347.AD. 
Harris, R. P., S. L. Sheridan, C. L. Lewis, C. Barclay, M. B. Vu, C. E. Kistler, C. E. Golin, J. T. DeFrank, 
and N. T. Brewer. 2014. The harms of screeni ng: A proposed taxonomy and application to lung 
cancer screening. JAMA Internal Medicine  174(2):281–286. 
HHS (U.S. Department of Hea lth and Human Services). 1979. The Belmont report: Ethical principles and 
guidelines for the protection of human subjects of research.  Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. 
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2001. Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st century.  
Washington, DC: National Academy Pr ess. https://doi.org /10.17226/10027. 
IOM. 2013. Environmental decisions in the face of uncertainty. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press. https://d oi.org/10.17226/12568. 
IOM, NAS, and NAE (Institute of Medicine, Nationa l Academy of Sciences, and National Academy of 
Engineering). 1995. On being a scientist: Responsible conduct in research  (2nd ed.). Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press. 
Krist, A. H., T. A. Wolff, D. E. Jonas, C. M. Mangione, C-W. Tseng, and D.  Grossman. 2018. Update on 
the methods of the U.S. Preventive Services Task  Force: Methods for understanding certainty and 
net benefit when making recommendations. American Journal of Preventive Medicine  54(Suppl 
1):S11–S18. 
London, A. J. 2022. For the common good: Philosophical foundations of research ethics . New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Mabry-Hernandez, I. R., S. J. Curry, W. R. Phillips, F.  A. García, K. W. Davidson, J. W. Epling, Jr., Q. 
Ngo-Metzger, and A. S. Bierman. 2018. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force priorities for 
prevention research. American Journal of Preventive Medicine  54(Suppl 1):S95–S103. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2017.08.014. 
Moberg, J., A. D. Oxman, S. Rosenbaum, H. J. Schünemann, G. Guyatt, S. Flottorp, C. Glenton, S. 
Lewin, A. Morelli, and G. Rada. 2018. The GR ADE Evidence to Decision (EtD) framework for 
health system and public health decisions. Health Research Policy and Systems  16(1):1–15. 
Morello-Frosch, R., J. G. Brody, P. Brown, R. G. Altman, R. A. Rudel, and C. Perez. 2009. Toxic 
ignorance and right-to-know in biomonitoring resu lts communication: a survey of scientists and 
study participants. Environmental Health  8:6. https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-8-6. 
NASEM (National Academies of Sciences , Engineering, and Medicine). 2017. An evidence framework 
for genetic testing . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
Norris, S. L., M. T. Aung, N. Chartres, and T. J. Woodruff. 2021. Evidence-to-decision frameworks: A 
review and analysis to inform decision-ma king for environmental health interventions. 
Environmental Health  20(1):124. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-021-00794-z. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles for Decision Making Under Uncertainty  55 
Prepublication Copy  NRC (National Research Council). 2004. Adaptive management for water resources project planning . 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Pr ess. https://doi.org/10.17226/10972.  
Rehfuess, E. A., J. M. Stratil, I. B. Scheel, A. Portela, S. L. Norris, and R. Baltussen. 2019. The WHO-
INTEGRATE evidence-to-decision framework vers ion 1.0: Integrating WHO norms and values 
and a complexity perspective. BMJ Global Health  4(Suppl 1):e000844. 
Resnik, D. B. 2021. Precautionary reasoning and the precautionary principle. In Precautionary reasoning 
in environmental and public health policy.  Cham, Switzerland: Springer. Pp. 111–128. 
Sawaya, G. F., J. Guirguis-Blake, M. LeFevre, R. Harris, and D. Petitti. 2007. Update on the methods of 
the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Estima ting certainty and magnitude of net benefit. 
Annals of Internal Medicine  147(12):871–875. https://doi .org/10.7326/0003-4819-147-12-
200712180-00007. 
Shrader-Frechette, K. 2002. Environmental justice: Creating equality, reclaiming democracy . New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Wandersman, A. 2003. Community science: Bridging  the gap between science and practice with 
community-centered models. American Journal of Community Psychology  31(3–4):227–242. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1023954503247. 
Workman, M., K. Dooley, G. Lomax, J. Maltby, a nd G. Darch. 2020. Decision-making in contexts of 
deep uncertainty—An alternative appr oach for long-term climate policy. Environmental Science 
& Policy  103:77–84. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56  Prepublication Copy  3 
 
Potential Health Effects of PFAS 
 
This chapter summarizes results of the committee’s review of the potential health effects of PFAS 
in response to the following elem ent of the committee’s Statement of Task: “to establish a basis for 
prioritized clinical surveillance or monitoring of PFAS health effects .” The aim of this review was to 
identify a set of health effects that may be asso ciated with PFAS to support preventive medicine 
recommendations and decisions. Based on the review , the committee developed strength-of-evidence 
conclusions for the various health effects associated with PFAS.  
The committee’s Statement of Task limited this re view to those PFAS included in the Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental 
Chemicals  (see Table 3-1). The PFAS in Table 3-1 are those most commonly studied in epidemiological 
research, although other PFAS may also cause harm give n some similarities with those in Table 3-1 with 
respect to biological persistence and toxicities (Kwi atkowski et al., 2020). It is important to note as well 
that while different PFAS have distinct physical, chemical, and toxicological properties, people are 
exposed to more than a single PFAS. As a result, exposures are often to mixtures of PFAS such that 
specific effects are difficult to disentangle. Consider ing these issues, and recognizing that some PFAS are 
less frequently measured, the committee ultimately decided to provide one strength-of-evidence 
determination for all PFAS for each health effect. 
The Statement of Task did not limit the health effects included in the committee’s review. 
Speakers at the committee’s town halls  described a variety of health effects of concern that they had 
observed in their communities and that may be asso ciated with PFAS exposure. Cancers, endocrine 
effects, immune function, and fertility were the most frequently mentioned health effects (see Table 3-2). 
The committee considered this input to be valuable a nd paid special attention to the health effects of 
concern observed in communities wh en describing the evidence.  
 
 
TABLE 3-1  PFAS Species Currently Included in the Ce nters for Disease Control and Prevention’s 
(CDC’s) National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals   
Abbreviated Name  Full Name  CAS Registry No.  
MeFOSAA Methylperfluorooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid 2355-31-9 
PFHxS Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid 
perfluorohexane sulfonic acid 355-46-4 
n-PFOA (linear isomer), Sb-PFOA 
(branched isomers) Perfluorooctanoic acid 335-67-1* 
PFDA Perfluorodecanoic acid 335-76-2 
PFUnDA Perfluoroundecanoic acid 2058-94-8 
n-PFOS (linear isomer), Sm-PFOS 
(branched isomers) Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid 1763-23-1* 
PFNA Perfluorononanoic acid 375-95-1 
NOTES: CAS = Chemical Abstracts Service. * = CAS number refers to linear isomer only. Previous survey years 
have also included perfluorobutane sulfonic acid (PFBS), perfluoropentanoic acid (PFpA), perfluorododecanoic acid 
(PFDoDA), perfluorooctane sulfonamide  (FOSA), and 2-(N-ethyl-perfluoro octane sulfonamido)acetate (EtFOSAA), 
according to Patrick N. Breysse’s presentatio n to the committee on February 4, 2021. 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  57 
Prepublication Copy  TABLE 3-2 Categories of Health Effects Mentioned by  Speakers at the Committee’s Town Halls  
Health Effect Category No. of Speakers 
Mentioned 
Cancers, including bladder, urinar y tract, liver, breast, testicular, thyroid, bone, kidney, pancreatic, 
and ovarian, as well as melanoma, leukemia, multiple myeloma, and lymphoma 16 
Disruption of the endocrine system, including impaired thyroid and disease  10 
Impaired immune function 9 Fertility and reproductive issues, including menstruation and lactation concerns 9 
Diabetes, other metabolic concerns, and obesity 8 
Liver disease and impairment, including nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 7 Disease and impairment of the digestive system, including ulcerative colitis, gallbladder 
dysfunction, irritable bowel syndrome, and other colon impairment 6 
High cholesterol 6 
Autoimmune disease 5 
Birth defects 5 
Developmental and neurological impacts, including learning disorders and autism 5 High blood pressure, gestational hypertension, and preeclampsia 5 
Asthma, pulmonary disease, and cardiovascular disease 5 
Premature and underweight births 4 Skin rashes, hair loss, and other skin concerns 3 
Chronic inflammation and allergic reactions 3 
Arthritis, osteoporosis, and other impacts to the skeletal system 2 Multiple sclerosis 1 
 
 
OVERVIEW OF EVIDENCE REVIEW APPROACH 
 
 Appendix D provides full details of the methods used for the committee’s review. Briefly, the 
committee aimed to build upon exis ting decisions from other authoritative bodies. The focus was on more 
recent studies, both high-quality systematic reviews a nd published epidemiologic research articles, which 
could inform updates to authoritative conclusions  regarding PFAS exposure and any human health 
effects. The review approach improved efficiency while minimizing the risk of excluding scientific 
findings that could inform the committee’s recommendations.   
Consideration of Authoritative Reviews 
 
The committee focused on authoritative reviews produced by government agencies or other 
bodies that publish strength-of-evidence determinations  through a process that includes peer review. As 
detailed in Appendix D, the committee focused on the findings from the following organizations, 
presented in chronological order by year the literature search was completed:  
 
 C-8 Science Panel reports (last report published 2012) 
 European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) (search complete: 2013) 
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation a nd Development (OECD) (published 2013) 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) (search complete: 2014) 
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (search complete: 2015) 
 National Toxicology Program (NTP) (search complete: 2016) 
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Re gistry (ATSDR) (search complete: 2018) 
 
Among the authoritative reviews, ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls  included 
the greatest number of PFAS that were included in  the committee’s Statement of Task (MeFOSAA was 
not included), was the most recen t (literature search completed in September 2018), and was not limited 
in terms of health effects covered (ATSDR, 2021). Therefore, the committee used this source as the 
primary basis for the next stages of the review process.  
The committee did not formally critique the qualit y of the any authoritative reviews, as each 
authoritative body has its own procedures for public co mment and peer review to ensure that biases are 
limited in its reviews. Nonetheless, the co mmittee noted several areas in which ATSDR’s Toxicological 
Profile for Perfluoroalkyls  could be strengthened. First, the toxicological profile does not provide a 
detailed description of the evidence identification met hods or document its reasons for excluding specific 
studies. Second, the study quality assessment does not app ear to follow a standard approach, and in some 
cases, it is difficult to identify the study designs that  were included in the review. Third, the process for 
assessing the strength of the evidence is not well described. Despite these limitations, however, the 
committee concluded that the ATSDR review provi ded a basis for assessing evidence of association 
between PFAS and health effects.  
Review of Systematic Reviews 
 
As detailed in Appendix D, the committee’s review of systematic reviews consisted of the 
following steps: a literature search, screening of abstract s, a full-text review of studies identified in the 
abstract screening, and evaluation of a final set of  relevant studies. The literature search identified 639 
potentially relevant articles, of which 26 systematic  reviews met the committee’s inclusion criteria and 
were evaluated using AMSTAR-2 (A MeaSurement T ool to Assess systematic Reviews) (Shea et al., 
2017). The committee conducted a critical appraisal of the systematic reviews because such reviews can 
be subject to a range of biases. All high-quality syst ematic reviews included studies that were also 
reviewed in ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls . Thus, the systematic reviews were used 
as sources for reference in the committee’s assessment, but they were not formally included as part of the 
final strength-of-evidence determination. 
 
Review of Recent Epidemiologic Studies 
 
As detailed in Appendix D, the committee’s review of original  literature consisted of the 
following steps: a literature search, screening of abstract s, a full-text review of studies identified in the 
abstract screening, evaluation of a final set of studies identified as relevant after the full-text review, data 
abstraction, and an evidence synthesis step.  
The literature search identified 5,172 potentially  relevant studies. After removal of duplicates 
(112 articles), 5,060 articles were subject to title a nd abstract screening by two independent reviewers. 
After 4,434 articles had been excluded because the titles and abstracts did not meet the committee’s 
inclusion criteria, 626 articles were subjected to fu ll-text review, during whic h additional articles were 
excluded if they had been pub lished before 2018 or we re listed among the references in ATSDR’s 
Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls (n = 320); were cross-sectional in design (n = 160); were not 
published in English (n = 1); did not provide risk estimates associated with PFAS exposure (n = 3); or 
documented studies not conducted in humans (n = 3) . Cross-sectional studies were excluded largely 
because this study design measures exposure and disease at the same time, and so cannot determine cause 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  59 
Prepublication Copy  and effect. The remaining 139 articles were categoriz ed according to the human health outcomes studied, 
as shown in Figure 3-1.  
The committee’s review of the recent literature fo cused mainly on those health effect categories 
for which additional evidence might have change d the committee’s understanding of the association 
between PFAS exposure and health outcomes. The co mmittee formally evaluated the individual studies 
for internal validity or “risk of bias,” using a tool adapted from the Navigation Guide of Woodruff and Sutton (2014), assigning to each an ove rall assessment of its risk of bias (low, probably low, probably 
high, or high risk of bias). Effect estimates from the individual studies included in the review were 
extracted into a database and uploaded to a public webs ite (Tableau Public) to allow for visualizations 
such as evidence maps and forest plots.
1 The effect estimates in the Tableau represent those from the 
model most adjusted for confounders. Appendix D provi des the critical domains u sed by the committee to 
assess risk of bias, as well as the data abstraction procedure.   
Evidence Synthesis 
 
To assess the strength of evidence regarding the po tential for PFAS to cause a particular health 
effect, the committee integrated th e evidence reviewed in ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for 
Perfluoroalkyls  with the evidence from its review of the original epidemiologic studies. A framework 
based on the Hill considerations, which help dete rmine whether associations are causal, guided the 
synthesis of available evidence (Fedak et al ., 2015; Hill, 1965; NASEM, 2018a). The committee 
considered the animal studies discussed in ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls  and in the 
systematic reviews examined by the committee in maki ng its determinations, as an aid to interpretation of 
the human studies. Toxicologic evidence, whethe r it supports or conflicts with evidence from 
epidemiologic studies, provides insights about bi ologic processes and informs how an observed 
association might be interpreted (NASEM, 2018a). 
The committee’s strength-of-evidence conclusions reflect one of the four categories described 
below (see Figure 3-2).  
Sufﬁcient Evidence of an Association 
 
For effects in this category, a positive association between PFAS and the outcome must be 
observed in studies in which chance, bias, and confou nding can be ruled out with reasonable confidence. 
For example, the committee might re gard as sufficient evidence of an  association evidence from several 
small studies that is unlikely to be  due to confounding or to otherw ise be biased and that shows an 
association that is consistent in magnitude and di rection. Experimental data supporting biologic 
plausibility strengthen the evidence of an association but  are not a prerequisite, nor are they sufficient to 
establish an association without corresponding epidemiologic ﬁndings. 
 
Limited or Suggestive Evidence of an Association 
 
In this category, the evidence must suggest an  association between exposure to PFAS and the 
outcome in studies of humans, but the evidence can be li mited by an inability to rule out chance, bias, or 
confounding with confidence. One high-quality study may indicate a positive association, but the results 
of other studies of lower quality may be inconsistent.    
 
                                                           
1 The committee’s public Tableau can be accessed at the following link: 
https://public.tableau.com/a pp/profile/nationalacademies/viz/NASEMP FASEvidenceMaps/PF ASEvidenceMap. The 
information may be viewed as an evidence map or as a fore st plot. Within forest plots, filters can be accessed using 
the “toggle filters” function in order to restrict the view to  data on specific health effect categories and other factors 
(reference, chemical, study design, study population, etc.).  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  
FIGURE 3-1 Evidence map describing the number of studies found, by PFAS, for each health outcome category. 
 
 
60          Prepublication Copy   
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  61 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 3-2 Categories of association used in this report. 
NOTES:  The categories of association only describe how strong the evidence is between PFAS and the health 
outcome. The risk of developing an outcome from exposure to PFAS for things in the same category can vastly differ and are dependent on whether an individual has other risk factors for developing the outcome.  
 
 
Inadequate or Insuf ﬁcient Evidence to Dete rmine an Association 
 
If there was not enough reliable scientific data to  categorize the potential association with a health 
effect as “sufficient evidence of an association,” “lim ited or suggestive evidence of an association,” or on 
the other end of the spectrum, “limited or suggestive evidence of no association,” the health outcome was 
placed in the category of “inadequate or insuf ﬁcient evidence to determine an association” by default. In 
this category, the available human  studies may have inconsistent ﬁndings or be of insuf ﬁcient quality, 
validity, consistency, or statistical power to support a conclusion regarding the presence of an association. 
Such studies may have failed to control for confou nding factors or may have had inadequate assessment 
of exposure.  
 
Limited or Suggestive Evidence of No Association 
 
A conclusion of “no association” is inevita bly limited to the conditions, exposures, and 
observation periods covered by the available studies,  and the possibility of a small increase in risk 
related to the magnitude of exposure studied can never be excluded. However, a change in classi ﬁcation 
from inadequate or insuf ﬁcient evidence of an association to  limited or suggestive evidence of no 
association would require new studies that corrected for the methodologic problems of previous studies and that had samples large enough to limit the possible study results attributable to chance. 
 
COMMITTEE’S CONCLUSIONS 
 
Annex Table 3-1 at the end of the chapter summar izes the health outcomes considered by the 
committee, the relevant conclusions from authoritativ e reviews, and the committee’s overall conclusions 
for endpoints relevant to each outcome. The committee’ s conclusions reflect its integration of evidence 
reviewed in ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls  and other authoritative reviews with the 
evidence garnered from the review of recent epidemiologic studies. 
The committee found sufficient  evidence of an association for the following diseases and health 
outcomes: 
 
 decreased antibody response (in adults and children), 
 dyslipidemia (in adults and children), 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   decreased infant and fetal growth, and 
 increased risk of kidney cancer (in adults). 
 
The committee found limited  or suggestive  evidence of an associatio n for the following diseases 
and health outcomes: 
 
 increased risk of breast cancer (in adults), 
 liver enzyme alterations (in adults and children), 
 increased risk of pregnancy-induced hypertension (gestational hypertension and 
preeclampsia), 
 increased risk of testicular cancer (in adults), 
 increased risk of thyroid disease a nd dysfunction (in adults), and  
 increased risk of ulcerative colitis (in adults). 
 
For a range of other health effects, the evidence was inadequate  or insufficient . These include: 
type 1 and gestational diabetes; cardiovascular disease ; metabolic syndrome; obesity; infertility; male and 
female reproductive effects; reproductive hormone le vels; and cancers other than kidney, breast, and 
testicular. 
The committee’s rationale for these conclusions is pr ovided in the sections that follow, organized 
by human health outcomes. For effects with limited  or sufficient  evidence, the range of effect size 
estimates considered by the committee is indicated. Add itional information, includi ng an evidence map of 
recent studies, information about the quality of individual studies, and forest plots showing effect size estimates in a searchable format, can also be  accessed from the committee’s public Tableau.  
With one exception (decreased infant and fetal gr owth), the committee provided forest plots for 
all outcomes with sufficient  evidence of an association to display effect estimates from the studies with 
low or probably low risk of bias. Specifically, forest plots based on the data in the Tableau are displayed 
in this chapter for the following out comes: changes in antibody response (a measure of immune function), 
total cholesterol (a marker of dyslipidemia), a nd hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. For these 
outcomes, the committee chose to di splay the effect estimate that w as the most common across studies if 
more than one was available in the Tableau. For cancer, forest plots were created based on studies 
included in ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile and Polyfluoroalkyls  and the more recent epidemiologic 
studies. The committee handled cancer in this wa y because it was upgrading the previously observed 
association between PFAS and kidney cancer and drawing a new conclusion on breast cancer. Each cancer figure displays the PFAS with the strongest e ffect. For birthweight, there were many studies with 
probably or definitely low risk of bias, and those with definitely low risk of bias are displayed in a table rather than a forest plot. In addition to the outcomes with sufficient evidence of an association, one 
outcome with limited  suggestive evidence, hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, is displayed in a forest 
plot. This was an important outcome category to speakers at the committee’s town halls. 
 
SUMMARY AND RATIONALE FOR THE COMMITTEE’S CONCLUSIONS  
BY HUMAN HEALTH OUTCOMES 
 
Immune System Effects 
 
The committee’s evaluation of th e impact of PFAS on immune function considered evidence 
relevant to the three basic functions of the immune  system: response to infection, response to foreign 
substances (allergy), and response to self (autoimmunity). The committee found sufficient  evidence for an 
association of PFAS exposure with decreased anti body response to vaccination or infection, and limited 
suggestive  evidence of an association with ulcerative co litis (relevant to autoimmunity). There was 
inadequate  evidence for other immune system endpoints, including infectious disease (response to 
infection) and response to allergens.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  63 
Prepublication Copy  Response to Infection 
 
ATSDR concluded that there is suggestive eviden ce for an association between serum levels of 
PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFDA and decreased antibod y response to vaccines, and limited evidence of 
an association for PFNA, PFUnA, and PFDoDA. Other authoritative reviews (including those of EFSA, 
EPA, NTP, and OECD) also found associations between PFAS and decreased antibody response to 
vaccines. Three more recent pape rs focus on antibody response earl y in life. Huang and colleagues 
(2020) conducted a study, with probably low risk of bi as, that found that immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels 
were slightly lower among children with higher PFA S serum levels. The regression coefficient per 1-
log10 nanograms per milliliter (ng /m L) increase in PFAS ranged from −0.04 (95% confidence interval 
[CI]: −0.11–0.04) for PFHxS to 0.00 for PFUnDA (95% CI: −0.06–0.05) (see Figure 3-3). In another 
study with probably low risk of bias, Timmermann and colleagues (2020) evaluated measles antibodies at three time points: before first vaccination (m easuring antibodies passed from the mother) and after 
first and second vaccination; for most PFAS, no stro ng associations with antib ody levels were found. 
For PFOS, there was an inverse association between PFAS levels in blood and antibody levels before 
first vaccination in boys (see Figure 3-4). In a st udy of bias of antibodies to hand, foot, and mouth 
disease (CA 16 and EV71 antibody), with probably high risk of bias, Zeng and colleagues (2019) 
observed that 3-month-old infants with higher PFAS cord blood levels were two to four times more 
likely to have levels of antibodies to hand, foot , and mouth disease that were below the clinically 
protective level (see Figure 3-5). This finding suggest s that higher PFAS blood levels may contribute to 
lower antibody levels over time. Taken togeth er, these three recent studies add support for the 
conclusion of sufficient  evidence of an association between PFAS exposure and decreased antibody 
response.  
The committee reviewed four papers focused on specific infectious diseases (chicken pox, 
common cold, otitis media, pneumonia, and respiratory tract infection) in children (Ait Bamai et al., 
2020; Huang et al., 2020; Kvalem et al., 2020; Manz ano-Salgado et al., 2019). All four studies were 
rated as having a probably low risk of bias; however , three of the studies used parental reports of 
infection to ascertain outcomes, which could result in information bias, leading in turn to null findings. 
The fourth study, by Huang and colleagues (2020), co llected data on infections from medical records. 
These four studies did not provide strong eviden ce of an association of PFAS with these common 
illnesses, although there was some suggestion that for children without siblings, PFAS may be 
associated with respiratory syncytial virus (Ait Ba mai et al., 2020). There was no evidence for fever 
among children with higher PFAS blood levels (T immermann et al., 2020). The committee concluded 
there is inadequate  or insufficient  evidence of an association between PFAS exposure and risk of 
infection, although this is an area worthy of future  research, including the relationship of PFAS to novel 
infections such as SARS-CoV-2 (see Box 3-1).  
  
 
FIGURE 3-3 Regression  coefficients for changes in immunogl obulin (IgG) concentrations per  
1-log10 nanograms per milliliter (ng /mL) increase in PFAS serum level.  DATA SOURCE: Huang et al., 2020. 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 3-4 Regression  coefficients for percent difference in measles antibody response per doubling of log10 
nanograms per milliliter (ng /mL) serum PFOS.  
DATA SOURCE: Timmerman et al., 2020.  
 
Response to Foreign Substances (Allergy) 
 
The committee reviewed several studies evaluati ng the impact of PFAS exposure on allergic 
symptoms and disease, all with a probably low risk of bias. The specific outcomes studied included 
allergies to food and inhaled substances, atopic der matitis, dermatitis, changes in serum immunoglobulin 
E (IgE) levels, rhinitis, rhinoconjunctiv itis, and results of skin prick tests. Six studies (Ait Bamai et al., 
2020; Chen et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2020; Impinen et al., 2019; Kvalem et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2019) 
evaluated some aspect of allergic response, with most not providing strong evidence of an association 
with PFAS. The one exception is the study by Wen and colleagues (2019), which showed increased 
atopic dermatitis among those in the highest tertile of PFOA levels, but not for other PFAS. One study 
included in ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls  found that PFAS exposure was 
associated with increased odds of asthma diagnosis among children at ages 5 and 13, but only those 
children who had not received measles, mumps, a nd rubella vaccination (Timmerman et al., 2020). 
Overall, the evidence for an associati on between PFAS and allergy response is inadequate  or 
insufficient , a finding consistent with the authoritative review by EFSA.  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  65 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 3-5 Regression  coefficients for percent change in hand, foot, and mouth disease antibody response per 
doubling of natural logarithm (ln)-nanograms per milliliter (ng /mL) sum of PFAS.  
DATA SOURCE: Zheng et al., 2019.  
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  BOX 3-1 
PFAS Exposure and Risk of  SARS-CoV-2 Infection 
 
SARS-CoV-2 is a novel virus with low immunity wo rldwide prior to the pandemic, which provides an 
opportunity to evaluate the impact of PFAS  exposure on response to infection.  
 
What types of studies have been conducted?  Available studies evaluate SARS-CoV-2 infection, severity, and 
mortality.  
 
What have the results shown?   
 Studies on SARS-CoV-2 infection . The results of two studies show a slightly increased risk of SARS-
CoV-2 infection associated with  PFAS exposure, but the designs of both preclude drawing causal 
conclusions. One study, conducted in China, used a case-control format to compare PFAS levels in urine 
in cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection versus noninfect ed controls. PFOS, PFOA, and total PFAS levels in 
urine were higher in those with infection than those without. The observed odds ratios, adjusted for age, 
sex, body mass index (BMI), comorbidities, and urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio, were 1.94 (95% 
confidence interval [CI]: 1.39–2.96) for PFOS, 2.73 (95% CI: 1.71–4.55) for PFOA, and 2.82 (95% CI: 
1.97–3.51) for the sum of 12 PFAS (Ji et al., 2021). Another study, of ecologic design, calculated sex- 
and age-standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) for SA RS-CoV-2 infection among adults in the Ronneby, 
Sweden, area, where drinking water was highly contaminated with PFAS, and in a neighboring reference 
town with similar demographic characteristics but background levels of PFAS exposure (Nielsen and 
Jöud, 2021). The authors found a slight, but significant, elevated risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the 
former group (SIR = 1.19, 95% CI: 1.12–1.27).  
 SARS-CoV-2 severity . The results of one study indicate that PFAS may influence the severity of COVID-
19 disease, but the study design does not allow for causal determinations. Researchers in Denmark 
analyzed plasma samples from 323 people with COVID-19 (Grandjean et al., 2021). The authors 
observed that perfluorobutanoic acid (PFBA) showed an unadjusted odds ratio of 2.19 (95% CI; 1.39–
3.46) for increasing the severity of the disease.  
 Studies on SARS-CoV-2 mortality . One study showed a slight but not statistically significant increased 
risk of mortality following SARS-CoV-2 infection among individuals exposed to high levels of PFAS 
contamination; however, its design does not allow for causal determinations. Investigators compared 
SARS-CoV-2 infection in a community in Venetto, It aly, where drinking water was highly contaminated 
with PFAS, and in a similar Italian community without contaminated water, using a Bayesian ecological 
regression model adjusted for education level and ba seline all-cause mortality. They found that the rate 
ratio for COVID-19 mortality for the area of high ex posure versus the area of low exposure was 1.60 
(90% CI: 0.94–2.51) (Catelan et al., 2021).  
 
Conclusion:  Taken as a whole, the extant research does not allow conclusions to be drawn on whether PFAS 
exposures may influence COVID-19 infection, severity, an d mortality. Given that most of the available studies 
have been ecological, more evidence is necessary to address this question. 
 
 
Response to Self (Autoimmunity) 
 
As noted in authoritative reviews by the EPA and OECD, the C-8 Science Panel identified an 
association between PFAS and ulcerative colitis, a rare  autoimmune condition of the gastrointestinal 
(GI) tract. In a follow-up to that study, Steenland and colleagues (2018) further evaluated the exposure–
response relationship between PFAS and ulcerative colitis, examining Crohn’s disease as well. They 
found that ulcerative colitis was positively associated with PFOA but not with other PFAS. The odds 
ratio for ulcerative colitis per 1 unit of log PFOA was 1.60 (95% CI: 1.14–2.24), but the trend by 
quintiles was not monotonic (1, 0.84, 40.98, 33.36, 2.86) (Steenland et al., 2018). The only other analysis of the association of PFAS with ulcerativ e colitis is a 2022 case-control study from the Nurses’ 
Health Study using blood specimens collected between  1989 and 1999 (Lochead et al., 2022), identified 
after the committee had completed its review. This study did not find an association between ulcerative 
colitis and any PFAS measured; the median concentration of PFOA among the 80 cases was 3.97 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  67 
Prepublication Copy  ng/mL, higher than the median value of 2.93 ng/mL for the 114 ulcerative co litis cases in the Steenland 
study. Given the low incidence of ulcerative colitis , it will be difficult to replicate the findings from 
either of these studies in other populations. The Nur ses’ Health Study also observed a statistically 
significant decreased risk of Crohn’s disease with  PFAS; the Steenland study found no association with 
Crohn’s disease. To assess the relationship between PFAS and inflammatory bowel disease, Xu and 
colleagues (2020b) measured two proteins (calprotectin and Zonulin) in feces and saw no association with PFAS.  
Given the difficulty of evaluating these diseases, future studies are needed  to characterize the 
impact of PFAS on autoimmunity. Although there is more  recent inconsistent evidence, it is not strong 
enough to override the previous conclusion from the C- 8 study. Overall, the committee concluded that 
there is limited suggestive  evidence of an association of PFAS w ith ulcerative colitis. The committee did 
not review studies that considered other autoimmune endpoints.  
Cardiometabolic Outcomes 
 
The committee’s evaluation of th e impact of PFAS on cardiometabolic outcomes considered 
evidence relevant to four disorders of the thr ee basic functions of the cardiometabolic system: 
dyslipidemia, high blood pressure or hypertension, metabolic syndrome, and elevated body mass index 
(BMI) or obesity. The committee did not identify an y studies that evaluated the association between 
PFAS and cardiovascular disease, a group of disorders involving the heart and blood vessels (coronary 
[ischemic] heart disease, cerebrovascular disease [stroke], peripheral arterial disease, rheumatic heart disease, congenital heart disease, and deep ve in thrombosis and pulmonary embolism).
2 The committee 
concluded that there is sufficient  evidence of an association of PFAS exposure with dyslipidemia in 
adults and children. This conclusion builds on tho se of the authoritative reviews considered by the 
committee, all of which (including those of ATSD R, EFSA, EPA, OECD, and the C-8 Science Panel) 
found associations between PFAS and dyslipidemia. The committee concluded that the evidence is 
insufficient  for other findings related to cardiovascula r risk factors and nonpregnancy clinical 
cardiovascular diseases. This conclusion is consistent with those of the authoritative reviews, which 
concluded that there was mixed to limited ev idence supporting associations between PFAS and 
cardiovascular risk factors and diseases other than the four discussed above because of inconsistencies in 
measurement, differences in study designs and popula tions, and differences in adjustment for potential 
confounding factors.   
Dyslipidemia  
 
The studies identified by the committee that evalua ted dyslipidemia used several types of study 
designs, including cohort and nested case-contro l approaches, and the studies encompassed both 
children and adults. Some of the major challenges to interpretation of their findings were that outcome 
definitions were inconsistent across studies (total  triglycerides, total cholesterol, and low-density 
lipoprotein [LDL], and high-density lipoprotein [HDL],  sometimes measured in a variety of different 
units). In addition, the study populations included we re very broad with respect to age range, sex, and 
race or ethnicity representation, making it difficult to interpret and generalize the results across studies. 
In addition, the timing of exposure to PFAS was ofte n unclear, particularly in the studies of adults, in 
which confounding could be an issue. The study desi gns and sample sizes varied; there were six cohort 
studies and one nested case-control study, most of which were rated as having probably low risk of bias. Figures 3-6 and 3-7 display effect estimates from those studies of low or probably low risk of bias that 
evaluated the impact of PFAS exposure on total cholester ol (the most consistent effect measured across 
studies) in adults (Donat-Vargas et al., 2019b; Lin et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2021) and children (Mora et 
                                                           
2 See https://www.heart.org/e n/health-topics/consumer-h ealthcare/what-is-cardiovascu lar-disease (accessed June 
28, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  al., 2018). The effects documented across studies were  heterogenous, possibly because of the timing of 
the exposures and outcome measurements. Overa ll, the committee concluded that there is sufficient  
evidence of an association between PFAS and dys lipidemia, as the recent epidemiologic literature 
provides additional confidence in the conclusions of authoritative reviews regarding this association.  
 
 
 
FIGURE 3-6  Regression coefficients for change s in total cholesterol in adults.  
DATA SOURCES: Donat-Vargas et al., 2019b; Lin et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2021. 
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  69 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 3-7  Regression coefficients for total cholesterol per interquartile range (IQR) increase in PFAS exposure 
in children.  
DATA SOURCE: Mora et al., 2018.  
 
 
High Blood Pressure or Hypertension  
The authoritative reviews do not identify an asso ciation between PFAS and high blood pressure 
or hypertension. The committee identified four studi es rated as having probably low or definitely low 
risk of bias that evaluated the impact of PFAS e xposure on hypertension, blood  pressure, systolic blood 
pressure, and diastolic blood pressure (Donat-Vargas et al., 2019b; Lin et al., 2020b; Mitro et al., 
2020a). The populations and designs  varied greatly across these studies: Donat-Vargus and colleagues 
(2019b) was a nested case-control study of middl e-aged women and men; Lin and colleagues (2020b) 
was a randomized, controlled clinical trial conducte d at 27 clinical centers around the United States from 
1996 to 2001; and Mitro and colleagues (2020a) w as a cohort study among postpartum females. Donat-
Vargus and colleagues (2019b observed that the effect  estimates for the impact of exposure to PFAS and 
hypertension were inconsistent. Lin and coll eagues (2020b) observed modest and mostly null 
associations of plasma PFAS concentrations with  high blood pressure and hypertension. Mitro and 
colleagues (2020a) observed higher systolic blood pressure (e.g., 1.2 mm Hg [95% CI: 0.3, 2.2] per doubling of PFOS) at 3 years postpartum. Given the inconsistency of the evidence, the committee concluded that the evidence is inadequate  or insufficient  to determine an association between PFAS and 
high blood pressure or hypertension. 
 
Metabolic Syndrome 
 
The authoritative reviews do not identify an asso ciation between PFAS and metabolic syndrome. 
Metabolic syndrome is a group of risk factors that in creases the risk of heart disease and stroke. Diagnosis 
requires that an individual have three of the following risk factors: (1) a large waist circumference (males: 
>102 cm, females: >88 cm); (2) high triglyceride levels ( ≥1.7 mmol/L); (3) low HDL cholesterol (males 
<1.04 mmol/L, females <1.30 mmol/L); (4) high blood pressure ( ≥130 over ≥85 mm Hg); and (5) high 
fasting glucose levels ( ≥6.1 mmol/L) (Beilby, 2004). The committee did not identify any new 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  epidemiologic studies reporting associations between exposure to PFAS and a diagnosis of metabolic 
syndrome. The committee concluded that the evidence is inadequate  or insufficient to determine such an 
association, although the relationship is plausible gi ven the association between PFAS and dyslipidemia.  
 
Elevated Body Mass Index or Obesity 
 
The authoritative reviews do not identify an asso ciation between PFAS and elevated body mass 
index or obesity. Epidemiologic studies have asse ssed associations between exposure to PFAS and 
anthropometric outcomes because some PFAS may activat e peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
(PPAR) gamma, which promotes adipogenesis (L iu et al., 2018; Takacs and Abbott, 2007). Sex 
differences in obesity, coupled with differences in  exposures within certain subpopulations, may place 
certain groups at increased risk of overweight and obesity (Fenton et al., 2021; Mitro et al., 2020; 
Starling et al., 2019). In addition, exposure during cer tain periods of growth and development may have 
short- and long-term consequences for overweight and obesity among children and adolescents, with 
later-life health consequences (Araújo and Ramos, 2017; Fenton et al., 2021; Gross et al., 2020; Hruby 
and Hu, 2015; Yeung et al., 2019;). Co-exposures to ps ychosocial factors and other chemicals that also 
promote fat cell development may work synergistically  with PFAS chemicals to impact fat growth and 
development, with impacts on body weight and gr owth measures (Araújo and Ramos, 2017; Braun et 
al., 2021; Chen et al., 2019; Fenton et al., 2021; Jensen et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2018, 2020; Mitro et al., 
2020b; Rahman et al., 2019; Romano et al., 2021; Shoaff et al., 2018; Starling et al., 2019, 2020).  
The committee identified several studies that evaluated the impact of exposure to PFAS on 
obesity, four being rated as having a definitely low ri sk of bias (Braun et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2019; 
Mitro et al., 2020a,b; Shoaff et al., 2018). These four studies varied greatly in the ages of the populations 
assessed. Two of the studies used data from the H ealth Outcomes and Measures of the Environment 
(HOME) study cohort (Braun et al., 2021; Shoaff et al., 2018), and one was a study of children in 
Shanghai, China (Chen et al., 2019). The fourth inv estigated the impact of PFAS exposure on adiposity 
among postpartum women (Mitro et al., 2020b). The study by Braun and colleagues (2020) (which largely updates Shoaff et al., 2018)—assessed expos ure to PFAS (PFOA, PFOS, and PFHxS) at 16 
weeks’ gestation and delivery, and measured weight  and length or height and calculated child BMI at 
several time points across the life course (4 weeks to 12 years). The authors observed some suggestive 
evidence of an impact on BMI trajectory (age × PFOA interaction p value = 0.03) for PFOA, but not for 
PFOS and PFHxS. The study in Shanghai, China, was a prospective birth cohort study that measured 10 
PFAS in cord blood plasma and assessed child adipos ity measures at 5 years of age. The authors 
observed no association for the PFAS considered in th is review, but did observe that, among girls, PFBS 
exposure had a significant positive association with wa ist circumference and waist-to-height ratio (p 
values <0.05). Mitro and colleagues (2020b) observed that PFOS and PFOA were associated with 
greater adiposity at 3 years postpartum. The heterogeneity of the effects found across studies is the reason the committee concluded that the eviden ce for an association between PFAS exposure and 
elevated BMI or obesity is inadequate  or insufficient  in adults and children, although this is an area 
worthy of future study. 
 
Developmental Outcomes 
 
The committee’s evaluation of the impact of PFAS on developmental outcomes considered 
evidence relevant to fetal growth, development of genitalia, and neurodevelopment. The committee 
concluded that there is sufficient  evidence of an association between  PFAS exposure and reductions in 
birthweight. This conclusion builds on those of th e authoritative reviews (including ATSDR, EFSA, and 
OECD). ATSDR concluded that the evidence is suggestive of association between serum PFOA and 
PFOS and small decreases in birthweight. The committee concluded that there is insufficient evidence of 
an association between PFAS exposure and either development of the external genitalia or 
neurodevelopmental outcomes.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  71 
Prepublication Copy  Birthweight  
 
The committee identified numerous studies with low or probably low risk of bias that examined 
the relationship between exposure to PFAS and birt hweight (Buck Louis et al., 2018; Chu et al., 2020; 
Gao et al., 2019; Kashino et al., 2020; Marks et al., 2019; Wikstrom et al., 2020; Workman et al., 2019). The magnitude and precision of the estimates of the impacts of PFAS exposure on birthweight varied 
across and within studies, but the direction of the effect was consistent. None of the studies found a 
statistically significant effect of PFAS exposure on an increase in birthweight. Table 3-3 presents the 
estimated impact of PFAS on birthweight from the two studies reviewed by the committee that were 
rated as having low risk of bias. Overall, these studies strengthened conclu sions and supported the 
committee’s assessment that there is sufficient  evidence of an association of PFAS exposure with small 
reductions in birthweight.  
 
 
TABLE 3-3  Effect Estimates Change in Birthweight Pe r Change in PFAS, from Studies Rated as Having 
Low Risk of Bias 
PFAS Short Citation Population Estimated Change in  
Birthweight (g) (95% CI) Units 
PFOA Buck Louis et al., 2018 infants −5.9 (−28.75 to –16.94)a standard deviation (SD) 
increase in log-PFOA  
Chu et al., 2020 infants −56.04 (−129.32 to −17.24)b 1 natural logarithm (ln) 
change in PFOA   
female infants −71.8 (−148.61 to – 5)c 1 ln change in PFOA   
male infants −73.64 (−126.39 to − 20.88)c 1 ln change in PFOA 
PFOS Chu et al., 2020 infants −71.52 (−142.44 to − 0.61)b 1 ln change in PFOS   
female infants −71.91 (−143.86 to – 0.05)c 1 ln change in PFOS   
male infants −83.28 (−133.2 to − 33.36)c 1 ln change in PFOS 
a Adjusted for maternal age, education, prepregnant body mass index, serum cotinine, infant sex, and a chemical–
maternal race/ethnicity interaction term.  
b Adjusted for gestational age, maternal age, maternal oc cupation, maternal education, family income, parity, and 
infant sex.  
c Adjusted for gestational age, maternal age, maternal occupation, maternal education, family income, and parity. 
 
 Development of Genitalia 
 
Authoritative reviews have yet to associate PFAS exposure with the development of genitalia, a 
possible indicator of reproductive disorders (Bonde et al., 2016). The committee identified one study 
that evaluated PFAS exposure and hypospadias a nd cryptorchidism, potential manifestations of 
testicular dysgenesis syndrome at birth (Anand-Ivell et al., 2018). Two studies (Arbuckle et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2019) evaluated PFAS and measures of anogenital distance (distance from the anus to the 
penis or scrotum in males or to the clitoris in females).  
Anand-Ivell and colleagues (2018) conducted a case-control study within a large national 
biobank of amniotic fluid samples, which was rate d as having a probably high risk of bias due to the 
high potential for confounding. The study found no influence of PFOS on cryptorchid or hypospadias (comparison of mean PFOS in amniotic fluid: contro l versus cryptorchid versus hypospadias). Arbuckle 
and colleagues (2020) conducted a cohort study with pr obably low risk of bias and reported inconsistent 
findings regarding PFAS and anogenital distance. A lthough the authors observed an association between 
PFOA (measured in first-trimester maternal plasma ) and increased anoscrotal distance (adjusted for 
active smoking status during pregnancy and gestational age), when they examined the data by quartiles, 
they found no consistent patterns of association, a nd the effect estimates were imprecise with wide 
confidence intervals. Tian and colleagues (2019) co nducted a cohort study with probably low risk of 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  bias to evaluate the impacts of a PFAS on anogenita l distance measures. They observed that maternal 
plasma concentrations (ln-transformed) of PFOS,  PFDA, and PFUdA were inversely associated with 
anoscrotal distance and anopenile distance measures at birth. For anoscrotal distance, they found per ln 
unit increase in PFAS concentrations −0.65 (−1.27 to −0.02) mm for PFOS; −0.58 (−1.11 to −0.06) mm 
for PFDA; and −0.57 (−1.09 to −0.06) mm for PFUdA. For anopenile distance, they found per ln unit 
increase in PFAS concentrations −0.63 (−1.24 to −0.01) mm for PFDA and −0.76 (−1.36 to −0.16) mm 
for PFUdA. The committee determined th at, taken together, the evidence is inadequate  or insufficient  to 
determine an association between PFAS exposure and the development of external genitalia, largely 
because effects were inconsistent across studies.  
 
Neurodevelopmental Effects 
 
The committee divided the literature on neurodeve lopmental effects of PFAS into studies of 
learning and behavior and of autism spectrum disorder.  
 
Learning and behavior The committee identified 12 studies with lo w or possibly low risk of bias that 
examined learning and behavior using psychometrically  valid tools to evaluate the impact of PFAS on 
neurodevelopment in children. The ages of the childre n varied greatly across studies, as did the timing of 
the exposure measurement used in the analysis, making it difficult to generalize the findings. For 
example, Hoyer and colleagues (2018) observed weak e ffects on child behavior of prenatal exposure to 
some PFAS. In analysis that combined results from birth cohorts in Greenland and Ukraine, the odds ratio (OR) for hyperactivity was 1.8 (CI: 1.0–3.2) for one nl-unit increase in prenatal PFNA and 1.7 (CI: 
1.0–3.1) for one nl-unit increase in prenatal PFDA exposure. Using the Ages and Stages Questionnaire, 
Niu and colleagues (2019) found that prenatal plasma  concentrations of most PFAS, including PFHxS, 
PFOS, PFOA, PFNA, PFDA, and PDUdA, tended to  be associated with an increased risk of 
developmental problems in personal/social skills , and the associations for PFNA and PFDA were 
significant (per nl-unit increase). The co mmittee concluded that the evidence is inadequate  or 
insufficient  to determine an association of PFAS exposur e with neurodevelopmental effects, largely 
because of the heterogeneity of both the e ffects measured and the results observed.  
 
Autism spectrum disorder The committee identified four studies with low or probably low risk of bias 
evaluating the impacts of PFAS exposure on autism spectrum disorder (Long et al., 2019; Lyall et al., 2018; Oh et al., 2021; Shin et al., 2020). Lyall and colleagues (2018) conduc ted a population-based 
nested case-control study of children born from 2000 to 2003 in southern California and did not observe an association between exposure to PFAS and au tism. Long and colleagues (2019) conducted a case-
control study that compared exposure to PFAS in amniotic fluid between cases and controls, and 
observed a negative association between PFAS in amnio tic fluid and autism spectrum disorder diagnosis 
(OR: 0.410, 95% CI: 0.174–0.967). Shin and colleag ues (2020) conducted a case-control study of autism 
spectrum disorder and observed that PFHxS and PFO S were borderline associated with increased odds 
of child diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (per ng /mL increase: OR = 1.46; 95% CI: 0.98 ‒2.18 for 
PFHxS, OR = 1.03; 95% CI: 0.99 ‒1.08 for PFOS). Oh and colleagues (2021) conducted an analysis of 
the impacts of PFAS exposure on the risk of deve loping autism spectrum disorder and found that 
increased PFOA exposures were associated with negativ e trend Early Learning Composite scores and all 
four subscales. When they compared trajectories of the scores between low- and high-scoring groups, 
PFOA was associated with having lower or decreasing Early Learning Composite scores (risk ratio [RR] 
= 1.49, 95% CI: 1.09, 2.03). The committ ee determined that the evidence is inadequate  or insufficient  to 
determine an association between exposure to PFA S and neurodevelopment, largely because effects 
were inconsistent across studies. 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  73 
Prepublication Copy  Cancers 
 
Authoritative reviews have considered th e carcinogenic potential of PFAS and IARC has 
classified PFOA as possibly carcinogenic to humans (Benbrahim-Tallaa et al., 2014). The committee 
concluded that there is sufficient  evidence for an association between PFAS and kidney cancer. This 
conclusion builds on those of the authoritative re views (C-8 Science Pane l, EPA, ATSDR), which 
concluded that the evidence for an association betw een PFAS and cancer in humans is limited, and takes 
into account robust findings from more recent epid emiological studies. The committee concluded that 
there is limited suggestive evidence for cancers of the testis and breast. The conclusion on testicular 
cancer is consistent with the authoritative reviews, and the finding on breast cancer is based on the more 
recent epidemiological studies considered by the co mmittee. The committee found that the existing body 
of literature on other cancers constituted inadequate  or insuf ﬁcient evidence to determine an association 
with PFAS. 
 
Kidney Cancer 
 
The committee’s assessment that there is sufficient  evidence of an association between PFAS 
exposure and kidney cancer was motivated in large part by the study with low risk of bias conducted by 
Shearer and colleagues (2021). These investigators conducted a nested case-control study within the 
Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Scre ening Trial with a large sample size, appropriate 
controls, and validated endpoints (rena l cell carcinoma diagnosis [C64.9 in the International 
Classification of Diseases for Oncology , Second Edition]). The statistical analyses conducted by the 
authors were robust and adjusted fo r relevant confounders, and sensitivity analysis was performed to 
assess whether effects were still observed regardless of  kidney function. The study clearly showed that 
ORs for kidney cancer were significantly elevated among individuals in the highest PFOA exposure 
category, with a strong exposure-response trend. This study and earlier studies (Barry et al., 2013; Vieira 
et al., 2013) demonstrating a consistency in the direct ion and magnitude of this effect among those with 
the highest exposure form a body of literature  that the committee concluded constitutes sufficient  
evidence of an association. Effect estimates for asso ciations between PFOA exposure and kidney cancer 
are summarized by study in Figure 3-8. 
 
Testicular Cancer 
 
The committee’s conclusion of limited  or suggestive  evidence of an association between PFAS 
exposure and testicular cancer is c onsistent with the conclusions of the authoritative reviews. ATSDR 
does not draw a clear conclusion with respect to PFA S and testicular cancer, but the C-8 Science Panel 
identified a probable link with incident testicular  cancer based on evidence from studies by Barry and 
colleagues (2013) and Vieira and colleagues (2013). These two studies were also included in the EPA 
review (2016), which noted the positive associations  they found with PFOA and their overlap in cases. 
IARC (2016) stated that the evidence for an association with testicular  cancer was credible and unlikely 
to be explained by bias and confounding, but limite d by small sample numbers. EFSA (2020) found that 
there was insufficient support for the carcinogenicity of PFOA and PFOS in humans. Given a lack of new studies on this association, the committee f ound the existing evidence to be supportive of a 
conclusion of limited  or suggestive  evidence of an association betw een PFAS exposure and testicular 
cancer (see Figure 3-9).  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 3-8  Kidney cancer adjusted rate ratios and 95% co nfidence intervals by study and PFOA exposure 
category.  
DATA SOURCE: Shearer et al., 2021; Viei ra et al., 2013; Barry et al., 2013;  Raleigh et al., 2014; Steenland and 
Woskie, 2012.  
 
 
FIGURE 3-9  Testicular cancer adjusted rate ratios and 95% confidence intervals by study and PFOA exposure 
category. 
DATA SOURCE: Vieira et al., 2013 and Barry et al., 2013.  
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  75 
Prepublication Copy  Breast Cancer 
 
ATSDR did not draw a clear conclusion with respect to PFAS and breast cancer. Studies 
included in the ATSDR review found inconsistent asso ciations, with Bonefeld-Jørgensen and colleagues 
(2014) finding an inverse association with PFHxS and null association for PFOS and PFNA, while Wielsøe and colleagues (2017) found positive associ ations with all these chemicals. Wielsøe and 
colleagues (2017) also found positive associations be tween PFDA, PFUnA, and PFHpA (not statistically 
significant), and no association for PFDoDA. Bone feld-Jorgensen and colleagues (2014) found a 
positive association with FOSA. IARC (2016) also revi ewed the null study of Bonefeld-Jorgensen and 
colleagues (2014), as did EPA (2016), which stated that no associations were found in the general community. Recent studies, however, found more asso ciations suggestive of a relationship between 
PFAS and breast cancer. A nested case-control study w ith low risk of bias found an association between 
estrogen receptor–positive breast cancer and PFOS (M ancini et al., 2020). An additional study with 
probably low risk of bias found no evidence of asso ciations between PFAS and breast cancer (Cohn et 
al., 2020). Two additional recent studies had high risk  of bias because the exposure was measured after 
the cancer diagnosis had been made (Hurley et al ., 2018; Tsai et al., 2020). Hurley and colleagues 
(2018) found no evidence of associations between PFA S exposure and breast cancer, whereas Tsai and 
colleagues (2020) found evidence of associations among women aged ≤50. Those associations were 
stronger among women with estrogen receptor–positive  tumors. Figure 3-10 summarizes the effect 
estimates for associations between PFOS exposure and breast cancer by study. The committee found that this body of literature constitutes limited  or suggestive  evidence of an association of PFAS exposure 
with breast cancer.  
Reproductive Outcomes 
 
In its review of reproductive outcomes, the committee considered evidence on hypertensive 
disorders of pregnancy, female reproductive e ffects, reproductive hormone levels, infertility and 
subfecundity, and gestational diabetes. The committee concluded that there is limited suggestive  
evidence of an association between PFAS exposure and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, 
preeclampsia, and gestational hypertension without preeclam psia. This conclusion is  consistent with that 
of the C-8 Science Panel and subsequent authorita tive reviews by ATSDR, EPA, and OECD. Consistent 
with ATSDR, the committee concluded that there is insufficient  evidence of an association between 
PFAS exposure and other reproductive outcomes.  Hypertensive Disorders of Pregnancy (Gest ational Hypertension and Preeclampsia)   
 
The committee identified five recent studies ex amining PFAS exposure and preeclampsia, all 
having probably low risk of bias (see Figure 3-11–3- 15). The four cohort studies (Birukov et al., 2021; 
Borghese et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2019; Wikstrom et al., 2019) supported the conclusions from the 
authoritative reviews. Wikstrom and colleagues (2019) observed modestly elevated risk for 
preeclampsia, but not necessarily a consistent expos ure-response trend, and Borghese and colleagues 
(2020) observed no association with gestational hypertension without preeclampsia. Birukov and colleagues (2021) evaluated exposure to PFAS in early pregnancy and maternal blood pressure 
trajectories in pregnancy, gestational hypertensi on, and preeclampsia. No clear associations were 
observed with gestational hypertension (de novo blood pressure >140/90 mm Hg after 20 weeks’ 
gestation on two or more episodes with at least 4 h in between or significant aggravation of preexisting 
hypertension) or preeclampsia (gestational hypertensi on with proteinuria [>0.3 g/24 h or at least +1 on 
sterile urine dipstick]). Birukov and colleagues (2021) did observe modest but not statistically 
significant increases in blood pressure for PFOS a nd PFOA. Another cohort study measuring PFAS in 
cord blood found an association with preeclampsia but  not gestational hypertension (Huang et al., 2019).  
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  A case-control study of preeclampsia and PFAS measured in maternal serum categorized PFAS into 
quartiles; the women in the highest quartiles ha d no significant increased risks of developing 
preeclampsia compared with the women in the lowest  quartile in adjusted analyses (Rylander et al., 
2020). Given that the studies showed a tendency towa rd an association between PFAS and hypertensive 
disorders of pregnancy, the committee concluded that there is limited  or suggestive  evidence of an 
association.    
 
FIGURE 3-10  Breast cancer adjusted rate ratios and 95% co nfidence intervals by study and PFOS exposure 
category. 
NOTE: ER = estrogen receptor; PR = progesterone receptor. 
DATA SOURCE: Bonefeld-Jorgensen et al., 2011; Cohn et al ., 2020; Hurley et al, 2018; Mancini et al., 2020; Tsai 
et al., 2020; Wiel søe et al. 2017.  
 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  77 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 3-11  Adjusted risk estimates for preeclampsia, ge stational hypertension (hypertension without 
preeclampsia), and hypertensive disord ers of pregnancy and 95% confidence in tervals by study and PFOS exposure 
category.  
NOTE: All studies present odds ratios except Birukov et al., 2021, which presents a hazard ratio. 
DATA SOURCE: Birukov et al., 2021; Bor ghese et al., 2020; Huan g et al., 2019; Rylander et al., 2020; Wikstrom 
et al., 2019. 
 
 Fertility and Fecundity  
 
A conclusion in ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls is that “epidemiological 
studies provided mixed evidence of impaired fertility (i ncreased risks of longer time to pregnancy and 
infertility) for PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS PFNA, PFHpA, a nd PFBS: the results are not consistent across 
studies or were only based on a single study. The small number of studies evaluating fertility for PFDA, 
PFUnA, PFDoDA, and FOSA did not find associati ons and no study has evaluated reproductive 
outcomes and PFBA” (ATSDR, 2021, p. 359). The co mmittee identified a few more recent studies to 
update that authoritative review.  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 3-12  Adjusted risk estimates for preeclampsia, ge stational hypertension (hypertension without 
preeclampsia), and hypertensive disord ers of pregnancy and 95% confidence in tervals by study and PFOA exposure 
category.  
NOTE: All studies present odds ratios except Birukov et al., 2021, which presents a hazard ratio. 
DATA SOURCE: Birukov et al., 2021; Bor ghese et al., 2020; Huan g et al., 2019; Rylander et al., 2020; Wikstrom 
et al., 2019.  
 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  79 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 3-13  Adjusted risk estimates for preeclampsia, ge stational hypertension (hypertension without 
preeclampsia), and hypertensive diso rders of pregnancy and 95% confiden ce intervals by study and PFuDA and 
PFDA exposure category.  
NOTE: All studies present odds ratios except Birukov et al., 2021, which presents a hazard ratio. 
DATA SOURCE: Birukov et al., 2021; Bor ghese et al., 2020; Huan g et al., 2019; Rylander et al., 2020; Wikstrom 
et al., 2019.  
 
 
Zhang and colleagues (2018) conducted a case-contro l study to evaluate the impact of PFAS on 
risks of premature ovarian insufficiency, and ob served positive associations with PFOA, PFOS, and 
PFHxS (highest versus lowest tertile, PFOA: OR, 3.80; 95% CI: 1.92–7.49; PFOS: OR, 2.81; 95% CI: 
1.46–5.41; PFHxS: OR, 6.63; 95% CI: 3.22–13.65). The study was rated as having high risk of bias for a 
potential for reverse causality (Zhang et al., 2018). Ma and colleagues (2021) conducted a small cohort 
study in a fertility clinic in Zhe jiang, China, that evaluated the asso ciation between PFAS exposure and 
fertility measures (numbers of retrieved oocytes, mature oocytes, two-pronuclei (2 PN) zygotes, good-
quality embryos, and semen parameters). The authors found that maternal plasma concentrations of 
PFOA were negatively associated with the numbers of retrieved oocytes (p-trend 0.023), mature oocytes 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  (p-trend 0.015), 2 PN zygotes (p-trend 0.014), an d good-quality embryos (p-trend 0.012). Higher 
paternal plasma PFOA concentrations were found to be significantly associated with reduced numbers 
of 2 PN zygotes (p-trend 0.047), but no associati ons were found between maternal or paternal PFAS 
levels and the probability of implantation, clinical pr egnancy, or live birth. Given the mixed evidence, 
the committee concluded that there is insufficient  evidence of an association between PFAS exposure 
and fertility or fecundity.    
 
FIGURE 3-14  Adjusted risk estimates for preeclampsia, ge stational hypertension (hypertension without 
preeclampsia), and hypertensive disord ers of pregnancy and 95% confidence in tervals by study and PFHxS exposure 
category.  
NOTE: All studies present odds ratios except Birukov et al., 2021, which presents a hazard ratio. DATA SOURCE: Birukov et al., 2021; Bor ghese et al., 2020; Huan g et al., 2019; Rylander et al., 2020; Wikstrom 
et al., 2019.
 
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  81 
Prepublication Copy  Male Reproductive Effects  
 
For its authoritative review, ATSDR looked at articles examining the relationship between 
PFAS and sperm quality and concluded that while some associations with serum perfluoroalkyl levels 
were observed for some markers of sperm quality, the markers measured were not consistent across 
studies. The committee identified only one new study evaluating the effect on PFAS on male 
reproduction (Ma et al., 2021). This study found no  significant association between PFAS and sperm 
progressive motility rate, but did find associations of  some PFAS with decreased sperm concentration. 
Given that this study has some potential for bias,  the committee concluded that the evidence is 
inadequate  or insufficient  to determine an association.  
 
 
 
FIGURE 3-15  Adjusted risk estimates for preeclampsia, ge stational hypertension (hypertension without 
preeclampsia), and hypertensive disord ers of pregnancy and 95% confidence in tervals by study and PFNA exposure 
category.  NOTE: All studies present odds ratios except Birukov et al., 2021, which presents a hazard ratio. 
DATA SOURCE: Birukov et al., 2021; Bor ghese et al., 2020; Huan g et al., 2019; Rylander et al., 2020; Wikstrom 
et al., 2019.
 
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Female Reproductive Effects  
 
Female reproductive effects discussed here incl ude menopause, age at menarche, and duration 
of breastfeeding. The authoritative reviews did not  find associations for other female reproductive 
outcomes (polycystic ovary syndrome, endometriosis ), and the committee identified no new studies of 
these effects.  
In its Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls , ATSDR concludes that there is some suggestive 
evidence of an association between serum PFAS le vels and an increased risk of early menopause; 
however, this finding may be due to reverse causa tion since an earlier onset of menopause would result 
in a decrease in the removal of perfluoroalkyls in menstrual blood. One more recent cohort study (Ding et al., 2020), with low risk of bias, found an asso ciation of PFAS with earlier onset of menopause. 
Mixed results were observed in a study of age at me narche (Ernst et al., 2019) and a study of cycle 
irregularity (Singer et al., 2018) (rated as probably ha ving and having low risk of bias, respectively).  
ATDSR’s Toxicological Profile  does not offer conclusions on the impact of PFAS exposure on 
duration of breastfeeding. The committee identified on e more recent study, with probably low risk of 
bias that observed mostly null associations but also  a decreased hazard of breastfeeding cessation by 3 
and 6 months with increasing maternal serum c oncentrations of PFNA, PFDA, and PFUnDA during 
pregnancy (Rosen et al., 2018). The committee concluded that there is insufficient  human evidence of an 
association of PFAS with female reproductive effects, including breastfeeding duration.  
 
Reproductive Hormone Levels 
 
ATSDR’s Toxicology Profile  reviews the literature on associations between PFAS 
concentrations and reproductive hormones. The conclu sion of this review is that while some studies 
examining reproductive hormone le vels have observed associations with PFAS, the findings are 
inconsistent across studies, and there are too few studies to enable interpretation of the results.  
The committee found several more recent studies evaluating the relationship between PFAS and 
reproductive hormone levels, but these studies varied in  the populations they included and the hormones 
measured, among other factors, making it difficult to synthesize the evidence. For example, three studies 
evaluated the impact of PFAS on estradiol levels (M a et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2018). 
The study by Ma and colleagues (2021) was conducted among couples visiting a fertility clinic in China; 
the study by Zhang and colleagues (2018) was a case -control study of adult women in China; and Yao 
and colleagues (2019) analyzed PFAS and hormone levels in infant cord blood. The studies that measured testosterone were also di stinct; two were analyses of data from birth cohorts (Jensen et al., 
2020a; Nian et al., 2020); two were studies in pregna nt women (Anand-Ivell et al., 2018; Yao et al., 
2019); and two were studies in Chinese adults (Ma et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2018). The committee 
concluded that the evidence is too heterogeneous  to support drawing conclusions and therefore 
inadequate  or insufficient  to determine an association.  
 
Gestational Diabetes 
 
ATSDR’s Toxicology Profile  reviews the evidence for an association between PFAS and 
gestational diabetes and concludes that the results of  the studies reviewed do not suggest an association. 
The committee identified four more recent studi es evaluating the impact of PFAS on gestational 
diabetes. These studies had varying designs, includin g case-control, cohort, and nested case-control 
(Preston et al., 2020a; Rahman et al., 2019; Wang et  al., 2018; Xu et al., 2020a) and had somewhat 
inconsistent results. Xu and colleagues (2020a) and Rahman and colleagues (2019) observed an effect 
on gestational diabetes, whereas Preston and co lleagues (2020a) and Wang and colleagues (2018) 
observed an effect on glucose homeostasis. Given the inconsistent effects reported, the committee 
concluded the evidence is inadequate  or insufficient  to determine an association.  
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  83 
Prepublication Copy  Endocrine Outcomes 
 
The committee’s evaluation of th e impact of PFAS on endocrine outcomes considered evidence 
in the following subcategories: thyroid disease, hyper- and hypothyroidism and thyroid hormones, and 
diabetes. The committee found limited suggestive  evidence of an association with thyroid hormones and 
disease, and inadequate  evidence for diabetes. 
 
Thyroid Hormones and Disease 
 
The authoritative review of the C-8 Science Panel and subsequent authoritative reviews 
completed by ATSDR, EPA, and OECD found associ ations between PFAS exposure and thyroid 
hormones and disease. Among the more recent cohort studi es with probably low or low risk of bias, the 
majority observed weak to no association with thyroi d hormone levels or subc linical hypothyroidism in 
children and adults (Blake et al., 2018; Itoh et al., 20 19; Jansen et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2020; Lebeaux et 
al., 2020; Liang et al., 2020; Preston et al., 2020b; Reardon et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2020). Timing of exposure, life stage, and dietary factors all are likely to modify the relationship between PFAS and 
thyroid hormones, which could account for the w eak observations observed in recent studies. For 
example, in a cohort study with low risk of bias that measured maternal and cord sera for PFAS and 
thyroid hormones, Lebeaux and colleagues (2020) found that individual PFAS or mixtures of PFAS were generally not associated with any thyroid horm ones, although they did observe a slight association 
between PFAS and cord serum thyroid-stimulating hor mone, with PFOS being the major contributor of 
the mixture (Bayesian kernel machine regression model estimate per doubling of PFOS [ β = 0.09; 95% 
credible interval: −0.08–0.27]). They also observed some indication of effect measure modification by 
maternal thyroid peroxidase antibody status for the associations of PFAS with cord free thyroxine. The 
committee concluded that there is limited suggestive  evidence of an association between PFAS and 
thyroid hormones and thyroid disease. 
 
Diabetes  
 
Authoritative reviews have not found evidence of  an association between PFAS and diabetes. 
ATSDR concluded that, while one prospective cohort study (Sun et al., 2018) suggested an association 
of PFOA and PFOS with risk of diabetes, overall the epidemiological studies did not provide support for 
an association between serum PFAS levels and increa sed risk of diabetes or related outcomes (e.g., 
increases in blood glucose, glucose tolerance). The committee identified three mo re recent studies with a 
probably low risk of bias examining type 2 diabet es. Their results were mixed, with elevated 
associations observed by Charles and colleagues ( 2020), an inverse association by Donat-Vargas and 
colleagues (2019b), and weak or null associations observed by Cardenas and colleagues (2019). One 
study identified after the committee had completed its literature review (Valvi et al., 2021) observed a 
modest association with decreased insulin sensitivity and increased panc reatic beta cell function in a 
cohort study of young adults, but associations with type 2 diabetes were not examined. No new studies 
examined type 1 diabetes. Given the mixed effects observed, the committee concluded that evidence is 
inadequate  or insufficient  to determine an association between PFAS exposure and diabetes.  
 
Hepatic Outcomes 
 
Authoritative reviews, including those by ATSD R, EFSA, and EPA, have  consistently found 
associations between PFAS and liver effects. ATSD R noted that decreases in serum bilirubin were 
observed in studies of PFOA, PFOS, and PFHxS, sugges tive of liver alterations. The committee identified 
four more recent studies on PFAS and liver effects with probably low or definitely low risk of bias, including a prebirth cohort study in Boston, a cohort study in Sweden, a study of pooled data from longitudinal birth cohorts across Europe, and a study based  on a liver registry in Atlanta (Jin et al., 2020; 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Mora et al., 2018; Salihovic et al., 2018; Stratakis et al., 2020). All studies observed some association 
between PFAS and the liver, but the effects observed we re slightly heterogeneous. Mora and colleagues 
(2018) observed an inverse association between PFAS e xposure and alanine transaminase in the prenatal 
period and in childhood. Salihovic and colleagues ( 2018) observed that changes in levels of many 
measured PFAS were positively associated with alan ine transaminase and alkaline phosphatase levels and 
negatively associated with bilirubin. Stratakis a nd colleagues (2020) observed that higher prenatal 
exposure to a PFAS mixture was associated with in creased risk of liver injury during childhood, as 
indicated by enzyme levels exceeding the 90th percen tile for the study populatio n. And Jin and colleagues 
(2020 observed that PFAS exposure was associated with more severe disease in children with 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Taken togeth er, the committee conclud es that the available 
studies provide limited or suggestive  evidence of an association between PFAS exposure and liver 
enzyme levels.  
 
Respiratory Outcomes 
 
Authoritative reviews, including those of ATSDR, EFSA, and EPA, have not yet drawn 
conclusions about PFAS exposure and respiratory eff ects. Respiratory outcomes considered by the 
committee include pulmonary function tests (objective measures of how well the respiratory system is 
working); respiratory diseases, including obstructiv e airway diseases, such as asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease; restrictive diseases, such as pulmonary fibrosis; and respiratory symptoms, such as wheeze, cough, phlegm, and dysp nea (shortness of breath). The committee identified 
ten recent studies evaluating the association between  PFAS exposure and respiratory outcomes. Three 
studies with probably low risk of bias evaluated PFA S and pulmonary function in cohorts of children 
(Agier et al., 2019; Kung et al., 2021; Manzano-Salga do et al., 2019); results were mixed within each 
study. Several studies evaluated the impact of PFAS exposure on asthma and respiratory symptoms, such 
as cough and wheeze; results were mixed both between  and within studies (Ait Bamai et al., 2020; Beck 
et al., 2019; Impinen et al., 2019; Kvalem et al., 2020; Manzano-Salgado et al., 2019; Timmermann et al., 2020; Zeng et al., 2019). Taken together, the committ ee concludes that the available studies provide 
inadequate  or insufficient  evidence of an association between PFAS exposure and liver enzyme levels. 
 
Hematological Outcomes 
 
ATSDR evaluated the impact of PFAS on hemato logical parameters and concluded that PFAS 
are associated with no consistent alteration in he matological parameters. The committee did not identify 
any more recent studies on hematological effects. Thus, the committee conclud es that the evidence is 
inadequate  or insufficient  to determine an association between PFAS exposure and hematological 
effects.   
Musculoskeletal Outcomes 
 
The authoritative reviews identify several studi es evaluating possible PFAS-associated risk of 
osteoarthritis, osteoporosis , and reduced bone mineral density (BMD). The committee identified two 
more recent studies evaluating the relationship between  PFAS exposure and bone health (Banjabi et al., 
2020; Hu et al., 2019). A case-control study with high risk of bias found that serum PFAS 
concentrations increased the odds of diagnosis of oste oporosis among adults in Saudi Arabia (Banjabi et 
al., 2020). A study with probably low risk of bias evaluated BMD within a weight-loss trial of U.S. adults aged 30–70 and found asso ciations between higher plasma PFA S concentrations and lower BMD 
at baseline, as well as a faster d ecline in BMD (Hu et al., 2019). The study by Hu and colleagues (2019) 
provides longitudinal evidence. However, the study was designed to measure weight loss, and its 
conclusions may not be generalizable  to the broader population. In add ition, the study is at risk of  
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  85 
Prepublication Copy  selection bias because only a small percentage of th e study participants had both measures of BMD. 
There is also a risk of information bias from resi dual confounding because the analysis did not account 
for nutritional and menopausal status. Because of the small sample size, moreover, the authors did not 
adjust for multiple comparisons. Taken togeth er with the evidence presented in ATSDR’s Toxicological 
Profile , these findings are intriguing and merit further study. The committee conc luded that the evidence 
is inadequate  or insufficient  to determine an association between  PFAS and bone health. Nevertheless, 
the available evidence does raise conc erns about the potential adverse effects of PFAS on bone health in 
both children and adults that wa rrant further investigation.  
 
Renal Outcomes 
 
ATSDR evaluated the impact of PFAS on kidney di sease and biomarkers of renal function, but 
did not draw any conclusions because results were mixed across studies for most outcomes, and most 
studies were cross-sectional, so causal determinati ons could not be made. The committee identified three 
more recent studies evaluating impacts of PFAS on glomular filtration rate. A cohort study of 
participants in a medical surveillance program for re sidents near a former U.S. Department of Energy 
uranium-processing site assessed serum  PFAS and measures of glomular filtration rate at repeated time 
points from 1990 to 2008 and found decreased glomular f iltration rate to be associated with serum PFAS 
(Blake et al., 2018). The study had a probably high risk of bias because of a small potential for selection 
bias into the cohort and a slight risk of reverse causality. Two studies analyzing a diabetes prevention 
trial (Lin et al., 2021, which updates Cardenas et al., 2019) found that plasma PFAS concentrations 
during the diabetes prevention program were inversely associated with glomular filtration. Each quartile 
increase in baseline plasma measures of six PFA S was associated with 2.26 ml/min/1.73 m2 lower 
glomular filtration (95% CI: −4.12, −0.39) at years 5 and 9. The study’s strengths included tests of 
reverse causation and a lengthy follow-up period, although there is potential for residual confounding. 
The study’s principal limitation is related to the generalizability of the findings to the general population 
given the inclusion criteria of overweight or obesity  and prediabetes. Overall, the committee concluded 
that the evidence is inadequate  or insufficient  to draw a conclusion regarding an association between 
PFAS exposure and renal function. Nevertheless, the available evidence does raise concerns about the 
potential adverse effects of PFAS on renal function that warrant further investigation.  
 
Neurological Outcomes 
 
The authoritative reviews do not draw conclusi ons about the impact of PFAS on neurological 
outcomes, such as changes in motor function; behavi oral changes; mood disorders; sensory disorders; 
cognitive disorders; and changes in neurochemistry , neurophysiology, or neuropathology. One recent 
case-control study nested within the diabetes pr evention trial mentioned above found no association 
between any PFAS measured in serum and neuropathy  in either the diabetes cases or the controls 
(Cardenas et al., 2019). The committee concluded that the evidence is inadequate  or insufficient  to draw a 
conclusion regarding an association between  PFAS exposure and neurological outcomes.  
 
EVIDENCE GAPS 
 
The committee found several conditions to be associ ated with exposure to PFAS. The effects of 
PFAS span many different organ systems and disease states. The human populations most at risk of 
these health effects include those with a family hist ory of or other risk factors for associated health 
effects and those who are in vulnerable life stages, including pregnancy, fetal development or early 
childhood, and the elderly. The committee did not co mplete a meta-analysis of the impact of each 
individual PFAS on each health outco me or provide an overall estimate of risk because the data from the 
studies are highly heterogeneous, limiting the applicab ility of meta-analytic techniques. The committee 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  also observed gaps in the evidence for many  health effects, whereby the evidence was inadequate  or 
insufficient  to determine associations. These gaps include 
 
 immune effects other than reduced an tibody response, and ulcerative colitis; 
 cardiovascular outcomes other than dyslipidemia; 
 developmental outcomes other than small reductions in birthweight; 
 cancers other than kidney, breast, and testicular; 
 reproductive effects other than hypertensive disorders of pregnancy; 
 endocrine disorders other than thyroid hormone levels; 
 hepatic effects other than liver enzyme levels; 
 respiratory effects; 
 hematological effects; 
 musculoskeletal effects, such as effects on bone mineral density; 
 renal effects, such as renal disease; and 
 neurological effects. 
 
It is critical to recognize that an assessment of inadequate  or insufficient  evidence does not mean 
there is no significant and important associa tion between PFAS exposure and the outcome under 
consideration. It is quite possible that further r esearch into the association of PFAS exposure with these 
outcomes would provide the evidence necessary to ch ange the assessment to the category of either 
limited suggestive  or sufficient  evidence. The committee believes that ongoing research on and review of 
these associations will be important in updating its clinical recommendations. A gap also remains in 
determining which developmental effects are the most clinically meaningful. For some outcome 
categories, the available research spans many differe nt tests, all of which assessed slightly different 
effects, making the evidence difficu lt to synthesize and support strong conclusions. An authoritative 
organization needs to determine which endpoints are th e most critical to evaluate to support clinical 
follow-up recommendations. 
Additionally, most studies reviewed by the committee were not conducted among people known 
to have high exposures to PFAS. As a result, ther e is a gap in understanding of the effects of PFAS 
among those highly exposed, and the evidence presented in this report may therefore underestimate the 
effects of PFAS. 
Although the committee aimed to assess the av ailable scientific evidence as carefully and 
systematically as possible, it was sensitive to the fact that value judgments are unavoidable when 
performing an assessment of this kind (Elliott, 2 017; Elliott and Richards, 2017; Jasanoff, 1998). These 
judgments include decisions about what forms of evidence to include, how to weigh and categorize 
different pieces of evidence, and what standards of  evidence to demand before drawing conclusions. 
Literature from the sociology of science and medici ne emphasizes not only that different expert 
communities may disagree about how to make these decisions (Cetina, 1999) but also that lay 
communities may make these decisions in ways that differ from those of expert communities (Epstein, 
1996; Ottinger, 2010; Suryanarayanan and Kleinman , 2016). For example, because lay communities are 
often particularly concerned about  addressing urgent health issues or informing time-sensitive policy 
decisions, they may accept lower standards of eviden ce than experts typically do (Brown, 1992). These 
differing evidential approaches across different comm unities raise the potential for differing rates of 
positive and negative errors (Douglas, 2009; Elliott,  2017; Elliott and Richards, 2017). Different 
communities also have varying background disease risk, which may lead to differing associations with 
PFAS and differing needs for risk assessment  as it relates to these associations.  
With these observations in mind, the committe e acknowledges that other expert and lay 
communities might draw different conclusions about PFA S health risks, either by including different lines 
of evidence or by making alternativ e judgments when assessing the availabl e evidence. This is one of the 
reasons that the committee emphasizes the importance of patient autonomy and shared decision making in 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  87 
Prepublication Copy  subsequent chapters. Although the committee’s eval uation of the evidence can provide an important 
starting point for decision making by clinicians and their patients, some individuals and groups could 
employ different evidential standards. Therefore,  the committee encourages ongoing efforts to make 
scientific information about PFAS publicly available a nd understandable so that patients and clinicians 
can make informed decisions that respect individual patient values.   
REFERENCES  
 
Agier, L., X. Basagana, L. Maitre, B. Granum, P. K. Bird, M. Casas, B. Oftedal, J. Wright, S. 
Andrusaityte, M. de Castro, E. Cequier, L. Chatzi , D. Donaire-Gonzalez, R. Grazuleviciene, L. S. 
Haug, A. K. Sakhi, V. Leventakou, R. McEach an, M. Nieuwenhuijsen, I. Petraviciene, O. 
Robinson, T. Roumeliotaki, J. Sunyer, I. Tamayo-Uria, C. Thomsen, J. Urquiza, A. Valentin, R. 
Slama, M. Vrijheid, and V. Siroux. 2019. Earl y-life exposome and lung function in children in 
Europe: An analysis of data from the l ongitudinal, population-based HELIX cohort. The Lancet 
Planetary Health  3(2):e81–e92. 
Ait Bamai, Y., H. Goudarzi, A. Araki, E. Okada, I. Kashino, C. Miyashita, and R. Kishi. 2020. Effect of 
prenatal exposure to per- and polyfluoroalky l substances on childhood allergies and common 
infectious diseases in children up to age 7 y ears: The Hokkaido study on environment and 
children’s health. Environment International  143:105979. 
Anand-Ivell, R., A. Cohen, B. Nørgaard-Pedersen, B. A.  G. Jönsson, J. P. Bonde, D. M. Hougaard, C. H. 
Lindh, G. Toft, M. S. Lindhard, and R. Ivell. 2018. Amniotic fluid INSL3 measured during the 
critical time window in human pregnancy relates to cryptorchidism, hypospadias, and phthalate 
load: A large case-control study. Frontiers in Physiology  9:406. 
Araújo, J., and E. Ramos. 2017. Paediatric obes ity and cardiovascular risk factors—A life course 
approach. Porto Biomedical Journal  2(4):102–110. 
Arbuckle, T. E., S. MacPherson, W. G. Foster, S. Sathyanarayana, M. Fisher, P. Monnier, B. Lanphear, 
G. Muckle and W. D. Fraser. 2020. Prenatal perfluoroalkyl substances and newborn anogenital 
distance in a Canadian cohort. Reproductive Toxicology  (Elmsford, NY)  94:31–39. 
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). 2021. Toxicological profile for 
perfluoroalkyls . Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service. 
Banjabi, A. A., A. J. Li, T. A. Kumosani, J. M. Yousef, and K. Kannan. 2020. Serum concentrations of 
perfluoroalkyl substances and their association with  osteoporosis in a population in Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia. Environmental Research  187:109676. 
Barry, V., A. Winquist, and K. Steenland. 2013. Pe rfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) exposures and incident 
cancers among adults living near a chemical plant. Environmental Health Perspectives  121(11–
12):1313–1318. 
Beck, I. H., C. A. G. Timmermann, F. Nielsen, G. Schoeters, C. Johnk, H. B. Kyhl, A. Host, and T. K. 
Jensen. 2019. Association between prenatal exposur e to perfluoroalkyl substances and asthma in 
5-year-old children in the Odense Child Cohort. Environmental Health: A Global Access Science 
Source  18(1):97. 
Beilby, J. 2004. Definition of metabolic syndrome: Report of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute/American Heart Association Conference on Scientific Issues Related to Definition. The 
Clinical Biochemist Reviews  25(3):195–198. 
Benbrahim-Tallaa, L., B. Lauby-Secretan, D. Loomis , K. Z. Guyton, Y. Grosse, F. El Ghissassi, V. 
Bouvard, N. Guha, H. Mattock, and K. Straif. 2014. Carcinogenicity of perfluorooctanoic acid, 
tetrafluoroethylene, dichloromethane, 1, 2- dichloropropane, and 1, 3-propane sultone. Lancet 
Oncology  15(9):924. 
Birukov, A., L. B. Andersen, M. S. Andersen, J. H. Nielsen, F. Nielsen, H. B. Kyhl, J. S. Jorgensen, P. 
Grandjean, R. Dechend, and T. K. Jensen. 2021. Exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances and blood 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  pressure in pregnancy among 1436 women from the Odense Child Cohort. Environment 
International  151:106442. 
Blake, B. E., S. M. Pinney, E. P. Hines, S. E. Fe nton, and K. K. Ferguson. 2018. Associations between 
longitudinal serum perfluoroalkyl substance (PFA S) levels and measures of thyroid hormone, 
kidney function, and body mass index in the Fernald Community Cohort. Environmental 
Pollution  (Barking, Essex 1987)  242(P):894–904. 
Bonde, J. P., E. M. Flachs, S. Rimborg, C. H. Glazer, A. Giwercman, C. H. Ramlau-Hansen, K. S. 
Hougaard, B. B. Hoyer, K. K. Haervig, S. B. Pete rsen, L. Rylander, I. O. Specht, G. Toft, and E. 
V. Brauner. 2016. The epidemiologic evidence linking prenatal and postnatal exposure to 
endocrine disrupting chemicals with male reproduc tive disorders: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Human Reproductive Update  23(1):104–125. 
Bonefeld-Jorgensen, E. C., M. Long, R. Bossi, P. Ayo tte, G. Asmund, T. Krüger, M. Ghisari, G. Mulvad, 
P. Kern, P. Nzulumiki, and E. Dewailly. 2011. Perfluorinated compounds are related to breast 
cancer risk in Greenlandic Inuit: A case control study. Environmental Health  10(88). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-10-88. 
Bonefeld-Jørgensen, E. C., M. Long, S. O. Fredslund,  R. Bossi, and J. Olsen. 2014. Breast cancer risk 
after exposure to perfluorinated compounds in Da nish women: A case–control study nested in the 
Danish National Birth Cohort. Cancer Causes & Control  25(11):1439–1448. 
Borghese, M. M., M. Walker, M. E. Helewa, W. D.  Fraser, and T. E. Arbuckle. 2020. Association of 
perfluoroalkyl substances with gestational hype rtension and preeclampsia in the MIREC study. 
Environment International  141:105789. 
Braun, J. M., M. Eliot, G. D. Papandonatos, J. P. Buckley, K. M. Cecil, H. J. Kalkwarf, A. Chen, C. B. 
Eaton, K. Kelsey, B. P. Lanphear, and K. Yolt on. 2021. Gestational perfluoroalkyl substance 
exposure and body mass index trajectories over the first 12 years of life. International Journal of 
Obesity  (2005)  45(1):25–35. 
Brown, P. 1992. Popular epidemiology and toxic waste contamination: Lay and professional ways of 
knowing. Journal of Health and Social Behavior  33(September):267–281. 
Buck Louis, G. M., S. Zhai, M. M. Smarr, J. Grewal, C. Zhang, K. L. Grantz, S. N. Hinkle, R. Sundaram, 
S. Lee, M. Honda, J. Oh, and K. Kannan.  2018. Endocrine disruptors and neonatal 
anthropometry, NICHD Fetal Growth Studies—Singletons. Environment International  119:515–
526. 
C-8 Medical Panel. 2013. C-8 Medical Panel report. https://www.hpcbd.com/wp-
content/uploads/sites/1603732/2021/ 01/Medical-Panel-Report-2013-05-24.pdf (accessed June 15, 
2022). 
Cardenas, A., M.-F. Hivert, D. R. Gold, R. Hauser, K.  P. Kleinman, P.-I. D. Lin, A. F. Fleisch, A. M. 
Calafat, X. Ye, T. F. Webster, E. S. Horton, and E. Oken. 2019. Associations of perfluoroalkyl 
and polyfluoroalkyl substances with incident diabetes and microvascular disease. Diabetes Care  
42(9):1824–1832. 
Catelan, D., A. Biggeri, F. Russo, D. Gregori, G. Pitter, F. Da Re, T. Fletcher, and C. Canova. 2021. 
Exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances and mortality  for COVID-19: A spatial ecological analysis 
in the Veneto region (Italy). International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health  
18(5):2734. 
Cetina, K. K. 1999. Epistemic cultures: How the sciences make knowledge . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Charles, D., V. Berg, T. H. Nøst, S. Huber, T.  M. Sandanger, and C. Rylander. 2020. Pre- and post-
diagnostic blood profiles of perfluoroalkyl acids in  type 2 diabetes mellitus cases and controls.  
Environment International  145:106095. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.envint.2020.106095. 
Chen, Q., R. Huang, L. Hua, Y. Guo, L. Huang, Y. Zhao, X. Wang, and J. Zhang. 2018. Prenatal 
exposure to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances a nd childhood atopic dermatitis: A 
prospective birth cohort study. Environmental Health  17(1):8. https://doi.org//10.1186/s12940-
018-0352-7.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  89 
Prepublication Copy  Chen, Q., X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, W. Lu, J. Wu, S. Zhao, J. Zhang, and L. Huang. 2019. Prenatal exposure to 
perfluorobutanesulfonic acid and childhood adiposity: A prospective birth cohort study in 
Shanghai, China. Chemosphere  226:17–23. 
Chu, C., Y. Zhou, Q.-Q. Li, M. S. Bloom, S. Lin, Y.-J. Yu, D. Chen, H.-Y. Yu, L.-W. Hu, B.-Y. Yang, 
X.-W. Zeng, and G.-H. Dong. 2020. Are perfluor ooctane sulfonate alternatives safer? New 
insights from a birth cohort study. Environment International  135:105365. 
Cohn, B. A., M. A. La Merrill, N. Y. Krigbaum, M. Wang, J.-S. Park, M. Petreas, G. Yeh, R. C. Hovey, 
L. Zimmermann, and P. M. Ci rillo. 2020. In utero exposure  to poly- and perfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFASs) and subsequent breast cancer. Reproductive Toxicology  (Elmsford, NY)  
92:112–119. 
Ding, N., S. D. Harlow, J. F. Randolph, A. M. Calafat,  B. Mukherjee, S. Batterman, E. B. Gold, and S. K. 
Park. 2020. Associations of perfluoroalkyl s ubstances with incident natural menopause: The 
Study of women’s health across the nation. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and 
Metabolism  105(9):e3169–e3182. 
Donat-Vargas, C., I. A. Bergdahl, A. Tornevi, M. Wennberg, J. Sommar, H. Kiviranta, J. Koponen, O. 
Rolandsson, and A. Akesson. 2019a. Perfluoroalkyl  substances and risk of type II diabetes: A 
prospective nested case-control study. Environment International  123:390–398. 
Donat-Vargas, C., I. A. Bergdahl, A. Tornevi, M. Wennberg, J. Sommar, J. Koponen, H. Kiviranta, and 
A. Akesson. 2019b. Associations between repeated  measure of plasma perfluoroalkyl substances 
and cardiometabolic risk factors. Environment International  124:58–65. 
Douglas, H. E. 2009. Science, policy, and the valu e-free ideal. Pittsburg, PA: University of Pittsburgh 
Press. 
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). 2020. Risk  to human health related to the presence of 
perfluoroalkyl substances in food. EFSA  Journal  18(9):e06223. 
Elliott, K. C. 2017. A tapestry of values: An intr oduction to values in science . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Elliott, K. C., and T. Richards. 2017. Exploring inductive risk: Case studies of values in science . New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 2005. Guidelines for carci nogen risk assessment . 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2013-09/ documents/cancer_guidelines_final_3-25-05.pdf 
(accessed June 15, 2022).  
EPA. 2016. Health effects support document fo r perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA).  Washington, DC: U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
Epstein, S. 1996. Impure science: AIDS, activism, and the politics of knowledge . Oakland, CA: University 
of California Press. 
Ernst, A., N. Brix, L. L. B. Lauridsen, J. Olsen, E. T. Parner, Z. Liew, L. H. Olsen, and C. H. Ramlau-
Hansen. 2019. Exposure to perfluoroalkyl substa nces during fetal life and pubertal development 
in boys and girls from the Danish National Birth Cohort. Environmental Health Perspectives  
127(1):17004. 
Fedak, K. M., A. Bernal, Z. A. Capshaw, and S. Gr oss. 2015. Applying the Bradford Hill criteria in the 
21st century: How data integration has changed causal inference in molecular epidemiology. 
Emerging Themes in Epidemiology  12:14. 
Fenton, S. E., A. Ducatman, A. Boobis, J. C. DeWitt, C.  Lau, C. Ng, J. S. Smith, and S. M. Roberts. 2021. 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substance toxicity and human health review: Current state of knowledge 
and strategies for informing future research. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  
40(3):606–630. 
Gao, K., T. Zhuang, X. Liu, J. Fu, J. Zhang, J. Fu, L. Wang, A. Zhang, Y. Liang, M. Song, and G. Jiang. 
2019. Prenatal exposure to per- and polyfluoroalk yl substances (PFASs) and association between 
the placental transfer efficiencies and dissociation constant of serum proteins-PFAS complexes. Environmental Science & Technology  53(1):6529–6538. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Grandjean, P., C. A. G. Timmermann, M. Kruse, F. Nielsen, P. J. Vinholt, L. Boding, C. Heilmann, and 
K. Mølbak. 2021. Severity of COVID-19 at elevated exposure to perfluorinated alkylates. PLOS 
ONE  15(12):e0244815. 
Gross, R. S., A. Ghassabian, S. Vandyousefi, M. J.  Messito, C. Gao, K. Kannan, and L. Trasande. 2020. 
Persistent organic pollutants expos ure in newborn dried blood spots and infant weight status: A 
case-control study of low-income Hispanic mother-infant pairs. Environmental Pollution  
267:115427. 
Hill, A. B. 1965. The environment and disease: Association or causation? Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of Medicine  58(5):295–300. 
Høyer, B.B., J.P Bonde, S.S. Tøttenborg, C.H. Ramlau-Hansen, C. Lindh, H.S. Pedersen, G. Toft. 2018.  
Exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances during pregna ncy and child behaviour at 5 to 9 years of 
age. Hormones and Behavior  101:105–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2017.11.007.  
Hruby, A., and F. B. Hu. 2015. The epidemiology of obesity: A big picture. PharmacoEconomics 
33(7):673–689. 
Hu, Y., G. Liu, J. Rood, L. Liang, G. A. Bray, L. de Jonge, B. Coull, J. D. Furtado, L. Qi, P. Grandjean, 
and Q. Sun. 2019. Perfluoroalkyl substances and ch anges in bone mineral density: A prospective 
analysis in the POUNDS-LOST study. Environmental Research  179(P):108775. 
Huang, H., K. Yu, X. Zeng, Q. Chen, Q. Liu, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, and L. Huang. 2020. 
Association between prenatal exposure to pe rfluoroalkyl substances and respiratory tract 
infections in preschool children. Environmental Research  191:110156. 
Huang, R., Q. Chen, L. Zhang, K. Luo, L. Chen, S. Zhao, L. Feng, and J. Zhang. 2019. Prenatal exposure 
to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroa lkyl substances and the risk of hypertensive disorders of 
pregnancy. Environmental Health: A Global Access Science Source  18(1):5. 
Hurley, S., D. Goldberg, M. Wang, J.-S. Park, M. Petr eas, L. Bernstein, H. Anton-Culver, D. O. Nelson, 
and P. Reynolds. 2018. Breast cancer risk a nd serum levels of per- and poly-fluoroalkyl 
substances: A case-control study nested  in the California Teachers Study. Environmental Health: 
A Global Access Science Source  17(1):83. 
IARC (International Agency for Resear ch on Cancer) Working Group. 2016. IARC Monographs on the 
Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans.  Some Chemicals Used as Solvents and in Polymer 
Manufacture. Vol. 110. Lyon, France. 
Impinen, A., M. P. Longnecker, U. C. Nygaard, S. J. London, K. K. Ferguson, L. S. Haug, and B. 
Granum. 2019. Maternal levels of perfluoro alkyl substances (PFASs) during pregnancy and 
childhood allergy and asthma related outcomes and infections in the Norwegian Mother and Child (MoBa) cohort. Environment International  124:462–472. 
Itoh, S., A. Araki, C. Miyashita, K. Yamazaki, H. G oudarzi, M. Minatoya, Y. Ait Bamai, S. Kobayashi, 
E. Okada, I. Kashino, M. Yuasa, T. Baba, and R.  Kishi. 2019. Associati on between perfluoroalkyl 
substance exposure and thyroid hormone/thyroid antib ody levels in maternal and cord blood: The 
Hokkaido Study. Environment International  133(P):105139. 
Jansen, A., J. P. Berg, O. Klungsoyr, M. H. B. Muller, J. L. Lyche, and J. O. Aaseth. 2020. The influence 
of persistent organic pollutants on thyroidal, reproductive and adrenal hormones after bariatric 
surgery. Obesity Surgery  30(4):1368–1378. 
Jasanoff, S. 1998. The political science of risk perception. Reliability Engineering & System Safety  
59(1):91–99. 
Jensen, R. C., M. S. Andersen, P. V. Larsen, D. Glint borg, C. Dalgard, C. A. G. Timmermann, F. Nielsen, 
M. B. Sandberg, H. R. Andersen, H. T. Chri stesen, P. Grandjean, and T. K. Jensen. 2020a. 
Prenatal exposures to perfluoroalkyl acids and asso ciations with markers of adiposity and plasma 
lipids in infancy: An Odense Child Cohort Study. Environmental Health Perspectives  
128(7):77001. 
Jensen, R. C., D. Glintborg, C. A. Gade Timmermann , F. Nielsen, H. B. Kyhl, H. Frederiksen, A. M. 
Andersson, A. Juul, J. J. Sidelmann, H. R. A ndersen, P. Grandjean, M. S. Andersen, and T. K. 
Jensen. 2020b. Prenatal exposure to perfluorodecanoi c acid is associated with lower circulating 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  91 
Prepublication Copy  concentration of adrenal steroid metabolites duri ng mini puberty in human female infants: The 
Odense Child Cohort. Environmental Research 182:109101. 
Ji, J., L. Song, J. Wang, Z. Yang, H. Yan, T. Li, L. Yu , L. Jian, F. Jiang, J. Li, J. Zheng, and K. Li. 2021. 
Association between urinary per- and poly-fl uoroalkyl substances and COVID-19 susceptibility. 
Environment International  153:106524. 
Jin, R., R. McConnell, C. Catherine, S. Xu, D. I. Walker , N. Stratakis, D. P. Jones, G. W. Miller, C. Peng, 
D. V. Conti, M. B. Vos, and L. Chatzi. 2020. Perfluoroalkyl substances and severity of nonalcoholic fatty liver in children: An untargeted metabolomics approach. Environment 
International  134:105220. 
Kashino, I., S. Sasaki, E. Okada, H. Matsuura, H. Gouda rzi, C. Miyashita, E. Okada, Y. M. Ito, A. Araki, 
and R. Kishi. 2020. Prenatal exposure to 11 perfl uoroalkyl substances and fetal growth: A large-
scale, prospective birth cohort study. Environment International  136:105355. 
Kim, Y. R., N. White, J. Braunig, S. Vijayasarathy, J.  F. Mueller, C. L. Knox, F. A. Harden, R. Pacella, 
and L.-M. L. Toms. 2020. Per- and poly-fluoroalkyl  substances (PFASs) in follicular fluid from 
women experiencing infertility in Australia. Environmental Research  190:109963. 
Kung, Y.-P., C.-C. Lin, M.-H. Chen, M.-S. Tsai, W.-S. Hsieh, and P.-C. Chen. 2021. Intrauterine 
exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances may harm children’s lung function development. 
Environmental Research  192:110178. 
Kvalem, H. E., U. C. Nygaard, K. C. Lodrup Carlsen, K. H. Carlsen, L. S. Haug, and B. Granum. 2020. 
Perfluoroalkyl substances, airways infections , allergy and asthma related health outcomes—
Implications of gender, expos ure period and study design. Environment International  
134:105259. 
Kwiatkowski, C. F., D. Q. Andrews, L. S. Birnbaum, T. A. Bruton, J. C. DeWitt, D. R. U. Knappe, M. V. 
Maffini, M. F. Miller, K. E. Pelch, A. Reade, A.  Soehl, X. Trier, M. Venier, C. C. Wagner, Z. 
Wang, and A. Blum. 2020. Scientific basi s for managing PFAS as a chemical class. 
Environmental Science & Technology Letters  7(8):532–543. 
Lebeaux, R. M., B. T. Doherty, L. G. Gallagher, R. T.  Zoeller, A. N. Hoofnagle, A. M. Calafat, M. R. 
Karagas, K. Yolton, A. Chen, B. P. Lanphear, J. M. Braun, and M. E. Romano. 2020. Maternal serum perfluoroalkyl substance mixtures and thyr oid hormone concentrations in maternal and 
cord sera: The HOME Study. Environmental Research  185:109395. 
Liang, H., Z. Wang, M. Miao, Y. Tian, Y. Zhou, S. Wen, Y. Chen, X. Sun, and W. Yuan. 2020. Prenatal 
exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances and thyroid hormone concentrations in cord plasma in a 
Chinese birth cohort. Environmental Health: A Gl obal Access Science Source  19(1):127. 
Lin, P.-I. D., A. Cardenas, R. Hauser, D. R. Gold, K.  P. Kleinmman, M. F. Hivert, A. F. Fleisch, A. M. 
Calafat, T. F. Webster, E. S. Horton, and E. Oken. 2019. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and 
blood lipid levels in pre-diabetic adults-longit udinal analysis of the diabetes prevention program 
outcomes study. Environment International  129:343–353. 
Lin, H.-W., H.-X. Feng, L. Chen, X.-J. Yuan, and Z.  Tan. 2020a. Maternal exposure to environmental 
endocrine disruptors during pregnancy is associated with pediatric germ cell tumors. Nagoya 
Journal of Medical Science  82(2):323–333. 
Lin, P.-I. D., A. Cardenas, R. Hauser, D. R. Gold, K.  P. Kleinman, M.-F. Hivert, A. M. Calafat, T. F. 
Webster, E. S. Horton, and E. Oken. 2020b.  Per- and polyfluoroalkyl  substances and blood 
pressure in pre-diabetic adults-cross-secti onal and longitudinal analyses of the diabetes 
prevention program outcomes study. Environment International  137:105573. 
Lin, P.-I. D., A. Cardenas, R. Hauser, D. R. Gold, K.  P. Kleinman, M.-F. Hivert, A. M. Calafat, T. F. 
Webster, E. S. Horton, and E. Oken. 2021. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl  substances and kidney 
function: Follow-up results from the Diabetes Prevention Program trial. 
Environment 
International 148:106375. 
Liu, P., F. Yang, Y. Wang and Z. Yuan. 2018. Pe rfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) exposure in early life 
increases risk of childhood adiposity: A me ta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health  15(10):2070. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Liu, Y., N. Li, G. D. Papandonatos, A. M. Calafat, C.  B. Eaton, K. T. Kelsey, A. Chen, B. P. Lanphear, 
K. M. Cecil, H. J. Kalkwarf, K. Yolton, a nd J. M. Braun. 2020. Exposure to per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances and adiposity at age 12 years: Evaluating periods of susceptibility. 
Environmental Science & Technology  54(2):16039–16049. 
Lochhead, P, H. Khalili, A. N. Ananthakrishnan, K. E. Burke, J. M. Richter, Q. Sun, P. Grandjean, and A. 
T. Chan. 2022. Plasma concentrations of perfl uoroalkyl substances and risk of inflammatory 
bowel diseases in women: A nested case control anal ysis in the Nurses’ Health Study cohorts.  
Environmental Research . 207:112222. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.envres.2021.112222.  
Long, M., M. Ghisari, L. Kjeldsen, M. Wielsoe,  B. Norgaard-Pedersen, E. L. Mortensen, M. W. 
Abdallah, and E. C. Bonefeld-Jorgensen. 2019. Autism spectrum disorders, endocrine disrupting 
compounds, and heavy metals in amniotic fluid: A case-control study. Molecular Autism  10:1. 
Lyall, K., V. M. Yau, R. Hansen, M. Kharrazi, C. K. Yoshida, A. M. Calafat, G. Windham, and L. A. 
Croen. 2018. Prenatal Maternal serum concentra tions of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in 
association with autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability. Environmental Health 
Perspectives  126(1):017001. 
Ma, X., L. Cui, L. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, Q. Kang, F. Jin, and Y. Ye. 2021. Parental plasma 
concentrations of perfluoroalkyl substa nces and in vitro fertilization outcomes. Environmental 
Pollution (Barking, Essex 1987)  269:116159. 
Mancini, F. R., G. Cano-Sancho, J. Gambaretti, P.  Marchand, M.-C. Boutron-Ruault, G. Severi, P. 
Arveux, J.-P. Antignac, and M. Kvaskoff. 202 0. Perfluorinated alkylated substances serum 
concentration and breast cancer risk: Evidence fro m a nested case-control study in the French 
E3N cohort. International Journal of Cancer  146(4):917–928. 
Manzano-Salgado, C. B., B. Granum, M.-J. Lopez-Es pinosa, F. Ballester, C. Iniguez, M. Gascon, D. 
Martinez, M. Guxens, M. Basterretxea, C. Zabaleta , T. Schettgen, J. Sunyer, M. Vrijheid, and M. 
Casas. 2019. Prenatal exposure to perfluoroalky l substances, immune-related outcomes, and lung 
function in children from a Spanish birth cohort study. International Journal of Hygiene and 
Environmental Health  222(6):945–954. 
Marks, K. J., A. J. Cutler, Z. Jeddy, K. Northstone , K. Kato, and T. J. Hartman. 2019. Maternal serum 
concentrations of perfluoroalkyl subs tances and birth size in British boys. International Journal 
of Hygiene and Environmental Health  222(5):889–895. 
Mitro, S. D., S. K. Sagiv, A. F. Fleisch, L. M. Jaacks, P. L. Williams, S. L. Rifas-Shiman, A. M. Calafat, 
M.-F. Hivert, E. Oken, and T. M. James-Todd.  2020a. Pregnancy per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substance concentrations and postpartum hea lth in Project Viva: A prospective cohort. The 
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism  105(9):e3415–e3426. 
Mitro, S. D., S. K. Sagiv, S. L. Rifas-Shiman, A. M.  Calafat, A. F. Fleisch, L. M. Jaacks, P. L. Williams, 
E. Oken, and T. M. James-Todd. 2020b. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substance exposure, gestational 
weight gain, and postpartum weight changes in Project Viva. Obesity  (Silver Spring, MD) 
28(1):1984–1992. 
Mora, A. M., A. F. Fleisch, S. L. Rifas-Shiman, J. A. Woo Baidal, L. Pardo, T. F. Webster, A. M. Calafat, 
X. Ye, E. Oke, and S. K. Sagiv. 2018. Early life exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
and mid-childhood lipid and alan ine aminotransferase levels. Environment International  111:1–
13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2017.11.008. 
NASEM (National Academies of Sciences , Engineering, and Medicine). 2018a. Advances in causal 
understanding for human health risk-based deci sion-making: Proceedings of a Workshop—in 
Brief . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/25004. 
NASEM. 2018b. Gulf War and health. Volume 11: Generational health effects of serving in the Gulf War. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/25162. 
NASEM. 2018c. Veterans and Agent Orange: Update 11.  Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press. https://doi.o rg/10.17226/25137. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  93 
Prepublication Copy  Nian, M., K. Luo, F. Luo, R. Aimuzi, X. Huo, Q. Chen, Y. Tian, and J. Zhang. 2020. Association between 
prenatal exposure to PFAS and fetal sex hormones: Are the short-chain PFAS safer? 
Environmental Science and Technology  54(1):8291–8299. 
Nielsen, C., and A. Jöud. 2021. Susceptibility to COVID-19 after high exposure to perfluoroalkyl 
substances from contaminated drinking wate r: An ecological study from Ronneby, Sweden. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health  18(20):10702. 
Niu, J., H. Liang, Y. Tian, W. Yuan, H. Xiao, H. Hu, X. Sun, X. Song, S. Wen, L. Yang, Y. Ren, and M. 
Miao. 2019. Prenatal plasma concentrations of perfluoroalkyl and polyfl uoroalkyl substances and 
neuropsychological development in children at four years of age. Environmental Health  18(1):53. 
Oh, J., D. H. Bennett, A. M. Calafat, D. Tancredi, D. L. Roa, R. J. Schmidt, I. Hertz-Picciotto, and H.-M. 
Shin. 2021. Prenatal exposure to per- and polyfl uoroalkyl substances in association with autism 
spectrum disorder in the MARBLES study. Environment International  147:106328. 
Ottinger, G. 2010. Buckets of resistance: Sta ndards and the effectiveness of citizen science. Science , 
Technology, & Human Values  35(2):244–270. 
Preston, E. V., S. L. Rifas-Shiman, M.-F. Hivert, A. R. Zota, S. K. Sagiv, A. M. Calafat, E. Oken, and T. 
James-Todd. 2020a. Associations of per- and pol yfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) with glucose 
tolerance during pregnancy in Project Viva. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and 
Metabolism  105(8):e2864–e2876. 
Preston, E. V., T. F. Webster, B. Claus Henn, M. D. McClean, C. Gennings, E. Oken, S. L. Rifas-Shiman, 
E. N. Pearce, A. M. Calafat, A. F. Fleisch, and S. K. Sagiv. 2020b. Prenatal exposure to per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances and maternal and neonatal thyroid function in the Project Viva 
Cohort: A mixtures approach. Environment International  139:105728. 
Rahman, M. L., C. Zhang, M. M. Smarr, S. Lee, M.  Honda, K. Kannan, F. Tekola-Ayele, and G. M. Buck 
Louis. 2019. Persistent organic pollutants and gestational diabetes: A multi-center prospective 
cohort study of healthy US women. Environment International  124:249–258. 
Raleigh, K. K., B. H. Alexander, G. W. Olsen, G. Ramachandran, S. Z. Morey, T. R. Church, P. W. 
Logan, L. L. Scott, and E. M. Allen. 2014.  Mortality and cancer incidence in ammonium 
perfluorooctanoate production workers. Occupational and Environmental Medicine  71(7):500–
506. https://doi.org/10.1136/oemed-2014-102109. 
Reardon, A. J. F., E. Khodayari Moez, I. Dinu, S. Goruk, C. J. Field, D. W. Kinniburgh, A. M. 
MacDonald, J. W. Martin, and A. P. Study. 2019 . Longitudinal analysis reveals early-pregnancy 
associations between perfluoroalkyl sulfonates and thyroid hormone status in a Canadian 
prospective birth cohort. Environment International  129:389–399. 
Romano, M. E., L. G. Gallagher, M. N. Eliot, A. M. Calafat, A. Chen, K. Yolton, B. Lanphear, and J. M. 
Braun. 2021. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substan ce mixtures and gestational weight gain among 
mothers in the Health Outcomes and Measures of the Environment study. International Journal 
of Hygiene and Environmental Health  231:113660. 
Rosen, E. M., A. L. Brantsæter, R. Carroll, L. Haug,  A. B. Singer, S. Zhao, and K. K. Ferguson. 2018. 
Maternal plasma concentrations of per- a nd polyfluoroalkyl substances and breastfeeding 
duration in the Norwegian mother and child cohort.  Environmental Epidemiology  2(3):e027. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/EE9.0000000000000027.  
Rylander, L., C. H. Lindh, S. R. Hansson, K. Br oberg, and K. Källén. 2020. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances in early pregnancy and risk for pr eeclampsia: A case-control study in southern 
Sweden. Toxics  8(2):43. 
Salihovic, S., J. Stubleski, A. Karrman, A. Larsson, T. Fall, L. Lind, and P. M. Lind. 2018. Changes in 
markers of liver function in relation to chang es in perfluoroalkyl substances—A longitudinal 
study. Environment International  117:196–203. 
Shea, B. J., B. C. Reeves, G. Wells, M. Thuku, C. Hame l, J. Moran, D. Moher, P. Tugwell, V. Welch, E. 
Kristjansson, and D. A. Henry. 2017. AMSTAR 2: A critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews 
that include randomised or non-randomised st udies of healthcare interventions, or both. British 
Medical Journal  358:j4008. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Shearer, J. J., C. L. Callahan, A. M. Calafat, W.-Y. Hu ang, R. R. Jones, V. S. Sabbisetti, N. D. Freedman, 
J. N. Sampson, D. T. Silverman, M. P. Purdue, and J. N. Hofmann. 2021. Serum concentrations 
of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substan ces and risk of renal cell carcinoma. Journal of the National 
Cancer Institute  113(5):580–587.  
Shin, H.-M., D. H. Bennett, A. M. Calafat, D. Tanc redi, and I. Hertz-Picciotto. 2020. Modeled prenatal 
exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substan ces in association with child autism spectrum 
disorder: A case-control study. Environmental Research  186:109514. 
Shoaff, J., G. D. Papandonatos, A. M. Calafat, A. Chen , B. P. Lanphear, S. Ehrlich, K. T. Kelsey, and J. 
M. Braun. 2018. Prenatal exposure to perfluoroalkyl  substances: Infant Birth weight and early life 
growth. Environmental Epidemiology  (Philadelphia, PA)  2(2):e101. 
Singer, A. B., K. W. Whitworth, L. S. Haug, A. Sabaredzovic, A. Impinen, E. Papadopoulou, and M. P. 
Longnecker. 2018. Menstrual cycle characteristics as determinants of plasma concentrations of 
perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in the Norweg ian mother and child cohort (MoBa study). 
Environmental Research  166:78–85. 
Starling, A. P., J. L. Adgate, R. F. Hamman, K. Kechris, A. M. Calafat, and D. Dabelea. 2019. Prenatal 
exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances a nd infant growth and adiposity: The Healthy 
Start Study. Environment International  131:104983. 
Starling, A. P., C. Liu, G. Shen, I. V. Yang, K. Kech ris, S. J. Borengasser, K. E. Boyle, W. Zhang, H. A. 
Smith, A. M. Calafat, R. F. Hamman, J. L. Adga te, and D. Dabelea. 2020. Prenatal exposure to 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, umbili cal cord blood DNA methylation, and cardio-
metabolic indicators in newborns: The Healthy Start Study. Environmental Health Perspectives 
128(1):127014. 
Steenland, K., and S. Woskie. 2012. Cohort mortality study of workers exposed to perfluorooctanoic acid. 
American Journal of Epidemiology  176(10):909–917. https://d oi.org/10.1093/aje/kws171. 
Steenland, K., S. Kugathasan, and D. B. Barr. 2018. PFOA and ulcerative colitis. Environmental 
Research  165:317–321. 
Stratakis, N., V. C. D, R. Jin, K. Margetaki, D. Va lvi, A. P. Siskos, L. Maitre, E. Garcia, N. Varo, Y. 
Zhao, T. Roumeliotaki, M. Vafeiadi, J. Urquiza, S. Fernandez-Barres, B. Heude, X. Basagana, M. 
Casas, S. Fossati, R. Grazuleviciene, S. Andr usaityte, K. Uppal, R. R. C. McEachan, E. 
Papadopoulou, O. Robinson, L. S. Haug, J. Wright, M. B. Vos, H. C. Keun, M. Vrijheid, K. T. 
Berhane, R. McConnell, and L. Chatzi. 2020. Pr enatal exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances 
associated with increased susceptibility to liver injury in children. Hepatology  72(5):1758–1770. 
Sun, Q., G. Zong, D. Valvi, F. Nielsen, B. Coull,  and P. Grandjean. 2018. Plasma concentrations of 
perfluoroalkyl substances and risk of type 2 di abetes: A prospective investigation among U.S. 
women. Environmental Health Perspectives  126(3):037001. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP2619.  
Suryanarayanan, S., and D. L. Kleinman. 2016. Vanishing bees.  New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 
Press. 
Takacs, M. L., and B. D. Abbott. 2007. Activation of  mouse and human peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptors (alpha, beta/delta, gamma) by perfl uorooctanoic acid and pe rfluorooctane sulfonate. 
Toxicological Sciences  95(1):108–117. 
Tian, Y., H. Liang, M. Miao, F. Yang, H. Ji, W. Cao, X. Liu, X. Zhang, A. Chen, H. Xiao, H. Hu, and W. 
Yuan. 2019. Maternal plasma concentrations of  perfluoroalkyl and polyf luoroalkyl substances 
during pregnancy and anogenital distance in male infants. Human Reproduction  (Oxford, 
England)  34(7):1356–1368. 
Tian, Y., M. Miao, H. Ji, X. Zhang, A. Chen, Z. Wang, W. Yuan, and H. Liang. 2021. Prenatal exposure 
to perfluoroalkyl substances and co rd plasma lipid concentrations. Environmental Pollution  
268(P):115426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115426. 
Timmermann, C. A. G., K. J. Jensen, F. Nielsen, E. Budtz-Jorgensen, F. van der Klis, C. S. Benn, P. 
Grandjean, and A. B. Fisker. 2020. Serum perfl uoroalkyl substances, vaccine responses, and 
morbidity in a cohort of Guinea-Bissau children. Environmental Health Perspectives  
128(8):87002. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential Health Effects of PFAS  95 
Prepublication Copy  Tsai, M.-S., S.-H. Chang, W.-H. Kuo, C.-H. Kuo, S. -Y. Li, M.-Y. Wang, D.-Y. Chang, Y.-S. Lu, C.-S. 
Huang, A.-L. Cheng, C.-H. Lin, and P.-C. Ch en. 2020. A case-control study of perfluoroalkyl 
substances and the risk of breast cancer in Taiwanese women. Environment International  
142:105850. 
Valvi, D., K. Højlund, B. A. Coull, F. Nielsen, P. Weihe, and P. Grandjean. 2021. Life-course exposure to 
perfluoroalkyl substances in relation to marker s of glucose homeostasis in early adulthood. 
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism  106(8):2495–2504. 
Vieira, V. M., K. Hoffman, H. M. Shin, J. M. Weinberg, T. F. Webster, and T. Fletcher. 2013. 
Perfluorooctanoic acid exposure and cancer outcomes in a contaminated community: A 
geographic analysis. Environmental Health Perspectives  121(3):318–323. 
Wang, Y., L. Zhang, Y. Teng, J. Zhang, L. Yang, J. Li, J. Lai, Y. Zhao, and Y. Wu. 2018. Association of 
serum levels of perfluoroalkyl substances with  gestational diabetes mellitus and postpartum blood 
glucose. Journal of Environmental Sciences  (China)  69:5–11. 
Wen, H. J., S. L.Wang, Y. C. Chuang, P. C. Chen, and Y. L. Guo. 2019. Prenatal perfluorooctanoic acid 
exposure is associated with early onset atopic dermatitis in 5-year-old children. Chemosphere  
231:25–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.05.100.  
Wielsøe, M., P. Kern, and E. C. Bonefeld-Jørgensen . 2017. Serum levels of environmental pollutants is a 
risk factor for breast cancer in Inuit: A case control study. Environmental Health  16(1):56. 
Wikstrom, S., C. H. Lindh, H. Shu, and C.-G. Bo rnehag. 2019. Early pregnancy serum levels of 
perfluoroalkyl substances and risk of  preeclampsia in Swedish women. Scientific Reports  
9(1):9179. 
Wikstrom, S., P.-I. Lin, C. H. Lindh, H. Shu, and C.-G. Bornehag. 2020. Maternal serum levels of 
perfluoroalkyl substances in early pregnancy and offspring birth weight. Pediatric Research  
87(6):1093–1099. 
Woodruff, T. J., and P. Sutton. 2014. The Naviga tion Guide systematic review methodology: A rigorous 
and transparent method for translating environmenta l health science into better health outcomes. 
Environmental Health Perspectives  122(10):1007–1014. 
Workman, C. E., A. B. Becker, M. B. Azad, T. J. Mo raes, P. J. Mandhane, S. E. Turvey, P. Subbarao, J. 
R. Brook, M. R. Sears, and C. S. Wong. 2019 . Associations between concentrations of 
perfluoroalkyl substances in human plasma and maternal, infant, and home characteristics in 
Winnipeg, Canada. Environmental Pollution  (Barking, Essex: 1987)  249:758–766. 
Xiao, C., P. Grandjean, D. Valvi, F. Nielsen, T. K. Jensen, P. Weihe, and Y. Oulhote. 2020. Associations 
of exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances with th yroid hormone concentrations and birth size. The 
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism  105(3):735–745. 
Xu, H., Q. Zhou, J. Zhang, X. Chen, H. Zhao, H. Lu , B. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Wu, C. Ying, Y. Xiong, Z. 
Zhou, and X. Li. 2020a. Exposure to elevated per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in early 
pregnancy is related to increased risk of gesta tional diabetes mellitus: A nested case-control study 
in Shanghai, China. Environment International  143:105952. 
Xu, Y., Y. Li, K. Scott, C. H. Lindh, K. Jakobsson, T.  Fletcher, B. Ohlsson, and E. M. Andersson. 2020b. 
Inflammatory bowel disease and biomarkers of gut inflammation and permeability in a 
community with high exposure to perfluo roalkyl substances through drinking water. 
Environmental Research  181:108923. 
Yao, Q., R. Shi, C. Wang, W. Han, Y. Gao, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, G. Ding, and Y. Tian. 2019. Cord blood 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, placental st eroidogenic enzyme, and cord blood reproductive 
hormone. Environment International  129:573–582. 
Yeung, E. H., E. M. Bell, R. Sundaram, A. Ghassabian, W. Ma, K. Kannan, and G. M. Louis. 2019. 
Examining endocrine disruptors measured in newborn dried blood spots and early childhood 
growth in a prospective cohort. Obesity  (Silver Spring, MD)  27(1):145–151. 
Zeng, X., Q. Chen, X. Zhang, H. Li, Q. Liu, C. Li, M.  Ma, J. Zhang, W. Zhang, J. Zhang, and L. Huang. 
2019. Association between prenatal exposure to  perfluoroalkyl substances and asthma-related 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  diseases in preschool children. Environmental Science and Poll ution Research International  
26(2):29639–29648. 
Zhang, S., R. Tan, R. Pan, J. Xiong, Y. Tian, J. Wu, and L. Chen. 2018. Association of perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances with premature ovarian insufficiency  in Chinese Women. The Journal 
of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 103(7):2543–2551. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
 ANNEX TABLE 3-1  Health Effects of PFAS by Category 
Health Effect 
Category Specific Health Effects 
Included Authoritative Strength-of-Evidence Conclusion Committee’s Strength-of-
Evidence Conclusion 
Immunological Response to infection 
Response to allergens Response to self: autoimmunity ATSDR: Evidence is suggestive of an association between serum levels of PFOA, PFOS, 
PFHxS, and PFDA and decreased antibody responses to vaccines; there is also limited evidence of this effect for PFNA, PFUnA, and PFDoDA.  EFSA: PFOS and PFOA are associated with reduced antibody response to vaccination, observed in several studies. Some of the studi es suggest that serum levels of PFOS and 
PFOA are associated with increased propensity  for infection. Epidemiological studies 
provide insufficient evidence to draw conclu sions on associations between exposure to 
PFASs and asthma and allergies. 
 EPA: Human epidemiology data show associa tions between PFOA exposure and decreased 
vaccination response. Increased risk of ulcerative colitis was found in the PFOA high-exposure community study, as well as in a study limited to workers in that population.  NTP: The evidence indicating that PFOA aff ects multiple aspects of the immune system 
supports the overall conclusion that PFOA alters immune function in humans. However, the mechanism(s) of PFOA-associated immunot oxicity is not clearly understood, and 
effects on diverse endpoints, such as suppre ssion of the antibody response and increased 
hypersensitivity, may be unrelated.  
 The NTP concludes that PFOS is presumed to be an immune hazard to humans based on a high level of evidence from animal studies that PFOS suppressed the antibody response and a moderate level of evidence from studies in humans. Although the mechanism(s) of PFOS-associated immunotoxicity is not clearly understood, potential mechanisms by which 
PFOS may reduce disease resistance include suppression of the antibody response and of 
NK cell function.  OECD: A study with 656 children demonstrated that elevated exposures to PFOA and 
PFOS are associated with reduced humoral immune response to routine childhood 
immunizations in children aged 5 and 7. A large epidemiological study of 69,000 persons conducted by the C-8 Science Panel found probable links between elevated PFOA blood levels and ulcerative colitis. Sufficient: decreased antibody 
response (in adults and children)  Limited or suggestive: ulcerative colitis in adults  Inadequate or insufficient: 
response to allergens, all other 
immune outcomes 
continued 
  Prepublication Copy                 97 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
 ANNEX TABLE 3-1  Continued 
Health Effect 
Category Specific Health Effects 
Included Authoritative Strength-of-Evidence Conclusion Committee’s Strength-of-
Evidence Conclusion 
Cardiometabolic Cardiovascular disease, 
dyslipidemia, metabolic syndrome, obesity ATSDR: The results of epidemiological studies of PFOA, PF OS, PFNA, and PFDA 
suggest an association between perfluoroalkyl exposure and increases in serum lipid levels, 
particularly total cholesterol and low- density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol.  
 
EFSA: Epidemiological studies provide clear evidence of an association between exposure 
to PFOS, PFOA and PFNA and in creased serum levels of cholesterol. There is insufficient 
evidence of associations with diabetes, obesity, and metabolic syndrome.  EPA: Human epidemiological data show asso ciations between PFOA exposure and high 
cholesterol. These epidemiological studies have generally found positive associations 
between serum PFOA concentration and tota l cholesterol in PFOA-exposed workers and 
high-exposure communities (i.e., increasing lip id level with increasing PFOA); similar 
patterns are seen with LDL cholesterol but  not with high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 
cholesterol. 
 
OECD: The C-8 Science Panel’s epidemiologi cal study of 69,000 persons found probable 
links between elevated PFOA blood levels and high cholesterol (hypercholesteremia). 
 C-8 Science Panel: There is a probable link be tween exposure to C-8 and high cholesterol 
(hypercholesterolemia). Sufficient: dyslipidemia in 
adults and children  Inadequate or insufficient: 
other outcomes 
Developmental Infant and fetal growth 
Neurodevelopment Development of the reproductive system ATSDR: Evidence is suggestive of an association between serum levels of PFOA and 
PFOS and small decreases in birthweight.  EFSA: There may well be a causal association between PFOS and PFOA and birthweight. 
Maternal serum levels in studies reporting results on other PFASs were generally much lower, and those studies provide no eviden ce of an adverse association between other 
PFASs and birthweight.  
EPA: The epidemiological studies found no a ssociation of PFOA with neurodevelopmental 
effects or with preterm birth and other complications of pregnancy. 
 OECD: High levels of PFOS and PFOA are toxic for reproduction and development of the 
fetus (such as reducing birthwei ght and lowering semen quality). Sufficient: small reductions in 
birthweight  Inadequate or insufficient: all other outcomes, such as development of the  reproductive system, neurodevelopment 
Cancer Kidney cancer, testicular 
cancer, breast cancer  EPA: Under EPA’s Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment  (EPA, 2005), there is 
“suggestive evidence of carcinogenic potential” for PFOA. Epidemiology studies demonstrate an association of serum PFOA with kidney and testicular tumors among 
highly exposed members of the general population.   There is suggestive evidence of carcinogenic potential for PFOS. Human epidemiology studies found no direct correlation between  PFOS exposure and the incidence of Sufficient: kidney cancer in 
adults  Limited or suggestive: testicular cancer, breast cancer in adults  98          Prepublication Copy   
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
 carcinogenicity in worker-based populations . Although one worker cohort showed an 
increase in bladder cancer, smoking was a ma jor confounding factor, and the standardized 
incidence ratios were not significantly diffe rent from those for the general population. 
Other worker and general population studies found  no statistically significant trends for any 
cancer type.  IARC: There is “limited” evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of PFOA. A positive 
association was observed for cancers of the te stes and kidney. Overall, PFOA is possibly 
carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B).  OECD: High levels of PFOS and PFOA have  been found to be potentially carcinogenic in 
animal tests. The C-8 Science Panel’s ep idemiological study of 69,000 persons found 
probable links between elevated PFOA blood  levels and testicular and kidney cancer. 
 C-8 Science Panel: There is a probable link between exposure to C-8 and kidney and testicular cancer. Inadequate or insufficient: all 
other cancers 
Reproductive Infertility 
Male reproductive effects Female reproductive effects Hormone levels Hypertension during pregnancy Gestational diabetes ATSDR: There is suggestive epidemiological evidence of an association between serum 
PFOA and PFOS and pregnancy-induced  hypertension and/or preeclampsia. 
 EPA: Human epidemiological data show associations between PFOA exposure and pregnancy-induced hypertension and preeclampsia.  OECD: High levels of PFOS and PFOA are toxic for reproduction and development of the 
fetus (e.g., reducing birthweight and lo wering semen quality). In addition, 8:2 
fluorotelomer phosphate diesters  (8:2 PAPs), 8:2 FTOH, and PFOA show endocrine effects 
in different in vitro and in vivo tests. Th e C-8 Science Panel’s epidemiological study of 
69,000 persons found probable links between elevated PFOA blood levels and preeclampsia and elevated blood pressure during pregnancy.  
 C-8 Science Panel: There is a probable link between exposure to C-8 and pregnancy-induced hypertension (i ncluding preeclampsia). Limited or suggestive: 
pregnancy-induced hypertension (gestational hypertension and preeclampsia)  Inadequate or insufficient: all other effects, such as fecundity, infertility, male reproductive effects,  
female reproductive effects, 
reproductive hormone  levels, gestational diabetes  
Endocrine Thyroid disease, 
hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, thyroid hormone levels Type 1 and 2 diabetes EPA: Human epidemiology data show associ ations between PFOA exposure and thyroid 
disorders. The epidemiological  studies found no associations  between PFOA and diabetes.  
 OECD: 8:2 fluorotelomer phospha te diesters (8:2 PAPs), 8:2 FTOH, and PFOA show 
endocrine effects in different in vitro an d in vivo tests. The C-8 Science Panel’s 
epidemiological study of 69,000 persons f ound probable links between elevated PFOA 
blood levels and thyroid disease.  
C-8 Science Panel: There is a probable link be tween exposure to C-8 and thyroid disease. Limited or suggestive:  
thyroid disease or dysfunction in adults  Inadequate or insufficient: all other outcomes, including type 1 and 2 diabetes 
continued 
  Prepublication Copy                 99 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
 ANNEX TABLE 3-1  continued  
Health Effect 
Category Specific Health Effects 
Included Authoritative Strength-of-Evidence Conclusion Committee’s Strength-of-
Evidence Conclusion 
Hepatic Liver disease, altered serum 
liver enzymes and bilirubin ATSDR: Increases in serum enzymes and decreas es in serum bilirubin, observed in studies 
of PFOA, PFOS, and PFHxS, are suggestive of liver alterations.  EFSA: Epidemiological studies provide evidence for an association between exposure to 
PFAS and increased serum levels of the liver enzyme alanine transferase (ALT). The 
magnitude of the association was small, how ever, and few studies found an association 
with ALT outside the reference range. There were no associations with liver disease. 
 EPA: Human epidemiology data show associa tions between PFOA exposure and increased 
liver enzymes. Limited or suggestive: liver 
enzyme alterations in children and adults 
Respiratory Respiratory symptoms, 
pulmonary function, respiratory diseases None Insufficient  
Hematological  Blood disorders or impacts on 
blood-forming organs None Insufficient  
Musculoskeletal Loss of muscle tone or strength, 
muscular rigidity, muscular atrophy, arthritis, altered bone density, arthralgia (joint pain) None Insufficient  
Renal Kidney disease and biomarkers 
of renal function  None Insufficient  
Neurological Parkinson’s disease 
Memory loss Neuropsychological function None Insufficient  
NOTE: ATSDR = Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; EFSA = European Food Safety Authority; EPA = U.S. Environmental  Protection Agency; 
IARC = International Agency for Research on Cancer; NK = natura l killer; NTP = National Toxicology Program; OECD = Organisation  for Economic Co-
operation and Development. 
 100          Prepublication Copy   
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Prepublication Copy 101 4 
 
PFAS Exposure Reduction 
 
It is difficult to provide clear advice on how to  reduce exposure to PFAS because there are many 
potential exposure sources. Importantly, even if the s ource of a person’s exposure is completely removed, 
it will take years for the internal body burden (levels in the body) of many PFAS to be fully eliminated. 
Biological half-lives (i.e., the time it takes for plas ma concentration to decrease by 50 percent after 
exposure) vary depending on the PFAS; half-life estimat es for the four most studied PFAS (PFOA, PFOS, 
PFHxS, and PFNA) range from around 2 to 8 years (Li et al., 2018; Olsen et al., 2007). These long biological half-lives are due to reabsorption in the kidney and enterohepatic r ecirculation, both processes 
greatly reducing the capacity to elim inate PFAS (Harada et al., 2007).  
In developing this chapter, the committee first created a conceptual model for exposure reduction 
(see Figure 4-1). The premise of this model is that  if any exposure pathway is interrupted, exposure 
should be reduced. For example, if PFAS were no long er used in industries, they would not be in 
consumer products or waste stre ams, so exposures would be reduc ed. Similarly, if PFAS in the 
environment are cleaned up, exposures will decrease.  
Support for the committee’s conceptual model is  found in the changes in exposure at the 
population level due to industry-wide changes in PFAS production. For example, serum PFAS concentrations in the United States declined over time following the 3M company’s (Maplewood, 
Minnesota) voluntary phase-out of perfluorooctanyl ch emicals and related precursors, including PFOS 
and PFOA, in 2000 (ITRC, 2017) (see Figure 4-2). Therefore, there is evidence that removing these 
chemicals from products on a large scale can r esult in lower levels in a population.  
  
 
FIGURE 4-1  Conceptual model for PFAS exposure reduction. 
NOTE: Red lines indicate a break in the pa thway that could reduce human exposure. 
SOURCE: Adapted from Sunderland et al., 2019. 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 4-2 Blood (serum) levels of PFAS, United States, 2000–2016. 
NOTE: Average = geometric mean.  
SOURCE: Patrick N. Breysse’s presentation to the commit tee on February 4, 2021. DATA SOURCE: Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. Fourth Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals, Updated Tables, 
(January, 2019). Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  
 
 
SOURCES AND ROUTES OF EXPOSURE TO PFAS 
 
The sources of and routes of exposure to PFAS are an  active area of investigation. What is well 
known is that PFAS exposure is highly complex, with  pathways that include occupational exposures, 
environmental contamination, consumer product use,  and food exposures. Specific sources of exposure 
include, for example, jobs in fluorochemical manuf acturing facilities or where PFAS-containing products, 
such as textiles or food contact materi als, are made. Other jobs with a known increased risk of exposure to 
PFAS include electroplating; painting; carpet installation and treatment; serving as a military or civilian firefighter, which entails using PFAS-containing foams in training exercises and wearing PFAS-
impregnated gear; and jobs that require prolonged work with ski wax (ATSDR, 2021). In addition, food 
workers and others in the hospitality industry ma y have elevated exposure since they handle PFAS-
containing food packaging as part of their job duties (Carnero et al., 2021; Curtzwiler et al., 2021; Schaider et al., 2017). 
Ingestion is the most well-studied route of e xposure in nonoccupational settings (Trudel et al., 
2008). Ingestion of PFAS can occur through drinking c ontaminated water; eating contaminated seafood; 
or consuming other contami nated foods, such as vegetables, game, or  dairy products (Bao et al., 2019, 
2020; Death et al., 2021; Domingo and Nadal, 2017; Herzke et al., 2013; Li et al., 2019). PFAS are often 
used in cookware and in materials  that came in contact with food, such as microwave popcorn bags or 
packaging used for fast foods or processed foods (Carne ro et al., 2021; Curtzwiler et al., 2021; Schaider et 
al., 2017). Exposure can also occur through accidental ingestion of PFAS-containing dusts (Fraser et al., 
2013). PFAS cross the placenta, and PFAS from the mother’s body burden can be passed on to her 
developing fetus (Gao et al., 2019; Manzano-Salga do et al., 2015). Maternal transfer of PFAS can also 
occur through breastfeeding (Serrano et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2021). 
Inhalation and transdermal exposures are l ess well studied. Inhalation of PFAS is well 
documented in occupational settings that use aer osolized PFAS (Gilliland, 1 992). Volatile PFAS have 
been detected indoors (Fromme et al., 2015; Morales- McDevitt et al., 2021), and inhalation near factory 
emissions and incinerators contri butes to exposures in nearby communities (Fenton et al., 2021). There 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Exposure Reduction 103 
Prepublication Copy  are as yet no data formally evaluating inhalation from s howering in contaminated water, but this is an 
active area of research.   
PFAS are used in thousands of products (e.g., pro ducts containing water; stain-resistant clothing; 
and personal care products, such as sunscreen, makeup, and dental floss). PFAS are also used in such 
products as paint, textiles, firefighting foam, electro plating material, ammunition, climbing ropes, guitar 
strings, artificial turf, and soil reme diation products (Glüge et al., 2020). The extent to which use of 
products contributes to human expos ures is unkown, however, because the relative contribution of PFAS 
exposures from sources other than food or water is  not well characterized (DeLuca et al., 2021).  
The presence of PFAS in everyday consumer produc ts may be an important source of exposure 
for the general population, but this likely varies gr eatly by individual (Rodgers et al., 2022). Consumer 
products are often treated with fluoropolymers to im part water and stain resistance, and fluoropolymers 
can result in exposure to the nonpolymer PFAS discussed in this report in several ways. Nonpolymer 
PFAS can be present as impurities in fluoropolymer-cont aining products because these PFAS are used as 
processing aids in chemical production or are degrad ation products of the fluoropolymers (Rodgers et al., 
2022; Schellenberger et al., 2019). Moreover, fluoropol ymer PFAS can degrade (biodegradation) slowly 
when exposed to water and release fluorotelomer al cohols, which are precursors to nonpolymer PFAS. 
Once the precursor PFAS are in the human body, they  can transform to such PFAS as PFOA, PFOS, and 
PFHxS (Washington and Jenkins, 2015).  
 
APPROACH TO DETERMINING ADVIC E ON PFAS EXPOSURE REDUCTION 
 
To inform its recommendations on how clin icians can advise patients on PFAS exposure 
reduction, the committee looked at several sources of evidence. The committee contracted with a 
consultant to review the literature evaluating the e ffectiveness of behavioral interventions in reducing 
exposure to PFAS. The consultant also reviewed sev eral studies that model estimates of PFAS intake, 
which could inform predicted changes in serum PFA S levels if exposure routes were modified (see 
Appendix E). The committee reviewed studies on PFAS exposure through breastfeeding since this route 
impacts a vulnerable population and is of particular in terest to people in PFAS-impacted communities, as 
voiced by speakers at the committee’s town halls (see Appendix B). The committee also evaluated studies 
of medical interventions for reducing internal leve ls of PFAS (e.g., phlebotom y or taking of prescription 
drugs). PFAS exposure pathways discussed in Chapter 1 were used to outline strategies clinicians can use 
to determine whether a patient may be at risk of PFA S exposure based on residential and work history. In 
addition, the committee reviewed advice from other entities on PFAS exposure reduction, such as that 
provided by nongovernmental organizations, stat e and local governments, and other countries. 
 
CONTRIBUTION  OF INDIVIDUAL  EXPOSURE  SOURCES  TO HUMAN  EXPOSURE 
 
Behavioral Intervention Studies 
 
Studies evaluating the impact of behavior cha nge on reducing exposures would help determine 
the impact of behavior on human exposure. This section, based on a literature review conducted by 
LaKind Associates (see Appendix E), provides an overvi ew of the literature available to inform what 
individuals can do to reduce their serum PFAS levels. Th e literature review used a three-step approach to 
identify relevant publications in PubMed, EMBASE, and Google Schol ar (see Appendix E for keywords 
and the search strategy). Studies were selected that  entailed interventions designed to reduce human 
exposure to PFAS, specifically interventions that could be carried out by individuals. Secondary 
references of retrieved articles were reviewed to identify publications not found through the electronic 
search. An additional literature search was then condu cted to identify reviews containing estimates of 
human PFAS intakes. The final search date was March 5, 2021. 
The reviewed intervention studies are presented here  by exposure route, with the primary focus 
being on drinking water and diet. L iterature on interventions for othe r exposure sources, such as dust and 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  consumer products, is more limited. Lastly, breastfeed ing is an important potential source of exposure for 
infants, and lactating could reduce parents’ PFAS leve ls. After reviewing the relevant studies, this section 
concludes by assessing the effectiveness of behavior  modifications based on the current literature.  
Drinking water has been identified as a substantial source of PFAS exposure for many 
populations (Andrews and Naidenko, 2020; Domingo and Nadal, 2019). Studies of interventions focused 
on drinking water are consistent in demonstrating the effectiveness of wa ter filtration at reducing levels of 
certain PFAS. Consumers have a variety of options for filtering PFAS from drinking water, including 
whole-house, under-sink, and filtering-pitcher devices.  The committee identified seven publications and 
one agency report evaluating possibl e drinking water interventions. Of  these, five (Ao et al., 2019; 
Herkert et al., 2020; Iwabuchi and Sato, 2021; MDH,  2008; Patterson et al., 2019) evaluate use of whole-
house, under-sink, and filtering-pitcher devices, and thr ee (Ao et al., 2019; Gellrich et al., 2013; Heo et 
al., 2014) evaluate differences in PFAS concentr ations between tap water and bottled water.  
In a study of real-world uses of water filtration options, Herkert and colleagues (2020) tested 
municipal, well, and filtered (n = 89) and unfiltered (n = 87) tap water in residences (N = 73) in North 
Carolina for 11 PFAS. The filters tested varied in both type and filtration method (reverse osmosis, 
granulated activated carbon, single-stage, dual-stage) . Notably, reverse osmosis and dual-stage filters 
were found consistently to remove most  measured compounds at an average of ≥90 percent efficiency; 
some short-chain replacement PFAS are difficult to re move with carbon filtration (Herkert et al., 2020). 
Use of bottled water can also be a way to redu ce PFAS exposure from drinking water, although some 
bottled waters contain detectable levels of C-3–C-10 perfluorocarboxy lic acids (PFCAs) and C-3–C-6 and 
C-8 perfluorosulfonic acids (PFSAs) (Chow et al., 2021). In Parkersburg, West Virginia, for example, the 
use of bottled water resulted in a dramatic reduc tion in serum PFOA levels among a contaminated 
community living near a Teflon-manufacturing plant (Emmett et al., 2006). 
Changes in diet may potentially reduce PFAS exposure, given that PFAS can be present in a 
number of food products, including wild-caught fi sh and game, livestock, and produce, as well as 
prepared foods. Fish and seafood have been identified as sources of PFAS, but the levels of PFAS vary by 
fish type and water body (Sunderland et al., 2019). PF AS-contaminated drinking water can also impact 
home-grown vegetables (Brown et al., 2020; Emmett et al., 2006). The majority of ingestion-based 
intervention studies focused on seafood preparation,  but there was no strong evidence that fish 
preparation methods influenced PFAS levels (Alves et al., 2017; Barbosa et al., 2018; Bhavsar et al., 
2014; Del Gobbo et al., 2008; Hu et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2019; Taylor et al., 2019).  
A study on PFAS exposure from indoor dust found significantly lower PFAS levels in vacuumed 
dust from rooms with PFAS-free furnishings relative to  control rooms (78 percent reduction, 95% CI: 38–
92). Results suggest that modifying personal behavior  to be capable of identifying and purchasing PFAS-
free furnishings can decrease exposure levels from indoor dust (Scher et al., 2019).  
Literature on PFAS in consumer pr oducts is available only for nonstic k pans and dental floss, and 
these studies have several weaknesses, including recall bias, small sample sizes, and lack of replication. Their results do not provide enough evidence to suggest that modifications in behavior relative to those 
products would decrease PFAS exposure, but in the absence of such evidence, consumers should be 
aware of which products contain PFAS (Scher et al., 2019; Young et al., 2021).  
Another factor that complicates consumer choices aimed at avoiding PFAS is the lack of 
consistent labeling of pr oducts. A recent study (identified afte r Appendix E of this report had been 
completed) that screened 93 market items across thr ee different product types (furnishings, apparel, and 
bedding) found that PFAS were present in many items that were labeled as green or nontoxic (Rodgers et 
al., 2022).  
To summarize, the available literature is limit ed in presenting recommendations for effective 
behavior modifications to reduce inte rnal levels of PFAS. In places with  water contamination, individuals 
can reduce their exposure through use of water filtrat ion. In places without PFAS water contamination or 
workplace exposure, diet is believed to be the primar y exposure route, but there is limited information 
with which to recommend dietary interventions. No intervention study has examined exposure reduction 
and its impact on serum concentrations, likely in part because to fully show effectiveness for an 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Exposure Reduction 105 
Prepublication Copy  intervention, it would have to be conducted over a lo ng enough time to account for the long half-lives of 
PFAS.  
 
Modeled Estimates of PFAS Intakes 
 
In the absence of studies demonstrating the impact  of interventions on reducing PFAS exposure, 
exposure models may help inform predicted chang es in serum PFAS levels if exposure routes are 
modified. Pharmacokinetic modeling is useful for estimating the body burden from different exposure 
routes, but such models are often limited by the many  assumptions made about intake factors (e.g., food 
contamination). High-quality data on the distributio n of PFAS in different food types and consumer 
products are sparse. Nonetheless, pharmacokinetic models  can be used to estimate the variability possible 
in exposure reduction and the impact of changes w ith different parameters. Although imperfect, exposure 
modeling can provide, at a minimum, an estimate of  the change in internal PFAS body burden if PFAS 
levels in diet or water were decreased. 
Studies that have estimated intake of PFOS and PFOA have been used to determine the dominant 
routes of exposure in communities without contamin ated drinking water (see Appendix E). Estimates of 
how much PFAS exposure comes from diet in adults vary widely, from 16–99 percent for PFOA to 66–100 percent for PFOS (Egeghy and Lorber, 2011; Haug et al., 2011; Lorber and Egeghy, 2011; 
Sunderland et al., 2019; Vestergren and Cousins, 2009); no estimates are available for individual food 
products. For dust, the estimates are 1–11 percent fo r PFOA and 1–15 percent for PFOS (Sunderland et 
al., 2019). For PFOA, the dominant routes are thought to  be oral exposure resulting from consumption of 
fish and seafood, drinking water, and ingestion of dust. For PFOS, the dominant routes are thought to be ingestion of food and water, ingestion of dust, and ha nd-to-mouth transfer from treated carpets (Trudel et 
al., 2008). Residual PFOA in food packaging (used to  greaseproof food-containing paper products) is 
another potential route of exposure (Trudel et al., 2008); polyfluoroalkyl phosphoric acids in food 
packaging can also be metabolized in the body to PFOA (Begley et al., 2005; Carnero et al., 2021; Curtzwiler et al., 2021; Schaider et al., 2017).  
Interpretation of the estimated intake studies is ch allenged by several factors. First, while diet 
appears to be a major pathway of exposure, ther e is little information on PFAS in commercial foods 
commonly consumed in the United States. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has released 
PFAS data for certain foods that could be used to m odel source contributions to PFAS intake in future 
studies.
 However, the FDA data for produce, meat, dairy,  and grain products are based on a small sample 
size, and the results “cannot be used to draw defi nitive conclusions about the levels of PFAS in the 
general food supply.”1  
The relative importance of different PFAS sources varies by study, population, and time period of 
exposure (Sunderland et al., 2019). The production an d use of individual PFAS have changed over time 
and will continue to do so. Serum PFAS levels in the United States dropped following the phase-out of 
production of PFOS and PFOA; however, exposures to  C9–C11 PFCAs have not followed the same 
trend. Thus, it is important to use recent environmen tal, consumer product, and dietary data to develop 
robust estimates of current dominant pathways of PFAS exposure. In a recent review evaluating 
nonoccupational intakes via background PFAS exposures,  De Silva and colleagues (2021) observed that 
the inconsistency among studies in the relative importa nce of different exposure sources may be due to 
differing concentrations of PFAS in sources, as we ll as the assignment of differing values for exposure 
intake factors (e.g., exposure fre quency and duration). The author s conclude, “Without rigorously 
conducted exposure studies it is challenging to rank or der the most important human exposure pathways 
and without these data, our ability to design eviden ce-based exposure intervention strategies will be 
limited.” 
 
                                                 
1 See https://www.fda.gov/food/chemicals/analytical-re sults-testing-food-pfas-environmental-contamination 
(accessed May 12, 2021). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Exposure to PFAS through Breastfeeding 
 
Breastfeeding is a route of exposure of great interest to people who spoke at the committee’s 
town halls. Breast milk is the only f ood many infants receive in their first 6 months of life, and if the 
breast milk they receive is contaminated with PFA S, it may take years for their body burden to be 
reduced, given the long half-lives of some PFAS.  
In her testimony at the committee’s first town ha ll (April 7, 2021), Loreen Hackett (PFOA Project 
New York) stated that in her view, health care mantras such as “breast m ilk is best” need to be thoroughly 
reevaluated in exposed communities, noting that breastf eeding “may double or triple PFAS levels in an 
infant compared to the mothers th ereby increasing risks to their deve loping systems.” She stressed that 
families in exposed communities cannot make inform ed reproductive choices or other family decisions 
without improved information tailored to their situ ation, and she relayed concerns among community 
members expressing guilt for unknowingly poisoning th eir child over the course of pregnancy and 
breastfeeding.  
Nonetheless, data on PFAS in breast milk are very limited. A few studies measuring PFAS in 
breast milk in North America (Kubwabo et al., 2013; Ta o et al., 2008; Zheng et al., 2021) indicate transfer 
from the parent to the child during the first months of  life. And although the concentrations in breast milk 
are generally much lower than the concentrations in maternal serum (Cariou et al., 2015; Kärrman et al., 
2007; Kim et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2011), breastfeedin g has been shown to contribute significantly to 
children’s serum levels of some PFAS (Gyllenhamma r et al., 2018, 2019; Koponen et al., 2018). In a 
cohort of 2- to 4-month-old infants in Sweden , for example, bottle-fed infants had mean serum 
concentrations twice as low as those of their excl usively breastfed counterparts, and serum levels of 
PFOA, PFNA, and PFHxS increased 8 −11 percent per week of exclusive breastfeeding (Gyllenhammar et 
al., 2018). Where measured and estimated PFAS concentr ations in breast milk in the United States have 
been compared with drinking water screening valu es of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
Registry (ATSDR), some exceedances have been ob served, especially in communities impacted by PFAS 
contamination (LaKind et al., 2022) (see Figure 4-3).  
Whether lactational exposure to PFAS can have a dverse health effects in children has not been 
well studied to date. Formula feeding can also l ead to PFAS exposure through either contaminated 
formula or formula reconstituted with contaminat ed drinking water. Given the increased exposures 
observed in breastfed versus formula-fed infants, it is not clear whether the benefits of breastfeeding 
outweigh the risks to the child among lactating pers ons with very high levels of PFAS exposure. 
Guidance to breastfeed remains the best feeding a dvice for most infants gi ven the many benefits 
of breastfeeding for both mothers and babies.2 Even though PFAS exposures have been occurring for 
many years, research has consistently shown benef its of breastfeeding, providing confidence in the 
traditional guidance, although a more in-depth unders tanding of this exposure route is warranted to 
inform protection of such a vulnerable population.   
MEDICAL INTERVENTIONS FOR POTENTIALLY REDUCING PFAS BODY BURDEN  
 
There have been few studies overall and no clini cal trials evaluating treatments to reduce PFAS 
body burden, even in cases of very high exposure. The few evaluations available have focused on the use 
of cholesterol-lowering medications and phlebotomy.  
PFAS are secreted in the bile and have enterohepa tic recirculation; therefore, researchers have 
been interested in medications that enhance bile  sequestration as potential approaches for reducing PFAS 
body burden. Cholestyramine is a bile-sequestering ag ent that is used mainly to reduce low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol. In a cross-sectional st udy of C-8 Health Project participants, 36 of 56,175 
adults were being treated with cholestyramine and were found to have lower levels of PFAS compared 
with those not taking this medication (Ducatman et al., 2021). Another medication, probenecid, was not 
                                                 
2 See https://www.cdc.gov/breastf eeding/about-breastfeeding/why-it-ma tters.html (accessed May 23, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Exposure Reduction 107 
Prepublication Copy  significantly associated with serum PFAS levels in this  study. Cholestyramine has also been evaluated in 
a few small case studies of 1 to 20 individuals (Gen ius et al., 2010, 2013). Results of these studies suggest 
that cholestyramine may be an effective treatment to  accelerate PFAS fecal excretion, but replication in 
studies with more participants is needed. No studies have assessed whether PFAS levels rebound when 
treatment with cholestyramine is discontinued.  
Phlebotomy has been discussed as a way to reduce the body burden of PFAS. Genuis and 
colleagues (2014) asked six patients aged 16–53 years from a highly PFAS-exposed family to submit to routine blood draws (500 mL) for up to 5 years, r esulting in a cumulative 2–12 L of blood drawn. The 
levels of PFOA, PFOS, and PFHxS decreased in these i ndividuals over that time at a faster rate than 
expected according to first-order excretion kine tics. In a recent randomized controlled trial of 285 
firefighters, serum PFOS and PFHxS concentrations we re significantly reduced in subjects who regularly 
donated blood or plasma over 12 months compared with the control group; the decline was more pronounced in the plasma donation group (Gasiorowski et al., 2022). While these studies indicate that 
phlebotomy can be effective at reducing PFAS le vels in blood, there are no established serum 
concentrations of PFAS at which the benefits of th is intervention reasonably outweigh the harms, and the 
safety and utility of this approach are uncertain. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 4-3  Measured (white bars) and estimated (gray bars) breast milk concentrations of per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in the United States and Canada, in comparison with children’s drinking water 
screening values (dotted line).  
NOTES: Bars represent the mean measured  breast milk levels for the data from Kubwabo and colleagues (2013) and 
Tao and colleagues (2008); the median measured breast milk levels from Zheng et al. (2021); and the geometric 
mean estimated breast milk levels for the National He alth and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), the 
Canadian Health Measures Survey (CHMS), and PFAS-c ontaminated communities. Erro r bars represent maximum 
measured concentrations in Kubwabo and colleagues (201 3) and Tao and colleagues (2008), and 95th percentile 
estimated concentrations for NHANES, CHMS, and PFAS-contaminated sites. Of note, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA 
were not detected in breast milk samples from Kubwabo an d colleagues (2013). The xx-axi s is log-scale. Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry children’s drinking water screening values: PFOA (21 ppt), PFOS (14 ppt), 
PFHxS (140 ppt), and PFNA (21 ppt) (ATSDR, 2018). 
SOURCE: LaKind et al., 2022.  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  EXISTING ADVICE ON PFA S EXPOSURE REDUCTION 
 
Several federally funded academic projects a nd nonprofit organizations provide information 
about PFAS, including how to identify potential community exposure and reduce personal exposure. 
Because concerned individuals look to online resources for data and information, a few of the resources 
are summarized here, with the caveat that they have no t been tested empirically, and the data they present 
may be incomplete, or the sources on which the data  are based may be missing. Furthermore, in 
discussing these online resources, th e committee is not endorsing them, nor do their content and 
conclusions necessarily represent the committee’s view s. In addition to the sources discussed below, 
many state health departments have state-level resources on PFAS that may be trusted sources of 
information.   
PFAS-REACH 
 
PFAS-REACH (Research, Education, and Action fo r Community Health) is a project funded by 
the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences to develop guidance materials and data 
interpretation tools for use by communities impacted by PFAS-contaminated drinking water. The project 
is led by Silent Spring, Northeastern University, an d Michigan State University, with collaboration from 
community partner organizations that include Testi ng for Pease, Massachusetts Breast Cancer Coalition, 
and Community Action Works. The project’s online r esource center, PFAS Exchange, provides factsheets 
and interactive maps; a factsheet on how to reduce one’s  exposure is most relevant to the discussion in 
this chapter.
3 Figure 4-4 shows the PFAS Exchange recommendations. 
  
 
FIGURE 4-4 Recommendations for reducing PFAS exposure available through the PFAS Exchange.  
SOURCE: PFAS-REACH project. 
  
                                                 
3 See https://pfas-exchange.org/h ow-to-reduce-your-exposure-to- pfas (accessed June 17, 2022). 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Exposure Reduction 109 
Prepublication Copy  PFAS Project Lab 
 
Northeastern University, one of the academic pa rtners for the PFAS-REACH project, operates the 
PFAS Project Lab within its Social Science Enviro nmental Health Research Institute (SSEHRI). Among 
the Lab’s publicly available resources is the PFAS Sites and Community Resources Map.4 The map 
interface provides the locations of known and susp ected PFAS contamination sites (see Figure 4-5), as 
well as community resources and state action. The da ta were collected from government websites, news 
articles, and publicly available sources. The map bega n as a collaborative effort with the Environmental 
Working Group (EWG), an advocacy group (see belo w and Chapter 1, Figure 1-2). The SSEHRI map 
“aims to help affected residents and community groups  to access information about data in their states and 
learn how to connect with other activists working on PFAS issues.”5 
 
Environmental Working Group 
 
The EWG is included as a data source in the PFAS Project Lab. The EWG site also provides an 
interactive map that “serves to show the extent of PF AS water contamination as documented by states, the 
department of defense and EWG’s testing,” providing the locations of industrial and military sites with 
known PFAS contamination.6 Additionally, the EWG provides a guide for avoiding exposure to PFAS 
chemicals. The EWG’s recommendations are similar to those in the PFAS-REACH factsheet (see Figure 
4-4) regarding consumer choices. The EWG has developed several cons umer guides providing 
information on the chemicals (not just PFAS) present in a variety of commercial products, including sunscreen, cosmetics, personal care and beauty pro ducts, bug repellants, and household cleaners, among 
others.   
 
FIGURE 4-5 PFAS Project Lab map showing PFAS contaminati on sites in the continental United States.  
SOURCE: Social Science Environmental Health Research Institute (SSEHRI). 
https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/12412ab41b 3141598e0bb48523a7c 940 (accessed May 25, 2022). 
  
                                                 
4 See https://experience. arcgis.com/experience/124 12ab41b3141598 e0bb48523a7c940 (acce ssed May 25, 2022). 
5 See https://www.ewg.org/news-insights/news/mapping-p fas-contamination-crisis (accessed June 15, 2022). 
6 See https://www.ewg.org /interactive-maps/pfas_contaminati on/#about (accessed June 17, 2022). 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The committee found that few evidence-based recommendations can be made for reducing 
exposure to PFAS on an individual level.  
Occupational exposures to PFAS may be much hi gher than community exposures. In accordance 
with the hierarchy of controls, methods for re ducing workplace exposure can include replacing the 
chemical with a less hazardous one; engineering cont rols, such as ventilation to reduce inhalation of the 
chemical; administrative controls, such as rotating op erations to reduce the amount of time an individual 
worker is around a chemical; or personal-level contro ls, such as personal protective equipment, including 
gloves and masks.  
Ingestion is an important route of exposure to PFAS in the general population; thus it is important 
to reduce consumption of PFAS in drinking water and foods. Contamination of drinking water with PFAS 
is a widespread problem in the United States, and the extent of the contamination has not been completely 
characterized. Both municipal and private sources of drinking water (e.g., private wells) can be 
contaminated with PFAS as a result of fluorochemica l manufacturing, use of firefighting foams, or 
discharge of landfill leachate to drinking water s ources. If PFAS are in drinking water, switching to 
another source of water with lower PFAS concentrations will reduce exposure.  
Consumption of game may also cause to exposure to PFAS. To date, 11 states have developed or 
are in the process of developing advisory guidelines fo r fish, wildlife, and other food products to protect 
human health from exposure to PFAS. These advisories offer guidance on limiting the quantity of 
consumption of these foods. These advisories are state- specific and range from do not eat (e.g., fish or 
deer in Michigan with PFOS concentrations ove r 300 parts per billion [ppb]) to no need to limit 
consumption (e.g., New Jersey fish with more than  0.56 nanograms per gram [ng/g] of PFOS). The 
Environmental Council of the States has compiled in formation from participating states on state PFAS 
standards, advisories, and guidance values (ECOS, 2020). 
For clinicians, based on its review of the evidence on PFAS exposure reduction, the committee 
makes the following recommendations:  
 
Recommendation 4-17: Clinicians advising patients on PFAS exposure reduction should 
begin with a conversation aimed at first dete rmining how they might be exposed to PFAS 
(sometimes called an environmental exposu re assessment) and what  exposures they are 
interested in reducing. This exposure assessm ent should include questions about current 
occupational exposures to PFAS (such as work with fluorochemicals or firefighting) and 
exposures to PFAS through the environment.  Known environmental exposures to PFAS 
include living in a community with PFAS-contaminated drinking water, living near industries that use fluorochemicals, serving in the military, and consuming fish and game 
from areas with known or potential contamination. 
 
Recommendation 4-2: If patients may be expo sed occupationally, such as by working with 
fluorochemicals or as a firefighter, clinicians should consult with occupational health and 
safety professionals knowledgeable about the workplace practices to determine the most 
feasible ways to reduce that exposure.  
 Recommendation 4-3: Clinicians should advise patients with elevated PFAS in their drinking water that they can filter their wa ter to reduce their exposure. Drinking water 
filters are rated by NSF International, an i ndependent organization that develops public 
health standards for products. The NSF data base can be searched online for PFOA to find 
                                                 
7 The committee’s recommendations ar e numbered according to the chapter of the main text in which they 
appear. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Exposure Reduction 111 
Prepublication Copy  filters that reduce the PFAS in drinking water included in the committee’s charge. 
Individuals who cannot filter their water can use another source of water for drinking. 
 
Recommendation 4-4: In areas with known PFA S contamination, clinicians should advise 
patients that PFAS can be present in fish, wildlife, meat, and dairy products and direct 
them to any local consumption advisories. 
 
There are fewer evidence-based exposure-reducti on recommendations for patients without known 
sources of exposure: 
 
Recommendation 4-5: Clinicians should direct patients interested in learning more about 
PFAS to authoritative sources of informatio n on how PFAS exposure occurs and what 
mitigating actions they can take. Authoritativ e sources include the Pediatric Environmental 
Health Specialty Units (PEHSUs), the Agency  for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 
(ATSDR), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).   Recommendation 4-6: When clinicians are co unseling parents of infants on PFAS exposure, 
they should discuss infant feeding and steps that can be taken to lower sources of PFAS 
exposure. The benefits of breastfeedin g are well known; the American Academy of 
Pediatrics, the American Academy of Family  Physicians, and the American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists support and recommend breastfeeding for infants, with 
rare exceptions. Clinicians should explain th at PFAS can pass through breast milk from a 
mother to her baby. PFAS may also be present in  other foods, such as the water used to 
reconstitute formula and infant food, and potent ially in packaged formula and baby food. It 
is not yet clear what types and levels of ex posure to PFAS are of concern for child health 
and development. 
 
Additionally, there is a critical need for more da ta to understand PFAS exposure among breastfed infants: 
 
Recommendation 4-7: Federal environmental health agencies should conduct research to 
evaluate PFAS transfer to and concentrations in  breast milk and formula to generate data 
that can help parents and clinicians make sh ared, informed decisions about breastfeeding. 
 
 At this time, it not possible to eliminate all sources of PFAS exposure. There are some sources 
people can try to limit if they desire and have the r esources to do so. If patients are resource-limited, it is 
most important that if PFAS contamination of their water is known or suspected, they use water filtration 
or another source of water for drinking that is lower in PFAS. In keeping with the principle of adaptability, it is also important to direct patient s to reliable sources of information on PFAS, such as 
ATSDR, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, a nd state and local departments of public health so 
they can obtain accurate and up-to-date information. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Alves, R. N., A. L. Maulvault, V. L. Barbosa, S. Cunha, C. J. A. F. Kwadijk, D. Álvarez-Muñoz, S. 
Rodríguez-Mozaz, O. Aznar-Alemany, E. Eljarrat,  and D. Barceló. 2017. Preliminary assessment 
on the bioaccessibility of contaminants of emerging concern in raw and cooked seafood. Food 
and Chemical Toxicology  104:69–78. 
Andrews, D. Q., and O. V. Naidenko. 2020. Popul ation-wide exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances from drinking water in the United States. Environmental Science & Technology 
Letters  7(12):931–936. https://doi.o rg/10.1021/acs.estlett.0c00713. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Ao, J., T. Yuan, H. Xia, Y. Ma, Z. Shen, R. Shi,  Y. Tian, J. Zhang, W. Ding, and L. Gao. 2019. 
Characteristic and human exposure risk assessment  of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances: A 
study based on indoor dust and drinking water in China. Environmental Pollution  254:112873. 
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). 2018. ATSDR’s Minimal Risk Levels 
(MRLs) and Environmental Media Ev aluation Guides (EMEGs) for PFAS . 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/pfas/resources/ mrl-pfas.html (accessed 21 May 2021). 
ATSDR. 2021. Toxicological profile for perfluoroalkyls . Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxpr ofiles/tp200.pdf (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Bao, J., W. J. Yu, Y. Liu, X. Wang, Y. H. Jin,  and G. H. Dong. 2019. Pe rfluoroalkyl substances in 
groundwater and home-produced vegetables and e ggs around a fluorochemical industrial park in 
China. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety  171:199. 
Bao, J., C. L. Li, Y. Liu, X. Wang, W. J. Yu, Z. Q.  Liu, L. X. Shao, and Y. H. Jin. 2020. Bioaccumulation 
of perfluoroalkyl substances in greenhouse vegeta bles with long-term groundwater irrigation near 
fluorochemical plants in Fuxin, China. Environmental Research  188:109751. 
Barbosa, V., A. L. Maulvault, R. N. Alves, C.  Kwadijk, M. Kotterman, A. Tediosi, M. Fernández-
Tejedor, J. J. Sloth, K. Granby, and R. R. Rasmussen. 2018. Effects of steaming on contaminants of emerging concern levels in seafood. Food and Chemical Toxicology  118:490–504. 
Begley, T. H., K. White, P. Honigfort, M. L. Twaroski, R. Neches, and R. A. Walker. 2005. 
Perfluorochemicals: Potential sources of and migration from food packaging. Food Additives and 
Contaminants 22(10):1023–1031. https://doi .org/10.1080/02652030500183474. 
Bhavsar, S. P., X. Zhang, R. Guo, E. Braekevelt, S. Petro, N. Gandhi, E. J. Reiner, H. Lee, R. Bronson, 
and S. A. Tittlemier. 2014. Cooking fish is not effective in reducing exposure to perfluoroalkyl 
and polyfluoroalk yl substances. Environment International  66:107–114. 
Brown, J. B., J. M. Conder, J. A. Arblaster, and C. P. Higgins. 2020. Assessing human health risks from 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substance (PFAS)-impact ed vegetable consumption: A tiered modeling 
approach. Environmental Science & Technology  54(23):15202–15214. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c03411. 
Cariou, R., B. Veyrand, A. Yamada, A. Berrebi, D. Zalko, S. Durand, C. Pollono, P. Marchand, J. C. 
Leblanc, J. P. Antignac, and B. Le Bizec. 2015. Perfluoroalkyl acid (PFAA) levels and profiles in 
breast milk, maternal and cord serum of French women and their newborns. Environment 
International  84:71–81. htttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2015.07.014. 
Carnero, A. R., A. Lestido-Cardama, P. V. Loureiro , L. Barbosa-Pereira, A. R. B. de Quirós, and R. 
Sendón. 2021. Presence of perfluoroalkyl and polyflu oroalkyl substances (PFAS) in food contact 
materials (FCM) and its migration to food. Foods  10(7):1443. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods10071443. 
Chow, S. J., N. Ojeda, J. G. Jacangelo, and K. J.  Schwab. 2021. Detection of ultrashort-chain and other 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in U.S. bottled water. Water Research  201:117292. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2021.117292. 
Curtzwiler, G. W., P. Silva, A. Hall, A. Ivey, and K. Vorst. 2021. Significance of perfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) in food packaging. Integrated Environmenta l Assessment and Management 
17(1):7–12. https://doi.o rg/10.1002/ieam.4346. 
De Silva, A. O., J. M. Armitage, T. A. Bruton, C. Dassuncao, W. Heiger-Bernays, X. C. Hu, A. Kärrman, 
B. Kelly, C. Ng, A. Robuck, M. Sun, T. F. We bster, and E. M. Sunderland. 2021. PFAS exposure 
pathways for humans and wildlife: A synth esis of current knowledge and key gaps in 
understanding. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  40(3):631–657. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.4935. 
Death, C., C. Bell, D. Champness, C. Milne, S. Re ichman, and T. Hagen. 2021.  Per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) in livestock and game species: A review. Science Of the Total Environment  
774:144795. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144795. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Exposure Reduction 113 
Prepublication Copy  Del Gobbo, L., S. Tittlemier, M. Diamond, K. Pepper, B. Tague, F. Yeudall, and L. Vanderlinden. 2008. 
Cooking decreases observed perfluorinated  compound concentrations in fish. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry  56(16):7551–7559. https://d oi.org/10.1021/jf800827r. 
DeLuca, N. M., M. Angrish, A. Wilkins, K. Thay er, and E. A. Cohen Hubal. 2021. Human exposure 
pathways to poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) from indoor media: A systematic review 
protocol. Environment International 146:106308. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.envint.2020.106308. 
Domingo, J. L., and M. Nadal. 2017. Per- and polyfl uoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in food and human 
dietary intake: A review of the recent scientific literature. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry  65(3):533–543. https://doi .org/10.1021/acs.jafc.6b04683. 
Domingo, J. L., and M. Nadal. 2019. Human exposur e to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) 
through drinking water: A review of the recent scientific literature. Environmental Research  
177:108648. 
Ducatman, A., M. Luster, and T. Fletcher. 2021. Perfl uoroalkyl substance excretion: Effects of organic 
anion-inhibiting and resin-binding drugs in a community setting. Environmental Toxicology and 
Pharmacology  85:103650. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.etap.2021.103650. 
Emmett, E. A., F. S. Shofer, H. Zhang, D. Free man, C. Desai, and L. M. Shaw. 2006. Community 
exposure to perfluorooctanoate: Relationships between serum concentrations and exposure 
sources. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine  48(8):759–770. 
ECOS (Environmental Council of the States). 2020. Processes and considerations for setting state PFAS 
standards. https://www.ecos.org/wp-content/ uploads/2020/02/Standards-White-Paper-FINAL-
February-2020.pdf (accessed March 25, 2020). 
Egeghy, P. P., and M. Lorber. 2011. An assessment of the exposure of Americans to perfluorooctane 
sulfonate: A comparison of estimated inta ke with values inferred from NHANES data. Journal of 
Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology  21(2):150–168. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/jes.2009.73. 
Emmett, E. A., F. S. Shofer, H. Zhang, D. Free man, C. Desai, and L. Michael Shaw. 2006. Community 
exposure to perfluorooctanoate: Relationships between serum concentrations and exposure 
sources. Journal of Occupational and Environm ental Medicine/American College of 
Occupational and Environmental Medicine  48(8):759. 
Fenton, S. E., A. Ducatman, A. Boobis, J. C. DeWitt, C.  Lau, C. Ng, J. S. Smith, and S. M. Roberts. 2021. 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substance toxicity and human health review: Current state of knowledge 
and strategies for informing future research. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  
40(3):606–630. https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.4890. 
Fraser, A. J., T. F. Webster, D. J. Watkins, M. J. Stry nar, K. Kato, A. M. Calafat, V. M. Vieira, and M. D. 
McClean. 2013. Polyfluorinated compounds in dust from homes, offices, and vehicles as 
predictors of concentrations in office workers’ serum. Environment International  60:128–136. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2013.08.012. 
Fromme, H.., S. Dietrich, L. Fembacher, T. Lahr z, and W. Völkel. 2015. Neutral polyfluorinated 
compounds in indoor air in Germany—The LUPE 4 study. Chemospher e 139:572–578. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.07.024. 
Gao, K., T. Zhuang, X. Liu, J. Fu, J. Zhang, J. Fu, L. Wang, A. Zhang, Y. Liang, M. Song, and G. Jiang. 
2019. Prenatal exposure to per- and polyfluoroalk yl substances (PFASs) and association between 
the placental transfer efficiencies and dissociation constant of serum proteins-PFAS complexes. Environmental Science & Technology  53(1):6529–6538. https:// doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b00715. 
Gasiorowski, R., M. K. Forbes, G. Silver, Y. Krast ev, B. Hamdorf, B. Lewis, M. Tisbury, M. Cole-
Sinclair, B. P. Lanphear, R. A. Klein, N. Holmes, and M. P. Taylor. 2022. Effect of plasma and 
blood donations on levels  of perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances in firefighters in 
Australia: A randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Network Open  5(4):e226257. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.6257. 
Gellrich, V., H. Brunn, and T. Stahl. 2013. Perfluor oalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in 
mineral water and tap water. Journal of Environmental Science and Health, Part A 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Toxic/Hazardous Substances and Environmental Engineering  48(2):129–135. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10934529.2013.719431. PMID: 23043333. 
Genuis, S. J., D. Birkholz, M. Ralitsch, and N. Th ibault. 2010. Human detoxification of perfluorinated 
compounds. Public Health  124(7):367–375. https://doi.org /10.1016/j.puhe.2010.03.002. 
Genuis, S. J., L. Curtis, and D. Birkholz. 2013. Gast rointestinal elimination of perfluorinated compounds 
using cholestyramine and chlorella pyrenoidosa. ISRN Toxicology  657849. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/657849. 
Genuis, S. J., Y. Liu, Q. I. Genuis, and J. W. Martin. 2014. Phlebotomy treatment for elimination of 
perfluoroalkyl acids in a highly exposed family: A retrospective case-series. PloS One  
9(12):e114295. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0114295. 
Gilliland, F. D. 1992. Fluorocarbons and human heal th: Studies in an occupational cohort. Thesis. 
University of Minnesota. https://static.ewg .org/reports/2019/pfa- timeline/1992_1-46-Gilliland-
Thesis.pdf (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Glüge, J., M. Scheringer, I. T. Cousins, J. C. DeWitt,  G. Goldenman, D. Herzke, R. Lohmann, C. A. Ng, 
X. Trier, and Z. Wang. 2020. An overview of the uses of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFAS). Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts  22(12):2345–2373. 
Gyllenhammar, I., J. P. Benskin, O. Sandblom, U. Berger, L. Ahrens, S. Lignell, K. Wiberg, and A. 
Glynn. 2018. Perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) in ser um from 2-4-month-old infants: Influence of 
maternal serum concentration, gestational age, breast-feeding, and contaminated drinking water. 
Environmental Science & Technology  52(12):7101–7110. 
https://doi.org/10. 1021/acs.est.8b00770. 
Gyllenhammar, I., J. P. Benskin, O. Sandblom, U. Berger, L. Ahrens, S. Lignell, K. Wiberg, and A. 
Glynn. 2019. Perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) in children’s serum and contribution from PFAA-contaminated drinking water. Environmental Science and Technology  53(19):11447–11457. 
https://doi.org/10. 1021/acs.est.9b01746. 
Harada, K. H., S. Hashida, T. Kaneko, K. Takenaka , M. Minata, K. Inoue, N. Saito, and A. Koizumi. 
2007. Biliary excretion and cerebrospinal fl uid partition of perfluorooctanoate and 
perfluorooctane sulfonate in humans. Enviornmental Toxicology and Pharmacology  24(2):134–
139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.etap.2007.04.003. 
Haug, L. S., S. Huber, G. Becher, and C. Thomse n. 2011. Characterisation of human exposure pathways 
to perfluorinated compounds—Comparing exposure estimates with biomarkers of exposure. 
Environment International  37(4):687–693. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2011.01.011. 
Heo, J. J., J. W. Lee, S. K. Kim, and J. E. Oh . 2014. Foodstuff analyses show that seafood and water are 
major perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) sources to humans in Korea. Journal of Hazardous Materials  
279:402–409. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.07.004. 
Herkert, N. J., J. Merrill, C. Peters, D. Bollinger, S. Zhang, K. Hoffman, P. L. Ferguson, D. R. U. 
Knappe, and H. M. Stapleton. 2020. Assessing the effectiveness of point-of-use residential 
drinking water filters for perfl uoroalkyl substances (PFASs). Environmental Science & 
Technology Letters  7(3):178–184. 
Herzke, D., S. Huber, L. Bervoets , W. D’Hollander, J. Hajslova, J. Pulkrabova, G. Brambilla, S. P. De 
Filippis, S. Klenow, G. Heinemeyer, and P. De Voogt. 2013. Perfluorinat ed alkylated substances 
in vegetables collected in four European count ries; Occurrence and human exposure estimations. 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research  20:7930. 
Hu, Y., C. Wei, L. Wang, Z. Zhou, T. Wang, G. Liu, Y. Feng, and Y. Liang. 2020. Cooking methods 
affect the intake of per- and polyfluor oalkyl substances (PFASs) from grass carp. Ecotoxicology 
and Environmental Safety  203:111003. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.111003. 
ITRC (Interstate Technology and Research Council). 2017. History and use of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) . https://pfas-1.itrcweb.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/pfas_fact_sheet_ 
history_and_use__11_13_17.pdf (accessed March 25, 2020). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Exposure Reduction 115 
Prepublication Copy  Iwabuchi, K., and I. Sato. 2021. Effectiveness of household water purif iers in removing perfluoroalkyl 
substances from drinking water. Environmental Science and Pollution Research  28(9):11665–
11671. 
Kärrman, A., I. Ericson, B. van Bavel, P. O. Darner ud, M. Aune, A. Glynn, S. Lignell, and G. Lindström. 
2007. Exposure of perfluorinated chemicals through lactation: Levels of matched human milk and 
serum and a temporal trend, 1996–2004, in Sweden. Environmental Health Perspectives  
115(2):226–230. https://doi .org/10.1289/ehp.9491. 
Kim, M-J., J. Park, L. Luo, J. Min, J. Hoan Kim, H- D. Yang, Y. Kho, G. J. Kang, M-S. Chung, S. Shin, 
and B. Moon. 2020. Effect of washing, soaking, and cooking methods on perfluorinated 
compounds in mackerel (Scomber japonicus). Food Science & Nutrition  8(8):4399–4408. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/fsn3.1737. 
Kim, S. K., K. T. Lee, C. S. Kang, L. Tao, K. Kannan, K. R. Kim, C. K. Kim, J. S. Lee, P. S. Park, Y. W. 
Yoo, J. Y. Ha, Y. S. Shin, and J. H. Lee. 2011 . Distribution of perfluoroc hemicals between sera 
and milk from the same mothers and implicati ons for prenatal and postnatal exposures. 
Environmental Pollution  (Barking, Essex: 1987)  159(1):169–174. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2010.09.008. 
Koponen, J., K. Winkens, R. Airaksinen, U. Berger, R.  Vestergren, I. T. Cousins, A. M. Karvonen, J. 
Pekkanen, and H. Kiviranta. 2018.  Longitudinal trends of per- a nd polyfluoroalkyl substances in 
children’s serum. Environment International  121(Pt 1):591–599. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2018.09.006. 
Kubwabo, C., I. Kosarac, and K. Lalonde. 2013. Dete rmination of selected perfluorinated compounds and 
polyfluoroalkyl phosphate surfactants in human milk. Chemosphere  91(6):771–777. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.02.011. 
LaKind, J. S., M-A. Verner, R. D. Rogers, H. Goeden, D. Q. Naiman, S. A. Marchitti, G. M. Lehmann, E. 
P. Hines, and S. E. Fenton. 2022. Current br east milk PFAS levels in the United States and 
Canada: After all this time,  why don’t we know more? Environmental Health Perspectives  
130(2):025002. 
Li, P., X. Oyang, Y. Zhao, T. Tu, X. Tian, L. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Li, and Z. Xiao. 2019. Occurrence of 
perfluorinated compounds in agricultural envir onment, vegetables, and fruits in regions 
influenced by a fluorine-chemical industrial park in China. Chemosphere  225:659. 
Li, Y., T. Fletcher, D. Mucs, K. Scott, C. H. Lindh , P. Tallving, and K. Jakobsson. 2018. Half-lives of 
PFOS, PFHxS and PFOA after end of exposur e to contaminated drinking water. Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine  75(1):46–51. https://doi.org/10.1136/oemed-2017-104651. 
Liu, J., J. Li, Y. Liu, H. M. Chan, Y. Zhao, Z. Cai, and Y. Wu. 2011. Comparison on gestation and 
lactation exposure of perfluorin ated compounds for newborns. Environment International  
37(7):1206–1212. https://doi.org /10.1016/j.envint.2011.05.001. 
Lorber, M., and P. P. Egeghy. 2011. Simple inta ke and pharmacokinetic modeling to characterize 
exposure of Americans to perfluoroctanoic acid, PFOA. Environmental Science and Technology  
45(19):8006–8014. https://doi.org/10.1021/es103718h. 
Luo, L., M-J. Kim, J. Park, H-D. Yang, Y. K ho, M-S. Chung, and B. Moon. 2019. Reduction of 
perfluorinated compound content in fish cake and swimming crab by different cooking methods. 
Applied Biological Chemistry  62(1):44. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13765-019-0449-x. 
Manzano-Salgado, C. B., M. Casas, M. J. Lopez-Espinosa, F. Ballester, M. Basterrechea, J. O. Grimalt, 
A. M. Jiménez, T. Kraus, T. Schettgen, J.  Sunyer, and M. Vrijheid. 2015. Transfer of 
perfluoroalkyl substances from parent to fetus in a Spanish birth cohort. Environmental Research  
142:471–478. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.envres.2015.07.020. 
MDH (Minnesota Department of Health). 2008, January. MDH evaluation of point-o f-use water treatment 
devices for perfluorochemical removal interim report . Fact Sheet. 
https://wrl.mnpals.net/islandora/object/WRLrepos itory%3A1862/datastream/PDF/view (accessed 
March 21, 2021). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Morales-McDevitt, M. E., J. Becanova, A. Blum, T. A. Bruton, S. Vojta, M. Woodward, and R. 
Lohmann. 2021. The air that we breathe: Neutral and volatile PFAS in indoor air. Environmental 
Science & Technology Letters  8(10):897–902. https://doi.o rg/10.1021/acs.estlett.1c00481. 
Olsen, G. W., J. M. Burris, D. J. Ehresman, J. W. Froelich, A. M. Seacat, J. L. Butenhoff, and L. R. 
Zobel. 2007. Half-life of serum elim ination of perfluorooctanesulfonate, 
perfluorohexanesulfonate, and perfl uorooctanoate in retired fluorochemical production workers. 
Environmental Health Perspectives  115(9):1298–1305. https://doi/org/10.1289/ehp.10009. 
Patterson, C., J. Burkhardt, D. Schupp, E. R. Kris hnan, S. Dyment, S. Merritt, L. Zintek, and D. 
Kleinmaier. 2019. Effectiveness of point ‐of‐use/point‐of‐entry systems to remove per ‐and 
polyfluoroalkyl substan ces from drinking water. AWWA Water Science  1(2):e1131. 
Rodgers, K. M., C. H. Swartz, J. Occhialini, P. B assignani, M. McCurdy, and L. A. Schaider. 2022. How 
well do product labels indicate the presence of PFAS in consumer items used by children and adolescents? Environmental Science & Technology  56(10):6294–6304. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c05175. 
Schaider, L. A., S. A. Balan, A. Blum, D. Q. Andrews, M. J. Strynar, M. E. Dickinson, D. M. 
Lunderberg, J. R. Lang, and G. F. Peaslee. 2017. Fluorinated compounds in U.S. fast food 
packaging. Environmental Science and Technology Letters  4(3):105–111. 
https://doi.org/10. 1021/acs.estlett.6b00435. 
Schellenberger, S., C. Jonsson, P. Mellin, O. A. Levenstam, I. Liagkouridis, A. Ribbenstedt, A-C. 
Hanning, L. Schultes, M. M. Plassmann, and C. Pe rsson. 2019. Release of side-chain fluorinated 
polymer-containing microplastic fibers from func tional textiles during washing and first estimates 
of perfluoroalkyl acid emissions. Environmental Science & Technology  53(24):14329–14338. 
Scher, D. P., J. E. Kelly, C. A. Huset, K. M. Barry, and V. L. Yingling. 2019. Does soil track-in 
contribute to house dust concentrations of perfluoroa lkyl acids (PFAAs) in areas affected by soil 
or water contamination? Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology  29(2):218–
226. 
Serrano, L., L. Mª. Iribarne-Durán, B. Suárez, F. Art acho-Cordón, F. Vela-Soria, M. Peña-Caballero, J. A. 
Hurtado, N. Olea, M. F. Fernández, and C. Fr eire. 2021. Concentrations of perfluoroalkyl 
substances in donor breast milk in Southern  Spain and their potential determinants. International 
Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health  236:113796. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2021.113796. 
Sunderland, E. M., X. C. Hu, C. Dassuncao, A. K. Tokranov, C. C. Wagner, a nd J. G. Allen. 2019. A 
review of the pathways of human exposure to poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) and 
present understanding of health effects. Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental 
Epidemiology  29:131. 
Tao, L., J. Ma, T. Kunisue, E. L. Libelo, S. Tana be, and K. Kannan. 2008. Pe rfluorinated compounds in 
human breast milk from several Asian countries, and in infant formula and dairy milk from the 
United States. Environmental Science & Technology  42 (22):8597–8602. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es801875v. 
Taylor, M. D., S. Nilsson, J. Bräunig, K. C. Bowles, V. Cole, N. A. Moltschaniwskyj, and J. F. Mueller. 
2019. Do conventional cooking methods alter c oncentrations of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFASs) in seafood? 
Food and Chemical Toxicology  127:280–287. 
Trudel, D., L. Horowitz, M. Wormuth, M. Scheri nger, I. T. Cousins, and K. Hungerbühler. 2008. 
Estimating consumer exposure to PFOS and PFOA. Risk Analysis  28(2):251–269. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2008.01017.x. 
Vestergren, R., and I. T. Cousins. 2009. Tracking the pathways of human exposure to 
perfluorocarboxylates. Environmental Science and Technology  43(15):5565–5575. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es900228k. 
Washington, J. W., and T. M. Jenkins. 2015. Abiotic hydrolysis of fluorotelomer-based polymers as a 
source of perfluorocarboxylates at the global scale. Environmental Science & Technology  
49(24):14129–14135. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.5b03686. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Exposure Reduction 117 
Prepublication Copy  Young, A. S., E. H. Sparer-Fine, H. M. Pickard, E. M. Sunderland, G. F. Peaslee, and J. G. Allen. 2021. 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl subs tances (PFAS) and total fluorine in fire station dust. Journal of 
Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology  31:930–942.  
Zheng, G., E. Schreder, J. C Dempsey, N. Uding,  V. Chu, G. Andres, S. Sathyanarayana, and A. 
Salamova. 2021. Per- and polyfluor oalkyl substances (PFAS) in breast milk: Concerning trends 
for current-use PFAS. Environmental Science & Technology  55(11):7510–7520. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118  Prepublication Copy  5 
 
PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  
Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 
 
The Centers for Disease Control and Preventi on (CDC) and various other health agencies 
routinely conduct biomonitoring, including measuring of exposure biomarkers in human tissues, as an 
important part of environm ental public health surveillance (Latshaw  et al., 2017). With the exception of a 
few environmental exposures, however, such as child ren’s blood lead measurements, biomonitoring is 
rarely included in routine clinical care. Biomonito ring integrates all sources and routes of exposure into 
measurements of internal exposure. In this regard it is advantageous  because it is more reflective of 
aggregate exposure than are measures of external e xposure, but as a consequence, it does not identify the 
specific source of an exposure. Nonetheless, when prope rly interpreted, biomonitoring data can be used to 
monitor exposure levels and trends, evaluate poten tial health risks connected to specific sites or 
populations, and inform public health decisions (Latshaw et al., 2017).  
Biomonitoring can be based on the direct measure ment of environmental chemicals or their 
reaction or breakdown products (metabolites) in human  tissues and fluids, such as blood (serum, plasma, 
and whole blood), urine, hair, nails, and breast milk  (CDC, 2021; NRC, 1987). Traditionally, biomarkers 
have been classified as biomarkers of exposur e, effect, or susceptibility (see Figure 5-1). 
This chapter addresses options and considerations to guide decision making for PFAS testing in a 
patient’s biological samples, strategies for interpre ting biomonitoring data, and PFAS concentrations that 
could inform clinical care of exposed patients. 
 
OPTIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS TO GUID E DECISION MAKING FOR PFAS TESTING 
 
PFAS Laboratory Methods 
 
There are no standard methods for PFAS exposure biomonitoring; some, but not all, laboratories 
use methods similar to those used by the CDC. Unlike most clinical laboratories, laboratories that offer 
PFAS testing are not subject to measurement standa rdization through external proficiency testing 
programs that evaluate laboratory performance agains t preestablished criteria. Laboratories that offer 
PFAS testing also need not comply with clinical cer tification, such as Clinical Laboratory Improvement 
Amendments (CLIA) certification, for reporting of resu lts to patients. To suppor t the quality and integrity 
of results, PFAS testing should be  conducted in laboratories that meet the following criteria: 
 
● have an extensive quality assurance/quality c ontrol (QA/QC) program (Kannan et al., 2021); 
● report National Institute of Standards and T echnology Standard Reference Material (NIST-
SRM)–traceable data (Kannan et al., 2021); and  
● employ laboratory methods with relative standard  deviations of less than 15 percent and with 
limits of detection (LODs) in the picogram/mL re gion, consistent with the LODs of the CDC 
and academic laboratories (FDA, 2018; SWGTOX, 2013).  
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 119 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 5-1 Simplified flow chart of classes of biomarkers.  
SOURCE: NRC, 1987. 
 
 
Which PFAS are most important to measure depends on the reasons for testing. A method 
comparable to that of the CDC that reports th e linear and branched isomers of PFAS will allow 
comparison of individual results with those in the National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental 
Chemicals  (CDC, 2015, 2021)—an informative method for in dividuals who wish to understand whether 
their exposure is high or low compared with background exposures in the U.S. population. For people with a past history of exposure to PFAS not included in  the CDC panel, laboratory tests need to detect the 
compounds to which the person is suspected to have been exposed. However, adequate targeted exposure 
biomonitoring approaches may not currently exist for measuring many PFAS—especially those that are 
emerging or newly studied—that may be of concern in some communities. Most laboratories can test only for a limited number of PFAS; a typical PFAS panel w ill include fewer than 25 specific PFAS. Standard 
reference materials (SRMs) exist for some but not al l PFAS. NIST 1957 has reference values for 7 PFAS, 
and NIST 1958 includes 5 PFAS. The availability of SRMs for a broader range of PFAS would support 
higher-quality data for more PFAS.  
Interpretation of PFAS biomonitoring data depends  on the analytical methods being used, the 
matrix (blood, serum, plasma, urine, breast milk, etc.) in which the PFAS are measured, and the pharmacokinetics of the PFAS being measured.  
Analytical Methods 
 
Biological samples are generally analyzed using targeted analytical methods (i.e., for specific 
PFAS for which methods and standards are available), leaving a wide array of PFAS unaccounted for. 
Methods for measuring total extractab le or adsorbable organofluorine can circumvent the limitations of 
targeted analytics, but these methods are also plagued by important challenges. Some non-PFAS are 
merged into the total organofluorine load. Moreover, clear health guidance values for total organofluorine 
have not been—and may very well never be—derived  (see Box 5-1) because toxicological testing and 
risk assessments are typically conducted on a chemical -by-chemical basis so regulations can be derived 
for specific chemicals, although it is well known that single-chemical exposures are not reflective of how 
exposures occur in reality (NRC, 2009). Untargeted tes ting can also be used to assess exposure to PFAS, 
but is less standardized and precise than current target ed testing. Untargeted a pproaches, especially those 
that employ multiplexing techniques to account for high levels of endogenous ch emicals, may provide a 
better overall picture of total PFAS exposure; as of now, however, those data would not be quantifiable 
and would provide only a qualitative (presence or absence) estimate of exposure (Guo et al., 2022). 
  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  BOX 5-1   
Total Organofluorine Testing 
 
In communities that could be exposed to many diffe rent PFAS, total organofluorine testing could be 
considered. This method measures all the organic compounds containing fluorine in a sample. In so doing, it 
addresses the challenge of the lack of a standard reference for so many PFAS. In a study of blood samples from 
the Swedish population, for example, 70 percent of organofluorine compounds measured in samples from women 
aged 16–44 using extractable organofluo rine measurements were not accounted for by the 63 PFAS measured in 
targeted analyses (Aro et al ., 2021). However, these m easures of total organic fluorine include compounds that 
have a fluorine atom but are not typically considered PFAS (e.g., pesticides such as trifluralin, fluometuron, and 
benefin; or drugs such as Prozac). With untargeted mass spectroscopy techniques, then, it may be possible to 
detect many more PFAS, but confirming their identity a nd quantifying them can be challenging if authentic 
standards are not available for them, wh ich is often the case. At this point, moreover, methods for measuring total 
organofluorine are not standardized and are used primar ily in academic and research laboratories (Aro et al., 
2022), and there are no refe rence- or risk-based concentrations wi th which to compare measurements, making 
interpretation difficult. Still, the committee believes total organofluorine measurements hold promise for 
addressing the vast number of PFAS compounds as a class and notes that at least one commercial laboratory has 
started using this testing.  
 
 
Biological Matrix 
 
The specific PFAS to which a patient is at risk of exposure may also dictate the biological 
samples (e.g., blood, urine) that should be coll ected. Most studies measure PFAS in serum, which is 
likely the best matrix for measuring PFAS with long biological half-lives (Calafat et al., 2019). Other 
matrices, such as whole blood or urine, may be be tter suited to the detection of PFAS with short 
biological half-lives or those whose distribution in the body differs from that of the most commonly studied PFAS, such as PFOA and PFOS (Calafat et al., 2019; Poothong et al., 2017).  
PFAS can be measured in multiple biological ma trices, including but not limited to whole blood, 
serum, plasma, urine, breast milk, and hair (Alves et al., 2015). Overall, most studies have used either serum or plasma to evaluate PFAS exposure, and the measured concentrations in serum and plasma are 
comparable for PFOS, PFOA, and PFHxS (Ehresman et  al., 2007). PFAS concentrations in other matrices 
can provide information on exposure during specific periods of life; for example, PFAS levels in 
segments of hair can help reconstruct historical exposures, and PFAS levels in breast milk make it 
possible to estimate infants’ intake through breastfeed ing (Zheng et al., 2021). On multiple occasions, this 
study’s town hall participants indicated that they wanted to know not only their serum PFAS levels but 
also their breast milk levels, as these translate into early-life exposure  for their children.  
While urine, breast milk, and hair samples can be obtained relatively noninvasively, 
biomonitoring efforts in the United States have fo cused largely on serum, which is one of the most 
important biological compartments for the distribution of many PFAS in the body. Consequently, 
reference ranges and risk-based biomonitoring levels are limited or unavailable for other matrices. To 
date, the published literature provides measurements in  breast milk for fewer than 200 people in the 
United States. If breast milk levels are measured, they  can be interpreted by comparison with breast milk 
levels estimated using data from the National H ealth and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), a 
series of surveys on the health status, health-rela ted behaviors, and nutrition of the U.S. population 
(Lakind et al., 2022). Finally, much remains unknown about the distribution of the wide array of PFAS; 
for some of them, such traditional matrices as serum may not be optimal for estimating exposure to those 
PFAS whose distribution into these matrices is not significant. 
Micro-samples are samples in which blood, usuall y from a pricked finger or heel stick, is 
collected into a small cuvette or spotted onto special ly prepared filter paper and dried in open air under 
ambient conditions. Micro-samples have several advant ages: they are minimally invasive, do not have to 
be collected by a phlebotomist, reduce biohazard risks,  and in some cases do not require refrigeration or 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 121 
Prepublication Copy  freezing (Freeman et al., 2018). On the other hand, th e blood collected from a pricked finger is capillary 
blood, which, unlike venous blood, c ontains interstitial fluid, and research is needed to determine whether 
capillary blood concentrations are comparable to serum measurements. Capillary blood also requires 
validation, particularly if collected as dried blood spots because volume is difficult to estimate as a result 
of hematocrit and chromatographic effects, although K+  standardization is show ing promise (Barr et al., 
2021). Newborn blood spots have, however, been used  successfully in research studies to evaluate 
exposures to PFAS and assess changes in exposures over  time (Gross et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2013; Yeung 
et al., 2019).  
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
Some PFAS, including PFOA and PFOS, have a relatively long biological half-life, and 
measurement of these PFAS in serum may represent chem ical exposures that occurred in past years. For 
some other PFAS, half-lives are on the order of days. For example, GenX is estimated to have a 
biological half-life of 81 hours (Clark, 2021); as a result, its measurement in serum or urine likely 
represents exposure that occurred much more recently,  such as in the last fe w weeks. In such cases, 
samples taken at different times may be needed to  derive an adequate representation of long-term 
exposure. Alternative measures for estimating long -term exposure include exposure reconstruction of 
drinking water levels. Also, some physiological ev ents may influence biological levels of PFAS. 
Pregnancy and breastfeeding can increase PFAS excretion, for example, so levels in mothers may not be 
reflective of levels prior to pregnancy (Kato et al., 2014).   
Sample Contamination 
 
The concentrations of PFAS measured in most human tissues can be considered trace 
concentrations, making sample contamination an issue. Contamination occurring during sample 
collection, transport, storage, or preparation can im pact the ability to interpret a laboratory result. For 
example, PFAS are commonly used in medical colle ction equipment, such as Teflon-capped blood test 
tubes. Teflon should therefore be avoided in sample collection equipment intended for PFAS 
measurement (NASEM, 2018a), and field blanks may need  to be performed to ensure that contamination 
is negligible.   
Commercially Available PFA S Testing Laboratories 
 
A few laboratories currently offer PFAS testing. NMS labs (Horsham, Pennsylvania) offers PFAS 
testing through a clinician request for out-of-poc ket payment (Test Code 39307, CPT Code[s] 82542; 
reported by town hall speakers to cost more than  $600) or reimbursement from insurance. NMS can 
measure six PFAS in serum: perfluorobutanesulfonic acid (as the linear isomer) (PFBS), perfluoroheptanoic acid (as the linear isomer) (PFH pA), perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (as the linear 
isomer) (PFHxS), perfluorononanoic acid (as the linear  isomer) (PFNA), perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (as 
the linear isomer) (PFOS), and perfluoroocta noic acid (as the linear isomer) (PFOA).
1 It is important to 
note that although the NMS panel does not completely  overlap with the speci fic PFAS the committee was 
charged to evaluate, it does include PFOA, PFOS, and PFNA, three of the PFAS that are commonly 
reported as detected in the NHANES and therefore t ypically contribute the most to exposure. The NMS 
panel would be more comparable to NHANES if it included the branched isomers of PFOS and PFOA, 
and PFHxS.  
EMPower DX (Framingham, Massachusetts), a subs idiary of Eurofins Scientific (Luxembourg 
City, Luxembourg), recently began offering direct-to- consumer testing for more than 40 PFAS via self-
                                                           
1 See https://www.nmslabs.com/tests/3427SP (June 16, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  collected finger prick sample at a cost of $399.2 The website for this lab reports that the test will 
“quantitatively determine PFAS concentrations … a nd positive or negative detections are reported with 
99% confidence” (para. 4). In an email communica tion, company representatives reported that NIST 
reference standards are used, and that coefficients of variation are being developed for all PFAS in the 
panel (personal communication). As discussed above, method validation is needed for PFAS 
measurements from capillary blood to  know how comparable they are to measurements from other PFAS 
tests.  
Harms and Benefits of PFAS Testing 
 
Based on the committee’s principle of proportionality (see Chapter 2), it is necessary to consider 
the plausible harms and benefits associated with PFA S testing, although the weight of each will depend 
on the individual. Harms of PFAS testing include fear induced by blood draw, a small risk of injury or 
infection at the draw site, difficulties in interpreti ng results, and psychological stress that may occur when 
people who are tested learn that they or their family  members have high levels of PFAS exposure. On the 
other hand, biomonitoring for PFAS blood levels may al so alleviate fears associated with not knowing 
one’s PFAS levels. Another potential be nefit is increasing awareness of exposure so that exposures can be 
reduced. If sources of exposure are identified, actions  taken to reduce these exposures, such as using a 
water filter, may also benefit family members in ad dition to the person who was tested. Community-level 
benefits may be associated with PFAS testing as we ll, such as empowering communities to respond to 
contamination and providing a baseline with which to evaluate the impact of community-level interventions to reduce exposure. Additionally, biomon itoring for PFAS in the context of epidemiologic 
studies could provide more information about PFAS-associated health effects.  
To evaluate these potential harms and benefits  associated with biom onitoring, the committee 
considered research studies evaluating the harms and be nefits of reporting biomon itoring results to study 
participants (report-back). Report-back has been an  active area of research by multidisciplinary teams, 
focused on whether and how to report study results to participants. These studies have varied in design, 
but methods used generally include in terviews with study participants, investigators, and/or institutional 
review boards. They may also include focus gr oups; advisory councils; stakeholder workshops; 
observations at community meetings; one-on-one user t esting of reports; and digital analytics, such as 
page views or time spent interacting with digital results pages. Investigators in these studies have 
identified harms associated with reporting of biomon itoring results, such as stress or concerns about the 
health effects associated with exposures, but the levels  of stress reported have not been high enough to be 
considered extreme worry or panic (Emmett et al., 2009; Ohayon et al., 2017; Ramirez-Andreotta et al., 2016). Report-back studies have found further that when biomonitoring results are returned with 
information about how study participants could be ex posed to the chemicals, what health effects are 
potentially associated with exposure, and what stra tegies could reduce exposure, participants express 
appreciation for receiving the results and feel empowered  by the information (Adams et al., 2011; Altman 
et al., 2008; Brody et al., 2014; Giannini et al., 2018; Hernick et al., 2011; Perovich et al., 2018; Ramirez-Andreotta et al., 2016; Tomsho et al., 2019). Moreover , research studies have found that participants 
appreciate receiving test results even  when the health implications of those results are unclear (Adams et 
al., 2011; Hernick et al., 2011; NASEM, 2018b). One st udy that compared the benefits of receiving 
individual versus aggregate biomonitoring results f ound that the former motivated participants to access 
information about environmental sources of chemical exposure and their health effects. The study also 
found that personal report-back increased engagement with exposure reports among Black participants. 
Report-back was associated with a small increase in ps ychological stress, but the authors suggest that this 
stress could motivate appropriate behavior cha nge to reduce exposure (Brody et al., 2021).  
In many cases, community members who provided testimony at the committee’s town halls were 
strongly in favor of PFAS testing and described  being frustrated with the numerous difficulties 
                                                           
2 See https://empowerdxlab.com/products/pro duct/pfas-exposure-test (June 16, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 123 
Prepublication Copy  encountered in accessing the testing (see Appendix B). Kristen Mello of Westfield Residents Advocating 
for Themselves (WRAFT) said to the committee:  
 
You don’t have a problem getting an insurance assessor when your car is hit, you don’t have a problem getting an insurance as sessor when you have a tornado, but this 
slow motion unfolding environmental and pub lic health disaster … is intentionally 
keeping the information from us so that we cannot take action.  
 
Furthermore, Emily Donovan of Clean Cape Fear, said:  
 
Sadly it feels like guinea pigs are treated better, because at least their exposures are 
thoroughly studied for the betterment of humanity. 
 
And Cathy Wusterbarth of Need Our Water said:  
 
We’ve tested the fish; we’ve tested the deer; we’ve tested the groundwater, the 
waterways, and the foam. When are we going  to test the people?… The only risk [of 
testing] is to the polluters who do not want us to link them to our exposure. 
 
Community members stated that th ey want access to PFAS testing so they can understand their personal 
level of exposure and, as suggested by Ayesha Kh an of Nantucket PFAS Action Group, “help those who 
are exposed to be proactive in reducing exposure and managing risk.” An example of the how PFAS 
testing can help people manage health risks was pr esented by Sandy Wynn-Stelt, who learned that the 
drinking water in her home was contaminated with PFAS at a level more than 1,000 times the current 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) health advisory and paid out of pocket for PFAS testing. 
She shared her results with her clinician, and they decided to conduct clinical follow-up for any of the 
conditions associated with PFAS, including impacts on thyroid hormone levels. The results of her thyroid 
tests led to other follow-up and ultimately to her diagnosis of thyroid cancer. Wynn-Stelt believes her 
PFAS testing led to an earlier diagnosis  and better outcomes for her cancer.  
 
Social and Ethical Implications of PFAS Testing 
 
Many town hall speakers voiced frustration abou t not having access to testing for PFAS. Speakers 
mentioned the injustices related to having been expos ed to PFAS without their consent or knowledge and 
their frustration with being unable to access testing. They  shared that PFAS testing, when available, is 
expensive. Town hall speakers also suggested that discussion of PFAS testing should be conducted in a 
culturally sensitive manner, be available in a variety of languages, and be at a reading level that the 
average American can understand (e.g., 4th-grade level).  
Another important social consideration is that  people who are tested for PFAS may experience 
social and economic conflicts related to their t esting. If a PFAS blood test identifies community 
contamination, business revenue and property values ma y be adversely affected (Harclerode et al., 2021). 
People who draw attention to the contamination ma y experience anger and social isolation from other 
community members. Indeed, one town hall speaker ask ed that their name be removed from the town hall 
agendas and the committee’s website because they were  worried about angering neighbors by talking 
about their contaminated well.  
Art Schaap, a dairy farmer in New Mexico, di scovered that his farm was unknowingly subjected 
to severe PFAS contamination due to use of military  aqueous film-forming foam (AFFF). After learning 
of the contamination, Schaap voluntarily tested hi s herd for PFAS and discovered that his cows were 
highly exposed. The PFAS contamina tion on Schaap’s farm devastated  his livelihood because he had 
limited options available for getting rid of the contam inated animals in any prof itable way. The dairy, 
beef, and rendering industries do not want PFAS-contamin ated animals or products. The result for Schaap 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  was the stranding of at least 4,000 cows, the death of  1,200, and the dumping of 1,500 loads of milk (see 
Appendix B for Schaap’s complete testimony). 
 
PFAS Testing: Findings and Recommendations 
 
Applying the principle of proportionality , the committee believes that the benefits of PFAS 
testing for those who request it typically outweigh th e harms (see Box 5-2). The harms reported in studies 
of report-back of biomonitoring results are worry abou t the harms of exposure, decreased property values, 
and potential social isolation or ostracism. In many cases, people who request testing are already worried 
about their exposure, which is why they are requesting the testing, and they may already be at risk of decreased property values associated with contamin ation. People in exposed communities have been 
“contaminated without consent” a nd “poisoned without permission.”
3  
 
BOX 5-2  
Potential Harms and Benefits of PFAS Testing 
 
Potential Harms  
 Fear of blood draw 
 Small risk of injury or infection at draw site 
 Difficulties in interpreting results 
 Stress or concern about the health effects from exposure 
 Decreased property values 
 Social isolation 
 Clinical consequences from medical follow-up as a result of exposure 
 
Potential Benefits 
 Increased awareness of exposure so that exposure can be reduced 
 Empowerment of communities to respond to contamination 
 Relief from the stress of not knowing one’s exposure level 
 Identification of the potential risk for health cond itions associated with PFAS exposure to inform 
subsequent preventive care 
 Help in monitoring whether efforts to reduce exposure are working through the conduct of baseline and 
follow-up tests.  
 
An important element of the principle of justice is making PFAS testing easily accessible and 
readily available to all regardless of ability to pay, race, ethnicity, age, occupation, or location. Some 
populations are at increased risk of PFAS exposure and therefore may be at increased risk for a wide 
range of health conditions. These factors favor making  exposure biomonitoring available to all who desire 
it. The principle of autonomy  (i.e., respect for the ability of people to make their own health decisions) 
also favors allowing people who are likely to have a history of elevated exposure to PFAS and want 
PFAS testing to receive it and those who do not, to refuse it. These decisions require shared decision 
making4 between patient and clinician a nd should include clarifying that exposure biomonitoring results 
                                                           
3 Quotes from Andrea Amico,  speaker at the committee’s meeting on July 13, 2021. 
4 Barry and colleagues (2012) build on concepts in Ch arles (1997) and the Institute  of Medicine’s (2001) 
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century , describing shared decision making as the 
pinnacle of patient-centered care: “The process by which the optimal decision may be reached ... is called shared 
decision-making and involves, at minimu m, a clinician and the patient.... In shared decision-making, both parties 
share information: the clinician offers options and describes their risks and benefits, and the patient expresses his or 
her preferences and values. Each participant is thus armed with a better understanding of the relevant factors and 
shares responsibility in the decisi on about how to proceed” (p. 780).  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 125 
Prepublication Copy  do not predict future health conditions and can only in dicate the potential for an in creased risk for certain 
conditions associated with exposures. Allowing people  the opportunity to discuss with their clinicians 
whether they should undergo PFAS testing shows respect for patient values and is particularly important 
for people who have experienced environmental inju stice as a result of PFAS contamination in their 
community.  
The committee acknowledges that important factors need to be addressed. There are deficiencies 
in the current cost payment model, and the ava ilability of PFAS testing may need to be addressed. 
Clinicians and health care facilities will also need to be made aware of re imbursement policies and 
laboratory codes (e.g., CPT; Reference Lab Order C ode). New Hampshire recently required that health 
insurance cover PFAS blood testing.5 PFAS testing can currently be ordered online without a provider, 
and the committee believes the testing and interpretation of  its results are most beneficial if done with the 
guidance of a clinician.  
The committee makes the fo llowing recommendations:  
 
Recommendation 5-1: As communities with  PFAS exposure are identified, government 
entities (e.g., Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]/Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry [ATSDR], public health departments) should support 
clinicians with educational materials about PFA S testing so they can discuss testing with 
their patients. These educational materials sh ould include the following information: 
 
 How people can be exposed to PFAS: Exposure routes include occupational 
exposures and work with fluorochemicals or as a firefighter; consumption of 
contaminated drinking water in comm unities that obtain their water from 
sources near commercial airports, military  bases, fluorochemical manufacturing 
plants, wastewater treatment plants, landfills, or incinerators where PFAS-containing waste may have been disposed of or farms where sewage sludge may have been used; and consumption of contaminated fish or game if fishing or 
hunting occurs in contaminated areas. I ndividuals living near fluorochemical 
plants may also be exposed via inhalation of air emissions. 
 Potential health effects of PFAS exposu re and strategies for reducing exposure. 
 Limitations of PFAS blood testing: PFAS blood testing does not identify the 
sources of exposure or predict future he alth outcomes; it only assesses body 
burden at the time of sample collection. For example, a person with low blood levels today may have had higher levels in the past.  
 The benefits and harms of PFAS testing. 
 
Recommendation 5-2: Clinicians should offer PFAS testing to patients likely to have a 
history of elevated exposure. In all discussions of PFAS testing, clinicians should describe 
the potential benefits and harms of the testin g and the potential clinical consequences (such 
as additional follow-up), related social implicat ions, and limitations of the testing so patient 
and clinician can make a shared, informed de cision. Patients who are likely to have a 
history of elevated exposure to PFAS include those who have 
 
 had occupational exposure to PFAS (such as those who have worked with 
fluorochemicals or served as a firefighter); 
 lived in communities where environmental and public health authorities (Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
                                                           
5 See https://providernews.anthem.com/new-hampshire/a rticle/coverage-for-pfas-and-pfc-blood-tests-for-new-
hampshire-residents (accessed June 17, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Registry [ATSDR], U.S. Environmental Pr otection Agency [EPA], state and local 
environmental or health authorities), or academic researchers have documented PFAS 
contamination; or 
 lived in areas where PFAS contamination may have occurred, such as near facilities 
that use or have used fluorochemicals, co mmercial airports, military bases, wastewater 
treatment plants, farms where sewage sludge may have been used, or landfills or 
incinerators that have received PFAS-containing waste. 
 
When clinicians discuss results of PFAS with pa tients, the results will be most useful if 
accompanied by information on how exposure occurs , the potential associated health effects, and 
strategies that may reduce exposure—the same contex tual information included in the report-back 
literature reviewed by the committee. Clinicians may al so want to consider the frequency of PFAS testing 
based on the considerations in Box 5-3.  
 
 
BOX 5-3  
Considerations for Frequency of PFAS Testing 
 
 Consider confirmatory retesting when the result is much higher or lower than anticipated given exposure 
history. 
 Consider retesting if exposure changes because 
– public health actions (such as drinking water treatment programs or site cleanup are taken to reduce 
exposure); 
– the patient takes action(s) to reduce exposure (s uch as installing water filters, moving from a 
community with known high levels of PFAS in drinking water, or modifying occupational 
exposures); or 
– the patient moves into a community with known high levels of PFAS or otherwise has a suspected 
increase in exposure risk. 
 For follow-up testing of PFAS with a long half- life, allow at least a year before retesting. 
 Retesting is of no or limited value if initial se rum levels are low and exposure does not change.   
 
 
STRATEGIES FOR INTERPRETING BIOMONITORING DATA 
 
There are two general strategies for interpre ting chemical concentrations for exposure 
biomonitoring: reference-based (or descriptive) a nd risk-based (NRC, 2006). Both approaches can be 
useful to inform clinical care of exposed patients.  Reference-based approaches can allow a clinician to 
understand whether the concentration of a chemical in th e patient’s biological sample is within or outside 
of the normal background range, while risk-based appr oaches can allow a clinician to determine whether 
a patient’s biological concentration is below or above a value associated with tolerable, negligible, or 
minimal risk. Note that comparing concentrations of  individual PFAS against reference- or risk-based 
levels may underestimate overall exposure to a comple x mixture of PFAS and associated risk, such as in 
areas contaminated with PFAS used to re place other PFAS that have been phased out. 
Figure 5-2 illustrates the distribution of biomarker concentrations in a generic reference population, 
expressed as cumulative frequency. As is commonly done in a clinical test, the 95th percentile of the 
distribution can be used to determine the upper-limit value of the test result. However, a different 
percentile may be chosen, depending on the circumstan ces, the characteristics of the reference population, 
the distribution of the results, and the purpose of the st udy. It is important to be aware that a particular 
cutpoint does not represent a level that separates the population into typical versus highly exposed (NRC, 
2006). Box 5-4 describes the use of reference ranges to  interpret other environmental exposures, such as 
exposures to lead and arsenic (see Box 5-4).  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 127 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 5-2  Distribution of biomarker concentrations in a generic reference population.  
NOTE: ULV = upper limit value.  
SOURCE: NRC, 2006. 
 
 
Reference-Based Approaches 
 
Use of a reference-based approach to interpret biomonitoring data requires descriptive statistics 
from a reference population against wh ich to compare the data. Typically, an individual’s result would be 
compared with a statistical review of the reference data , typically in the form of a data distribution, such 
as 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles within the reference population. The reference range offers 
a point of comparison, although some people or subgr oups within that range may be subject to more or 
less exposure. This section describes a number of interp retive issues that arise with this approach. The 
validity and utility of biomonitoring values for use as  reference ranges depend on the design of the studies 
from which those values were derived and the quality of the data, with special atte ntion to the availability 
and comparability of data on the reference population in relation to the stud y population (NRC, 2006).  
 
 
BOX 5-4  
Clinical Use of Reference Ranges 
 
The examples of lead and arsenic may serve to illustrate the clinical use of biomonitoring results and 
reference ranges. In 2009, an elevated  blood lead level (BLL) was defined by the Council of State and Territorial 
Epidemiologists as 10 micrograms per deciliter ( μg/dL) or greater for children and adults. Subsequently, 
additional research documented health effects at BLLs below 10 μg/dL. In 2012, the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) and the Advisory Committee on Childhood Lead Poisoning recommended that a BLL of 5 
μg/dL or greater be defined as elevated. This reference range value was based on the 97.5th percentile of the BLL 
distribution for children aged 1–5 years, using 2007–2010 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES) data. This reference range  value can be updated every 4 year s using the two most recent NHANES 
surveys.a In May 2021, a BLL reference value of 3.5 μg/dL was set using the two most recent NHANES surveys 
to identify children with BLLs higher than those of most children. The adult elevated level was set at 5 μg/dL in 
2012 on the basis of evidence of adverse health effects with no BLL threshold identified. The mean BLL at that 
time was 1.09 μg/dL for U.S. adults older than age 20, with a 95th percentile value of 3.36 μg/dL. When a patient 
presents with a BLL above this reference value, the clinic ian, often in conjunction with public health officials, 
will initiate medical surveillance that includes repeated testin g at intervals based on the level, history taking as to 
potential sources of the lead exposure, evaluation for signs and symptoms of lead toxicity, and treatment if 
necessary.b 
continued 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
 
BOX 5-4 continued  
 
Reference ranges are not used as commonly to interpret urinary arsenic levels. NHAN ES reports urinary total 
arsenic results (inorganic arsenic and methylated meta bolites) to survey participants based on the following 
categories: ≤50 micrograms per liter (µg/l) is considered normal;  >50 to <200 µg/L is considered high normal; 
and ≥200 µg/L is considered high. NHAN ES recommends that participants with a “high” result consult their 
medical provider. In a clinical setting, when the level of urinary arsenic is high normal (above 50 μg/dL or 100 
μg/dL depending on the laboratory), the clinician will search  for sources of exposure to arsenic and evaluate for 
signs and symptoms of arsenic toxicity. Diagnosis of arsenic toxicity is based on integration of exposure history, 
clinical findings, and laboratory results. In acute arsenic to xicity, total urine arsenic is typically greater than 1000 
μg/L. In chronic arsenic toxicity, simple comparison with the “normal range” is not sufficient. It is important to 
evaluate for signs of arsenic toxicity and compare urine le vels with a toxicity threshold from the literature (Baker 
et al., 2018). 
 
a See https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topi cs/ables/ReferenceBloodLevelsforAdu lts.html#_ftn3 (accessed June 17, 
2022). 
b See https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.cste.org/resource/resm gr/PS1/15-EH-01_revised_12 .4.15.pdf (accessed June 
17, 2022).  
 
 
The reference range approach de pends on data availability and data comparability for both the 
method used to measure PFAS and the population with which the results are being compared. Ideally, the 
reference population includes people similar in age, race or ethnicity, sex, and other demographic factors 
to the person whose PFAS testing result is being interp reted. Additionally, it is important that the PFAS 
be analyzed in the same tissues or fluids (blood, ser um, breast milk, urine, etc.) and that the chemical 
analysis methods used are comparable and measure the same PFAS (NRC, 2006).  
Note that interindividual variability in PFAS t esting results may be a function of differences not 
only in exposure but also in pharmacokinetics with respect to excretory clearance. Such host factors as 
parity, breastfeeding status, menstrual status, age, genetic polymorphisms, conc urrent acute or chronic 
disease, and medication use can affect pharmacokinetics.  
Because the NHANES is conducted in only a few communities each year, regional estimates or 
even urban versus rural comparisons cannot be ma de. Table 5-1 provides the most recent years of 
NHANES data (in serum ng/mL) for the total population sampled (ages 12 and older) for the four most 
predominant PFAS: PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA. These PFAS have been detected in almost all NHANES participants. Since the production and use of PFOS and PFOA were phased out, their levels 
have been declining (Brennan et al., 2021). Impor tant limitations of NHANES data are that data for 
vulnerable populations, such as children younger than 12 years old and pregnant persons, are not always 
available. Children younger than 12 also are not included in the National Report on Human Exposure to 
Environmental Chemicals , although there are published estimates of PFAS exposure for children aged  
3–11 years for 2013 and 2014 (Ye et al., 2018). Pregnant people are also not included in large numbers in NHANES, so multiple years of NHANES data will need  to be combined to obtain a large enough sample 
for comparison (Watson et al., 2020); it may be more appropriate to compare pregnant people with the 
data for females in the same age range and time period. The NHANES also does not specifically enroll 
participants in PFAS-exposed communities.  
 
Distribution of PFAS Concentrations in Exposed Communities 
 
While the NHANES provides descriptive statistics for the general U.S. population, it is 
noteworthy that clinicians in exposed communities will likely encounter higher PFAS levels in their 
patients. Discussed below are examples from some of the contaminated communities throughout the 
United States. The first community identified as ha ving known PFOA (C-8) exposure was residents living 
near the DuPont Teflon-manufacturing plant in Parkersburg, West Virginia. Contamination of six nearby 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 129 
Prepublication Copy  public water districts and hundreds of private drinki ng water wells in West Virginia and Ohio was 
discovered, leading to public health  concerns. As part of a settlement for a large class action lawsuit 
against DuPont, the C-8 Science Panel was establishe d to determine potential health effects of PFOA 
exposure, and a 1-year cross-sectional survey (2005–2006), known as the C-8 Health Project, was 
conducted among approximately 70,000 residents with contaminated drinking water (Frisbee et al., 2009). 
The average measured serum PFOA level among reside nts in Little Hocking, Ohio, with the highest 
PFOA drinking water contamination was 227.6 ng/mL; for the entire C-8 Health Project survey, the average value for PFOA was 82.9 ng/mL). For comparis on, the average PFOA serum level in the general 
U.S. population was 4.2 (ng/mL) in 2005 (CDC, 2015). 
The 3M Company (Maplewood, Minnesota) produ ced PFAS at its Cottage Grove facility from 
the late 1940s until 2002. PFOA was a prominent PFAS ma de at this site. In late 2003, the Minnesota 
Pollution Control Agency discovered groundwater cont amination near Cottage Grove and several other 
sites in the suburbs east of St. Paul, Minnesota (t he 3M Chemolite site, 3M  Woodbury site, and 3M 
Oakdale site, as well as the Washington County Landfill).
6 In 2006, water filtration systems for polluted 
public and private wells were installed to reduce PFA S exposure. The Minnesota Department of Health 
completed three projects to test blood levels of PFAS in  people living in the east metro area of St. Paul.  
  
TABLE 5-1  Distributions of Serum PFAS Concentration (nanograms per milliliter [ng/mL]) in Four 
Cycles of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 2011–2018 
PFAS 
Chemical NHANES  
Survey Years Geometric Mean 
(95% confidence interval [CI]) 50th Percentile 
(95% CI) 95th Percentile 
(95% CI) 
PFOA 2011–2012 2.08 (1.95–2.22) 2.08 (1.96–2.26) 5.68 (5.02–6.49) 
 2013–2014 1.94 (1.76–2.14) 2.07 (1 .87–2.20) 5.57 (4.60–6.27) 
 2015–2016 1.56 (1.47–1.66) 1.57 (1 .47–1.77) 4.17 (3.87–4.67) 
 2017–2018 1.42 (1.33–1.52) 1.47 (1 .37–1.57) 3.77 (3.17–5.07) 
PFOS 2011–2012 6.31 (5.84–6.82) 6.53 (5.99–7.13) 21.7 (19.3–23.9) 
 2013–2014 4.99 (4.50–5.52) 5.20 (4 .80–5.70) 18.5 (15.4–22.0) 
 2015–2016 4.72 (4.40–5.07) 4.80 (4 .40–5.30) 18.3 (15.5–22.7) 
 2017–2018 4.25 (3.90–4.62) 4.30 (3 .80–4.90) 14.6 (13.1–16.5) 
PFNA 2011–2012 0.881 (0.801–0.968) 0.860 (0.750–0.960) 2.54 (2.28–2.89) 
 2013–2014 0.675 (0.613–0.742) 0.700 (0 .600–0.800) 2.00 (1.80–2.30) 
 2015–2016 0.577 (0.535–0.623) 0.600 (0 .500–0.600) 1.90 (1.50–2.20) 
 2017–2018 0.411 (0.364–0.464) 0.400 (0 .400–0.500) 1.40 (1.10–1.80) 
PFHxS 2011–2012 1.28 (1.15–1.43) 1.27 (1.11–1.45) 5.44 (4.61–6.82) 
 2013–2014 1.35 (1.20–1.52) 1.40 (1 .20–1.60) 5.60 (4.70–7.10) 
 2015–2016 1.18 (1.08–1.30) 1.20 (1 .10–1.40) 4.90 (4.10–5.80) 
 2017–2018 1.08 (0.996–1.18) 1.10 (1 .00–1.20) 3.70 (3.30–5.60) 
 
 
 
                                                           
6 See https://www.pca.state.mn.us /waste/pfas-investigation-and-cl ean-up (accessed June 17, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 5-3  Geometric means of PFAS in blood from east metro St. Paul biomonitoring, in nanograms per 
milliliter (ng/mL).  
SOURCE: U.S. population levels are from the 2011–2012 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES). 
 
 
In Hoosick Falls, New York, high PFOA levels in water led to a public outcry, and a federal class 
action lawsuit was filed against Saint-Gobain Perform ance Plastics and Honeywell International. In 2016, 
the geometric mean PFOA serum level among participan ts in the Hoosick Falls Biomonitoring Study who 
used village water was 43.5 ng/mL (N = 1,640).7 In the aftermath of Hoosic k Falls, impacted community 
members voiced significant concern that the EPA’s recommended health advisory level for drinking 
water at the time (400 ng/L8) provided insufficient protection. In January 2016, the EPA recommended 
that the community not drink water with PFOA in excess of 100 ng/L,9 and in May 2016, after reviewing 
the existing body of PFOA and PFOS data,10 it revised its health advisory level for drinking water to 70 
ng/Lfor the sum of PFOA and PFOS. In New Hampshire, the state conducted biomonitoring in 
Merrimack Village District, where another Saint-Goba in plant had contaminated local drinking water. 
The average PFOA serum levels among participants was 3.9 ng/mL (N = 217). 
In 2014, it was discovered that a public wate r supply well in Pease, New Hampshire, was 
contaminated with PFOS, PFOA, and PFHxS as a result of the use of firefighting foams at Pease Tradeport, a former Air Force Base. Beginning in Ap ril 2015, the New Hampshir e Department of Health 
and Human Services conducted blood te sting for people in communities where PFAS had been found in 
drinking water above lifetime health advisory levels . Between April and October 2015, 1,578 members of 
the Pease Tradeport community had their blood test ed for PFAS. Results of biomonitoring from all 
individuals in the study showed th at the geometric mean of PFAS exceeded that of the general U.S. 
population for PFOS (Pease: 8.59 ng/mL, NHANES: 6.31 ng/mL), PFOA (Pease: 3.09 ng/mL, NHANES: 2.08 ng/mL), and PFHxS (Pease: 4.12 ng/mL, NHANES: 1.28 ng/mL).
11  
Communities in Bucks and Montgomery counties in  Pennsylvania have detected PFOS in their 
drinking water from use of firefighting foams duri ng military activities. In response to this water 
contamination, the state health department cond ucted biomonitoring for PFOS exposure. The average 
PFOS serum level in this community was 10.2 ng/mL (N = 235).12 A military base in Newburgh, New 
                                                           
7 See https://www.health.ny.gov/environmental/investiga tions/hoosick/docs/infosheetgrouplong.pdf (accessed 
June 17, 2022). 
8 See https://www.epa.gov/sites/defa ult/files/2015-12/documents /hoosickfallsmayorpfoa. pdf (accessed June 17, 
2022). 
9 See https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016- 01/documents/epa_statement_on_private_wells_in_ 
the_town_of_hoosick.pdf (accessed June 16, 2022). 
10 See https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016- 06/documents/drinkingwaterhealthadvisories_pfoa_ 
pfos_updated_5.31.16.pdf (accessed June 16, 2022). 
11 See https://www.dhhs.nh.gov/dph s/documents/pease-pfc-blood-tes ting.pdf (accessed June 16, 2022). 
12 See https://www.health.pa.gov/topics/Documents /Environmental%20Health/P EATT%20Pilot%20Project 
%20Final%20Report%20April%2029%2020 19.pdf (accessed June 16, 2022). 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 131 
Prepublication Copy  York, also contaminated drinking water in that co mmunity, resulting in a median PFOS serum level of 
16.3 ng/mL (N = 1,917).13  
The primary manufacturer of PFOS, 3M, has also b een implicated in drinking water contamination, 
in Decatur, Alabama. In a community study there, the median level was 39.3 ng/mL (N = 121) among participants with contaminated drinking water.
14  
 
Risk-Based Approaches 
 
The most complex approaches for interpreting biomon itoring data are those that evaluate the risk 
associated with a biomonitoring result. Evaluation of risk may be desirable given the importance of the 
question of how risky a blood concentration is, as well as the fact that the descriptive approaches provide 
only relative information without assessing the risk to human health (NRC, 2006). Some exposure disease 
processes are thought to have a “threshold” or exposur e level that needs to be exceeded before a response 
occurs, while others are thought to have a “nonthreshol d” response such that there is no level at which no 
harm occurs. Examples of nonthreshold dose responses at a population level include lead, particulate matter, radon, and secondhand smoke. To  set standards for nonthreshold effects, an acceptable risk needs 
to be determined (NRC, 2009). The standard reflect s the expected daily intake associated with an 
acceptable risk for one or more adverse outcomes. Drinking water health advisories are risk-based 
standards that use dose estimates associated with dail y consumption to predict long-term health effects. 
As a result, they should not be u sed to interpret biomonitoring results  that represent an integration of 
multiple exposure sources over differe nt periods depending on PFAS-specific half-lives (see Box 5-5).  
 
 
BOX 5-5 
PFAS Serum Levels Are Not Directly Compar able to PFAS Drinking Water Levels 
 
In an effort to interpret PFAS testing results, member s of the lay public sometimes compare PFAS levels in 
serum with PFAS drinking water advisory levels. This comparison may involve converting the units of the PFAS 
serum levels (usually given in nanograms per milliliter [ng/mL] of blood) to align with how PFAS drinking water 
advisory levels are generally reported (as nanogram s per liter [ng/L] of water). The committee strongly 
discourages this comparison. Drinking water advisory levels reflect the levels of PFAS (in ng/L of water) that are 
assumed to represent a tolerable, negligible, or minimal ri sk for daily consumption in addition to other sources of 
exposure. In contrast, PFAS serum (n g/mL) levels are an integration of multiple exposure sources representing 
different periods of exposure, depending on PFAS-specific half-lives.  
The committee also strongly recommends against transla ting a drinking water advisory level into a “safe” 
serum PFAS level. Using an online re source (https://www.ics.uci .edu/~sbartell/pfascalc.html [accessed June 16, 
2022]; Bartell et al., 2017; Lu and Bartell, 2020), calcula tions can be made to answer such questions as “How 
long will it take for my serum PFOA levels to return to normal now that there’s no more PFOA in my water?” or 
“My water has PFOA in it, but my blood hasn’t yet been tested; do you expect my serum PFOA levels to be 
elevated?” The online calculator incl udes four PFAS chemicals (PFOA,  PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA) and an 
optional physiological adjustment to the serum half-life for menstruation. Although informative for some 
questions, the calculator does not allow users to include ex posure sources other than drinking water. In contrast, 
agencies typically account for the contribution of drinking water to total exposure (e.g., 20 percent) when 
determining drinking water advisory levels. Serum PFAS levels reflect an integration of multiple exposure 
sources at a single time and are distinct from recommended levels in water for daily consumption.  
Instead of comparing PFAS serum le vels with PFAS drinking water levels, the committee recommends that 
individuals refer to health-based and reference-based serum levels.  
                                                           
13 See https://www.health.ny.gov/environmental/inves tigations/newburgh/docs/infosheetgroupresults.pdf 
(accessed June 16, 2022).  
14 See https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/hac/ pha/Decatur/Perfluorochemical_Ser um%20Sampling.pdf (accessed June 
16, 2022).  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  There are several options for deriving serum or pl asma concentrations that are consistent with 
health-based guidance values. In the most straight forward risk-based approach, epidemiologic studies 
with exposure-response relationships  could be used to conduct biomon itoring-based risk assessment. As 
presented below, the German Human Biomonitoring Commission (HBM Commission) reviewed the epidemiologic literature to compile serum or plas ma levels with and without observable effects. 
Contrasting patient serum PFAS levels with levels with or without eff ects in an epidemiologic study can 
facilitate understanding risk for the give n response endpoint (Apel et al., 2020).  
Another option is to derive serum or plasma con centrations that are consistent with health-based 
guidance values such as reference doses (RfDs) and to lerable daily intakes (TDIs), commonly referred to 
as biomonitoring equivalents (BEs) (Hays et al., 2008). Because these values are frequently based on animal experiments, some with no measure of serum  concentrations, pharmacoki netic modeling is often 
used to translate a point of departure (e.g., the benc hmark dose) into animal serum levels, which can be 
converted into BEs by adjusting for uncertainty f actors. For this report, the committee focused on the 
human data to evaluate risk levels.  
The committee reviewed the International Human Biomonitoring (i-HBM) Working Group 
dashboard to search for biomonitoring guidance va lues for PFAS and found that the only risk-based 
standards were the German HBM values for PFOS and PFOA. The committee also searched for RfDs 
based on human data in the tables in the Environmental Council of the States White Paper on Setting 
State PFAS Standards  and in the authoritative reviews consid ered in the committee’s review of PFAS 
health effects (see Chapter 3). The committee found that only the European Food Safety Authority 
(EFSA) scientific opinion contained a risk-based value estimated in humans.   
German HBM Values 
 
The German HBM Commission develops human bi omonitoring (HBM) values for interpretation 
of the concentrations of environmental chemicals m easured in biological samples. These values, which 
are derived for the general population (including vul nerable subgroups) with chronic exposure, represent 
concentrations below which no observed risk of adve rse health effects is e xpected (HBM-I) or above 
which adverse health effects are possible (HBM-II) (Schulz et al., 2011).  
In 2021, the HBM Commission published HBM-I values for PFOS and PFOA in plasma, which 
is assumed to have concentrations similar to those of serum (Ehresman et al., 2007; Hölzer et al., 2021). 
To derive HBM-I values, the HBM Commission conducte d a literature review for studies of the health 
effects of PFOS and PFOA. It then selected epidemiological studies and identified points of departure for various health effects for use in quantifying an asso ciation between exposure and critical effects. The 
determination of these points of departure varied  depending on the methods of each study. Where 
epidemiological analyses were based on quantiles of exposure, the point of departure represented the 
lower limit of the quantile for which significan tly increased risk was ob served. For studies using 
continuous measures of exposure, points of departure were based on either benchmark dose-response 
modeling or a qualitative assessment of the effects and dose-response relationship. Health outcomes in the 
reviewed studies included fertility (time to pregnanc y), pregnancy-induced hypertension and diabetes, 
reduced birthweight, serum cholesterol concentrations , serum uric acid concentrations, reduced antibody 
response to vaccination, pubertal development, thyr oid metabolism, and onset of menopause. Once points 
of departure for each compound, study, and outcome had been selected, HBM-I values were selected in 
the low range of points of departure for both chemic als. The points of departure identified represented a 
wide range of exposure values. It was determined  that the HBM-1 values were 2 ng/mL) for plasma 
PFOA and 5 ng/mL for plasma PFOS. The HBM Commission considers these HBM-I values to be 
precautionary. Exceedance of these levels should not be  interpreted as increasing risk, but may warrant 
efforts to reduce exposure (Hölzer et al., 2021). 
The HBM Commission also established HBM-II values in 2021, based on epidemiological 
studies on PFOA or PFOS and adverse health outcom es, including reduced birthweight, developmental 
effects, reduced fertility, reduced antibody response to vaccination, in creased cholesterol concentrations 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 133 
Prepublication Copy  (low-density lipoprotein [LDL] and total cholester ol), and type 2 diabetes. Because HBM-II values 
represent levels above which adverse health effects ar e possible, the points of departure for those values 
differed from those identified for HBM-I values. Wh ere appropriate, benchmar k dose-response modeling 
was used to determine a level for a given effect leve l. For studies with continuous exposure data in which 
benchmark dose-response modeling could not be pe rformed, risk estimates from adjusted regression 
analyses were used. In the case of  studies in which analyses were based on quantiles of exposure, the 
median value of the lowest quantile with a signifi cant association with an a dverse health outcome was 
used as the point of departure.  
The points of departure chosen represent quan titatively defined changes (such as 5–10 percent, 
calculated with a confidence interval for a populatio n) in certain target parameters (e.g., morbidity, 
laboratory values). In the evaluation of reduced birthweight, for example, the points of departure of 10 ng PFOA/mL and 15 ng PFOS/mL were determined from a meta-analysis that observed a reduction in 
birthweights by approximately 20 g per ng PFOA/ mL and 20 g per ng PFOS/mL. Compiled points of 
departure were 3–10 ng/mL for PFOA and 1–30 ng/mL  for PFOS. HBM-II values for plasma PFOA (10 
ng/mL) and PFOS (20 ng/mL) were established as the mid-  to high values in these ranges for the general 
population, excluding women of childbearing age. Lower values were derived for plasma PFOA (5 ng/mL) and PFOS (10 ng/mL) in women of childbearing age, mainly because studies indicated associations with developmental toxicity, reduced fertility, and increased incidence of gestational 
diabetes. However, the HBM Commission indicated that there is ample uncertainty around HBM-II 
values for PFOA and PFOS (Schümann et al., 2021).   
European Food Safety Authority’s (EFSA’s) Human Point of Departure 
 
In 2020, EFSA published a scientific opinion on the derivation of a tolerable weekly intake for 
the sum of four predominant PFAS: PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA. Following a review of the animal 
and epidemiological literature on adverse health  effects of PFAS, immunological endpoints were 
considered the most robust and sensitive for risk assessment. An epidemiological study in German 
children was used as the critical study for deriving th e health-based guidance value. In this study, 
children’s serum PFAS levels at 1 year of age we re associated with lower antibody titers against 
diphtheria at a BMDL
10 (the lower one-sided confidence limit of the benchmark dose for a 10 percent 
response) value of 17.5 ng/mL for the sum of PFOS, PFOA, PFHxS, and PFNA (Abraham et al., 2020). Physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling was used to translate th is value in children’s 
serum into a daily dose in their mothers, assuming that le vels at 1 year of age in breastfed children reflect 
primarily the body burden acquired through placental and lactational transfer. To reach this BMDL
10 
value in children’s serum at the end of 12 months of breastfeeding, EFSA estimated that the maternal 
level at 35 years of age would need to be 6.9 ng/mL for the sum of the four PFAS, a level associated with 
an estimated maternal intake of 0.631 ng/kg body weight/day. Although EFSA did not specifically aim to 
determine acceptable serum PFAS leve ls, the 6.9 ng/mL serum concentration could be considered a serum 
level for women of reproductive age below which risk is negligible. 
 
PFAS Concentrations That Could Inform C linical Care: Findings and Recommendations 
 
The HBM Commission has identified risk-based  levels for two PFAS chemicals—PFOS and 
PFOA—while EFSA has established such values for the sum of PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA. No 
individual values are available for PFHxS and PF NA, and no values could be found for methyl-
perfluorooctane sulfonamide (MeFOSAA), perfl uorodecanoic acid (PFDA), and perfluoroundecanoic 
acid (PFUnDA). The lowest PFAS risk-based level is 2 ng/mL (HBM-I for PFOA), and the highest PFAS 
risk level is 20 ng/mL (HBM-II for PFOS in the ge neral population), demonstrating that risks are 
unexpected below 2 ng/mL and that the risk of PFAS-associated effects at the population level is 
increased at 20 ng/mL. The risk-based levels for sensitive populations fall between 2 ng/mL and 20 
ng/mL (see Figure 5-4). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
 
FIGURE 5-4  Reference- and risk-based serum PFOS and PFOA concentrations that could inform clinical 
assessments. NOTES: Human biomonitoring (HBM) values are risk-based values derived from a compilation of epidemiological 
studies and represent levels at which no effect is exp ected (HBM-I) and above which effects are possible (HBM-II). 
The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) risk-based  value is a maternal seru m PFAS concentration derived 
from an epidemiological study of child ren’s prenatal and postnatal PFAS expo sure and decreased antibody response 
to vaccines; maternal levels below this  value are expected to have negligib le impact on children’s response to 
vaccines. The National Health and Nu trition Examination Survey  (NHANES) reference-base d serum concentration 
represents the 95th percentile of serum levels in a repres entative sample of the population aged 12 and older.  
 
 
The committee used weighed data from the NHAN ES to estimate PFAS exposures in the U.S. 
population. The HBM-I value, or the value below whic h effects are not expected, for PFOA (2 ng/mL) is 
the 73rd percentile, and the corresponding value for PFOS (5 ng/mL) is the 57th percentile. The HBM-II 
value, or the value above which effects may be e xpected for PFOA (10 ng/mL) is the 99th percentile and 
for PFOS (20 ng/mL) is the 98th percentile. For women  of childbearing age (15–49), the HBM-II values 
for pregnant women for PFOS and PFOA are the 99th  and 98th percentile, respectively. The committee 
observed that 25 percent of the U.S. population is exposed to PFAS above the EFSA point of departure 
(6.9 ng/mL sum of PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA).  
Given the large number of PFAS and the fact that  all humans are exposed to mixtures of PFAS, 
an approach that accounts for mixtures of PFAS would be tter inform clinical care than do single-chemical 
exposure values. Because the toxicities of different PF AS may not be equal, an approach using potency 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 135 
Prepublication Copy  factors (e.g., dioxins) may be optimal for determining how a mixture of PFAS may exert its toxic effects. 
However, EFSA did not identify studies comparing the dose-response curves for different PFAS that 
would allow derivation of their potencies, and inters pecies and sex differences also would complicate that 
effort. Thus EFSA assumed equal potencies for the fo ur selected PFAS, which in humans share half-lives 
on the order of years. To facilitate easier compar ison with estimated exposure, this calculation was 
performed on a weight rather than a molar basis. Bil and colleagues (2021) recently developed relative 
potency factors for several PFAS, which when app lied result in the sum of PFOA equivalents in a 
mixture. Overall, the approach entails uncertainti es, as the potency factors are derived from animal 
studies using mainly liver endpoints, which may correla te with effects in humans but to what degree is 
unknown. The additive approach used by EFSA has advantag es. It is simple to appl y and has been used in 
other efforts to regulate exposures to mixtures.15 Also, there is evidence that many PFAS have similar 
toxic effects (Kwiatkowski et al., 2020). The committe e believes the additive approach could be applied 
to the PFAS currently measured in the NHANES (MeFOSAA, PFHxS, PFOA [linear and branched 
isomers], PFDA, PFUnDA, PFOS [linear and branched isomers], and PFNA). Applying this approach of 
weight-based dose additivity, and using the HB M Commission’s values, the committee makes the 
following recommendations (see Figure 5-5):   
Recommendation 5-3: Clinicians should use serum or plasma concentrations of the 
sum of PFAS* to inform clinical care of exposed patients, using the following 
guidelines for interpretation:  
 Adverse health effects related to PFAS ex posure are not expected at less than 2 
nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL).  
 There is a potential for adverse effects,  especially in sensitive populations, 
between 2 and 20 ng/mL.  
 There is an increased risk of adverse effects above 20 ng/mL.  
 
* Simple additive sum of MeFOSAA, PFH xS, PFOA (linear and branched isomers), 
PFDA, PFUnDA, PFOS (linear and branched isomers) and PFNA in serum or plasma. Caution is warranted when using capillary blood measurements as levels 
may differ from serum or plasma levels.  
 The committee estimated that fo r the sum of PFAS in the NHANES, 2 ng/mL corresponds to the 2nd 
percentile, and 20 ng/mL corresponds to the 91st percentile, indicating that 89 percent of the U.S. 
population falls in the orange area in Figure 5-5, and 9 percent in the red area. Choosing cutoffs, as the committee has done, reflects ethical decisions and ri sks overstating or understa ting the risk of PFAS 
exposure given the uncertainty of the available info rmation. Values suggested herein were derived from 
epidemiological studies evaluating associations at the population level, and the relevance of these values 
to interpret risk in individuals is uncertain. Also , these values were derived in part from studies in 
vulnerable populations (e.g., child ren, pregnant women), and so should account for many sensitive 
populations, but they may not protect all populati ons. Moreover, the assumption of weight-based dose 
additivity is likely an oversimplification. The molar sum may be more appropriate if the equal potency of 
all PFAS is assumed, and future research to produce t oxic equivalency data or identify relevant potency 
factors could help refine the calculation (Bil et al., 2021). Furthermore, regardless of how the dose is 
calculated, there may not even be a level of PFAS exposure without some biological effect. Still, the 
increased risk from low levels of exposure is bette r addressed through population-health efforts than 
through individual action. The cutoff levels should be updated as more information becomes available. 
 
 
                                                           
15 See https://www.epa.gov/sites/defa ult/files/2014-11/documents /chem_mix_1986.pdf (a ccessed June 8, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 5-5 Graphical display of levels of PFAS to inform clinical care for the sum of MeFOSAA, PFHxS, PFOA 
(linear and branched isomers), PFDA, PFUnDA, PFOS ( linear and branched isomers) , and PFNA in serum or 
plasma.  
 
 
The committee acknowledges that, in  many communities, a large percentage of the population 
may have exposures to PFAS that would be consider ed high using the cutoffs presented here. This does 
not mean that health effects will occur, but likely rela tes to increased risk. More  reference- and risk-based 
values are needed for other PFAS and other biological  matrices, but given the expansiveness of the class, 
approaches based on relative potency factors may be mo re successful than developing risk-based levels 
for each PFAS in addressing this gap. 
The committee also acknowledges the existence of  data gaps with respect to reference 
populations. Appropriate PFAS refere nce populations may not be availa ble for vulnerable populations 
such as pregnant people and young children, as pre gnant people are included in low numbers in the 
NHANES, and children younger than 12 are not rout inely included in the publicly available data. 
Therefore, the committee makes the following recommendation: 
 
Recommendation 5-4: The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey should begin collecting and sharing more da ta on children younger than 12 years of 
age and pregnant people to generate reference populations for those groups. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Determining options and consid erations to guide decision making for PFAS testing and PFAS 
concentrations that could inform clinical care of  exposed patients will be beneficial in helping 
communities identify those who have elevated exposur e to those chemicals. Test ing for PFAS offers an 
opportunity to identify those who may be at in creased risk of certain health outcomes. The 
recommendations in this chapter could expand PFAS t esting among people already integrated into the 
health system (i.e., those with reliable insuran ce or other health care coverage). The committee 
acknowledges, however, that PFAS testing is expensiv e. Race, age, and other social and demographic 
characteristics already have disadvantaged many pa tients from accessing clinical preventive services. 
That disadvantage would be compounded by the expans ion of PFAS testing services, as those services 
should be linked to counseling on steps for mitigati ng exposure and its impacts. Therefore, encouraging 
testing primarily among people with relatively stable access to care could have the unintended effect of 
aggravating disparities in exposure to PFAS, a sever e disadvantage of encouraging testing without a 
funded, national PFAS testing program.  
REFERENCES 
 
Abraham, K., H. Mielke, H. Fromme, W. Völkel, J. Menzel, M. Peiser, F. Zepp, S. N. Willich, and C. 
Weikert. 2020. Internal exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances (P FASs) and biological markers in 
101 healthy 1-year-old children: Associations between levels of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 137 
Prepublication Copy  and vaccine response. Archives of Toxicology  94(6):2131–2147. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-
020-02715-4. 
Adams, C., P. Brown, R. Morello-Frosch, J. G. Brody, R. Rudel, A. Zota, S. Dunagan, J. Tovar, and S. 
Pattonand. 2011. Disentangling the exposure experience: The roles of community context and report-back of environmental exposure data. Journal of Health and Social Behavior  52(2):180–
196. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/0022146510395593. 
Altman, R. G., R. Morello-Frosch, J. G. Brody, R. Rudel, P. Brown, and M. Averick. 2008. Pollution 
comes home and gets personal: Women’s e xperience of household chemical exposure. Journal of 
Health and Social Behavior  49(4):417–435. https://doi.o rg/10.1177/002214650804900404. 
Alves, A., G. Jacobs, G. Vanermen, A. Covaci, a nd S. Voorspoels. 2015. New approach for assessing 
human perfluoroalkyl exposure via hair. Talanta  144:574–583. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.talanta.2015.07.009. 
Apel, P., C. Rousselle, R. Lange, F. Sissoko, M.  Kolossa-Gehring, and E. Ougier. 2020. Human 
biomonitoring initiative (HBM4EU)—Strategy to derive human biomonitoring guidance values 
(HBM-GVs) for health risk assessment. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental 
Health  230:113622. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2020.113622. 
Aro, R., U. Eriksson, A. Kärrman, and L. W. Y. Yeung. 2021. Organofluorine mass balance analysis of 
whole blood samples in relation to gender and age. Environmental Science & Technology  
55(19):13142–13151. https://doi .org/10.1021/acs.est.1c04031. 
Aro, R., U. Eriksson, A. Kärrman, K. Jakobsson, and L. W. Y. Yeung. 2022. Extractable organofluorine 
analysis: A way to screen for elevated per- a nd polyfluoroalkyl substance contamination in 
humans? Environment International  159:107035. https://doi.org/1 0.1016/j.envint.2021.107035. 
Baker, B., V. Cassano, and C. Murray. 2018. Arsen ic exposure, asessment, toxicity, diagnosis, and 
management: Guidance for occupationa l and environmental physicians. Journal of Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine 60(12):e634–e639. https://aco em.org/acoem/media/News-
Library/Arsenic_Exposure_Assessment_Toxicit y_Diagnosis.pdf (accessed June 17, 2022). 
Barr, D. B., K. Kannan, Y. Cui, L. Merrill, L. Petr ick, J. Meeker, T. Fennell, and E. Faustman. 2021. The 
use of dried blood spots for characterizing children’s exposure to organic environmental chemicals. Environmental Research 195:110796. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.envres.2021.110796. 
Barry, M. J., and S. Edgman-Levitan. 2012. Shared  decision making—pinnacle of patient-centered care. 
New England Journal of Medicine . 366(9):780–781. https://doi .org/10.1056/NEJMp1109283.  
Bil, W., M. Zeilmaker, S. Fragki, J. Lijzen, E. Verbruggen, and B. Bokkers . 2021. Risk assessment of 
per‐and polyfluoroalkyl substance mixtures: A relative potency factor approach. Environmental 
Toxicology and Chemistry  40(3):859–870. 
Brennan, N. M., A. T. Evans, M. K. Fritz, S. A. P eak, and H. von Holst. 2021. Trends in the regulation of 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substa nces (PFAS): A scoping review. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health  18(20):10900. 
https://doi.org/10. 3390/ijerph182010900. 
Brody, J. G., S. C. Dunagan, R. Morello-Frosch, P. Brown, S. Patton, and R. A. Rudel. 2014. Reporting 
individual results for biomonitoring and e nvironmental exposures: lessons learned from 
environmental communication case studies. Environmental Health  13:40. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069x-13-40. 
Brody, J. G., P. M. Cirillo, K. E. Boronow, L. Havas, M. Plumb, H. P. Susmann, K. Z. Gajos, and B. A. 
Cohn. 2021. Outcomes from returning individual ve rsus only study-wide biomonitoring results in 
an environmental exposure study using the Di gital Exposure Report-Back Interface (DERBI). 
Enviornmental Health Perspectives  129(11):117005. https:// doi.org/10.1289/ehp9072. 
Calafat, A. M., K. Kato, K. Hubbard, T. Jia, J. C. Botelho, and L. Y. Wong. 2019. Legacy and alternative 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in the U.S. general population: Paired serum-urine data from 
the 2013-2014 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Environment International  
131:105048. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.envint.2019.105048. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Charles, C., A. Gafni, and T. Whelan. 1997. Shared  decision-making in the medical encounter: what does 
it mean? (or it takes at least two to tango). Socoilogical Science in Medicine  44:681–692. 
https://doi.org.10.1016/s0277-9536(96)00221-3. 
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2021. Fourth national report on human exposure to 
environmental chemicals, updated tables . Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. 
CDC. 2022. National report on human exposure to environmental chemicals. Atlanta, GA: U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. 
https://www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/overview_ner.html  (accessed June 28, 2022). 
Clark, D., and The Chemours Company. 2021, March 17. Letter to EPA, Office of Pollution Prevention 
and Toxics regarding propanoic acid, 2,3,3,3-tetraf luoro-2-(1,1,2,2,3,3,3- heptafluoropropoxy)-
CAS RN 13252-13-6 (also known as HFPO-DA). 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/21093 350-chemours-tsca-fyi-letter-3-17-2021-v2 
(accessed June 16, 2022).  
Ehresman, D. J., J. W. Froehlich, G. W. Olsen, S- C. Chang, and J. L. Butenhoff. 2007. Comparison of 
human whole blood, plasma, and serum matrices for the determination of perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) , perfluorooctanoate (PFOA), and other fluorochemicals. 
Environmental Research  103(2):176–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2006.06.008. 
Emmett, E. A., H. Zhang, F. S. Shofer, N. Rodway, C. Desai, D. Freeman, and M. Hufford. 2009. 
Development and successful application of a “Community-First” communication model for 
community-based environmental health research. Journal of Occupational and Environmental 
Medicine  51(2):146–156. https://doi.org/10.1097/JOM.0b013e3181965d9b. 
FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration). 2018. Bioanalytical method validation guidance for industry.  
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 
Freeman, J. D., L. M. Rosman, J. D. Ratcliff, P. T. Strickland, D. R. Graham, and E. K. Silbergeld. 2018. 
State of the science in dried blood spots. Clinical Chemistry  64(4):656–679. 
https://doi.org/10.1373/clinchem.2017.275966. 
Frisbee, S. J., A. P. Brooks, Jr., A. Maher, P. Flensbor g, S. Arnold, T. Fletcher, K. Steenland, A. Shankar, 
S. S. Knox, C. Pollard, J. A. Halverson, V. M. Vieira, C. Jin, K. M. Leyden, and A. M. 
Ducatman. 2009. The C-8 health projec t: Design, methods, and participants. Environmental 
Health Perspectives  117(12):1873–1882. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0800379. 
Giannini, C. M., R. L. Herrick, J. M. Buckholz, A. R. Daniels, F. M. Biro, and S. M. Pinney. 2018. 
Comprehension and perceptions of study partic ipants upon receiving pe rfluoroalkyl substance 
exposure biomarker results. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 
221(7):1040–1046. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2018.07.005. 
Gross, R. S., A. Ghassabian, S. Vandyousefi, M. J.  Messito, C. Gao, K. Kannan, and L. Trasande. 2020. 
Persistent organic pollutants expos ure in newborn dried blood spots and infant weight status: A 
case-control study of low-income Hispanic mother-infant pairs. Environmental Pollution 
267:115427. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115427. 
Guo, P., T. Furnary, V. Vasiliou, Q. Yan, K. Nyhan,  D. P. Jones, C. H. Johnson, and Z. Liew. 2022. Non-
targeted metabolomics and associations with per- and polyfluoroalkyl  substances (PFAS) 
exposure in humans: A scoping review. Environment International  162(2022):107159. 
Harclerode, M., S. Baryluk, H. Lanza, and J. Fr angos. 2021. Preparing for effective, adaptive risk 
communication about per- a nd polyfluoroalkyl  substances in drinking water. AWWA Water 
Science  3(5):e1236. https://doi.org/10.1002/aws2.1236. 
Hays, S., L. Aylward, J. Lakind, M. Bartels, H. Barton, P. Boogaard, C. Brunk, S. Dizio, M. Dourson, D. 
Goldstein, J. Lipscomb, M Kilpatrick, D. Krewsk i, K Krishnan, M. Nordberg, M. Okino, Y-M. 
Tan, C. Viau, and J. Yager. 2008. Guidelines for the drivation of biomonitoring equivalents : 
Report from the Biomonitoring Equivalents Expert Workshop. Regulatory Toxicology and 
Pharmacology  51:S4–S15.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PFAS Testing and Concentrations to Inform  Clinical Care of Exposed Patients 139 
Prepublication Copy  Hernick, A. D., M. Kathryn Brown, S. M. Pinney, F. M. Biro, K. M. Ball, and R. L. Bornschein. 2011. 
Sharing unexpected biomarker results with study participants. Environmental Health Perspectives  
119(1):1–5. https://doi.o rg/10.1289/ehp.1001988. 
Hölzer, J., H. Lilienthal, and M. Schümann.  2021. Human biomonito ring (HBM)-I values for 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooc tane sulfonic acid (PFOS)—Description, 
derivation and discussion. Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology  121:104862. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yrtph.2021.104862. 
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2001. Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st century . 
Washington, DC: National Academy Pr ess. https://doi.org /10.17226/10027. 
Kannan, K., A. Stathis, M. J. Mazzella, S. S. Andra, D. Boyd Barr, S. S. Hecht, L. S. Merrill, A. L. 
Galusha, and P. J. Parsons. 2021. Quality assura nce and harmonization for targeted biomonitoring 
measurements of environmenta l organic chemicals across the Children’s Health Exposure 
Analysis Resource laboratory network. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental 
Health  234:113741. 
Kato, K., L. Y. Wong, A. Chen, C. Dunbar, G. M. Webster, B. P. Lanphear, and A. M. Calafat. 2014. 
Changes in serum concentrations of maternal poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances over the course 
of pregnancy and predictors of exposure in a multiethnic cohort of Cincinnati, Ohio pregnant 
women during 2003–2006. Environmental Science and Technology  48(16):9600–9608. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es501811k. 
Kwiatkowski, C. F., D. Q. Andrews, L. S. Birnbaum, T. A. Bruton, J. C. DeWitt, D. R. U. Knappe, M. V. 
Maffini, M. F. Miller, K. E. Pelch, A. Reade, A.  Soehl, X. Trier, M. Venier, C. C. Wagner, Z. 
Wang, and A. Blum. 2020. Scientific basi s for managing PFAS as a chemical class. 
Environmental Science & Technology Letters  7(8):532–543. 
https://doi.org/10. 1021/acs.estlett.0c00255. 
LaKind, J. S., M-A. Verner, R. D. Rogers, H. Goeden, D. Q. Naiman, S. A. Marchitti, G. M. Lehmann, E. 
P. Hines, and S. E. Fenton. 2022. Current br east milk PFAS levels in the United States and 
Canada: After all this time,  why don’t we know more? Environmental Health Perspectives  
130(2):025002. 
Latshaw, M. W., R. Degeberg, S. Sutaria Patel, B. Rhodes, E. King, S. Chaudhuri, and J. Nassif. 2017. 
Advancing environmental health surveillance in  the US through a national human biomonitoring 
network. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health  220(2):98–102. 
Lu, S., and S. M. Bartell. 2020. Serum PFAS calculator for adults, web-based software , version 1.2. 
https://www.ics.uci.edu/~sbartell/pf ascalc.html (accessed June 28, 2022). 
Ma, W., K. Kannan, Q. Wu, E. M. Bell, C. M. Dru schel, M. Caggana, and K. M. Aldous. 2013. Analysis 
of polyfluoroalkyl substances a nd bisphenol A in dried blood spots by liquid chromatography 
tandem mass spectrometry. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry  405(12):4127–4138. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-013-6787-3. 
NASEM (National Academies of Sciences , Engineering, and Medicine). 2018a. Feasibility of addressing 
environmental exposure questions using department of defense biorepositories: Proceedings of a 
workshop—in brief.  Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
https://doi.org/10.17226/25287. 
NASEM. 2018b. Returning individual research results to  participants: Guidance for a new research 
paradigm . Washington, DC: The National Academie s Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/25094. 
NRC (National Research Council). 1987. Biological  markers in environmental health research. 
Environmental Health Perspectives  74:3–9. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.74-1474499. 
NRC. 2006. Human biomonitoring for environmental chemicals.  Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/11700.  
NRC. 2009. Science and decisions: Advancing risk assessment . Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/12209.  
Ohayon, J. L., E. Cousins, P. Brown, R. Morello -Frosch, and J. G. Brody. 2017. Researcher and 
institutional review board perspectives on the benefits and challenges of reporting back 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  biomonitoring and environmental exposure results. Environmental Research  153:140–149. doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2016.12.003. 
Perovich, L. J., J. L. Ohayon, E. M. Cousins, R. Mo rello-Frosch, P. Brown, G. Adamkiewicz, and J. G. 
Brody. 2018. Reporting to parents on children’s ex posures to asthma triggers in low-income and 
public housing, an interview-based case study of ethics, environmental literacy, individual action, 
and public health benefits. Environmental Health: A Global Access Science Source  17(1):48. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-018-0395-9. 
(personal communication, R. Mitzel, President Eu rofins Air Toxics, LLC SVP Eurofins Specialty 
Services, December 6, 2022) 
Poothong, S., C. Thomsen, J. A. Padilla-Sanchez, E.  Papadopoulou, and L. S. Ha ug. 2017. Distribution of 
novel and well-known poly- and perfluoroalkyl subs tances (PFASs) in human serum, plasma, and 
whole blood. Environmental Science & Technology  51(22):13388–13396. 
https://doi.org/10. 1021/acs.est.7b03299. 
Ramirez-Andreotta, M. D., J. G. Brody, N. Lothrop, M. Loh, P. I. Beamer, and P. Brown. 2016. 
Improving environmental health literacy and ju stice through environmental exposure results 
communication. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health  13(7):690. 
https://doi.org/10. 3390/ijerph13070690. 
Schulz, C., M. Wilhelm, U. Heudorf, and M. Kolossa- Gehring. 2011. Update of the reference and HBM 
values derived by the German Human Biomonitoring Commission. International Journal of 
Hygiene and Environmental Health  215(1):26–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2011.06.007. 
Schümann, M., H. Lilienthal, and J. Höl zer. 2021. Human biomonitoring (HBM)-II values for 
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooc tane sulfonic acid (PFOS)—Description, 
derivation and discussion. Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology  121:104868. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yrtph.2021.104868. 
SWGTOX (Scientific Working Group for Forensic T oxicology). 2013. Scientific Working Group for 
Forensic Toxicology (SWGTOX) standard practi ces for method validation in forensic toxicology. 
Journal of Analytical Toxicology  37(7):452–474. 
Tomsho, K. S., C. Schollaert, T. Aguilar, R. B ongiovanni, M. Alvarez, M. K. Scammell, and G. 
Adamkiewicz. 2019. A mixed methods evaluation of sharing air pollution results with study 
participants via report-back communication. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health  16(21):4183. https://doi.o rg/10.3390/ijerph16214183. 
Watson, C. V., M. Lewin, A. Ragin-Wilson, R. Jones,  J. M. Jarrett, K. Wallon, C. Ward, N. Hilliard, and 
E. Irvin-Barnwell. 2020. Characterization of trace elements exposure in pregnant women in the 
United States, NHANES 1999–2016. Environmental Research  183:109208. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.109208. 
Ye, X., K. Kato, L. Y. Wong, T. Jia, A. Kalathil,  J. Latremouille, and A. M. Calafat. 2018. Per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances in sera from children 3 to  11 years of age participating in the National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2013–2014. International Journal of Hygiene and 
Environmental Health  221(1):9–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2017.09.011. 
Yeung, E. H., E. M. Bell, R. Sundaram, A. Ghassabian, W. Ma, K. Kannan, and G. M. Louis. 2019. 
Examining Endocrine disruptors measured in newborn dried blood spots and early childhood 
growth in a prospective cohort. Obesity  (Silver Spring, MD)  27(1):145–151. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/oby.22332. 
Zheng, G., E. Schreder, J. C. Dempsey, N. Uding,  V. Chu, G. Andres, S. Sathyanarayana, and A. 
Salamova. 2021. Per- and polyfluor oalkyl substances (PFAS) in breast milk: Concerning trends 
for current-use PFAS. Environmental Science & Technology 55(11):7510–7520. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
Prepublication Copy  141  6 
 
Guidance for Clinicians on  Exposure Determination,  
PFAS Testing, and C linical Follow-Up 
 
Despite continued uncertainty about the exact natu re of risks from PFAS exposure, clinicians will 
need to advise and make decisions with patients rega rding their exposure. While there is evidence of an 
association of PFAS with several health outcomes, th e likelihood that a partic ular individual will have 
any specific adverse health outcome following exposur e to PFAS cannot currently be determined with 
great specificity. There are also gaps in knowledge about how individuals can reduce any potential risks 
related to PFAS exposure. Despite  these gaps, however, many individuals and communities expect 
clinicians to address PFAS-associated risks as part of routine health care delivery. Although close 
monitoring and exposure mitigation might prevent or lessen the severity of h ealth effects for those 
exposed to PFAS, aggressive clinical follow-up could lead to unnecessary treatment, with attendant risk 
of treatment-related adverse effects; increase patients ’ anxiety; and even provide false assurance. For 
these reasons, trust and clear communication between clin icians and patients are of the utmost importance 
as they face the task of making decisions that consider  all options and incorporate informed preferences, 
although how best to include children, especially a dolescents, in shared decision making is a complicated 
matter and an active focus of research (Boland et al., 2019). Ongoing and future research should 
eventually guide clinicians in predicting patient ri sk and provide an understanding of the benefits and 
harms of interventions designed to avoid adverse health outcomes.  
CRITERIA FOR SCREENING 
 
Screening is the process of testing to identify in dividuals at high risk for developing a clinical 
condition or those who have a condition for which si gns or symptoms may not be evident. Population 
screenings are one type of clinical preventive ser vices recommended by health and medical professional 
agencies and organizations such as the American Acad emy of Family Physicians (AAFP), the American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) , the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the 
American Heart Association (AHA), the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF). Th ese organizations usuall y recommend population-
level screenings as part of routine clinical care when it is clear that they offer a net benefit (compared 
with potential harms of the screening itself and any subsequent treatment). Although there are different 
frameworks for determining when to adopt population- level screening, the criteria articulated by Wilson 
and Jungner (1968) are a common platform for these frameworks:  
 The condition should be an importa nt public health concern. 
 There should be a treatment for the condition. 
 Facilities for diagnosis and treatment should be available. 
 There should be a latent stage of the condition. 
 There should be a test or examination for the condition. 
 The test should be acceptable to the population. 
 The natural history of the disease should be adequately understood. 
 There should be an agreed-upon policy on whom to treat. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   The total cost of finding a case should be economi cally balanced in relationship to medical 
expenditure as a whole. 
 Case finding should be a continuous process. 
 
The degree to which these criteria are applied and how  they are weighted must be tailored to the 
particular clinical issue and the perspective of tho se developing the preventive service. For example, the 
degree to which the evidence base must be clear can vary  based on the urgency of the clinical context, and 
cost is often not explicitly considered because cost/b enefit data from the societal perspective are rarely 
available. Despite this variation, a key common th eme across all frameworks is  the need to assess whether 
the expected benefits of population screening ex ceed the potential harms. This assessment can be 
challenging when significant scientific uncertainty exists, as is the case for population screening for PFAS 
exposure. The committee faced challenges in maki ng population-level recommendations related to the 
following issues:   
 PFAS testing could identify risks for many diverse health outcomes, as opposed to the usual 
case in which screening identifies one condition or  a group of related conditions. Assessment 
of benefit and harm is difficult if the various potential health outcomes differ in this regard. 
Furthermore, developing recommendations fo r clinical follow-up after PFAS exposure is 
challenging because of the heterogene ity of potential health outcomes. 
 The benefits of screening might accrue to i ndividuals other than those who would be 
screened. For example, determining that an i ndividual had a harmful environmental exposure 
might not help that person but could lead to br oader public health measures that could protect 
the community. 
 
When there are gaps in knowledge about the bene fits and harms of screening or when benefits 
and harms are closely matched, clinicians should assess individual patient preferences. Informed decision 
making can be challenging given the above gaps a nd the limited time clinicians and patients have 
together. Because standard screening criteria have important limitations in settings of substantial 
scientific uncertainty, such as PFAS-related health eff ects, this chapter offers recommendations for basing 
screening decisions on the principles the committee proposes in Chapter 2.   
PFAS-ASSOCIATED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
 
The committee identified several health outcome s associated with PFAS exposure (see Chapter 
5). Many are common diseases in the general population, and all have multiple known risk factors (Schrager, 2018). The committee believed it was importan t to categorize the strength of the evidence for 
each outcome, but concluded that all conditions with  an association should be considered for patient 
follow-up, as acknowledging the potential risk may make  doctors and patients more likely to prioritize 
screenings. If a patient has a known or suspected e xposure to PFAS, the committee encourages clinicians 
to prioritize screenings for those conditions related to PFAS when relevant and possible. The committee 
encourages clinicians to use evidence-based best pr actices and strategies when speaking with patients to 
support shared decision making and clear health ri sk communication. Resources such as the Consumer 
Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) Ambulatory Care Improvement Guide can provide evidence-based trainings, tools, and st rategies for shared decision making and clear 
communication (AHRQ, 2020). The committee did not cond uct a meta-analysis to determine the level of 
increased risk posed by PFAS exposur e for each health outcome. Risks vary by exposure level, life stage, 
and whether patients have other risk factors for de veloping a health effect. These uncertainties make it 
infeasible to determine the optimal screening tests and their frequency.  
The committee found sufficient evid ence of increased risk for the following health outcomes 
with exposure to PFAS: 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Guidance for Clinicians on Exposure Determinati on, PFAS Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 143 
Prepublication Copy   reductions in birthweight; 
 dyslipidemia in children and adults; 
 kidney cancer in adults; and 
 decreased antibody response  in children and adults, but with  insufficient evidence of an 
increase in risk or severity of infection or differences in vaccine effectiveness.  
 
The committee found limited suggestive evidence of  increased risk for the following health 
outcomes with exposure to PFAS:  
 breast cancer in adults, 
 pregnancy-induced hypertension (gesta tional hypertension and preeclampsia), 
 liver enzyme elevations (in children and adults), 
 testicular cancer (in adults), 
 thyroid dysfunction (in adults), and 
 ulcerative colitis (in adults). 
 
For many of these adverse health effects, however , including cancers, it is unclear what clinicians 
and individuals can do to monitor for their developmen t and intervene to lower the risk related to PFAS 
exposure. Guidance for clinicians’ engagement in sh aring decision making with their patients regarding 
follow-up care for PFAS-associated health outco mes is included later in this chapter. 
 
Clinical Practice Guidelines for PFAS-Associated Health Outcomes 
 
The committee reviewed clinical practice guidelin es for the health effects associated with PFAS 
exposure, as well as the recommendations from the C-8 Medical Panel (see Table 6-1). The C-8 Medical Panel developed a medical monitoring protocol fo r a community with high PFAS exposure surrounding 
Parkersburg, West Virginia. The protocol speci fies follow-up for human diseases for which the C-8 
Science Panel found a probable link: dyslipidem ia, kidney cancer, pregnancy-induced hypertension 
(gestational hypertension and preeclampsia), testicular cancer, thyroid disfunction, and ulcerative colitis.  
 
Outcomes with Sufficient Evidence of Association  
 Dyslipidemia in Children and Adults 
 
In the United States, blood testing for lipid and cholesterol levels is recommended throughout the 
life course based on age and risk factors. AAP reco mmends that all children be screened once between 
ages 9 and 11 years and again between 17 and 21 year s, with selective screening for children over 2 years 
of age with a family history of lipid and cholesterol disorders or heart disease (Richerson et al., 2017). 
The AHA recommends screening every 4–6 years for people aged 20 or older who are at low risk for 
cardiovascular disease (Grundy et al., 2019). The C-8 Medical Panel provided cholesterol screening starting as early as 2 years of age, which is simila r to the age recommended for cholesterol screening for 
children with a family history of lipid disorders (C-8 Medical Panel, 2013).  
 
Reductions in Birthweight  
Birthweight is an important and well-establis hed pregnancy outcome. Clinical prevention 
guidance for reductions in birthweight is to screen for risk factors that lead to reductions in birthweight. 
Common prenatal exposures associated with a risk of reduced birthweight in full-term newborns include 
use of tobacco, alcohol, or other drugs.  
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  TABLE 6-1 An Overview of Screening Recommendations for the Health Effects Associated with 
Exposure to PFAS 
Recommendations for the General Population  a C-8 Medical Panel Recommendationb,c for  
Class Members 
Lower birthweight 
Screen for risk factors for low birthweight in pregnant persons 
during prenatal well visit  d No screening recommended for C-8 class members  e 
Dyslipidemia (in adults and children) 
Screen all children once between ages 9 and 11 years and again 
between ages 17 and 21; among those with a familial history, begin 
screening at age 2 years and follow up yearly  f 
Screen adults aged 40–75 with no history of cardiovascular disease 
(CVD), one or more CVD risk factors, and a calculated 10-year 
CVD event risk of 10% or greater  g 
American Heart Association recommends all adults aged 20 or 
older have their cholesterol and other traditional risk factors 
checked every 4–6 years as long as their risk remains low  h Screen children for cholesterol levels at age 2 years and 
older unless already screened during the prior 5 years, already diagnosed, or receiving treatment 
Kidney cancer (in adults) 
No routine screening recommende d Screen individuals aged 20–39 years with a symptom questionnaire; follow up with abdominal exam and urine test if symptoms present 
Screen individuals aged 40 or older with a symptom 
questionnaire, abdominal exam, and urine testing  
Decreased antibody response (in adults and children) 
No routine screening recommende d No screening recommended for C-8 class members  e 
Breast cancer in adults 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF): Screen average-
risk women aged 50–74 with mammography every  
2 years  i 
Women’s Preventive Services Initiative (WPSI): Screen average-risk women with mammogra phy; mammography should be 
initiated no earlier than age 40 and no later than age 50 and occur 
annually or biennially until age 74
 j No screening recommended for C-8 class members  e 
Pregnancy-induced hypertension (gestational hypertension and preeclampsia)  
Screen pregnant persons for hypertension and preeclampsia 
throughout pregnancy  k,l Screen pregnant persons for hypertension and 
proteinuria throughout pregnancy 
Liver enzyme alterations in children and adults 
No routine screening recommende d No screening recommended for C-8 class members  e 
Testicular cancer in adults  
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) and USPSTF 
recommend against  screening asymptomatic adolescents and adults 
for testicular cancer  m Screen for testicular cancer with a physical exam and 
questionnaire  
Thyroid dysfunction in adults  
Screen newborns as part of recommended uniform  
screening paneln 
No routine screening recommende d o Screen adults’ serum thyroid-stimulating hormone; 
otherwise test based on signs and symptoms of thyroid 
dysfunction 
Ulcerative col itis in adults  
No routine screening recommende d Screen for symptoms with questionnaire starting at age  
15 years 
a In cases in which conflicting or differing recommendations for population-level screenings have  been issued, the clinical 
practice guideline developers have been identified for clarity.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Guidance for Clinicians on Exposure Determinati on, PFAS Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 145 
Prepublication Copy  b C-8 Medical Panel, 2013. 
c The C-8 Medical Panel recommended that members of the class action lawsuit, Jack W. Leach, et al. v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours 
& Company  (no. 01-C-608 W.Va., Wood County Circui t Court, filed April 10, 2002), be screened once in 2013; the panel has 
since updated its guidance, and now recommends that class members be screened three times, 3 years apart (C-8 Medical Panel, 
2022). See Chapter 1 for more details about the lawsuit. 
d Hagan et al., 2017. 
e The C-8 Medical Panel was allowed to develop recommendations only for the six c onditions identified by the C-8 Science 
Panel in 2013: pregnancy-induced hyperten sion, kidney cancer, testicular cancer, th yroid disease, ulcer ative colitis, and 
hypercholesterolemia. The C-8 Medical Panel did not deliberat e about screenings for lower birthweight, decreased antibody 
response, breast cancer, or liver enzyme  functions (C-8 Medical Panel, 2013). 
f Richerson et al., 2017. 
g USPSTF, 2016b. 
h Grundy et al., 2019. 
I USPSTF, 2016a. 
j WPSI, 2019. 
k USPSTF, 2021. 
l USPSTF, 2017. 
m USPSTF, 2011. 
n HRSA, 2018. 
o USPSTF, 2015. 
 
 
Kidney Cancer in Adults 
 
There are no effective screening approaches for identifying kidney cancer early in its course, and 
therefore no authoritative clinical screening recommendati ons. Urinalysis is effective at finding blood in 
the urine, which can be a sign of advanced kidney cancer  but is also indicative of other disorders, such as 
infections and kidney stones. The C-8 Medical Panel r ecommends that clinicians ask about family history, 
symptoms of kidney cancer (gross hematuria, chroni c abdominal pain, recent involuntary weight loss, 
unexplained fever for 1 week), conduct a physical ex am for abdominal mass, and check a urine dipstick 
for blood (C-8 Medical Panel 2013, 2022). Although palpation for an abdominal mass is not harmful, it is 
unlikely to lead to early detection and may provide false reassurance.  
 
Decreased Antibody Response in Children and Adults 
 
The predictive value of antibody titers after vacci nation or infection is usually unclear, and the 
evidence for an association between PFAS exposure and in fection risk or severity is insufficient. Nor are 
there any evidence-based recommendations or other clinical guidance for addressing decreased antibody 
response. This is an important area for additional research.  
 
Outcomes with Limited Suggest ive Evidence of Association 
 
Breast Cancer in Adults 
 
The USPSTF recommends biennial mammographic scr eening for all average-risk women aged 
50–74 (USPSTF, 2016a). For women aged 40–49, the USPSTF states that the decision to start screening 
mammography should be an individual one, and th at women who place a higher value on the potential 
benefit than on the potential harms may choose to  begin biennial screening. For women aged 75 and 
older, the USPSTF makes no recommendation because of insufficient evidence (USPSTF, 2016a). The 
HRSA-supported Women’s Preventive Services Initiative recommends that average-risk women initiate 
“mammography screening no earlier than age 40 and no later than age 50,” that “screening 
mammography should occur at least biennially a nd as frequently as annually,” and that it “should 
continue through at least age 74 and age alone should not be the basis to discontinue screening” (WPSI, 
2019). 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Pregnancy-Induced Hypertension 
 
Pregnancy-induced hypertension, including gest ational hypertension and preeclampsia, affects 
about 1 in every 12–17 pregnant pe rsons aged 20–44 in the United States, and poses serious health risks 
for pregnant persons and fetuses duri ng pregnancy (Bateman et al., 2012). As part of standard prenatal 
care, pregnant persons seeing a clin ician will have their blood pressure  monitored routinely throughout 
their pregnancy to reduce various risks to both pa rent and fetus associated with high blood pressure 
(Kilpatrick, 2017). This standard measurement is feasi ble, and its benefits outweigh its harms. The C-8 
Medical Panel reinforces the standard blood pressure  monitoring recommendations (C-8 Medical Panel 
2013, 2022).   
Elevated Liver Enzymes in Children and Adults 
 
Elevated liver enzymes do not represent a health outcome by themselves, although they generally 
indicate a level of liver inflammation. Elevations are often found incidentally with multiphasic blood test 
panels administered as part of routine medical care or as part of an assessment of patient symptoms or concerns. Elevated liver enzymes have many causes, the most common of which include use of over-the-
counter pain medications (particularly acetaminophe n) and certain prescription medications (including 
statin drugs), alcohol consumption, heart failure, vi ral hepatitis, fatty liver disease, and obesity. There are 
no authoritative recommendations for screening for liver enzyme alterations in otherwise healthy patients 
who are not being monitored for liver dysfunction, and follow-up recommendations for elevations depend 
on which enzymes are affected, the degree of elevati on, and characteristics of the individual patient.  
 
Testicular Cancer in Adults 
 
Testicular cancer, though rare, is the most comm on cancer in American males aged 15–25 (NCI, 
n.d.). Most cases of testicular cancer are discovered incidentally by patients or their partners. The 
USPSTF found that there is inadequate evidence that  screening by clinician examination or patient self-
examination has a higher yield or greater accuracy for detecting testicular cancer at earlier stages. It is 
also not known whether earlier detection would l ead to better health outcomes. The USPSTF concludes 
that there is no benefit of screening for testicul ar cancer in the general population and recommends 
against it (USPSTF, 2011). The C-8 Medical Panel re commends a risk questionnaire and clinical 
testicular exam, considering ultrasound if additional ri sk factors are identified (C-8 Medical Panel, 2013, 
2022).  
 
Thyroid Disease and Dysfunction in Adults  
There are well-defined appro aches for identifying and treating thyroid hormone dysfunction, 
especially among older adults and women (CDC, 2014). The standard clinical practice for identifying 
thyroid dysfunction is to order blood testing for leve ls of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) when there 
are signs or symptoms that could be attributable to hypo- or hyperthyroidism (NIDDK, 2017). Standard 
approaches exist for diagnosis and treatment of th yroid disorders. In its review, however, the USPSTF 
concluded that the current evidence is insufficient to  assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening 
for thyroid dysfunction in nonpregnant, asymptomatic adults. The C-8 Medical Panel recommends that 
adults in PFAS-contaminated communities receive TSH -level screening in addition to testing based on 
signs and symptoms (C-8 Medical Panel 2013, 2022).   Ulcerative Colitis in Adults 
 
Ulcerative colitis is a chronic bowel disease with a prevalence of 1.3 percent among U.S. adults 
that results in inflammation and sores in the lining of the large intestine (colon) and rectum (Dahlhamer et 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Guidance for Clinicians on Exposure Determinati on, PFAS Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 147 
Prepublication Copy  al., 2016). It can be debilitating and lead to life-threat ening complications. In addition to such generalized 
symptoms as fatigue, fever, and weight loss, affected  individuals experience abdominal pain; blood or pus 
in stool; rectal bleeding; and frequent, recurring di arrhea. Diagnosis requires endoscopy and laboratory 
testing (Hanauer, 2004). There are no authoritative recommendations for screening for ulcerative colitis. 
The C-8 Medical Panel recommends that clinicians ad minister a questionnaire to elicit symptoms of the 
condition beginning at age 15 (C-8 Medical Panel, 2013, 2022); however, no in formation is available 
regarding the accuracy of the questionnaire.   
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PATIENT FOLLOW-UP 
 
Where appropriate, the committee developed reco mmendations for patient follow-up for PFAS-
associated health outcomes that should be offered to  patients based on shared, informed decision making 
between patient and clinician. The clinical prac tice guidelines for standard medical care and the C-8 
Medical Panel recommendations served as the b asis of these recommendations. Some conditions 
associated with PFAS exposure have no established c linical prevention guidance, while other clinical 
prevention recommendations are beneficial when app lied in cases of increased risk. There is value in 
specifying follow-up that is part of the standard of care as defined by authoritative clinical professional 
groups because clinicians often are unable to deliver  all recommended preventive services during primary 
care visits (Privett and Guerrier, 2021) and must decide with patients which services to focus on 
considering both evidence and patient valu es and preferences (USPSTF et al., 2022).  
The committee used its three estab lished cutoff levels for PFAS in serum or plasma (detailed in 
Chapter 5) to determine follow-up based on PFAS expos ure level, although the risks are not the same 
within each of these three categories. PFAS blood testing measures burden at the time of sample collection. For example, a person with low blood leve ls today may have had higher levels in the past. 
Clinicians should use judgment and shared deci sion making in making follow-up decisions based on 
PFAS exposure and other risk factors. Figure 6-1 sugg ests that clinicians engage in shared, informed 
decision making with their patients regarding follo w-up care for PFAS-associated health outcomes. 
  
 
FIGURE 6-1 Clinical guidance for follow-up with patients after PFAS testing.  
  PFAS Exposure:  Clinical Follow‐Up
•Clinicians  should offer PFAS testing to patients who are likely to have a history of elevated exposure.  In all 
discussions  of PFAS testing, clinicians should describe the potential benefits and harms of PFAS testing and the 
potential clinical consequences  (such as additional  follow‐up), related social implications,  and limitations  of the 
testing so patient and clinician can make a shared, informed decision. 
•If testing is done the clinician should compare its results with the chart below and discuss treatment  accordingly.
Encourage  PFAS exposure reduction  if a source has been 
identified,  especially  for pregnant persons. 
Within the usual standard of care clinicians should: 
•Prioritize screening  for dyslipidemia  with a lipid panel 
(once between 9 and 11 years of age, and once every 4 to 
6 years over age 20) as recommended  by the American  
Academy of Pediatrics  (AAP) and American  Heart 
Association  (AHA). 
•Screen for hypertensive  disorders  of pregnancy  at all 
prenatal visits per the American  College of Obstetricians  
and Gynecologists  (ACOG). 
•Screen for breast cancer based on clinical practice 
guidelines  based on age and other risk factors such as 
those recommended  by US Preventive  Services Task Force 
(USPSTF).  Encourage  PFAS exposure reduction  if a source of exposure is 
identified,  especially  for pregnant persons. 
In addition to the usual standard of care, clinicians should: 
•Prioritize screening  for dyslipidemia  with a lipid panel (for 
patients over age 2) following  AAP recommendations  for high‐risk 
children and AHA guidance for high‐risk adults.  
•At all well visits:
•Conduct thyroid function testing (for patients over age 18) 
with serum thyroid stimulating  hormone (TSH),
•Assess for signs and symptoms  of kidney cancer (for 
patients over age 45), including with urinalysis,  and
•For patients over age 15, assess for signs and symptoms  of 
testicular  cancer and ulcerative  colitis.Provide usual 
standard of care.
* Simple additive sum of MeFOSAA,  PFHxS, PFOA (linear and branched  isomers), PFDA, PFUnDA, PFOS (linear and branched  isomers), and PFNA  in serum or plasma
2–<20 (ng/mL) PFAS* ≥20 (ng/mL) PFAS* <2 (ng/mL) PFAS*
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Recommendation 6-1: Clinicians should treat patients with serum PFAS 
concentration below 2 nanograms per millilit er (ng/mL) with the usual standard of 
care. 
 
Recommendation 6-2: For patients with serum PFAS concentration of 2 nanograms 
per milliliter (2 ng/mL) or higher and less than 20 ng/mL, clinicians should 
encourage PFAS exposure reduction if a sou rce of exposure is identified, especially 
for pregnant persons. Within the usual standard of care clinicians should: 
 
 Prioritize screening for dyslipidemia with a lipid panel (once between 9 and 11 
years of age, and once every 4 to 6 years over age 20) as recommended by the 
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the American Heart Association (AHA). 
 Screen for hypertensive disorders of preg nancy at all prenatal visits per the 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). 
 Screen for breast cancer based on clinic al practice guidelines based on age and 
other risk factors such as those recomm ended by the U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force (USPSTF). 
 
Recommendation 6-3: For patients with serum PFAS concentration of 20 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) or higher,  clinicians should encourage PFAS 
exposure reduction if a source of exposure is identified, especially for pregnant 
persons. In addition to the usual st andard of care, clinicians should: 
 
 Prioritize screening for dyslipidemia with  a lipid panel (for patients over age 2) 
following American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) guidelines for high-risk children and American Heart Association (AHA) guidance for high-risk adults. 
 At all well visits: 
o conduct thyroid function testing (for patients over age 18) with serum 
thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), 
o assess for signs and symptoms of ki dney cancer (for patients over 45), 
including with urinalysis, and 
o for patients over 15, assess for signs a nd symptoms of testicular cancer and 
ulcerative colitis. 
 
APPLYING THE COMMITTEE’S EXPOSURE, TESTING, AND CLINICAL  
FOLLOW-UP RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The Committee created a flow chart summari zing PFAS education, exposure assessment, and 
clinical follow-up (see Figure 6-2). In communiti es where PFAS exposure has been identified, the 
Agency of Toxic Substances and Disease Registry  (ATSDR) and other government entities should 
support local clinicians with educational materials about PFAS exposure and testing. Clinicians should 
then determine whether a particular patient is likely to  have a history of elevated exposure to PFAS. If so, 
the clinician should offer PFAS testing and make a shared , informed decision on that testing. If testing is 
chosen, the labs should be ordered (Test Code 393 07, Current Procedural Terminology [CPT] Code 
82542). Test results should be interpreted by summ ing the concentrations of MeFOSAA, PFHxS, PFOA 
(linear and branched isomers), PFDA, PFUnDA, PFO S (linear and branched isomers), and PFNA. The 
laboratory may not report results for all PFAS cons idered by the committee or may include different 
PFAS in their panel. In that case, the sum of PFA S should include only the PFAS in the analyte list 
considered by the committee. For example, if the lab tests for PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, PFNA, and PFBS,  
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Guidance for Clinicians on Exposure Determinati on, PFAS Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 149 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE 6-2  Flow chart on how the committee’s recommendations work together in a clinical setting. 
NOTE: ATSDR = Agency for Toxic Substances and Di sease Registry; MeFOSAA= methylperfluorooctane 
sulfonamidoacetic acid, PFHxS= perfluorohexane sulfonic acid, PFOA = perfluorooctanoic acid, PFDA= perfluorodecanoic acid, PF UnDA= Perfluoroundecanoic acid, PFOS= Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid, PFNA= 
Perfluorononanoic acid.  
 
 the summation should include PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA. Differing analyte lists may cause some variation in test results. Still, as long as PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFNA are included in the analyte list, 
the results may not vary too greatly, as these four an alytes are the ones most commonly detected in the 
United States. If any analyte is below the limit of dete ction, the clinician should calculate the analyte limit 
of detection divided by the square  root of 2 and use this value in the summation. The summation should 
then be compared against Figure 6-2 to determine an  appropriate clinical follow-up plan based on shared, 
informed decision making between patient and clinician.  In communities where PFAS exposure has been identified, ATSDR and other 
governmental entities should support local clinicians with educational materials about PFAS exposure and PFAS testing (Rec. 5-1). 
Clinical providers determine whether the patient is likely to have a history of elevated exposure to PFAS (Rec. 4-1 and 5-2)
If decision is to test patient, order PFAS serum or plasma test from a laboratory that 
meets standards that support 
quality and integrity of results
Sum concentrations of MeFOSAA, 
PFHxS, PFOA (linear and branched 
isomers), PFDA, PFUnDA, PFOS (linear and branched isomers), and PFNA (Rec. 5-3)
Provide appropriate clinical follow-up based on test result (Rec. 6-1–3)
Counsel patient on PFAS exposure 
reduction (rec 4-1–6)If decision is not to test patient, engage in shared informed decision making on 
PFAS exposure reduction and 
clinical follow-up If patient is unlikely to have a history of elevated exposure, discuss usual standard 
of care with patient
Consider 
retesting if: 
• Initial result 
seems too 
low or too 
high based 
on potential 
exposure 
history
• Exposure 
changes
If serum or 
plasma 
exposure is low 
and exposure 
should not 
have changed, 
retesting is of 
no or limited 
valueIf elevated exposure to PFAS: 
• Determine how patient is exposed and 
what exposures the patient is interested 
in reducing (Rec. 4-1). 
• Engage in shared informed decision 
making about PFAS testing (Rec. 5-2)
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  CONCLUSION 
 
The committee believes its clinical follow-up reco mmendations may be helpfu l to clinicians who 
have been asked to address PFAS-associated risks as part of routine health care delivery. There are 
potential harms both from aggressive clinical follow- up and from ignoring the risks of PFAS exposure. 
Clinicians and patients should decide which screen ing practices and services to pursue through a process 
of shared, informed decision making, along with cons ideration of the patients’ level of PFAS exposure 
and other risk factors they may have. For young child ren, these discussions will likely take place with the 
parents; for adolescents, shared, informed decision ma king is complicated and an active area of research 
(Boland et al., 2019). The committee’s patient follow- up recommendations should be updated as clinical 
practice guidelines change and as more is l earned about the health effects of PFAS. 
 
REFERENCES  
 
AHRQ (Agency for Healthcare Research and Qualit y). 2020. The CAHPS ambulatory care improvement 
guide: Practical strategies for improving patient  experience. https://www.ahrq.gov/cahps/quality-
improvement/improvement-guide/improvement- guide.html (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Bateman, B. T., K. M. Shaw, E. V. Kuklina, W. M. Callaghan, E. W. Seely, and S. Hernández-Díaz. 
2012. Hypertension in women of reproductive age in the United States: NHANES 1999–2008. 
PLOS ONE 7(4):e36171. https://doi.org / 10.1371/journa l.pone.0036171. 
Boland, L., I. D. Graham, F. Légaré, K. Lewis, J.  Jull, A. Shephard, M. L. Lawson, A. Davis, A. 
Yameogo, and D. Stacey. 2019. Barriers and facilitato rs of pediatric shared decision-making: A 
systematic review. Implementation Science  14(1):7. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-018-0851-5. 
C-8 Medical Panel. 2013. Information on the C-8 (PFOA) Medical Monitoring Program screening tests 
prepared by the medical panel for the C-8 class members . http://www.c-8medicalmonitoring 
program.com/docs/med_panel_education_doc .pdf (accessed January 28, 2022). 
C-8 Medical Panel. 2022. C-8 Medical Monitoring Program . http://www.c-
8medicalmonitoringprogram.com (accessed January 28, 2022). 
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2014. HTDS Guide—About thyroid disease: Section 
summary. https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/radiation/hanford/ htdsweb/guide/thyroid.htm (accessed 
January 28, 2022). 
Dahlhamer, J. M, E. P. Zammitti, B. W. Ward, A. G. Wheaton, and J. B. Croft. 2016. Prevalence of 
inflammatory bowel disease among adults aged ≥18 years—United States, 2015. Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report  65(42):1166–1169. 
Grundy, S, M., N. J. Stone, A. L. Bailey, C. Beam, K. K. Birtcher, R. S. Blumenthal, L. T. Braun, S. de 
Ferranti, J. Faiella-Tommasino, D. E. Forman, R. Goldberg, P. A. Heidenreich, M. A. Hlatky, D. 
W. Jones, D. Lloyd-Jones, N. Lopez-Pajares, C. E.  Ndumele, C. E. Orringer, C. A. Peralta, J. J. 
Saseen, S. C. Smith, L. Sperling, S. S. Virani, and J. Yeboah. 2019. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/ AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on the Management of Blood Cholesterol: A Report of the American Colle ge of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation  139(25):e1082–e1143. 
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000625.  
Hagan, J. F., J. S. Shaw, and P. M. Duncan (Eds.). 2017. Bright Futures guidelines for health supervision 
of infants, children, and adolescents : Adolescence visits: 11 through 21 years . 
https://brightfutures.aap.org/Bright%20Futures% 20Documents/BF4_InfancyVisits.pdf (accessed 
February 9, 2022). 
Hanauer, S. B. 2004. Update on the etiology, pathogenesis and diagnosis of ulcerative colitis. Nature 
Clinical Practice Gastroenterology & Hepatology  1(1):26–31. 
HRSA (Health Resources and Services Administration). 2018. Recommended uniform screening panel.  
https://www.hrsa.gov/advisory-committees/heritable- disorders/rusp/index.html (accessed January 
28, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Guidance for Clinicians on Exposure Determinati on, PFAS Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 151 
Prepublication Copy  Kilpatrick, S. J., L-A. Papile, and G. A. Macones (Eds.). 2017. Guidelines for perinatal care  (8th ed.). 
Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics. 
NCI (National Cancer Institute). n.d. Cancer stat facts: Testicular cancer.  
https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/test is.html (accessed January 28, 2022). 
NIDDK (National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases). 2017. Thyroid tests. 
https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diag nostic-tests/thyroid (accessed June 30, 2022). 
Privett, N., and S. Guerrier. 2021. Estimation of the time needed to deliver the 2020 USPSTF preventive 
care recommendations in primary care. American Journal of Public Health  111:145–149. 
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2020.305967. 
Richerson, J. E., G. R. Simon, J. J. Abularrage, A.  D. Arauz Boudreau, C. N. Baker, G. A. Barden, O. 
Brown, J. M. Hackell, and A. P. Hardin. 2017. Bright Futures guidelines. Pediatrics  139(4)85-87. 
Schrager, S. 2018. Five ways to communicate risks so that patients understand. Family Practice 
Management 25(6):18–31.   
USPSTF (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force). 2011. Testicular cancer: Screening.  
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/testicular-cancer-screening (accessed January 28, 2022). 
USPSTF. 2015. Thyroid dysfunction: Screening.  https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/ 
uspstf/recommendation/thyroid-dysfunction-screening (accessed January 28, 2022). 
USPSTF. 2016a. Breast cancer: Screening.  https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/ 
recommendation/breast-cancer-screening (accessed February 9, 2022). 
USPSTF. 2016b. Statin use for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults: Preventive 
medication. https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce. org/uspstf/recommendation/statin-use-in-
adults-preventive-medication (accessed February 9, 2022). 
USPSTF. 2017. Preeclampsia: Screening.  https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/ 
recommendation/preeclampsia-screening (accessed January 28, 2022). 
USPSTF. 2021. Hypertension in adults: Screening.  https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/ 
recommendation/hypertension-in-adults-scr eening (accessed January 28, 2022). 
USPSTF. 2022. Collaboration and shared decision-maki ng between patients and clinicians in preventive 
health care decisions and U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendations. JAMA 
327(12):1171–1176. http://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2022.3267.  
Wilson, J. M., and Y. G. Jungne r. 1968. [Principles and practice of mass screening for disease].  Boletín de 
la Oficina Sanitaria Panamericana  65(4):281–393. 
WPSI (Women’s Preventive Services Initiative). 2019. Women’s preventive services guidelines. 
https://www.hrsa.gov/womens-guidelines-2019 (accessed February 9, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
152  Prepublication Copy  7 
 
Revising ATSDR’s PFAS Clinical Guidance 
 
Since the potential for harmful effects of PFAS e xposure were made known to the public in 2000, 
clinicians have increasingly needed guidance on a dvising their communities regarding sources, routes, 
and effects of exposure, even as significant uncertainty  about the health effects of exposure remains (see 
Chapter 3). The C-8 Medical Panel was the first body to  offer clinical guidance regarding PFAS exposure, 
but the guidance was limited to members of the class action lawsuit (C-8 Medical Panel, 2013).1 In 
response to this increasing need from clinicians for advice about responding to th is environmental hazard, 
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Regist ry (ATSDR) published clinical guidance regarding 
PFAS exposure in December 2019 (ATSDR, 2019). 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CHANGES TO ATSDR’S CLINICAL GUIDANCE 
 
In accordance with its Statement of Task ( see Chapter 1), the committee in this chapter 
recommends several changes to ATSDR’s guidance to en sure consistency with the conclusions, findings, 
and recommendations in this report. The Statement of Task specifies three main considerations regarding 
changes to the guidance. The first two—decision making for PFAS testing and PFAS concentrations 
informing clinical care of exposed patients—are discu ssed in Chapter 5; the third—clinical follow-up care 
specific to PFAS exposure—is addressed in Chapter 6.  
The following recommendations illustrate the pot ential use of the information presented in 
previous chapters of this report:  
 
Recommendation 7-1: The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 
(ATSDR) should update its PFAS clinical guidance to make it more succinct and 
accord with the review of PFAS-associat ed health effects, exposure reduction 
considerations, PFAS testing recommendations and interpretation, and 
recommendations for clinical follow-up presen ted in this report. When describing 
the health effects of PFAS, ATSDR should avoid using terms typically used to categorize toxicants, such as “endocrine disrupter” or “neurotoxin,” because they 
are vague and not necessarily clinically mean ingful. When discussing the strength of 
the association between PFAS and a health  outcome, ATSDR should use standard 
categories of association (such as sufficien t evidence of an association, limited 
suggestive evidence of an association, in adequate or insufficient evidence of an 
association, and limited suggestiv e evidence of no association).  
 
Recommendation 7-2: The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 
(ATSDR) should incorporate a reader-centered approach when developing its 
guidance, with the knowledge that many di fferent audiences will turn to its clinical 
guidance document to prepare for discussi ons with their clinicians. ATSDR should 
also solicit feedback on the guidance from a variety of stakeholders, such as 
                                                           
1 See Chapter 1 for a brief overview of the lawsuit, Jack W. Leach et al. v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company  
(no. 01-C-608 W.Va., Wood County Circuit Court, filed April 10, 2002), and Chapter 6 for details regarding the 
clinical guidance for class members.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Revising ATSDR’s PFAS Clinical Guidance   153 
Prepublication Copy  community groups, practicing clinicians, and medical associations. In addition, 
ATSDR should encourage clinicians to use evidence-based organizational health 
literacy strategies to support shared, info rmed decision making; patient-centered 
care; cultural humility; and accessible langua ge when communicating with patients 
about potential health risks.  Recommendation 7-3: The Agency for T oxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) 
should develop a process for updating its PFAS guidance that adheres to criteria for 
making guidelines trustworthy, such as being based on a thorough, transparent, unbiased 
review of the evidence and being developed by a knowledgeable panel of experts free from 
strong biases and conflicts of interest. A review of  the evidence on the health effects of PFAS 
should be completed by an authoritative ne utral party every 2 years, and the clinical 
guidance should be updated every 5 years or sooner if warranted by the evidence on the 
health effects of PFAS. Clinicians and members of communities with elevated PFAS 
exposure should be engaged to inform the problem and review updated guidance. 
 
In addition to these considerations, the committee believed it would be useful to address some 
more technical aspects of the ATSDR guidance doc ument, including its writing and design and its 
dissemination and implementation. To  this end, the committee referred  to existing clinical guidance on 
PFAS exposure, as well as materials on health literacy  and health communication, including the Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality’s (AHRQ’s) Hea lth Literacy Universal Precautions Toolkit (Brega, 
2015) and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ (CMS’s) Toolkit for Making Written Material Clear and Effective (McGee, 2010). Given the Cent ers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) 
long-standing commitment to effective health comm unication (Donovan, 1995; Gagen and Kreps, 2019; 
Roper, 1993; Tinker and Silberberg, 1997), the commi ttee decided not to focus on the finer details of 
these considerations but on their high-level aspects.  
The committee reviewed several other materials publis hed by other organizations to aid clinicians 
in addressing exposure to PFAS and determining optio ns for clinical follow-up. Table 7-1 describes the 
clinical guidance documents published by the Pediatri c Environmental Health Specialty Units (PEHSUs), 
and PFAS Research, Education, and Action for Comm unity Health (PFAS-REACH) and identifies the 
strengths of each.    TABLE 7-1 Description of PFAS Clinical Guidance Documents 
Clinical Guidance Document Description of Content  Strengths of Document 
How to Conduct a Clinical Visit with 
Patients Concerned About PFA S 
(PEHSU, 2021) Includes a numbered list of five 
strategies for clinicians to use in 
discussing PFAS exposure with 
concerned patients and provides some detail on how to apply them.  
Also provides some references to other 
materials with further detail.  Focuses on empathy and shared decision 
making and the potential need for exposure 
reduction. Offers advice only for overall 
approaches to naviga ting discussions with 
patients, and directs clinicians to 
supplementary Pediatric Environmental 
Health Specialty Units (PEHSUs) and 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
Registry (ATSDR) resources. 
PFAS Exposure: Information for 
Patients and Guidance for Clinicians 
to Inform Patient and Clinician 
Decision Making: For Clinicians  
(PFAS-REACH, 2021) Summarizes clinical services 
recommended by other trustworthy 
groups for adults and children with 
above-average PFAS exposure. 
Categorizes information by type of 
service—laboratory tests, exams, or 
counseling topics Accessible summary of material produced by 
others.  
Does not claim to provide rigorous analysis 
of others’ findings.  
Does provide more information than the 
PEHSU document in an accessible format. 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  WRITING AND DESIGN OF ATSDR’S CLINICAL GUIDANCE  
 
The CMS Toolkit for Making Written Material Cl ear and Effective provides advice about paying 
attention to content, organization, writing st yle, engagement, and motivation (McGee, 2010):  
 
 “Content” relates to what readers want and need to know and whether the information 
provided is accurate and up to date.  
 The “organization” of the written material i nvolves how well the materi al paces readers by 
grouping information in meaningful sections. 
 “Writing style” refers to whether the text is  conversational and uses the active voice, is 
specific and concrete, and uses familiar  and culturally appropriate terms.  
 “Engagement and motivation” refers to whethe r the material has a positive and friendly tone, 
offers trustworthy information sources, provides relatable statistics, or offers information 
about how readers can learn more. 
 The CMS Toolkit also includes “design” pr inciples related to such matters as 
 
 overall design and page layout; 
 font, size of print, and contrast; 
 headings, lists, and blocks of text; 
 use of color; 
 photographs and illustrations; and 
 tables, charts, and diagrams (McGee, 2010). 
 
As noted above, the committee limited its attention to design intricacies and overall layout, other 
than noting that the ATSDR guidance document is likel y too long for the target audience of clinicians. 
Best practices for guidance (AAFP, 2021) include pr oviding recommendations that are specific, offer 
clear direction, and are succinct—principles cons istent with comments made to the committee by 
community members and clinicians (see Appendix B) . Incorporating such best practices and using a 
reader-centered approach will allo w ATSDR’s clinical guidance to reach and support as many clinicians 
(and other community members) as possible.   
DISSEMINATING AND IMPLEMENTING ATSDR’S CLINICAL GUIDANCE 
 
Process for Updating the Guidance 
 
In addition to updates to the ATSDR guidan ce stemming from this report, the committee 
proposes the establishment of a process for regularly updating the guidance (see Figure 7-1). The first 
step in that process is engaging with impacted comm unities to inform understanding of the issue at hand. 
It will also be important for ATSDR to update its reviews regarding PFAS-associated health effects, as 
well as to catalyze future research by identifying gaps  in the evidence. This process should include both a 
review of guidelines issued by other authoritative bodi es reflecting decisions about the health effects of 
PFAS and a review of the epidemiologic literature to  identify any new studies that may warrant updating 
or revising ATSDR’s own authoritative guidance. These reviews should be conducted by a neutral party 
every 2 years, or sooner if a watershed study, such  as a large cohort or nested case-control study, on 
PFAS exposure and health effects is  published before the next review is scheduled. AHRQ, the U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), and other organizations use similar processes that may be 
informative. One such process incl udes conducting “living” systematic reviews to continually update an 
existing review as new evidence becomes available (E lliott et al., 2017). It will be important in this 
process to incorporate reviews conducted by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, the National 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Revising ATSDR’s PFAS Clinical Guidance   155 
Prepublication Copy  Toxicology Program, and other authoritative bodi es. The committee proposes that ATSDR revise its 
guidance within 5 years of its 2021 analysis, consis tent with the timelines for updating of the National 
Guideline Clearinghouse (NGC) and the USPSTF. The process for updating the literature review should 
encompass studies on PFAS exposure reduction, incl uding those evaluating behavior change, 
interventions, or clinical measures, as well as studies on ri sk-based levels of PFAS to inform clinical care. 
It will also be important to review recomme ndations on standard care, as clinical follow-up 
recommendations would change if, for example, a beneficial screening test existed for a PFAS-associated health outcome. Finally, as noted above, the up dating process should incorporate approaches for 
assembling feedback from clinicians and community members prior to each review. It should also include 
processes for updated documents to be reviewed by cl inicians, in consultation with community members 
impacted by PFAS (see Figure 7-1 for an ove rview of this propo sed updating process). 
 
Transparency and Trustworthiness 
 
Transparency enhances the trust clinicians and others place in clinical guidance. To advise 
ATSDR in this regard, the committe e turned to the Institute of Medicine’s (IOM’s) standards for 
developing trustworthy clinical practice guide lines (CPGs) (IOM, 2011). The 2011 IOM report Clinical 
Practice Guidelines We Can Trust  defines CPGs as 
 
statements that include recommendations intended to optimize patient care. They are 
informed by a systematic review of evid ence and an assessment of the benefits and 
harms of alternative care options. (p. 15) 
  
 
FIGURE 7-1  Suggested framework for updating the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry’s 
(ATSDR’s) clinical guidance based on new evidence. 
 
 The definition also includes six attributes required to  make CPGs trustworthy, including that they  
 
 are based on a systematic review of the existing evidence; 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   are developed by a knowledgeable, multidisci plinary panel of experts and representatives 
from key affected groups; 
 consider important patient subgroups a nd patient preferences, as appropriate; 
 are based on an explicit and transparent process that minimizes distortions, biases, and 
conflicts of interest; 
 provide a clear explanation of the logical rela tionships between alternative care options and 
health outcomes, and provide ratings of bot h the quality of evidence and the strength of 
recommendations; and 
 are reconsidered and revised as appropriate  when important new evidence warrants 
modifications of recommendations (p. 26). 
 
The above definition of and standards for trustw orthiness are intended to distinguish CPGs as 
transparent and methodologically rigorous, evidence- based guidelines as compared with other important 
forms of clinical guidance, such as expert advice,  consensus statements, and practice bulletins. CPGs 
provide recommendations based on the balance of bene fits and harms of different interventions for 
preventing or treating disease. Although ATSDR may be  unable to issue CPGs regarding general PFAS 
exposure, as the complexity of the data may make a formal systematic review to inform such CPGs 
difficult, it should still strive to ensure that its clin ical guidance reflects these criteria when possible.  
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The need for clear clinical guidance regardi ng PFAS exposure has only increased, despite the 
remaining uncertainties regarding the specific health risks of exposure. Yet it is difficult to distill the 
necessary information for effective clinical practice with respect to PFAS exposure, its possible health 
effects, and options for shared decision making once exposure has been confirmed. In addition to the 
distillation of the information itself, moreover, the writing, design, and general implementation of the 
clinical guidance are as important and as complex as th e distillation of the information itself. This chapter 
offers recommendations that, if implemented, may assist ATSDR in its efforts to offer the guidance 
needed by clinicians. The committee believes ATSDR can continue to offer up-to-date, useful, and 
trustworthy clinical guidance by incorporating the updated data on the health effects of PFAS exposure 
presented in earlier chapters of this report, as well as adhering to the important risk communication and 
health literacy principles discussed above.   
REFERENCES 
 
AAFP (American Academy of Family Physicians). 2021. Clinical practice guidelines.  
https://www.aafp.org/family-physi cian/patient-care/clinical-
recommendations/definitions/cpg.html  (accessed December 28, 2021). 
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). 2019. PFAS: An overview of the science 
and guidance for clinicians on per- an d polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) . 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/pf as/docs/ATSDR_PFAS_ClinicalGu idance_12202019.pdf (accessed 
March 25, 2020). 
Brega, A. G., J. Barnard, N. M. Mabachi, B. D. Weiss, D. A. DeWalt, C. Brach, M. Cifuentes, K. 
Albright, and D. R. West. 2015. AHRQ health literacy universal precautions toolkit, second 
edition . Rockville, MD. AHRQ Publication No. 15-0023-EF. https://www.ahrq.gov/health-
literacy/improve/precautions/toolkit.ht ml (acessed July 1, 2022). 
C-8 Medical Panel. 2013. Information on the C-8 (PFOA) Medical Monitoring Program screening tests 
prepared by the medical panel for the C-8 class members . http://www.c-8medicalmonitoring 
program.com/docs/med_panel_education_doc .pdf (accessed January 28, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Revising ATSDR’s PFAS Clinical Guidance   157 
Prepublication Copy  Donovan, R. J. 1995. Steps in planning and developing health communication campaigns: A comment on 
CDC’s framework for health communication.  Public Health Reports  110(2):215–217. 
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/64183 (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Elliott, J. H., A. Synnot, T. Turner, M. Simmond, E. Akl, S. McDonald, G. Salanti, J, Meerpohl, H. 
MacLehose, J. Hilton, D. Tovey, I, Shemilt, and J. Thomas, on behalf of the Living Systematic 
Review Network. 2017. Living systematic review: 1. Introduction—the why, what, when, and how. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology  91:23–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2017.08.010.  
Gagen, D. M., and G. L. Kreps. 2019. An examinati on of the clarity of government health websites using 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Clear Communication Index. Frontiers in 
Communication  4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2019.00060.  
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2011. Clinical practice guidelines we can trust.  Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press. h ttps://doi.org/10.17226/13058. 
McGee, J. 2010. Toolkit for making written material clear and effective. Baltimore, MD: Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services. https://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-
Education/Outreach/WrittenMaterialsTo olkit (accessed July 1, 2022). 
PEHSU (Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit). 2021. How to conduct a clinical visit with 
patients concerned about PFAS exposure. https://deohs.washington.edu/pehsu/sites/deohs. 
washington.edu.pehsu/files/PFAS%20Clinical %20Visit%20tips%20for%20clinicians_AK_Jan%
202021.pdf (accessed June 30, 2022).  
PFAS-REACH (PFAS Research, Education, and Action for Community Health). 2021. PFAS exposure: 
Information for patients and guidance for clinicians to inform patient and clinician decision 
making—For people in PFAS-impacted communities. https://wordpress.silentspring.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/PFAS-REACH-Medi cal-screening-guidance_PFAS-impacted-
communities.pdf (accessed June 30, 2022). 
Roper, W. L. 1993. Health communication takes on new dimensions at CDC. Public Health Reports  
108(2):179. https://www.ncbi.nlm .nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1403358. 
Tinker, T. L., and P. G. Silberberg. 1997. An evaluation primer on health risk communication programs 
and outcomes . https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/risk/evalprimer /index.html (accessed June 28, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
158  Prepublication Copy  8 
 
Implementing the Committee’s Recommendations  
to Improve Public Health 
 
Improving public health requires the use of multifac eted approaches to emerging health issues. In 
environmental health—the subset of public health  focused on environmental factors—mitigation of 
potential harms associated with chemical exposures is often complicated because there is no exposure 
surveillance system for most chemicals. To address PFAS effectively as a public health issue, it will be 
important to identify the people and communities w ith high exposures to PFAS, improve environmental 
health education for both clinicians and the pub lic, and prevent exposur es. Thus, the committee’s 
recommendations would be most effective if implemen ted as part of a larger national effort toward 
increased PFAS-focused biomonitoring, exposure surv eillance, and education around environmental 
health. 
To promote a coordinated response to PFAS exposures, the committee makes the following 
recommendations: 
 
Recommendation 8-1: Laboratories conducting  PFAS testing of serum or plasma should 
report the results to state public health author ities, following the respective states’ statutes 
and reporting regulations. This reporting wo uld improve PFAS exposure surveillance; it 
could be linked with the Centers for Disease Co ntrol and Prevention’s environmental public 
health tracking network and help build ca pacity for improvements in the state-based 
national biomonitoring network. 
 
BIOMONITORING AND SURVEILLANCE 
 
PFAS exposure is nearly ubiquitous, but indivi dual levels of exposure are not consistently 
measured or documented (CDC, 2021; NASEM, 2020, 2021a ). Given the persistence of most PFAS in the 
human body, biomonitoring will likely produce meaningf ul exposure data, especially for those PFAS with 
longer half-lives. Collecting these data is critical to  identifying communities and other areas with elevated 
PFAS exposure. Failing to identify such communities ma gnifies existing disparities for those that already 
have limited access to health care, live in areas of hi gh exposure, and do not know that they may be at 
elevated risk for PFAS-associated health outcom es. Using biomonitoring data to establish exposure 
surveillance programs while also ensuring that medical  professionals and the publ ic have access to clear, 
accurate information about the risks of PFAS expos ure will improve public health overall while also 
empowering people and communities to safeguard their own health.  
According to the 2006 report by the National Research Council Human Biomonitoring for 
Environmental Chemicals :  
 
Identifying, controlling, and preventing population exposures to potentially harmful environmental chemicals have been cornerston es of U.S. environmental health efforts. 
Biomonitoring has become a tool that is cen tral to these efforts. (NRC, 2006, p. 1) 
 
While aggregate PFAS biomonitoring data can be used to promote population health, individual 
PFAS biomonitoring can provide people with info rmation about their personal exposures, which is 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Implementing the Committee’s Recommendati ons to Improve Public Health 159 
Prepublication Copy  important in informing clinical care (see Chapter 5). Therefore, access to PFAS blood tests for patients 
likely to have a history of elevated exposure as well as the results of those tests can help individuals better 
understand and, if possible, address their persona l risk from PFAS exposure. Additionally, while 
biomonitoring studies are important to identify exposed communities and study potential health 
outcomes, PFAS testing intended to inform an indi vidual’s medical care should be coordinated by 
clinicians to ensure appropriate care and follow-up.  
Improving access to PFAS blood testing for individua ls could also allow for the collection of 
aggregate biomonitoring data if the results were co mpiled into a database. As discussed in Chapter 5, 
public health professionals can use those data to determine reference ranges of PFAS exposure in the 
general population. Understa nding those ranges of exposure would s upport prioritization and allocation of 
funding and resources for preventive medicine or  public health actions. Other high-profile cases 
demonstrate this powerful use of biomonitoring data to improve public health practice, as occurred in 
2015 when Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha be gan reviewing her patients’ medical records and realized that the 
percentage of patients with elevated blood lead leve ls had increased after the city of Flint, Michigan, 
changed its water source.1  
In addition to informing clinical care, biomonito ring data can be used in establishing exposure 
surveillance programs. Biomonitoring-based exposure su rveillance enables public health practitioners and 
policy makers to identify exposure trends, mitigat e ongoing exposures, and study associations between 
exposures and disease outcomes (Goldman et al., 1995; Thacker et al., 1996). In contrast with agencies’ 
ongoing monitoring of environmental contaminants in ai r, soil, and water, there are few comprehensive 
databases or collection strategies for measuring and tr acking levels in exposed people (Latshaw et al., 
2017). The data that are currently collected, such as measurements from  the National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey (NHANES),2 often provide a snapshot of exposure that is useful in tracking 
nationwide trends in exposure over time, but cannot in form a localized public health response or help 
identify potential exposure “hot spots.” Additionall y, unlike the National Health Interview Survey,3 the 
NHANES does not list urban versus rural as a publicly  available variable, which limits researchers’ 
ability to identify potential location-based dispar ities in PFAS exposure. Without collecting and 
compiling comprehensive PFAS biomonitoring data, fe deral agencies are less able to prioritize highly 
exposed communities in their mitigation strategies. A dditionally, a lack of biomonitoring data limits 
studies on putative health effects, resulting in continue d uncertainty that hinders public health response. 
As Kristen Mello stated during the committee’s April 7, 2021, town hall, “Don’t avoid taking our data 
and then complain about data gaps.” 
An effective strategy for PFAS exposure surve illance would involve multip le levels of public 
health response (Colles et al., 2021; Eatman and St rosnider, 2017). As with U.S. programs on pediatric 
monitoring for lead exposure, laboratories would report the biomonitoring results, zip code, and 
demographic information to state health departments, which in turn would report the data to the federal 
government. Data collected by states could be more geographically granular than the data typically 
accessible through the NHANES, thereby enabling lo calized public health responses for highly 
contaminated areas (Nassif et al., 2021). Additionally,  hierarchical data collection and reporting processes 
might include repeated stopgaps and promote oversight to ensure that clinicians, researchers, and public 
health agencies were using the data as effectively as possible. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH EDUCATION 
 
If the use of biomonitoring data and environmental surveillance programs is to be most effective 
at preventing or at least minimizing clinical disease associated with exposure, clinicians and the public 
                                                      
1 See ww.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2018/06/25/623126968/pediatrician-who-exposed-flint-water-crisis-
shares-her-story-of-resistan ce (accessed June 17, 2022). 
2 See https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes /index.htm (accessed June 17, 2022). 
3 See https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nh is (accessed June 17, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  must have access to the information and know what to do with it. From a clinical perspective, providers 
need a better working knowledge of environmental health and chemical expos ures. At the committee’s 
town halls, speakers described their frustration with trying to obtain medical care from practitioners who 
were unfamiliar with PFAS and did not understand the environmental h ealth contexts of the communities 
in which they practiced. At the town hall on April 7, 2021, Hope Grosse said:  
When I would go to the doctors and tell them  about some of the exposures of over 50 
chemicals that I was exposed to, the doctors would laugh and say no. Clearly, they 
didn’t have any information about envir onmental components [of disease]. They made 
me feel small; they made me feel stupid and embarrassed even just asking the question. 
 
The National Academies has previously acknowledged the issue of limited clinical education in 
environmental health. The 1991 Ins titute of Medicine (IOM) report Addressing the Physician Shortage in 
Occupational and Environmental Medicine: Report of a Study  notes that all levels of medical education, 
from undergraduate to graduate and co ntinuing education programs, provide limited, if any, training in 
occupational and environmental medicine. The repor t recommends that occupational and environmental 
medicine concepts be introduced early and cont inuously during medical education (IOM, 1991). 
Likewise, Environmental Medicine: Integrating a Missing Element into Medical Education notes a need 
for more environmentally literate physicians (IO M, 1995a). Decades later, however, Green-McKenzie 
and colleagues (2021) found that only 70 percent of  medical students had heard of occupational and 
environmental medicine, and most of them had r eceived only one lecture on the topic. After medical 
school, residency programs align with specialty require ments, which may not include further training in 
environmental and occupational medicine. In addition to  the more formal medical training doctors receive 
in medical school and residency programs, professional associations such as the American Medical 
Association,
4 the American College of Preventive Medicine,5 and the American College of Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine6 offer continuing medical educa tion modules on environmental health. 
However, these modules are optional, meaning that physicians may not learn about environmental and 
occupational medicine after medical school, either. 
Physicians are not alone in their limitations with  respect to environmental health education. 
According to the 1995 IOM report Nursing, Health, and the Environmen t: Strengthening the Relationship 
to Improve the Public’s Health , “environmental health currently receives scant attention in nursing 
education and research” (IOM, 1995b, p. 14). The report calls for more nurses with education in 
environmental health, given that nurses represent the largest proportion of the health care workforce. 
Similarly, a recent commentary on the nursing profession notes that most nurses do not see themselves as 
environmental health practitioners or scientists  (McCauley and Hayes, 2021). To address this 
shortcoming, environmental health is now a recommended domain for nursing education (NASEM, 
2021b); in addition, nurses may need additional continuing education on  environmental health topics. 
Continuing education of clinicians is importa nt to address knowledge gaps in environmental 
health. Increasing the opportunities for clinician edu cation in environmental a nd occupational medicine; 
promoting collaborative, interdisciplinary environm ental health networks; and framing environmental 
health as a tenet of preventive medicine and primar y care are essential to ensure proper medical care for 
those facing environmental exposures and to assist fa milies in reducing exposures when possible. One 
resource that can be leveraged to help respond to e nvironmental exposures is the Pediatric Environmental 
Health Specialty Units (PEHSUs). ATSDR funds th e PEHSUs with support from EPA. The PEHSUs are 
a “national network of experts in the prevention, di agnosis, management, and treatment of health issues 
that arise from environmental exposures from preconception through adolescence.”3 While the primary 
                                                      
4 See https://www.ama-assn.org  (accessed June 17, 2022). 
5 See https://www.acpm.org (accessed June 17, 2022). 
6 See https://acoem.org (accessed June 17, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Implementing the Committee’s Recommendati ons to Improve Public Health 161 
Prepublication Copy  focus is reproductive and children’s health, clinicians  will work with the whole family in determining 
exposure pathways and reducing these exposures. The PEHSU network includes nurses, physicians, 
medical toxicologists, and public health professi onals and promotes collaboration among these diverse 
groups of practitioners. The network provides contin uing education opportunities and information on 
PFAS for both health care professionals and community  members. PEHSU-affiliated practitioners have 
proposed concrete environmental health competency  areas for medical education programs (Goldman et 
al., 2021). Similarly, the Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments (ANHE)7 addresses environmental 
exposures and health, including PFAS and related clinical care, in va rious online resources and engages 
with universities to integrate environmental hea lth into their nursing education curricula. Other 
organizations, such as the Children’ s Environmental Health Network,8 also provide educational materials 
in environmental health for health care providers. 
Many public health practitioners  have received training in environmental health because until 
recently, it was a required component of master of  public health (M.P.H.) programs; however, the 
curriculum for public health is changing. In 2016, the Council on Education for Public Health (CEPH) 
released new accreditation criteria, aimed at offering sc hools of public health greater flexibility in course 
offerings and students a more a pplied, practice-based education.9 With these more flexible coursework 
requirements, the CEPH removed the explicit requireme nt for education in environmental health sciences, 
replacing it and the other core disciplines with a serie s of competencies. This change may inadvertently 
lead to reduced environmental health training for public health professionals.10 Indeed, by December 
2019, just 91 percent of accredited M.P.H. programs c ontinued to offer a concentration in environmental 
health sciences.11 Addressing such challenges as PFAS requi res a public health workforce with 
competency in environmental health sciences, t oxicology, and epidemiology, which is why the 
Association for Prevention Teaching and Research ca lls on schools and programs in public health to 
maintain existing environmental health content and de velop such content if previously eliminated or 
never offered (Levy et al., 2022).12  
The public’s environmental health literacy comp lements clinician education in environmental 
health by promoting individuals’ personal health  decision making while galvanizing communities to 
demand population-level public  health responses. Historically, health literacy as a concept centered on 
individual decision making based on an understanding of  health information. In Healthy People 2030, 
however, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) expanded the definition to 
encompass organizations’ responsibility to ensure th at individuals have acc ess, understanding, and 
services to inform their health d ecisions, a concept HHS refers to as organizational health literacy.13  
The term health literacy  as used in this report focuses on Nutbeam’s (2000) second and third 
levels of health literacy—interactive and critical  literacy—which emphasize empowerment, autonomy, 
and action. More specifically, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) authors Finn 
and O’Fallon (2017) describe environmental health literacy as  
 
a philosophical perspective, a public hea lth policy to improve literacy and health 
literacy in the general public, and a set of  strategies to empower individuals and 
communities to exert control over the envi ronmental exposures that may lead to 
adverse health outcomes. (p. 495) 
                                                      
7 See https://envirn.org (accessed June 17, 2022). 
8 See https://cehn.org ( accessed June 17, 2022). 
9 See https://media.ceph.org/do cuments/Environmental_Health.p df (accessed June 17, 2022). 
10 See http://www.pub lichealthnewswire.org/?p=enviro nmental-health-in-education (accessed June 17, 2022). 
11 See https://media.ceph.org/do cuments/Environmental_Health.p df (accessed June 17, 2022). 
12 See https://www.aptrweb .org/page/ClimateChange (accessed June 17, 2022). 
13 See https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/hea lth-literacy-healthy-people-2030/history-health-literacy-
definitions (accessed June 17, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Building on the concept of health literacy, environm ental health literacy has three dimensions: (1) 
awareness and knowledge of an environmental exposure,  (2) skills and self-efficacy that allow individuals 
to make decisions to protect their own health, a nd (3) community change based on actions that reduce 
environmental exposures and protect public health  (Gray, 2018). The committee recognizes that many 
exposures to PFAS are beyond individual control, and placing the onus for action on individuals often 
imposes an undue burden. Nevertheless, environmenta l health literacy can empower people to understand 
their own risks and ask their providers informed qu estions. As demonstrated by the community liaisons 
and town hall speakers who contributed to this stud y, many individuals have already worked especially 
hard to access information and educate themselves on PFAS.  
In keeping with the principle of reducing the burden on exposed community members, PFAS-
related environmental health literacy should cen ter on making PFAS research publicly available and 
understandable for general audiences. Open access publi cation platforms are more accessible than those 
that are behind paywalls. Summaries written in plain language for the lay public, as blogs, news articles, 
and podcasts would be even better for increasing awareness about PFAS. Such resources as ATSDR’s 
ToxFAQs14; Northeastern University’s PFAS-TOX Database15; the PFAS Research, Education, and 
Action for Community Health PFAS Exchange16; and the Environmental Working Group’s PFAS 
Contamination in the U.S. map17 distill key information for the public  and may serve as models for other 
environmental health literacy work. Other online res ources, such as Purdue University’s Online Writing 
Lab, describe considerations for evaluating the credib ility of online sources that can serve as a guide for 
both those developing and those using the resources.18 People must have access to information that can 
help them make health decisions and advo cate for the health of their communities. 
 
BARRIERS TO IMPLEMENTATION 
  Barriers to the committee’s proposed implementa tion approach include difficulties with PFAS 
testing, lack of data standardization, poor coor dination among experts from different disciplines, and a 
lack of funding for and availability of education in environmental and o ccupational medicine and 
environmental health literacy activities. Few laborator ies currently have the capability to test for PFAS. 
The testing methodology is complex, and not all PFAS can be detected in serum or plasma. Data 
standardization is also a challenge (Latshaw et  al., 2017) given the variability in testing methods, 
participant demographics, and exposure sources. As no ted in Chapter 5 of this report, PFAS testing is 
expensive, and limiting the availability of testing b ased on access to consistent clinical care and insurance 
coverage could exacerbate health disparities in e xposed communities. Furthermore, comprehensive PFAS 
exposure surveillance requires collaboration among a range of experts across different fields (Nassif et al., 
2021); training in environmental and occupational medi cine and environmental health is lacking; and 
support for PFAS health literacy is limited. 
 Given widespread PFAS exposure and the putative h ealth effects associated with these chemicals, 
public health authorities would do well to prioritize a ddressing these barriers. Laboratory capacity to test 
for PFAS could be increased through coordination with the Association of Public Health Laboratories. 
Biomonitoring data and exposure surveillance program s could be standardized as long as they were 
developed with structures in place to ensure that the data were collected with the intent of their being 
comparable. The Network Steering Committee of the National Biomonitoring Network provides a template for successful implementation (Nassif et al., 2021).  
                                                      
14 See https://wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/ToxFAQs/ToxFAQ sLanding.aspx (accessed June 17, 2022). 
15 See https://pfasproject.com/pfas-toxi c-database (accessed June 17, 2022). 
16 See https://pfas-exchange.o rg (accessed June 17, 2022). 
17 See https://www.ewg.org/interactive-maps/pfas_ contamination/map (accessed June 17, 2022). 
18 See https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/research_and_c itation/conducting_research/evaluating_sources_ 
of_information/evaluating_ digital_sources.html ( accessed June 17, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Implementing the Committee’s Recommendati ons to Improve Public Health 163 
Prepublication Copy   Finally, continuing education opportunities such  as “train-in-place” programs allow clinicians to 
learn environmental and occupational medicine c oncepts during the course of their ongoing practice 
(Green-McKenzie et al., 2021). Optimizing these program s and other innovative education strategies, as 
well as planning communication efforts as part of biomonitoring studies (NRC, 2006), can increase environmental health knowledge without re quiring unattainable funding allocations.  
 
MOVING FORWARD 
  Based on the recommendations and conclusions of  this report, ATSDR, NIEHS, environmental 
health organizations, and bodies res ponsible for clinical education can take specific actions to address 
issues of PFAS contamination and clinical care, which will ultimately lead to improved public health (see 
Figure 8-1). By updating its PFAS clinical guidance according to the recommendations in Chapter 7, 
ATSDR will lay the groundwork for clinicians to participate in shared decision making and provide 
informed care for individuals exposed to PFAS. A ccess to informed care will allow communities with 
elevated exposure to PFAS to receive relevant medical advice, testing, screening, and treatment. In addition to improved guidance on clinical care,  coordination between ATSDR and the National 
Biomonitoring Network will allow for the expansion of  testing and surveillance. Additional communities 
identified as having elevated PFAS exposur es can then receive informed care. 
 Additionally, NIEHS can use the information in  this report to translate the research gaps 
identified in Chapter 3 into resear ch needs, prioritizing research on potential associations between PFAS 
exposure and adverse health outcomes where the evid ence is limited. As the research gaps narrow, 
ATSDR can update its clinical guidance to ensure that clinicians’ knowledge  and monitoring of PFAS-
associated health outcomes remains current.   Environmental health education for clinicians and the public is key to reducing PFAS exposure 
and ensuring shared decision making and appropriate  follow-up. Introductory environmental health 
training provides the foundation for PFAS-specific clinical education. Given this, the Liaison Committee on Medical Education,
19 the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education,20 the American 
Board of Medical Specialties,21 the Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing,22 and other 
bodies responsible for curricula and accreditation of  clinician education programs may consider 
incorporating environmental health into clinician trai ning. Input from such interdisciplinary organizations 
as PEHSUs and ANHE can support these efforts. State and local health departments may serve as a link 
between the public and clinicians and proactively provide current information about environmental 
exposures to the communities they serve. Health depa rtments could receive support for this work through 
liaison organizations funded by the Centers for Dise ase Control and Prevention, including the National 
Association of County and City Health Officials23 and the Association of State and Territorial Health 
Officials.24 Intentional collaboration at every level—from c linician education; to community partnerships; 
to local, state, and federal government initiatives—will  begin closing the gaps in environmental health 
infrastructure and training, facilitating the overdue coor dinated response and clinical care that people with 
elevated PFAS exposures deserve. 
These efforts in environmental exposure surve illance, environmental health literacy, and 
improved environmental health tracking will aid in  continuing to identify communities impacted by 
PFAS, which in turn will support exposure mitigation and effective preventive medicine responses. As 
the committee looks forward, it sees a pressing need for a robust environmental health infrastructure to 
                                                      
19 See https://lcme.org (accessed June 17, 2022). 
20 See https://www.acgme.org  (accessed June 17, 2022). 
21 See https://www.abms.org (accessed June 17, 2022). 
22 See https://www.acenursing.or g (accessed June 17, 2022). 
23 See https://www.naccho.org  (accessed June 17, 2022). 
24 See https://www.a stho.org (accessed June 17, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, T esting, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  continue to respond to PFAS, as well as to address ot her complex emerging and pe rsistent environmental 
challenges.  
 
 
 
FIGURE 8-1  Recommended approach to mitigating PFAS exposure and adverse health outcomes. 
NOTE: ASTHO = Association of State and Territorial Health  Officials; ATSDR = Agency  for Toxic Substances and 
Disease Registry; NACCHO = National Association of County and City Health Officials; NIEHS = National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; PEHSU = Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit. 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2021. Fourth national report on human exposure to 
environmental chemicals, updated tables . Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. https://www.cdc.gov/biomonitoring/pd f/fourthreport_updatedtables_feb2015.pdf 
(accessed June 28, 2022). 
Colles, A., D. Coertjens, B. Morrens, E. Den Hond, M. Paulussen, L. Bruckers, E. Govarts, A. Covaci, G. 
Koppen, K. Croes, V. Nelen, N. Van Larebeke, S. De Henauw, T. Fierens, G. Van Gestel, H. 
Chovanova, M. Mampaey, K. Van Campenhout, I. L oots, W. Baeyens, and G. Schoeters. 2021. 
Human biomonitoring data enables evidence-info rmed policy to reduce internal exposure to 
persistent organic compounds: A case study. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health  18(11):5559. https://doi.org /10.3390/ijerph18115559.  
Eatman, S., and H. M. Strosnider. 2017. CDC’s Nati onal Environmental Public Health Tracking Program 
in action: Case studies from state and local health departments. Journal of Public Health 
Management and Practice  23(Suppl 5):S9–S17. https://doi.org/10.1097/phh.0000000000000640.  
Finn, S., and L. O’Fallon. 2017. The emergence of e nvironmental health literacy—From its roots to its 
future potential. Environmental Health Perspectives  125(4):495–501. 
https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1409337. 
Goldman, L. R., H. Anton-Culver, M. Kharrazi, and E. Blake. 1995. Banking of human tissue for 
biomonitoring and exposure assessment: U tility for environmental epidemiology and 
surveillance. Environmental Health Perspectives  103:31–34. https://doi.org/10.2307/3432557. 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Implementing the Committee’s Recommendati ons to Improve Public Health 165 
Prepublication Copy  Goldman, R. H., L. Zajac, R. J. Geller, and M.  D. Miller. 2021. Developing and implementing core 
competencies in children’s environmental health for students, trainees, and healthcare providers: 
A narrative review. BMC Medical Education  21:503. https://doi.org /10.3390/ijerph15030466.  
Gray, K. M. 2018. From content knowledge to co mmunity change: A review of representations of 
environmental health literacy. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health  15:466. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15030466. 
Green-McKenzie, J., U. Savanoor, H. Duran, C. Jones, D. Vearrier, P. Malak, E. Emmett, and F. Shofer. 
2021. Outcomes of a survey-based approach to dete rmine factors contributing to the shortage of 
occupational medicine physicians in the United States. Journal of Public Health Management & 
Practice 27(3 Suppl):S200–S205. htps://doi.org/10.1097/PHH.0000000000001315. 
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 1991. Addressing the physician shortage in  occupational and environmental 
medicine: Report of a study.  Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
https://doi.org/10.17226/9494. 
IOM. 1995a. Environmental medicine: Integrating a missing element into medical education.  
Washington, DC: National Academy Pr ess. https://doi.org/10.17226/4795  
IOM. 1995b. Nursing, health, and the environment.  Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
https://doi.org/10.17226/4986. 
Latshaw, M. W., R. Degeberg, S. S. Patel, B. Rhodes, E. King, S. Chaudhuri, and J. Nassif. 2017. 
Advancing environmental health surveillance in  the US through a national human biomonitoring 
network. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 220(2):98–102. 
Levy, C. R., L. M. Phillips, C. J. Murray, L. A. Ta llon, and R. M. Caron. 2022. Addressing gaps in public 
health education to advance envir onmental justice: Time for action. American Journal of Public 
Health  112(1):69–74. https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2021.306560. 
McCauley, L., and R. Hayes. 2021. From Florence to fossil fuels: Nursing has always been about 
environmental health. Nursing Outlook 69(5):720–731. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2021.06.007.  
NASEM (National Academies of Sciences , Engineering, and Medicine). 2020. Understanding, 
controlling, and preventing exposure to PFAS : Proceedings of a workshop—in brief.  
Washington, DC: The National Academies Pr ess. https://doi.org/10.17226/25856.  
NASEM. 2021a. Federal government human health PFAS research workshop: Proceedings of a 
workshop—in brief.  Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
https://doi.org/10.17226/26054.  
NASEM. 2021b. The future of nursing 2020–2030: Charti ng a path to achieve health equity.  
Washington, DC: The National Academies Pr ess. https://doi.org/10.17226/25982.  
Nassif, J., A. M. Calafat, and K. M. Aldous. 20 21. The U.S. national biomonitoring network—Enhancing 
capability and capacity to assess human chemical exposures. International Journal of Hygiene 
and Environmental Health  237:113828. https://doi.org /10.1016/j.ijheh.2021.113828. 
NRC (National Research Council). 2006. Human biomonitoring for environmental chemicals. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Pr ess. https://doi.org/10.17226/11700.  
Nutbeam, D. 2000. Health literacy as a public health goal: A challenge for contemporary health education 
and communication strategies into the 21st century. Health Promotion International  15(3):259–
257. https://doi.org/10.1097/PHH.0000000000001315.  
Thacker, S. B., D. F. Stroup, R. G. Parrish, and H.  A. Anderson. 1996. Surv eillance in environmental 
public health: Issues, systems, and sources. American Journal of Public Health  86(5):633–638. 
https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.86.5.633.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166  Prepublication Copy  Appendix A 
 
Committee Member, Staff, and Community Liaison Biographies 
 
COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
 
Bruce N. Calonge, M.D., M.P.H. (NAM) (Chair ), is an associate professor of family medicine at the 
Colorado School of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, and an associate professor of 
epidemiology at the Colorado School of Public Health . He most recently served as the president and chief 
executive officer of The Colorado Trust, a private gr ant-making foundation dedicated to achieving health 
equity for all Coloradans. Nationally, Dr. Calonge  chairs the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention’s (CDC’s) Task Force on Community Preven tive Services; chairs the National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s Board on Popula tion Health and Public Health Practice; and is a 
member of the National Academies’ Roundtable on the Promotion of Health Equity. He is the past chair 
of the U.S. Preventive Services Ta sk Force, the past chair of the CDC’s Evaluation of Genomic 
Applications in Practice and Prevention Working Group,  and a past member of the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services’ Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in Newborns and Children. Prior to 
coming to The Colorado Trust, Dr. Calonge was the ch ief medical officer of the Colorado Department of 
Public Health and Environment. He received his B. A. in chemistry from Colorado College; his M.D. from 
the University of Colorado; and his M.P.H. from the University of Washington, where he also completed 
his preventive medicine residency. Additionally, Dr. Calonge completed his family medicine residency at 
the Oregon Health & Science University.  
Laura Anderko, Ph.D.,  RN, is an environmental health nurse consultant and the co-director of the 
Federal Region 3 Pediatric Environmen tal Health Specialty Unit (PEHSU) of the Mid-Atlantic Center for 
Children’s Health and the Environment at the M. Louise Fitzpatrick College of Nursing, Villanova 
University. Prior to joining Villanova University, sh e held the Robert and Kathleen Scanlon Chair in 
Values Based Health Care and was a professor at the School of Nursing & Health Studies at Georgetown 
University. Dr. Anderko is an educator, clinician, a nd scholar in public health, nursing, and environmental 
health. Over the past 8 years in her role with th e Region 3 PEHSU, she has consulted with and educated 
local governments, communities, families, and health  professionals about potential health impacts and 
risk-reduction strategies for PFAS. She has published extensively on PFAS, focusing on the clinicians’ 
role in addressing health impacts and strategies for reducing risks. Dr. Anderko has served on several 
federal advisory committees, including the Children’s Health Protection Advisory Committee for the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, and is a founding member and steering committee member of the Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments. She cu rrently serves as a special advisor for the National 
Environmental Health Partnership C ouncil, coordinated by the American  Public Health Association. Dr. 
Anderko was recognized by the Obama White House as a Champion of Change for her efforts in climate 
change and public health. She received her M.S. in  nursing from Northern Illinois University and her 
Ph.D. in public health from the University of Illinois Chicago. 
 
Erin M. Bell, Ph.D., is a professor in the Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and the 
Department of Environmental Health Sciences in the Sc hool of Public Health of the University at Albany. 
She joined the faculty at the University at Alba ny after completing her postdoctoral training at the 
National Cancer Institute’s Occupa tional and Environmental Epidemiology Branch. Dr. Bell has taught 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A 167 
Prepublication Copy  epidemiology and environmental health to undergra duate and graduate students for almost 20 years, 
serving most recently as the faculty director of th e undergraduate program in public health at the 
University at Albany. She is also an affiliate with  the Center for Social and Demographic Analysis. Her 
research studies focus on environmental exposures as th ey relate to reproductive, immune, and cancer 
outcomes. Dr. Bell is currently the co–principal i nvestigator of two cohort studies: the Upstate KIDS 
study, which follows more than 6,000 children to id entify potential risk factors for developmental health 
effects, and the Health Study of New York State Communities Exposed to PFAS Contaminated Drinking 
Water, funded by the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry as one of seven sites 
participating in the Multi-site PFAS Health Stud y. She has served on several committees with the 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, including the Committee to Review the 
Health Effects in Vietnam Veterans of Exposure to  Herbicides: Seventh, Eighth, and Tenth Biennial 
Updates. Dr. Bell received her M.S. in epidem iology and biostatistics from the University of 
Massachusetts Amherst and her Ph.D. in epidemiology  from the University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill. 
 
Dana Boyd Barr, Ph.D., is a research professor at the Emory Univ ersity Rollins School of Public Health, 
where she co-directs the Laboratory for Exposure Assessment and Development in Environmental 
Research and leads research within the National In stitutes of Health–funded Human Exposome Research 
Center: Understanding Lifetime Exposures (HERCULES) . Her research focuses on using analytical 
chemistry techniques to assess exposure to toxicants, prim arily related to maternal and child health. Prior 
to joining the faculty at Emory, Dr. Boyd Barr worked  for 23 years at the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), where she devoted much of her time to the development of methods for assessing 
human exposure to a variety of environmental toxicant s. She is the past president of the International 
Society of Exposure Science (ISES), former editor-in-chief of the Journal of Exposure Science and 
Environmental Epidemiology , and the current deputy editor for Environmental Health Perspectives . Dr. 
Boyd Barr has received many awards for her resear ch, including ISES’s Daisy Award for Outstanding 
Investigator, two awards from the Secretary of  Health and Human Services for exposure-health 
investigations involving diethylene glycol and meth yl parathion poisoning, the 2004 Federal Scientific 
Employee of the Year award, the CDC’s Mackel Award for outstanding collaboration among 
epidemiology and laboratory, and the U.S. Envi ronmental Protection Agency’s Silver Medal for 
outstanding service to environmental health. In 2 014, 2015, and 2016, she was designated by Thomson 
Reuters as a Highly Cited Scientist in environment/eco logy, representing the top 1 percent of scientists in 
her field. She recently became a member of the Na tional Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine’s Division on Earth and Life Studies’ Board on Environmental Studies and Toxicology. Dr. 
Boyd Barr received her Ph.D. in analytical chemistry from Georgia State University.  
Kevin C. Elliott, Ph.D., is a professor at Michigan State Universi ty (MSU) with joint appointments in the 
Lyman Briggs College, the Department of Fisheries a nd Wildlife, and the Department of Philosophy. His 
research lies at the intersection of the philosophy of science, research ethics, and environmental ethics, 
exploring the roles of ethical and social values in  scientific research on environmental pollution, as well 
as ethical issues related to science communication, science policy, and team science. Dr. Elliott has 
authored a wide range of articles and book chapters and has published two books with Oxford University 
Press: Is a Little Pollution Good for You?: Incorporat ing Societal Values in Environmental Research  
(2011) and A Tapestry of Values: An Introduction to Values in Science  (2017). He has also co-edited two 
books: Exploring Inductive Risk: Case Studies of Values in Science  (with Ted Richards, Oxford 
University Press, 2017) and Current Controversies in Values and Science  (with Dan Steel, Routledge 
Press, 2017). Dr. Elliott served as the program committee chair for the 2018 meeting of the Philosophy of 
Science Association and is the associate editor for the journal Philosophy of Science
. He served as a 
member of the advisory council for the National Ins titute of Environmental Health Sciences from 2014 to 
2018 and is currently a member of the MSU Ce nter for PFAS Research. Dr. Elliott has served on 
organizing committees and workshops with the Natio nal Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Medicine, including the Committee on the Use of Emer ging Science for Environmental Health Decisions. 
He received his Ph.D. and M.A. in history and philo sophy of science from the University of Notre Dame. 
 
Melissa Gonzales, Ph.D., M.S., is a professor and the chair in the Department of Environmental Health 
Sciences at the Tulane University School of Public  Health and Tropical Medicine. She formerly was a 
professor in the Division of Epidemiology, Biostatisti cs, and Preventive Medicine at the University of 
New Mexico (UNM) School of Medicine. At UNM she was the co-director of UNM’s Center for Native Environmental Health Equity Research; director of evaluation for the vice chancellor’s Office of 
Diversity; and associate vice chancellor for research and evaluation in the Office of Diversity, Equity and 
Inclusion at the UNM Health Sciences Center. As an  environmental health scientist with expertise in 
exposure assessment and epidemiology, Dr. Gonzal es’s community-engaged, translational research 
focuses on understanding the contribution of environm ental exposure to health disparities, rural and 
minority health, and the translation of research for im proved health equity through informed policy. Her 
research and leadership roles at UNM include ser ving in the Metal Exposure Toxicity Assessment on 
Tribal Lands in the Southwest Superfund Center, and the Transdisciplinary Research, Equity, and 
Engagement Center for Advancing Behavioral H ealth. Her work includes the Albuquerque Hispanic 
Moms Study, the Zuni Exposure Study, the Colorectal Disease Prevention Study, and the UNM–
University of Texas at El Paso ARCH study of asthma and air pollution among children living on the 
U.S.-Mexico border. Dr. Gonzales has previously ser ved on two committees with the National Academies 
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine: the Comm ittee to Review the Health Effects in Vietnam 
Veterans of Exposure to Herbicides: Tenth Biennial Update, and the Committee to Evaluate the Potential 
Exposure to Agent Orange/TCDD Residue and Level of Risk of Adverse Health Effects for Aircrew of 
Post-Vietnam C-123 Aircraft. She received her M.S. in toxicology/industrial hygiene at the University of 
Arizona College of Pharmacy and her Ph.D. in enviro nmental health at the University of California, 
Berkeley, School of Public Health. 
 
Erin N. Haynes, Ph.D., is the Kurt W. Deuschle Professor in Preventive Medicine and Environmental 
Health and the chair of the Departments of Epidem iology and Preventive Medicine and Environmental 
Health within the University of Kentucky (UK) College  of Public Health. She is the deputy director of the 
National Institutes of Health’s (NIH’s) National Ins titute of Environmental Health Sciences’ (NIEHS’s) 
UK Center for Appalachian Research in Environmental Sciences; associate director of the UK Center for Clinical and Translational Science; co-chair of the NIEHS Disaster Research Response Committee; and 
senior associate editor of the Journal of Appalachian Health . Her current research, funded by NIEHS, 
focuses on investigating the effects of neurotoxicant exposure, particularly me tals, on neurodevelopment 
in rural adolescents, and development and validation of  a real-time, lab-on-a-chip sensor for blood metals 
detection. Dr. Haynes works with community memb ers to address environmental health issues and 
develops citizen science tools to enable envir onmental health research. She also serves on the 
NIH/NIEHS Environmental Health Sciences study section and as an academic counselor for the International Society of Exposure Science. Dr. Hayn es received her M.S. in environmental genetics and 
molecular toxicology from the University of Cinci nnati, and her Dr.P.H. in environmental health sciences 
from the University of Michigan.  
 
Jane Hoppin, S.M., Sc.D., is a professor of biological sciences and the deputy director of the Center for 
Human Health and the Environment at North Caro lina State University. Her research focuses on how 
epidemiologic evidence can inform mechanisms of disease from environmental exposures. Dr. Hoppin is 
currently leading a National Institutes of Health–funde d study of PFAS exposures in the Cape Fear River 
basin, as well as a study evaluating the impact of p esticide exposure to residents in the banana-growing 
region of Costa Rica. She has authored more than 200 publications related to exposure assessment for 
chemicals in the environment and health outcomes. Dr. Hoppin previously spent almost 15 years at the 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,  working on the Agricultural Health Study. She 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A 169 
Prepublication Copy  received her S.M. and Sc.D. in environmental hea lth and epidemiology from the Harvard T.H. Chan 
School of Public Health.  
Tamarra James-Todd, Ph.D., M.P.H.,  is the Mark and Catherine Winkler Assistant Professor of 
Environmental Reproductive and Perinatal Epidemiology  at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public 
Health, an associate epidemiologist at Brigham and Wo men’s Hospital, and an instructor in medicine at 
Harvard Medical School. Her research expertise is in reproductive and developmental outcomes 
following exposure to environmental risk factors. Spec ifically, she evaluates the impact of pregnancy as a 
sensitive period of environmental chemical exposur e for women’s cardiometab olic health across the 
reproductive life course. Dr. James-Todd is the pr incipal investigator (PI) of the Environmental 
Reproductive and Glucose Outcomes (ERGO) Study, wh ich evaluates the impact of environmental 
chemicals and glucose metabolism during the perinatal pe riod. She is also the PI of a study evaluating the 
effects of PFAS exposure on maternal cardiometabolic  health across the reproductive life course within 
the Project Viva pregnancy/birth cohort. Dr. James-Todd has a particular focus on racial and ethnic 
disparities in environmental exposures and women’s re productive health outcomes. She has served on the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Scientific  Advisory Board for the Chemical Assessment 
Advisory Committee and on the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s 
Committee for Gulf War and Health: Volume 11: Generati onal Health Effects of Serving in the Gulf War. 
Dr. James-Todd received her M.P.H. in international h ealth from the Boston University School of Public 
Health and her Ph.D. in epidemiology from Columbia University. 
 
Alex R. Kemper, M.D.,  is the division chief of primary care pediatrics at Nationwide Children’s Hospital 
and a professor of pediatrics at The Ohio State Univer sity College of Medicine. The focus of his research 
is the evaluation of preventive services delivered in the primary care setting. Dr. Kemper currently serves 
as the chair of the Evidence Review Workgroup fo r the Secretary of Health and Human Services’ 
Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in Newb orns and Children and as the deputy editor of 
Pediatrics . He is a former member of the U.S. Prev entive Services Task Force and has served on the 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s Planning Committee on Examining Special Nutritional Requirements for Disease States. Dr. Kemper received his M.D. from Duke 
University, where he also completed his pediatric residency training, followed by combined fellowship 
training in health services research and medical info rmatics, and residency training in preventive 
medicine at the University of North Carolina. 
 
Brian Linde, M.D., M.P.H.,  is an assistant professor in the Yale Occupational and Environmental 
Medicine Program at the Yale School of Medicine, where he oversees medical education and training and 
has designed curricula for physicians in training. He is  also the chief of occupational health services at the 
Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System, wher e he oversees more than 3,000 employees, offering 
services including medical surveillan ce, work injury evaluation and ma nagement, infection prevention, 
and employee health and well-being. As a board-cer tified occupational and envi ronmental physician, Dr. 
Linde also provides patient consultations to evaluate  health effects of occupational and environmental 
exposures. He received his M.P.H. in occupational an d environmental medicine from the Yale School of 
Public Health and his M.D. from Albert Einste in College of Medicine, Yeshiva University. 
 
Marc-André Verner, Ph.D., M.S.,  is an associate professor in the Department of Occupational and 
Environmental Health, School of Public Health, Univers ité de Montréal (Canada). He is also a member of 
the Centre for Public Health Research. Dr. Verner ’s expertise is in human health risk assessment, 
toxicology, biological modeling, and environmental epidemiology. His current research projects focus 
primarily on developmental exposure to environmen tal chemicals in the womb and postnatally through 
breastfeeding in the context of epidemiologic studies and risk assessment, including estimating 
gestational and lactational exposure to PFAS. Namely, he participated in the Minnesota Department of 
Health reevaluation of water guidance values fo r perfluorooctanoic acid and perfluorooctane sulfonic 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  acid. In 2016, Dr. Verner received the Joan M. Dais ey Outstanding Young Scientist Award for his studies 
using pharmacokinetic modeling to assess exposures during hypothesized windows of susceptibility to 
contaminants. He received his M.S. and Ph .D. from the Université du Québec à Montréal. 
 
Veronica M. Vieira, D.Sc., M.S.,  is a professor in and the chair of the Department of Environmental and 
Occupational Health at the University of California,  Irvine (UC Irvine), Program in Public Health. Her 
current work includes evaluating birth defects and in fant morbidity in relation to air pollution using 
generalized additive models, and she has worked  with the Boston University Superfund Research 
Program. She works extensively with reconstructing historic environmental exposures using geographic 
information systems and has experience with gr oundwater modeling and perfluorooctanoic acid. Dr. 
Vieira collaborated on the C-8 Health Project, contribu ting to several health and exposure studies, and is 
currently an investigator on the UC Irvine PFAS Health  Study, part of a multisite study sponsored by the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. 
She has served on the National Academies of Scienc es, Engineering, and Medicine’s Committee to 
Review Possible Toxic Effects from Past Environmental Containment at Fort Detrick. Dr. Vieira received 
her M.S. in environmental engineering from Stanford  University and her D.Sc. in environmental health 
from the Boston University School of Public Health. 
 
Xiaobin Wang (NAM), M.D., M.P.H., is the Zanvyl Krieger Professor in Children’s Health, the director 
of the Center on the Early Life Origins of Disease at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, a professor of pediatrics at the Johns Hopkins  University School of Medicine, and an American 
Board of Pediatrics–certified pediatrician at Johns Ho pkins Hospital. Her work unites biomarkers, clinical 
medicine, epidemiology, and disease prevention. Dr. Wang served as the principal investigator in a 
number of molecular epidemiological studies funded by  the National Institutes of Health and led multi-
institution, multidisciplinary teams to investigate e nvironmental, nutritional, genetic, and epigenetic 
factors during critical developmental windows (precon ception, in utero, infancy, and childhood). Her 
team has conducted a series of studies in three unique study cohorts (Boston Birth Cohort, Chicago Family Cohort, and Chinese Twin Cohort). Dr. Wang has served on two committees with the National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine : the Committee on Food Al lergies: Global Burden, 
Causes, Treatment, Prevention, and Public Policy,  and the Committee on Understanding Premature Birth 
and Assuring Healthy Outcomes. She is also a memb er of the National Academy of Medicine. Dr. Wang 
received her M.D. from Beijing Medical University, he r M.P.H. from the School of Public Health and 
Tropical Medicine at Tulane University, and her Sc.D. from the Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and 
Public Health. She completed a 3-year research fellows hip in environmental epid emiology at the Harvard 
T.H. Chan School of Public Health and a residency in  pediatrics at the Boston University Medical Center.  
 
Chris J. Wiant, Ph.D., M.P.H.,  is the founding president and the former chief executive officer of the 
Caring for Colorado Foundation, ser ving from 2000 until his retirement in 2020. Previously the executive 
director of Colorado’s Tri-County Health Departme nt, Dr. Wiant is experienced in risk assessment and 
communication, exposure science, and environm ental policy, as well as in collaborating with 
communities dealing with environmental contamination.  He also served as the chief of the Environmental 
Chemistry Section of the Illinois Department of Publ ic Health. Dr. Wiant was appointed to five terms on 
the Colorado Water Quality Control Commission and has served on the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency’s National Drinking Water Advisory Council, the federal advisory committee for development of 
regulations for disinfection by-produc ts in drinking water (Stages I and II), and he was the chair of the 
National Science Foundation’s Interna tional Council of Public Health Consultants. Dr. Wiant is also the 
past president of both the National Environmental He alth Association and the Colorado Public Health 
Association, and was a key participant in the negotia tion of the cleanup (Record of Decision) at the Rocky 
Mountain Arsenal Superfund site. He has been appointed to and recognized for his service on a variety of other local, state, and national advisory committees and boards, and as a facilitator of solutions to 
community public health challenges. Dr. Wiant r eceived his M.S. in health services administration, 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A 171 
Prepublication Copy  M.P.H. from the University of Illinois, and Ph.D. in public policy with an emphasis in environmental 
policy from the University of Colorado.  
STAFF  
 
Elizabeth Barksdale Boyle, M.P.H.,  is a senior program officer in the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine’s Hea lth and Medicine Division’s Board on Population Health and Public 
Health Practice. She previously served for sever al years as a program officer with the National 
Academies’ Board on Environmental Studies and Toxico logy. Formerly, she was an environmental health 
scientist at Westat, where she supported the U.S. Envi ronmental Protection Agency, the National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development, and the Nati onal Cancer Institute. Before her tenure at Westat, 
Ms. Boyle was a student epidemiologist at the Minne sota Department of Health and an industrial 
hygienist at a consulting firm in Cincinnati, Ohio. She is a fellow of the Bloomberg American Health 
Initiative at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of P ublic Health, where she is pursuing a Dr.P.H. in 
environmental health. Ms. Boyle has an M.P.H. in en vironmental health from the University of Minnesota 
and a certificate in risk sciences and public policy fr om the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, and is a certified industrial hygienist. 
 
Marilee Shelton-Davenport, Ph.D., is a senior program officer at the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine, where she serves as th e director of the innovative, cross-institutional 
Environmental Health Matters Initiative. Since 1999 , Dr. Shelton-Davenport has worked to guide the 
country’s best scientists and practitioners in pr oviding authoritative advice to agencies and other 
organizations interested in biomedical research a nd regulatory issues. Specifically, she has experience 
developing and executing impactful activities that ser ve the National Institutes of Health, the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Depart ment of Defense, and the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration. Her work with the National Academi es’ Board on Life Sciences and Board on Chemical 
Sciences and Technology has focused on emerging sci ence related to the impact of environmental 
exposures on human health and defense. A leader of multidisciplinary and multisector teams, Dr. Shelton-
Davenport is skilled at guiding expert s in drilling down to the root of issues, generating strategies, and 
developing creative solutions. She has a B.S. in bi ochemistry from Clemson University and a Ph.D. in 
pharmacology from the University of North Carolina.  
 
Kate Guyton, Ph.D.,  is a senior program officer with the Board on Environmental Studies and 
Toxicology within the Division on Earth and Life Studies at the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine. She has more than 20 ye ars of experience applying her expert knowledge in 
mechanistic toxicology and carcinogenesis, and has b een certified as a diplomate of the American Board 
of Toxicology since 1998. Her prior experience in cludes service as a senior toxicologist at the 
International Agency for Research on Cancer with the World Health Organization in Lyon, France (2014–
2020). Previously, Dr. Guyton served as a toxicologist in the Office of Research and Development at the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2005–2014) and as the director of scientific affairs at CCS 
Associates (1998–2005), a woman-owned small business.  She has authored more than 90 scientific 
articles in her areas of expertise with an overall h-i ndex of 46. Dr. Guyton received her B.A. (cum laude) 
in biology from Johns Hopkins University, her Ph.D. in toxicological sciences from the Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, and her postdoctoral training at th e National Institutes of Health.  
 
Kaley Beins, M.P.H.,  is a program officer with the Board on Environmental Studies and Toxicology 
within the Division on Earth and Life Studies at th e National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine. Previously, she worked as a federal cont ractor for Abt Associates,  where she supported the 
development of toxicological profiles for the Agen cy for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, as well 
as green chemistry and product labeling programs for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Ms. 
Beins focuses on the intersection of public health and toxicology, and has conducted research and led 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  community engagement initiatives with nongovernmental  organizations and local health departments, 
including service as a Fulbright Research Fellow. She is a board member for DC EcoWomen and the vice 
president of the Washington, DC, chapter of Sigma Xi  Scientific Research Honor Society. Ms. Beins has 
a B.S. in environmental biology from Georgetown Un iversity and an M.P.H. in environmental health 
sciences from the Univer sity of Maryland. 
 
Alexis Wojtowicz  is an associate program officer who has supported the National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s Board on P opulation Health and Public Health Practice since 
2016. She has also supported the Roundtable on Health  Literacy, an action collaborative on preventing 
firearm violence, and consensus studies about Medicar e payment and the public health effects of e-
cigarettes. Before joining the National Academies, Ms. Wojtowicz conducted recruitment and intake at a 
culinary job training program in Washington, DC, and prior to that, coordinated an AmeriCorps VISTA 
program that placed summer associate members at an ti-hunger nonprofit organiza tions across the United 
States. Ms. Wojtowicz has a B.A. in art history from the University of Maryland and is currently pursuing 
an M.P.H. at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, where she is a Bloomberg American 
Health Initiative fellow. 
 
Alexandra McKay, M.A.,  is a senior program assistant in the Health and Medicine Division of the 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. During her graduate and undergraduate 
careers, she worked in museums and cultural herita ge institutions, focusing on  public education and 
assisting in database creation and exhibit curation.  Ms. McKay also has experience working for the 
National Park Service as an interpretation range r, concentrating on science education and public 
engagement. She received her M.A. in ar chaeological studies from Yale University. 
 
COMMUNITY LIAISONS  
 
Laurene Allen  is a resident of Merrimack, New Hampshire, who co-founded the community group 
Merrimack Citizens for Clean Water after learning, in March 2016, that the water she and her family 
drank for decades was contaminated by PFAS. She has been an advocate for the needs of her PFAS-
impacted community for the past 6 years, engaging local, state, and federal officials, and bringing 
together residents to work together on both a local an d national level. After worki ng to gather health data 
in her community, Ms. Allen co-authored an article in the journal Environmental Health titled “Making 
the Invisible Visible: Results of a Community-Led Health Survey following PFAS Contamination of 
Drinking Water in Merrimack, New Hampshire.” Additi onally, she co-founded and continues to serve in 
leadership of the National PFAS Contamination Coalition, made up of community members from across 
the nation working together to attain mutual federal needs.  
 
Andrea Amico  is the co-founder of the Testing for Pease community action group at the former Pease 
Air Force Base in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. In 2014, after learning her husband and two small children were impacted by drinking water highly c ontaminated by PFAS, she began advocating for her 
community and others, raising awareness and providi ng education, to achieve a common goal of reducing 
PFAS exposure to impacted communities. Ms. Amico t estified at U.S. Senate hearings on PFAS in 
September 2018 and again in December 2021. She received the Citizen Excellence in Community 
Involvement Award from the U.S. Environmental Pr otection Agency Region 1 in November 2018. Ms. 
Amico attended the President’s State of the Un ion Address as Senator Jeanne Shaheen’s guest in 
February 2019 to raise awareness of PFAS contamin ation. She is the co-founder of the National PFAS 
Contamination Coalition, formed in June 2017 to  bring PFAS advocates from around the country to 
organize for change at the federal level. Additionally, Ms. Amico help ed organize the first two National 
PFAS Conferences held at Northeastern University in Boston, Massachusetts, in June 2017 and June 
2019. She has given a TEDx talk on PFAS and presented at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s first Public Health Grand Rounds on PF AS in Atlanta, Georgia. Ms. Amico serves on the 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A 173 
Prepublication Copy  Pease Community Assistance Panel with the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry and is 
community co-chair of the Pease Restoration Advisory  Board with the U.S. Air Force. She is also a 
community co-chair on the City of Portsmouth Safe Water Advisory Group. Ms. Amico has a master’s 
degree in occupational therapy. 
 
Stel Bailey  is the chief executive director of Fight For Zero and the co-facilitator of the National PFAS 
Contamination Coalition, is certified in wildlife monito ring, and is a content administrator behind several 
online publications. Her life took a dramatic turn in 2013 when she and her father, brother, and uncle, as 
well as the family dog, were diagnosed with cancer . Her family’s case was so unique that a genetic 
counselor invited them to do genetic testing, whic h showed no mutation genes, indicating they did not 
have an increased risk of developing the disease. De termined to find answers, Ms. Bailey began to 
crowdsource information about other cancer cases in  her hometown on Florida’s space coast. As she 
spoke out about her family’s case, she connected with  many others affected by diseases in unusual ways. 
As a cancer survivor and military dependent, Ms. Bailey is passionate a bout helping families and veterans 
prevent disease by sharing her insights about harmful t oxins, including PFAS, and their health effects. 
Her broad knowledge in coordi nating community engagement projects has resulted in various 
opportunities to share environmental health informati on, such as contributing to local publications and 
speaking at events. She has led additional efforts fo cused on harmful contaminants, such as assisting in 
getting a state health assessment, collecting water samples for countywide projects, and developing 
partnerships that will help impr ove understanding of the burdens of  PFAS contamination and related 
chronic diseases.  
 
Kyla Bennett, Ph.D.,  is the director of science at Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility 
(PEER), a national nonprofit service organization for e nvironmental and public health professionals, land 
managers, scientists, enfo rcement officers, and other civil servant s dedicated to upholding environmental 
laws and values. Prior to working at PEER, Dr. Benne tt was an environmental scientist and attorney for 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA ) for 10 years. Her work at PEER includes the 
investigation of sources of PFAS contamination in artificial turf and pesticides, and of impacts on 
endangered species, such as the North Atlantic right  whale, manatee, and Louisiana black bear. Dr. 
Bennett is currently working on exposing the effects of aerial pesticide spraying and investigating faulty 
risk assessments of pesticides and other chemicals at  EPA. She has a Ph.D. in ecology and evolutionary 
biology from the University of Connecticut, and a law degree with a certificate in environmental and 
natural resources law from Lewis and Clark Law School. 
 
Karen Blondel  is an environmental organizer/advocate for the Fifth Avenue Committee. She has 
conducted field trainings and has a background in h ealth and engineering. A native of Brooklyn, Ms. 
Blondel has led the Gowanus Neighborhood Coalition fo r Justice activist group to demand the city 
include the neighborhood’s New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) houses in its development plan. 
During her tenure with AmeriCorps, she coordinated a women’s history event at the Red Hook Library; 
started a volunteer program to escort seniors on their errands; and launched a summer Safe Streets 
program, facilitating a shutdown of local roads for r ecreational use for local residents. In 2018, Ms. 
Blondel began a “Know Your Rights” workshop for Red Hook public housing residents to inform them 
on bylaws, requirements, and deadlines. In her current  role as an environmental organizer, she educates 
public housing residents on envir onmental burdens within and near NYCHA housing developments that 
are often overlooked by the city. 
 
Phil Brown, Ph.D.,  is a university distinguished profe ssor of sociology and health science at 
Northeastern University, where he directs the Social Science Environmental Health Research Institute and 
co-directs its PFAS Lab, which has grants from the National Science Foundation to study social policy 
and activism concerning PFAS, and from the Nationa l Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 
(NIEHS) to study children’s immune responses and community’s responses to PFAS contamination, and 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  to develop a nationwide report-back and informa tion exchange. He directs an NIEHS T-32 training 
program, “Transdisciplinary Training at the Intersect ion of Environmental Health Science and Social 
Science,” heads the Community Outreach and Tr anslation Core of Northeastern’s Children’s 
Environmental Health Center (Center for Resear ch on Early Childhood Exposure and Development in 
Puerto Rico, orCRECE), and is the research translati on director and the community engagement core co-
director of Northeastern’s Superfund Research Program (Puerto Rico Testsite to Explore Contamination Threats, or PROTECT). Dr. Brown is a past member of the NIEHS Council. His books include No Safe 
Place: Toxic Waste, Leukemia, and Community Action ; Toxic Exposures: Contested Illnesses and the 
Environmental Health Movement ; and Contested Illnesses: Citizens, Science and Health Social 
Movements . Dr. Brown earned his Ph.D. in sociology from Brandeis University.  
 
Alberto J. Caban-Martinez, D.O., Ph.D., M.P.H.,  is a public health board-certified faculty member in 
the Department of Public Health Sc iences at the University of Miami with an educational background in 
medicine, epidemiology, and public health and more than 10 years of domestic and international practice 
and research experience. He is the assistant provost for research standards and an associate professor of 
public health sciences and physical medicine and re habilitation at the University of Miami Miller School 
of Medicine; the deputy director of the Firefighter  Cancer Initiative at the Sylvester Comprehensive 
Cancer Center; and the co-director and principal investigator of the na tional Federal Emergency 
Management Agency–funded Fire Fighter Cancer Co hort Study. He is a former fellow of the National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s Gulf Research Program, and in 2014, he was appointed to the Institute of Medicine’s Committe e on Gulf War and Health for 2 years to provide 
scientific expertise on occupational exposures and wo rk-related health conditions. He also served on the 
National Occupational Research Agenda committee of th e National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health (NIOSH), helping to set the national research  agenda on worker health and safety. He served 4 
years as a standing member of the NIOSH study section and 1 year as the chair. He has published more 
than 120 peer-reviewed publications and shared more than 215 scientific presentations on a wide range of 
occupational health and safety topics.  Cheryl Cail is a small business owner in Myrtle Beach, S outh Carolina, the vice chief of the Waccamaw 
Indian People, and the chair for SC Idle No More, a committee within the South Carolina Indian Affairs 
Commission. In December 2018, after her 20-year-old son was diagnosed with testicular cancer, Ms. Cail 
became aware of PFAS contamination in the groundwa ter at the former Myrtle Beach Air Force Base, 
and later learned of the extent of contamination from the use of aqueous film-forming foam at other U.S. 
Department of Defense sites throughout the state. She joined the National PFAS Contamination Coalition 
in 2019, and is currently working to raise awareness of the impact of PFAS contamination of both the 
environment and people in South Carolina. Ms. Cail received associate degrees from Horry-Georgetown 
Technical College in both legal studies and human se rvices and received the Phi Theta Kappa Society’s 
All-State Academic Team award.  
 
Courtney Carignan, Ph.D.,  is an exposure scientist and an enviro nmental epidemiologist at Michigan 
State University (MSU). Her rese arch helps protect reproductive and child health by investigating 
exposure to contaminants in food and water, a nd consumer and personal car e products. She currently 
helps lead biomonitoring studies (PFAS UNITEDD and PFAS REACH) funded by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the National In stitutes of Health, investigating PFAS exposure and 
immunotoxicity for communities impacted by drinki ng water contamination. Dr. Carignan is on the 
organizing committee for the National PFAS Confer ence and helps lead MSU’s Center for PFAS 
Research. She received her Ph.D. in environmental h ealth from the Boston University School of Public 
Health and completed postdoctoral training at Dartmouth College and the Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health.  
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A 175 
Prepublication Copy  Tracy Carluccio  is the deputy director of the Delaware Riverkeeper Network (DRN), where she has 
worked as an environmental advocate since 1989. DR N is a nonprofit membership organization working 
throughout the entire length and breadth of the Dela ware River Watershed to  defend its outstanding 
values and restore them where needed. Ms. Carlu ccio works for the Watershed’s protection in New 
Jersey, Pennsylvania, New York, and Delaware, a ddressing issues that include water quality; healthy 
habitats and communities; environm ental regulation and policy; clean, efficient, and renewable energy; 
and biodiverse ecosystems. She h as also worked on PFAS issues since 2005 and has commented and 
written extensively on community and regulatory ma tters related to these compounds in New Jersey, 
Pennsylvania, and Delaware. Ms. Ca rluccio serves on the New Jersey Department of Health Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention Biomonitoring Advisory Committee on PFAS.  
 
Jamie DeWitt, Ph.D.,  is an associate professor in the Department  of Pharmacology & Toxicology of the 
Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina Un iversity. Her research focuses on the effects of 
environmental contaminants on the adult and devel oping immune systems, as well as on interactions 
between the immune and nervous systems. She is the principal investigator, co–principal investigator, and 
co-investigator on several funded studies concerni ng the immune effects of PFAS, especially those 
considered novel or understudied. Dr. DeWitt receive d her Ph.D.s in environm ental science and neural 
science from Indiana University Bloomington and comp leted postdoctoral training in immunotoxicology 
at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under a cooperative training agreement with the University 
of North Carolina. 
 
Emily Donovan  is the co-founder of Clean Cape Fear. She is a tireless advocate for clean water, spending 
her free time educating the public on the dangers of PFAS and other toxins in drinking water and the 
environment. Ms. Donovan has testified before Congress twice regarding the influence of the 
DuPont/Chemours facility in Fayetteville, North Carolina, which is contaminating the downstream 
drinking water supply for 250,000 residents, in cluding giving testimony during the first-ever 
congressional hearing on PFAS contamination. She participated in a Washington Post Live  panel 
discussion with actor Mark Ruffalo and lawyer Rob Bilott. Most recently, Ms. Donovan worked to secure 
reverse osmosis filling stations in 49 public schools impacted by PFAS contamination in Brunswick and 
New Hanover counties. She regularly travels the count ry sharing her personal impact story, as well as 
those of her friends and neighbors. Ms. Donovan frequents Washington, DC, and Raleigh, North 
Carolina, pressuring lawmakers and regulators for swif ter responses to the growing PFAS public health 
crisis.  
 
Alan Ducatman, M.D., M.S.,  is a Mayo Clinic–trained internis t and occupational physician, and a 
professor emeritus in the West Virginia University Sc hool of Public Health and School of Medicine. His 
clinical career has focused on medical screening re lated to environmental exposures, with research 
addressing environmental disease and disease prevention, including health communications to affected 
populations. He has designed community studies and actively published on population aspects of exposure to PFAS, and many of his more than 30 publications concerning PFAS are highly cited. As a 
clinical consultant to industry, labor, nonprof it organizations, and government organizations, Dr. 
Ducatman has also worked with a variety of commun ity groups to provide information concerning PFAS 
clinical science. In addition, he has an active rese arch program in quality assurance concerning clinician 
laboratory orders and interpretation, which inform s his community service. His other public service has 
included serving as the chair of the external scien ce advising committee to the National Center for 
Environmental Health and the Agency for Toxic S ubstances and Disease Registry of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, and as the chair of  the Residency Review Committee in Preventive 
Medicine for the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education.  
 
Patrick Elder  is the director of Military Poisons, an organiza tion that works to draw attention to the role 
of the military in the environmental contaminati on through the use of PFAS in firefighting foams and 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  other applications. Two hundred of his articl es on PFAS have been published in several dozen 
publications, including Global Geneva , Truthout , Consortium News , Common Dreams , and LA 
Progressive . Mr. Elder seeks to draw public attention to  food, especially seafood, as the primary pathway 
of human exposure to PFAS. He receives support fro m the Women’s International League for Peace and 
Freedom (WILPF); WILPF US Earth Democracy; th e Patagonia Foundation; the Peace Development 
Fund; and the Center for Health, Environment & Justi ce. Mr. Elder is presently working on campaigns in 
several New England states and Maryland, as well as in Germany and Japan, to influence policy makers 
to take steps to protect public health from the sc ourge of PFAS. He has toured the United States and 
Europe several times, speaking on contamination at military bases. Mr. Elder holds an M.A. in 
government from the University of Maryland and a B.A. in political science/education from St. Mary’s 
College of Maryland.  
 
Teresa Gerade  is an advisory member of a Vermont-Canadian volunteer organization in the Northeast 
Kingdom known as DUMP (Don’t Undermine Memphremagog’ s Purity), which came into being in June 
2018 to appeal the application for a 51-acre expansio n of Vermont’s only permitted, privately owned 
landfill. The group’s goal is to restore and protect the waters and watershed of  Lake Memphremagog, an 
international lake located in the northeast corner of Vermont. The appeal was unsuccessful because of a 
lack of funding for legal representation. However, th e group participated in a mediation session with the 
owners of the landfill and achieved a 4-year moratori um on the discharge of landfill leachate (the garbage 
juice that is created in landfills) into the La ke Memphremagog watershe d. DUMP is now actively 
pursuing a state legislative designation of “Lake in Cr isis” to garner funding and additional support for 
restoring and protecting the wa ters of Lake Memphremagog.  
 
Hope Grosse  is the co-founder of Buxmont Coalition fo r Safer Water and serves on the National PFAS 
Contamination Coalition, working to establish enforceab le federal and state drinking water standards for 
this chemical class. She acts as the community liais on for outreach and leads social media efforts, 
updating residents about PFAS water contamination a nd related issues. Ms. Grosse has been featured on 
WHYY’s Radio Times, Live with Marty Moss-Coane,  discussing PFAS chemicals health and regulations. 
She also serves as a community re presentative on the Warminster Naval Airbase Technical Review 
Committee, which is charged with oversight of the environmental cleanup under the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act. Ms. Grosse grew up directly across the street 
from Warminster Naval Base and worked on the base af ter high school graduation. Her father died of 
cancer at age 52, and she was diagnosed with stage 4 cancer at age 25, which quickly spread to her lymph 
system. Other unexplained tumors have also been removed from her body over the years. After learning 
that the Warminster Naval Base was named a Superfund National Priority site, she began to get involved 
in environmental advocacy and is committed to bri nging awareness of PFAS and other contaminants to 
others in her community.  
 
Loreen Hackett  has been advocating for families in Hoosic k Falls, New York, since the discovery of 
severe contamination more than 6 years ago led to is suance of the first National Priorities List Federal 
Superfund Site declarations for PFOA. Through biomon itoring, her family exhibited some of the highest 
levels of perfluorooctanoic acid tested in the area. In  June 2016, she created #PfoaProjectNY, which has 
gone worldwide, and continues to share information on PFAS. Ms. Hackett is the co-chair of the Hoosick 
Falls Community Action Working Group established for the superfund sites, serves on the Community 
Action Partnership Committee for the Centers for Di sease Control and Prevention–awarded site study, 
and is on the Committee of the National PFAS Contam ination Coalition. She has attended and submitted 
testimony in two congressional hearings in Washington,  DC, and continues working with elected officials 
on bills regulating PFAS, as well as with various envi ronmental organizations. Sh e survived cancer that 
may have been linked to PFAS exposure.  
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A 177 
Prepublication Copy  Ayesha Khan  worked at Vitamin Water in New York City  for a decade before moving to the island of 
Nantucket, Massachusetts, where she worked for a lo cal surgeon. Currently, she is a stay-at-home mom 
for her two young children. Her husba nd Nate, who works as a firefighter, was recently diagnosed with 
testicular cancer and is in remission. As Ms. Khan  researched about her husband’s cancer, she learned 
about PFAS and their connections to aqueous film -forming foam and firefighter gear. She co-founded 
Nantucket PFAS Action Group as an educational res ource about the hazards of PFAS and as a space for 
local community members to openly discuss concerns, thoughts, and experiences. Ms. Khan holds a B.A. 
in applied mathematics and statistics from Boston University.  
 
Rainer Lohmann, Ph.D.,  is a professor of oceanography and the director of the University of Rhode 
Island Superfund Research Center, where he and his gr oup conduct research into the sources, transport, 
and bioaccumulation of anthropogenic pollutants, often relying on the use of passive samplers. In addition 
to PFAS, his research covers dioxins, polychlori nated biphenyls, legacy pesticides, and emerging 
contaminants. Dr. Lohmann is a scientific counselor  for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s 
Sustainable and Healthy Communities Subcommittee and a speaker at the National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s Environm ental Health Matters Initiative on PFAS. He was 
selected as an Alexander von Humboldt fellow, a nd as a Fulbright fellow for the 2021–2022 Arctic 
Initiative. Dr. Lohmann serves as the editor for Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  and is on the 
editorial boards of publications including Environmental Science & Technology  and Environmental 
Science & Technology Letters .  
 
Samraa Luqman  works in social services with the federal government. A native of Dearborn, Michigan, 
she has experience working in public schools and ser ving in community hospitals and cultural centers, 
including the Arab Community Center for Economic  and Social Services and the American Yemeni 
Women’s Association, where she is the secretary and a board member. Ms. Luqman has observed a 
multitude of community members becoming ill with can cers, asthma, and other illnesses attributable to 
pollution, and has become involved in pursuing enviro nmental justice, speaking at community meetings 
and town halls. In 2019, she joined the Environm ental Health Research to Action Steering Committee, 
which educates high school students about the imp acts of pollution, and the PFAS Alliance shortly 
thereafter. By 2020, Ms. Luqman also joined th e Clean Air Council and presented to multiple audiences 
on the effects and existence of PFAS in both air and water. She has also worked with the Concerned 
Residents for South Dearborn, the University of Michigan’s Environmental Interpretive Center, and 
Friends of the Rouge to raise awareness on the envi ronmental issues of her community. Her most recent 
endeavors include providing input on the enactment and enforcement of a fugitive air dust ordinance; 
fighting for cumulative health impact studies; and pa rtnering with organizations , universities, and other 
entities to add greenspace, trees, and rain gardens to  the area. Ms. Luqman completed her bachelor’s 
degree in psychology at the University of Michigan.  
 
Beth Markesino  is the founder of North Carolina Stop GenX in Our Water, advocating for regulations on 
GenX, PFAS, and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid in North Carolina. She is a participant in the first ever 
GenX human health study. Ms. Markesino has multiple  endocrine issues associated with PFAS, including 
a thyroid tumor, an adrenal tumor, and placenta probl ems during her pregnancy that resulted in the death 
of her son. She actively advocates in her commun ity for clean water and regulatory action addressing 
endocrine disruptor chemicals. With a grant from Hy droviv, she provided 120 filters for low-income 
residents in the Lower Cape Fear region. Additionall y, she has lobbied against DuPont scientist Michael 
Dourson’s appointment to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.   
Aaron Maruzzo  worked as a water lab analyst for a public utility company in th e Northern Mariana 
Islands, serving the islands of Saipan, Tinian, and Rota . He is currently working toward an M.P.H. in 
environmental health science at the University of California (UC), Berkeley. In 2020, Mr. Maruzzo co-
authored a report for the Berkeley Center for Green Ch emistry to identify nontoxic  alternatives to short-
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  chain PFAS in molded fiber food packaging. His curre nt interests are in community exposure to PFAS in 
drinking water, green technology, environmental epid emiology, and environmental justice, where he aims 
to leverage academic resources at UC Berkeley to benefit science and policy actions toward a PFAS-free 
future in the Western Pacific U.S. territories. Mr. Maruzzo received his B.A. in biology and comparative 
literature, with a concentration in  public health, from Williams College, where he developed a strong 
interdisciplinary approach to diverse public health issues. 
 
Tobyn McNaughton  is a resident of Belmont, Michigan, who has been affected by PFAS. She is a 
former elementary teacher and now stays home w ith her two sons. Ms. McNaughton has become an 
activist and voice for people affected by PFAS.  
 
Kristen Mello, M.S.,  is the director of Westfield Residents Advocating for Themselves (WRAFT), a 
community group formed in response to PFAS contamination of the drinking water in Westfield, 
Massachusetts, caused by the use of aqueous film-fo rming foam at the Barnes Air National Guard Base. 
With WRAFT, Ms. Mello has led efforts to get PFAS blood testing for Westfield residents and has served 
on the Massachusetts Department of Environmenta l Protection’s PFAS MCL (Maximum Contaminant 
Level) Stakeholder Group. Her advocacy work on PF AS, in large part, led to her being elected a 
Westfield City Councilor At-Large in 2019 and 2021. Ms . Mello has a bachelor’s degree in chemistry and 
a master’s degree in analytical chemistry, specializing in chemometrics. 
 
Elizabeth Neary, M.D.,  is a pediatrician, as well as an educator and scholar in public and environmental 
health. Having practiced general pediatrics for 15 year s, she has devoted herself to educating students, 
residents, legislators, and the general public about environmental health issues. Dr. Neary is the co-
president of the Wisconsin Environmental Health Netw ork, part of Physicians for Social Responsibility–
Wisconsin. She is an adjunct assistant clinical profess or of pediatrics at the University of Wisconsin–
Madison School of Medici ne and Public Health and the Wisc onsin representative to the Region 3 
Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit. For th e past 5 years, she has taught environmental health 
to pediatric residents. Dr. Neary has testified on the health effects of PFAS to the Wisconsin state 
legislature and to the Madison Water Utility Board.  
 
Laura Olah  is the executive director and the co-founder of Citizens for Safe Water Around Badger, a 
community-based group that organized in 1990 when the community learned that a plume of cancer-
causing chemicals had poisoned private drinking  water wells near Wisconsin’s Badger Army 
Ammunition Plant. A member of the Sokaogon Ojibwa  Community Mole Lake Band, Ms. Olah defines 
her role as part of a community “undefined by ge ography” that shares a deep concern for the human 
environment and the need to empower affected trib es and stakeholders in the decision-making process, 
ensuring powerful, long-term solutions to military a nd industrial toxins in our rural communities. She 
views the past 30 years of accomplishments not as hers  alone but as shared with the many individuals 
who have and who continue to be at her side  in the work for environmental justice.  
 
Jacob Park, Ph.D.,  is an associate professor in the Castle ton University College of Business. He 
specializes in innovation, entrepreneurship, and communi ty health issues, with sp ecial focus and expertise 
in emerging and developing economies in Africa, Asia P acific, and the Caribbean islands. Dr. Park is also 
a visiting professor at the University of Johannesbur g (South Africa); a former Kevin Ruble fellow in 
conscious capitalism at the Rutgers University Scho ol of Management and La bor Relations; the Edmond 
J. Safra Network Fellow at Harvard University; and a research fellow in the Ox ford University Smith 
School of Enterprise and the Environment. He has serve d as the coordinating lead author of the report for 
the United Nations (UN) Environment Programme’s  Global Environment Outlook (GEO-6); as lead 
author for the UN Millennium Ecosystem Assessment in itiative; and as an expert reviewer for a number 
of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change publi cations, including the Sixth Assessment Report. Dr. 
Park is a former member of the Renewable Ener gy and Adaptation to Climate Technologies Investment 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A 179 
Prepublication Copy  Committee of the Africa Enterprise Challenge Fund,  and the chair of the U.S. Sustainable and 
Responsible Investment Forum’s International Working Group Steering Committee. He received his 
master’s degree in city planning from the Massachuse tts Institute of Technology and his Ph.D. in social 
sciences/public administration from the Erasmus University of Rotterdam. 
 
Sue Phelan1 was the co-founder and the volunteer director of GreenCAPE, a nonprofit community 
advocacy organization formed to educate Cape Cod r esidents about the hazards of pesticides and other 
harmful chemicals (including PFAS) being used above the Cape Cod’s vulnerable sole source aquifer. 
The focus of GreenCAPE’s work is the community’s exposure to PFAS via the public drinking water 
system and other as-yet-unidentified sources. Its ma jor concerns include that PFAS-exposed Hyannis 
residents have not been provided with blood testing and the lack of health-protective PFAS regulations 
nationwide. Ms. Phelan was a board member of th e Alliance for a Healthy Tomorrow/Boston and Clean 
Water Action/Mass, as well as a member of the Cape Chapter of the Sierra Club, the Sierra Club Toxics 
Team, and the National PFAS Coalition. She served as a community project partner and a member of the 
Cape Cod Advisory Committee for the Sources, Tran sport, Exposure, and Effects of PFAS Research 
Center and was one of only two community representatives invited to be on the Massachusetts 
Department of Environmental Protection’s PFAS MCL (Maximum Contaminant Level) Stakeholder 
Group. After working as a medical microbiologist/virologi st, Ms. Phelan returned to the University of 
Connecticut College of Agriculture, graduated from the environmental horticulture program, and worked 
in research and development on insect pheromones a nd light-mediated changes in plant growth and 
development.  
 
Andrea Rich is an active participant in fighting for clean  water in Wisconsin. She works with S.O.H2O 
(Save Our Water) to bring the impacts of PFAS to light, and share relevant information with the 
community in Marinette. Marinette is the third-largest  PFAS contamination site in the nation. Ms. Rich 
has been researching PFAS and its h ealth impacts, as well as filtration methods, for several years. She has 
been an active participant in public hearings and Department of Natural Resources presentations, and has 
provided testimony to Senate and Assembly committe es on multiple bills proposed to regulate PFAS. Ms. 
Rich was also instrumental in bringing into the spo tlight the contamination of farm fields and dozens of 
contaminated wells in rural Marinette County, some  of which may otherwise still be unidentified. Her 
current focus is trying to get testing for PFAS in  the agricultural goods coming from the contaminated 
farm fields, and blood testing for the community to  determine exposure levels, and possibly identify 
additional sources of exposure. She is an honors gr aduate of Lakeland College , with a double major in 
business administration and marketing. 
 
Dana Sargent  is the executive director of the environm ental nonprofit Cape Fear River Watch (CFRW), 
based in Wilmington, North Carolin a, where she works to protect and improve the water quality of the 
Cape Fear River basin for all people through edu cation, advocacy, and action. Her work on PFAS began 
in 2017 when her community learned that DuPont an d then Chemours had polluted their drinking water 
supply for more than 40 years. Her organization sued  the polluter and the state regulatory body, which 
culminated in a Consent Order, parts of which she, along with her CFRW partners and their legal counsel, 
maintain oversight, ensuring the polluter and the re gulatory agency are upholding the requirements of the 
Order. In addition, CFRW partners with academia on several PFAS research grants including the GenX 
exposure study, along with several ecological studi es and outreach grants. She works among a coalition of 
advocates in North Carolina pushing for strong PFA S legislation and regulatory action and her 
organization is one of six that has sued the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency after it refused to hold 
a PFAS polluter accountable for funding health and toxicity studies. Ms. Sargent has published two 
websites and numerous articles and op-eds on PFAS, incl uding an op-ed in which she questions whether 
PFAS exposure caused the brain cancer that took her brother’s life in December 2019. He had been 
                                                           
1 Deceased January 2022. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  exposed for decades in the line of duty as a Chicago fi refighter and a former U.S. Marine. She holds an 
M.S. in environmental sciences and policy from Johns Hopkins University and a B.A. in journalism with 
a music minor from San Diego State University. 
 
Laurel Schaider, Ph.D., M.S.,  is a senior scientist in environmental chemistry and engineering at the 
Silent Spring Institute, where she leads water quality research on PFAS and other contaminants of 
emerging concern. Her research focuses on characteriz ing PFAS exposures from drinking water, diet, and 
consumer products; understanding hea lth effects associated with PFAS; investigating socioeconomic 
disparities in exposures to drinking water contam inants; and working with communities to develop 
research studies and resources to address their concerns. Dr. Schaider is the principal investigator for the 
PFAS-REACH (Research, Education, and Action for Community Health) study, a researcher–community 
partnership that is evaluating PFAS exposures and im mune system effects in children in communities 
with PFAS water contamination,  and developing an online resource center for PFAS-affected 
communities. She is also the principal investigator of the Massachusetts PFAS and Your Health Study, 
one of seven projects within the Centers for Di sease Control and Prevention PFAS Multi-site Health 
Study. Dr. Schaider co-leads the Community E ngagement Core for the STEEP (Sources, Transport, 
Exposure, and Effects of PFAS) Superfund Research Program at the University of Rhode Island, 
including a study to evaluate PFAS levels in pr ivate wells on Cape Cod and identify contamination 
sources. Before joining the Silent Spring Institute, sh e was a research associate at  the Harvard T.H. Chan 
School of Public Health, where she currently holds an appointment as a visiting scientist. Dr. Schaider 
served as a member of the planning committee for the 2020 National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine’s Workshop on Federa l Government Human Health PFAS Research. She 
earned her master’s degree and Ph.D. in environmen tal engineering at the University of California, 
Berkeley, and a bachelor’s degree in environmental engineering science from the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology.  
 
Linda Shosie, a proud Latina woman, is a mother, grandmot her, wife, and the founder and organizer of 
the grassroots community organization Mothers for Safe  Air & Safe Water Force in Tucson, Arizona. In 
her fight for the human right to clean and safe water she has dedicated her entire life to protecting public 
health. Ms. Shosie has become one of the leadi ng voices nationally regarding PFAS exposures in Latino 
barrios. In 2007, she lost her child to a rare di sease she believes was caused by exposures to numerous 
toxic chemicals in the drinking water in the Tucson South-Side barrio. More recently Ms. Shosie has 
begun initiating a community-led PFAS health study in her community to assess for PFAS in human 
blood. She is also part of the National PFAS Contamination Coalition.  
 
Lenny Siegel  is the executive director of the Center for Public Environmental Oversight, where he has 
been serving since 1994. He is one of the American  environmental movement’s leading experts on both 
military facility contamination and the vapor intrusion pathway. Mr. Siegel runs two Internet newsgroups 
for his organization: the Military Environmental Foru m and the Brownfields Internet Forum, as well as 
activist discussion lists on trichloroethylene and PFAS.  He has served on several Interstate Technology 
and Regulatory Council work teams on environmen tal remediation, as well as a dozen National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine  committees addressing military environmental issues. 
In July 2011, Mr. Siegel was awarded the U.S. E nvironmental Protection Agency’s Superfund Citizen of 
the Year award. In 2018, he served as mayor of Mountain View, California. 
 
Mike Watters is a community organizer in the Fayetteville, North Carolina, area. After learning his well 
was contaminated with more than 16 PFAS, Mr. Wa tters set up a community outreach group. He created 
a Facebook group with more than 2,700 members and actively provides information to the community, 
ensuring wells are tested in a rapidly growing ar ea around the Fayetteville Works Facility in North 
Carolina. Mr. Watters provides input at all North Carolina Science Advisory committee meetings, leads 
teams in assisting in research with the NC PFAS Testing Network, and works actively with North 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A 181 
Prepublication Copy  Carolina State University research teams. Additionally,  he engages with state and federal authorities to 
ensure that violations and spills are documented and ac tion is taken; two notices of violation are directly 
tied to his actions. Mr. Watters also works with the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality, 
having participated in the Granular Activated Ca rbon Pilot Test. He currently has a state PFAS air 
monitoring station on his property and assists the stat e in gathering information. While in the military, 
Mr. Watters was trained and certified as a U.S. Depart ment of Defense hazardous materials handler. He 
has college degrees in information t echnology and firearms technology. 
 
La’Meshia Whittington  is a professor in the Division of Sociol ogy at Meredith College. She is also the 
deputy director for Advance Carolina and the campaigns  director for the North Carolina Black Alliance. 
She is the co-convener of the North Carolina Black  and Brown Policy Network, a former national 
democracy campaigner for Friends of the Earth, the chair of the FRENC Fund Administration, a founding member of Democracy Green, a member of the Burk e Women’s Fund in Western North Carolina, and a 
former North Carolina spokesperson on fair courts for The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human 
Rights. A leader in intersectional democracy and environmental justice, Ms. Whittington was the co-
author of North Carolina Senate Bill 673, prioriti zing environmentally contaminated communities of 
color in voting rights, and the co-author in several Pro-Democracy North Star legislation bills. She is a 
member of the NC PFAS Testing Network, anchorin g legislation on aqueous fi lm-forming foam, and she 
is a convener of the Black Firefighters Fighting PFAS Collective. Ms. Whittington has created and co-
convened national, regional, and st atewide tours and workshops on environmental justice, focusing on 
chemical contaminants and dirty corporations. She wo rks continually with the Brody School of Medicine 
at East Carolina University, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Servic es, and other government 
agencies to ground community needs and strategies in alleviating health disparities in Black and Brown 
communities. Ms. Whittington led the development of a statewide map to highlight the intersection of 
environmental justice contamination zones and th e frequency in which they are located within 
gerrymandered Black majority voting districts. She is a petitioner in two active petitions to the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Ms. Whittington is  an Afro-Indigenous woman from North Carolina, 
hailing from a former environmental justice settleme nt: The Kingdom of the Happy Land. She received 
her education at Western Piedmont Co mmunity College and Meredith College. 
 
Alan Woolf, M.D.,  is a professor of pediatrics at Harvard Medical School, a board-certified pediatrician 
and medical toxicologist, and a senior attending physic ian at Boston Children’s Hospital (BCH). He is the 
director of the Pediatric Environmental Health Center  at BCH, directing its fellowship training program in 
pediatric environmental health and the Region 1 New England Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty 
Unit. Dr. Woolf is a member of the Executive Commit tee of the Council on Environmental Health of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics and a past president of both the American Association of Poison 
Control Centers and the American Academy of Clinical  Toxicology. He is the editor and author of two 
books: The Children’s Hospital Gu ide to Your Child’s Health and Development  (Perseus Publishers) and 
History of Modern Clinical Toxicology  (Academic Press) and has authored or co-authored more than 300 
scientific publications.  
 
Cathy Wusterbarth  is a registered dietitian nutritionist, and the co-leader and founder of NOW (Need 
Our Water) in her hometown, Oscoda, Michigan. NOW was created in 2017 to give Oscoda-AuSable and 
surrounding communities a voice. Its mission is to be a reliable resource and catalyst for education and 
communication while advocating for long-term health a nd environmental welfare plans on behalf of those 
affected by water contamination from the former Wurtsmith Air Force Base in Oscoda, Michigan. Ms. 
Wusterbarth and other NOW members have consistently  demanded that the State of Michigan and the Air 
Force address the PFAS contamination that affects her community, as well as more than 700 military 
installations. She was invited to the 2019 State of the Union by Congressman Dan Kildee to represent 
communities affected by PFAS contamination and support the newly created Congressional PFAS Task 
Force. In addition to testing and monitoring the health  of Oscoda residents, Ms. Wusterbarth believes the 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  federal government should conduct the necessary epidem iological studies to correlate health outcomes 
among veterans and their families.  
Sandy Wynn-Stelt  is a clinical psychologist in private practice. In 2017, she learned that her 
groundwater had been contaminated by PFAS fro m a landfill that had been used by Wolverine 
Worldwide to dispose of Scotchgard-laden tannery waste. Since then, Ms. Wy nn-Stelt has become an 
advocate for preventing similar contamination in ot her communities. She has spoken with several state 
and local legislators and the Michigan attorney genera l, and has testified in Washington, DC, at hearings 
on PFAS contamination. Ms. Wynn-Stelt currently pa rticipates on the leadership team of the local 
Wolverine Community Advisory Committee, as we ll as on the Michigan PFAS Action Response Team. 
She also participates in the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services’ Health Study as a 
stakeholder for both the state PFAS study and the Ag ency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry’s 
Multisite PFAS Study. Ms. Wynn-Stelt participates in  training with U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) staff on effective communications w ith community members. In 2020, she was awarded 
the Citizen Excellence in Community Involvement Award  by the EPA for her work in the community and 
state in advocating for stronger regulation of this class of chemicals. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Prepublication Copy   183  Appendix B 
 
Summary of the Committee’s Town Halls 
 
As noted in Chapter 1, the committee engage d with community members throughout the study 
process. A key component of the community engageme nt was the conduct of three town halls, held on 
April 7, May 6, and May 25, 2021. The town ha lls were conducted remotely, because of the COVID 
pandemic, and designated Eastern, Middle, and Western.  In total, they featured 36 people affected by 
PFAS.1  
This appendix summarizes the discussions at the town halls. It was prepared by Anna Ruth 
Robuck, Ph.D., as a factual summary of what occurred. The statements made are those of the rapporteur or individual meeting participants and do not necessarily represent the vi ews of all town hall participants, 
the study committee, or the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.   
 
OVERVIEW 
 
The town halls included presentations by invite d community representatives detailing information 
about exposures, health effects, and health car e needs; discussion sessions enabled exchange between 
committee members and participants. The presente rs described frustrating and harrowing ordeals 
navigating PFAS exposure and related health issues and concerns. Several ke y themes were echoed by 
multiple presenters and in discussion sessions, including:   
 an immediate need for accessible PFAS blood testing,  
 continued assessment of PFAS health effects, 
 the need for equitable action that best supports the people who are most vulnerable and 
disproportionately affected, and  
 a continuing need for comp rehensive exposure assessments. 
 
Accessible Testing Multiple speakers highlighted the importan ce of readily available, affordable 
PFAS blood testing. Such testing would serve to est ablish baselines of exposure, provide agency to 
exposed communities and families, show respect fo r community concerns, and inform precautionary 
health care. They stressed that testing must be financially accessible and recognized by insurance 
coverage. Many recounted reluctance or refusal by h ealth care providers to order such testing because of 
the inability to definitively relate blood concentrations  to health effects. While acknowledging pervasive 
exposure to PFAS in the U.S. population, speaker s suggested that exposed communities and vulnerable 
populations should be prioritized for PFAS blood test ing, using equity as a guide to design testing 
protocols.  
Continued Assessment of Health Effects  Many speakers highlighted the lack of studies 
detailing health outcomes related to PFAS exposures, c iting this as a glaring and troubling data gap, given 
the long list of health concerns and trends identifie d by and in exposed communities. Presenters pointed 
out that the lack of identified health effects often ge ts cited as a reason not to perform research or desired 
testing, leading to a circular situa tion in which health effects are not identified because of a lack of study, 
and studies are not conducted because of a lack of identified health effects.  
                                                           
1 PFAS are chemicals known as perfluoroalkyl a nd polyfluoroalkyl substances; see Chapter 1. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Equitable Action Numerous presenters acknowledged the im portance of considering systemic 
inequities when designing health care interventions or  protocols related to PFAS exposure. They noted 
that minority communities often bear disproportionate  burdens of exposure, magnified by inequitable 
sociocultural and economic frameworks. Health care workers seeking to mitigate and address PFAS 
exposure must consider such compounding effects of inequity, relying on community participation and 
input to guide intervention. Some speakers pointed  out that children, pregnant women, transient 
populations (such as service members and migrant wo rkers), and people without health insurance or 
lacking accessible health care need to be consider ed given the demonstrated burden of PFAS on these 
populations. Moreover, information ab out PFAS and appropriate health care options must be framed and 
presented in culturally appropriate ways across the co ntinuum of both formal and informal health care 
settings.  
Comprehensive Exposure Assessment Throughout the town halls, speakers provided 
background information about PFAS exposure scenarios in  their community or region. These descriptions 
revealed vast uncertainty about the scope and scale of  exposure. Speakers suggested that exposure vectors 
beyond drinking water should be explored, including air, cooking  and washwater, fish and seafood, 
wildlife products, garden vegetables, and other foods and agricultural products. Speakers also stated that a 
larger number of PFAS should be included in mon itoring efforts considering the ever-expanding number 
of compounds included in the PFAS class.  
 
EASTERN TOWN HALL 
 
Laurene Allen (Merrimack C itizens for Clean Water) 
 
Laurene Allen shared perspectives from the exte nsively exposed community of Merrimack, New 
Hampshire. Residents of this area learned about th eir exposure to PFAS, in 2016, related to local 
industrial activities. PFAS have since been found regi onally in air, soil, grou ndwater, and drinking water 
across an area of more than 65 miles containing five  towns. The community is therefore aware of their 
past exposure and frustratingly continues to grapple with current exposure from ongoing PTFE2 used in 
fabric and film coating by a local manufacturing fac ility. Allen stated the community finds the continuing 
exposure to unregulated PFAS troubling, particularly in the absence of appropriate health care that 
considers both the history and current extent of PFAS exposure.  
Allen described the inaccessibility of blood tes ting for PFAS and health screenings for PFAS-
related ailments, with feedback from physicians that such information is expensive to obtain and may be 
unhelpful or difficult to frame. However, Allen asserted that such testing is important and validating to 
the community, and a key “piece of the puzzle” to establish baseline information about the evolving 
understanding of the nature of expos ure. Allen also stated that the community sees patterns of disease and 
illness related to source proximity that are not curre ntly acknowledged or understood by health care 
practitioners. Given the documented link between PFAS and specific health effects, including immune 
function and endocrine health, blood t esting is vital for matched, rele vant health care based on exposure 
history.  
Allen noted a link between COVID-19 cases and PFAS exposure in New Hampshire, with the 
further suggestion that informati on about patient and community PFAS exposure should be incorporated 
into COVID-19 responses, vaccination protocols, and other public health cons iderations. Allen also 
underscored the importance of integrating environmenta l health and exposure history into health records 
to increase the capacity to monitor for PFAS-relate d health effects over time. Allen concluded by 
emphasizing the importance of improved guidance a nd support for physicians as to how to best 
incorporate PFAS exposure into clinical care and pa tient risk reduction to ensure support for highly 
exposed communities desperate for appropriate care.   
                                                           
2 Polytetrafluoroethylene, a polymer PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 185 
Prepublication Copy  “It’s been really difficult to get chronic PFAS exposure and risks posed from this chemical class 
acknowledged by health care providers.” Laurene Allen 
 
Teresa Gerade (Don’t Undermine Memphremagog’s Purity) 
 
Teresa Gerade provided information about landf ills as sources of PFAS contamination and her 
Vermont community’s concern about an adjacent landfill.  PFAS-enriched landfill leachate is often treated 
by nearby wastewater treatment plants. Wastewater tr eatment plants are typically not designed to remove 
PFAS, resulting in the generation of effluent and bios olids enriched in PFAS. PF AS are then reintroduced 
to the water cycle through effluent discharge or ma y enter plants grown in soils amended with sludge-
derived biosolids.  
Gerade focused on information about Vermont’s landfill neighb oring Lake Memphremagog, a 
lake spanning the border of the United Stat es and Canada. The community surrounding Lake 
Memphremagog is particularly con cerned about the local and regional PFAS exposure associated with the 
Vermont landfill and how it affects the health of bot h the lake and the community. Malignant melanoma 
has been found in a certain species of lake fish, raisi ng questions about the health of fish populations. The 
surrounding community has related concerns about the safety of eating freshwater fish from the lake and 
crops grown in biosolid-amended so ils. Gerade suggested the need for PFAS screening levels in human 
blood, like those in place for cholesterol or gluco se, to allow for exposure monitoring over time and 
related risk mitigation.  
Ayesha Khan (Nantucket PFAS Action Group)  
 
Ayesha Khan provided insight about the expe riences of the firefighting community and 
specifically the firefighting and AFFF-exposed
3 community on Nantucket, Massachusetts. Firefighters are 
routinely exposed to PFAS through both their gear and firefighting foams. Although the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends lim iting exposure to PFAS, many firefighters are 
unaware of PFAS or their unique occ upational exposure to the pollutants. As a result, firefighters often 
receive little or no training to mitigate the risk rela ted to gear handling and foam use. This unawareness 
has led to previous practices that caused undue PFAS exposure, such as using AFFF to clean vehicles or 
allowing children to play in AFFF.  
Khan emphasized the importance of medical mon itoring and PFAS bloodwork for firefighters and 
other PFAS-exposed communities. Khan asserted that  such access would establish exposure baselines, 
raise awareness, and empower people who are expo sed to be proactive in reducing exposure and 
managing risk. Khan illustrated the limited and frust rating accessibility of bloodwork by recounting an 
experience with a physician, one who is aware of the PFAS crisis and lectures on PFAS exposures. 
During care for a child, the patient’s parent requ ested PFAS bloodwork. The physician responded by 
trying to dissuade the parent from seeking the testing, saying if PFAS measurements in blood were carried out it would be difficult to frame the informat ion, especially since the ch ild was currently healthy. 
Khan also recounted that the doctor misquoted data  from studies by the Agency for Toxic Substances and 
Disease Registry (ATSDR) that measured PFAS in r esidents of exposed communities throughout the 
United States, stating these studies “did not find much.”  
The physician went so far as to jokingly cite a study that found higher reading ability in children 
whose mothers were prenatally exposed to PFAS. Kh an stated the doctor’s response felt as though they 
were vastly minimizing exposure concerns to the detr iment of informed health care for the patient and 
parent. Khan went on to assert the importance of  improving CDC guidance about PFAS provided to 
clinicians, as the current guidance recommends limiti ng exposure with little or no information about how 
to do so in practice. Khan stated that the vagueness of the current gu idance can result in situations in 
which clinicians become barriers to information or action, thereby imposing a burden on concerned 
                                                           
3 AFFF are aqueous film-forming foams, used in firefighting, that often contain PFAS.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  patients to figure out how to reduce exposure and ad vocate for themselves in a health care setting. Khan 
reiterated the importance of providing candid inform ation about PFAS to exposed communities, as well 
as to health care providers, lawmakers, union leaders, and other decision makers in  order to help exposed 
communities and families rectify their burden of contamination.   
“We are not scientists or doctors. We assume our  government is keeping us safe, and when there 
is a possible link to adverse health risks, we are led to  believe that issue is promptly resolved and not with 
a regrettable substitution.” 
 
“My hope is that [the committee] will educate physic ians to be honest with those of us who have 
been exposed.” Ayesha Khan 
 
Kristen Mello (Westfield Residents Advocating for Themselves [WRAFT]) 
 
Kristen Mello offered perspectives from a PFAS-impacted community as a representative of 
Westfield, Massachusetts. Mello provided contex t about her experience with PFAS exposure by 
explaining she learned about her community’s AFFF- contaminated drinking wa ter in 2016 and founded 
WRAFT in response. An ATSDR study of 459 Westfiel d residents subsequently found that 92 percent of 
the city’s residents had serum concentrations of at  least one PFAS that exceeded the national average.  
In considering the committee’s task regarding ch allenges related to PFAS encountered in health 
care settings, Mello cited the frustrating lack of clin ical guidance for health care providers as a major 
challenge. She noted that the current paucity of clinic al guidance contrasts sharply with the availability of 
scientific information describing exposure assessment of specific human populations, animal studies, and 
toxicological models, and the rigorous collation of such scientific information provided by the ATSDR 
toxicological profile for PFAS.  
Mello strongly stressed the need to collect da ta about PFAS exposure and associated health 
effects in exposed communities, citing the inherent di srespect of the plight of  exposed communities when 
testing efforts are denied or discouraged. Without  paired assessment of PFAS exposure and associated 
health outcomes, Mello suggested, the true scope of adverse health effects associated with specific PFAS 
thresholds cannot be identified, further limiting th e advancement of clinical guidance for health care 
practitioners.  
Mello highlighted health conditions of concern observed in her own community, including 
allergies, autoimmune and immune disorders, asthma and pulmonary disease, colon diseases, reproductive cancers, menstrual and fertility issues in women, diabetes and metabolic disorders, thyroid 
disease, cholesterol and liver disease, osteoarthr itis and osteoporosis, cogn itive and developmental 
disorders, neurological issues, brain cancer, kidney diseases, and bladder cancer. Mello further argued for 
the benefits of data collection in exposed commun ities by highlighting the value of PFAS exposure and 
health assessment in a tailored pub lic health response. For example,  Mello said, blood testing could 
facilitate identification of communities more likel y to be immunocompromised due to PFAS exposure 
when designing COVID-19 intervention or protocols.  
Even in the absence of information framing PFAS e xposure levels in relation to specific health 
outcomes, however, Mello said exposure assessment is critical for affected comm unities. Mello described 
the contamination occurring in exposed communiti es as an intentional crime, without the same 
protections afforded to victims of equally degr ading crimes. Mello argued that the accessibility and 
implementation of such testing validates and respects the plight of those contaminated without their 
knowledge or consent, akin to respecting the rights of a crime victim.  
Mello also commented on the ubiquity of PFAS exposure in the general population, pointing out 
that scientists have identified thousands of PFAS wh ile only nine are being considered as part of the 
committee’s study. She further pointed out exposure v ectors relevant to the general public, including the 
air and consumer products.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 187 
Prepublication Copy  Mello encouraged the committee to recommend am ending guidance for health care practitioners 
to better support exposure reduction, ensure respect and support for those exposed, and enable equitable 
and voluntary data collection to assess PFAS levels and associated health  effects. Additionally, Mello 
emphasized the importance of patient agency and full y informed consent during the care process. She also 
stressed the immediate need to use existing knowle dge to revise clinician guidance and treatment plans 
for those currently exposed to PFAS, rather than  waiting for further data. She also recommended the 
utility of future monitoring and a voluntary national database of exposure and health effects information 
so exposure and health data can be  stored and further explored.  
 
“So we were asked as community liaisons what  challenges we have had with our medical 
providers in dealing with PFAS exposure, and the challe nge is that there’s just no helpful information.”  
 
“You don’t have a problem getting an insurance assessor when your car is hit, you don’t have a 
problem getting an insurance assessor when you ha ve a tornado, but this slow-motion unfolding 
environmental and public health disaster … is inten tionally keeping the informat ion from us so that we 
cannot take action.” Kristen Mello  
 
Tracy Carluccio (Delaware Riverkeeper Network) 
 
Tracy Carluccio summarized perspectives as a co mmunity activist and advocate based in New 
Jersey. Carluccio contextualized her perspec tives by describing the scope of ongoing PFAS 
contamination and action in New Jersey. She acknowledge d the state’s heavy burden of legacy and novel 
environmental contamination, including prolific PFA S contamination, caused by  several companies such 
as DuPont, 3M, and Solvay. In response, the state ha s taken ground-breaking regulatory steps to address 
PFAS, and it was the first to adopt maximum contamin ant levels (MCLs) for drinking water that were 
lower than the health advisory guidelines proposed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).  
Despite New Jersey’s progressive stance on PFAS, however, Carluccio said that the narrative in 
the state is primarily driven by affected communiti es, and large information ga ps still exist. Some blood 
testing has been carried out in specific localities, but there has been limited blood testing across the state 
or near specific industrial sites. The PFAS crisis in New Jersey cannot be fully understood until the public 
has access to data claimed as confidential business in formation by companies producing or using PFAS, 
she said. Additionally, Carluccio argued, thorough exposure assessment, health studies, and medical 
monitoring must be carried out to fully characterize the scope of PFAS contamin ation and related effects 
for New Jersey residents. 
Carluccio provided two specific examples to underscore the importance of community access to 
information and monitoring in pursuit of the most appropriate health care. She described legacy and 
emerging PFAS contamination originating from Solvay, an industrial user of PFAS located in West 
Deptford. Industrial activities by the company were found to contaminate the drinking water of 50,000 residents of the surrounding area with legacy PFNA,
4 first identified in 2013. Since that time, the 
company has shifted to new PFAS to replace legacy compounds, while providing little information to the 
community about the occurrence and health implica tions of these new compounds. Carluccio also stated 
that the company has thus far refused to comply w ith a state directive requiring PFAS users and producers 
to provide information about production activ ities to the state, prompting a lawsuit.  
The lack of data describing community exposur e around Solvay has left the community in a 
precarious position, unable to appropriately steer thei r own health care and family choices. Carluccio also 
detailed PFAS exposure in communities adjacent to m ilitary bases in the state. She emphasized that 
company and agency recalcitran ce to share information about legacy and novel PFAS use and 
contamination actively thwarts the needs of surround ing communities. She suggested that “ignorance is 
not bliss,” as it may lead to misinformed health d ecisions; instead, informed community members gain 
                                                           
4 Perfluorononanoic acid, a PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  agency and can best decide if they  want to avoid tap water, install additional drinking water treatment, 
move out of a contaminated area, or consider e xposure in making reproductive and family decisions.  
 
Loreen Hackett (PFOA Project New York) 
 
Loreen Hackett provided insight about her expe riences as an organizer from Hoosick Falls, New 
York. In 2015 the town was found to be sever ely contaminated with PFAS, specifically PFOA,5 and has 
since been designated as the first PFOA site on the EPA Superfund national priorities list in the United 
States. The town is now home to three federal sit es, as well as several additional state Superfund site 
declarations, with more currently being investigated in the small community.  
Hackett detailed her intimate experiences with PFOA contamination by citing the highly elevated 
levels of PFOA found in her own blood and the blood  of her grandchildren, comparing these staggering 
figures to national averages that are hundreds of times lower. Hackett commented that the alarming levels 
found in her family’s blood required guidance from hea lth care professionals, yet thus far her family and 
community health care needs have been poorly met in a clinical setting. As an example, Hackett described 
a situation shortly after the community learned about  exposure. The New York Department of Health 
organized a community meeting with a pediatrician  who lacked PFAS expertise. The pediatrician 
responded to community questions about health concer ns by stating “I don’t believe any of your illnesses 
are caused by PFOA.” Hackett described feeling mortif ied and frustrated at this response, given the 
community was familiar with existing research  that decisively indicated the opposite.  
Hackett also described results from a community  health study that supported the community’s 
concerns, listing cases of kidney cancer, testicular cancer, thyroid disease, pregnancy-induced hypertension, and ulcerative colitis in the community. Hackett stated the people had to do research for 
themselves, which was arduous and confusing at times.  This fact-finding process took up valuable time 
that could have helped mitigate exposure-related effects in the comm unity. Hackett indicated that state 
and local regulatory agencies are now taking PFAS cont amination more seriously, with the state setting 
more protective drinking water MCLs an d continued community blood testing.  
Hackett stated that too few doctors are trained in  the ramifications of environmental toxins and 
associated care protocols. As a result, Hackett d escribed her habit of bringing research studies to 
appointments with specialists or unfamiliar doctors to illustrate relationships  between PFAS exposure and 
health effects. She indicated that few listen, and sh e is reluctant or unwilling to follow up with those who 
do not listen, therefore missing out on further treat ment and testing options, as well as any associated 
benefits.  
Hackett also mentioned that Hoosic k Falls residents often rely on the closest hospital, which is in 
Bennington, Vermont, which is itself a PFAS-contaminat ed community. Yet even there, Hackett stated, 
many health care providers are unaware of PFAS an d associated health implications. She provided an 
example in which a provider suggested her breast cancer  was genetic despite family history and medical 
history suggesting otherwise. She articulated that h ealth care practitioners unfamiliar with the issue often 
made her feel intellectually inferior because of her lack of formal medical credentials, rather than 
acknowledging and validating her signifi cant health concerns. She stated this dynamic continues to occur 
even with health care providers directly situ ated in currently contaminated communities.  
Hackett also provided an example depicting the bene fit of informed health care, by stating that a 
local general practitioner took time to learn about th e medical ramifications of PFAS exposure; this 
awareness has resulted in concerted follow-up on PFAS-re lated health issues in the immediate community 
to keep pace with the emergence of  health effects. Hackett suggested the implementation of continuing 
education credits to incentivize continued traini ng on environmental health issues for health care 
practitioners.  
Hackett also stressed the need to establish new health care paradigms and protocols specifically 
tailored to exposed communities. For example, she qu estioned whether blood donation is safe in highly 
                                                           
5 Perfluorooctanoic acid, a PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 189 
Prepublication Copy  exposed communities like Hoosick Falls. Additionally,  she suggested that exposed women should be 
informed by obstetrical/gynecological care providers that PFAS will be passed to babies in utero and in 
breast milk. Health care mantras like “breast milk is best” need to be thoroughl y reevaluated in exposed 
communities, given that breastfeeding may double or triple PFAS levels in infants in comparison with 
their mothers’ levels. Families in exposed comm unities cannot make informed reproductive choices or 
other family decisions without information tailored to their situation. Hackett relayed concerns from 
community members now expressing guilt at unknowi ngly poisoning their child over the course of 
pregnancy and breastfeeding. Hackett also suggested th at health care norms, such as visiting times, need 
to be adjusted to better fit environmental concerns  because health care discussion about PFAS require 
more attention than a short office visit. 
Hackett emphasized the need for health care pr ofessionals to trust their patients and their 
observations and knowledge on PFAS issues. By trusti ng local community members, practitioners and 
scientists can better use community data and experien ces in building effective health care for people who 
have been exposed. Hackett described her partic ipation on the Community Advisory Panel with 
University of Albany for their CDC-awarded multisite  study, collecting and sharing published health 
studies related to PFAS for the study website. Working in this context, Hacke tt stated, the study design 
has shifted to include more tests beyond liver, kidney, and thyroid function, as immune suppression, 
endocrine disruption, neurological effects, reproduc tive issues, and breast cancer become increasingly 
salient community concerns.  
Hackett also detailed ongoing contamination concer ns in her community due to continued stack 
emissions and exposure to unregul ated, short-chain compounds designed to replace PFOA that studies 
show to be as toxic as long-chain, legacy PFAAs.6 As a result of regrettable substitution, Hackett advised 
that bioaccumulation and total body burden of numerous  PFAS has to be considered for those requesting 
medical direction through continued blood testing beyond the limited number of PFAS currently under 
scrutiny.  
 
Patrick Elder (Military Poisons) 
 
Patrick Elder articulated concerns and insights about the understudied role of PFAS exposure 
from food. Elder stated that he believes there is t oo much emphasis on PFAS levels in drinking water, 
with too limited a focus on PFAS exposure from food, pa rticularly seafood. Elder contextualized this 
position by detailing his experiences testing surface wa ter and seafood items near his home in southern 
Maryland, adjacent to the Naval Air Station Patuxent River Webster Fiel d Annex. Elder’s efforts resulted 
in the detection of significant PFAS concentrati ons in surface water and seafood items. Elder published 
the results in the local press, leading to concern and outrage in the community. He indicated that a 
subsequent public meeting with Navy officials resulte d in an unsatisfactory exchange of information with 
the local community, as Navy officials reiterated that the chemicals in question were no longer in use and 
there was no medical treatment to reduce PFAS in  the human body. The community sought increased 
testing on seafood items and water, expressing disagreem ent with the Navy’s assertion that not enough is 
known about PFAS in seafood and the human body to justify immediate intervention.  
Elder further highlighted the untenable data gaps for PFAS in food in the United States through a 
comparison: the European Food Safety Authority recommendations suggest up to 86 percent of PFAS 
exposure stems from food intake while the U.S. Food  and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a statement 
suggesting there is no evidence that dietary choices s hould consider PFAS contamination. Overall, Elder 
emphasized the importance of better limiting PFAS exposure from food and seafood items in the United 
States and incorporating this vector of exposure when  considering health effects and health studies. 
 
  
                                                           
6 Perfluoroalkyl acids, a class of PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Hope Grosse (Buxmont Coalition for Safer Water) 
 
Hope Grosse described her experiences in Bucks and Montgomery counties (BuxMont), 
Pennsylvania. Grosse described a lif etime of exposure due to drinking water contaminated by AFFF use 
at Warminster Naval Base and W illow Grove Naval Air Station.  
Grosse reported that people in the BuxMont comm unity have voiced concern regarding their 
PFAS exposure and a number of diseases and health conditions including thyroid cancer, non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma, kidney cancer, testicular cancer, breast cancer, liver cancer, brain tumors, ovarian cancer, lung 
cancer, bladder cancer, melanoma, bone cancer, altere d metabolism and obesity, fertility issues, birth 
defects, diabetes, cholesterol, high blood pressure, preeclampsia in pregnant women, decreased infant 
birthweight, autoimmune diseases, chronic inflammati on, immune response, and alterations in liver 
enzyme levels. The implications of exposure are not limited to physical ailments: the community has also 
collectively experienced serious experiences with fear, a nxiety, grief, emotional and physical stress, and a 
feeling of being forgotten.  
Grosse said she personally wrestles with an unbelieva ble lack of trust, fear, and emotional scars 
accumulated related to the premature death of her fa ther, her own early cancer diagnosis, and deaths of 
multiple cherished community member s. Grosse further revealed that she struggles with shame and fear 
due to the feeling that she inadvertently poisoned children because she was unaware of her exposure. 
Grosse also described the financial stress imposed  on exposed communities to pay for bottled water, 
increased public water rates, home filtration, diagnosti c testing, medical fees, and loss of wages due to 
health issues and related loss of productivity.  
Grosse stressed the importance of increased awar eness and resources to better educate health care 
practitioners about the health effects of PFAS. She indicat ed that communities need to be able to trust that 
their caregivers and practitioners are knowledgeable on the issue and capable of advising action to 
address their concerns. She stated that the community f eels they have no local medical resources or health 
care providers to answer their questions or advocate for them in the health care system. During her own 
health struggles, she said she felt belittled and emba rrassed for asking questions about environmental 
health and its relation to her health maladies. Grosse recommended considering practical measures to 
improve the patient experience for exposed people, su ch as requiring questions about exposure history or 
concerns in health questionnaires and forms or designing better collaborations between insurance 
companies and physicians so practitioners can readily issue scripts for bloodwork and diagnostics that are 
covered by insurance.  
Grosse stressed that such clini cal guidance must particularly provide proper di rection detailing 
how to best protect and treat children, given th e particular risks of PFAS exposure during critical 
developmental periods. Mothers need awareness and gui dance to test for PFAS in blood and breast milk 
and make effective parenting choices based on exposure results to best safeguard children in utero or 
during breastfeeding. Grosse mentione d she lacked such information and agency raising her own children 
and would have greatly valued th e knowledge and associated opportunity  to switch to filtered water or 
bottle-feed her children to reduce their early-life exposures.  
Grosse also emphasized that blood testing rema ins imperative to characterize exposure and 
changes in PFAS blood levels over time. Grosse posited th at the value of blood testing is not predicated 
on how well the derived information can be explained or compared to thresholds. Rather, documentation 
of the exposure can retrospectively serve commun ities, as health science pr ogresses to more fully 
understand the health ramifications  of exposure. Grosse also asserted that blood testing facilitates 
appropriate health planning, as expo sed individuals have a right to pr eventive health measures and testing 
tailored to their exposure reality, such as titer testi ng to deduce PFAS-altered va ccine responses or tests 
for PSA and liver enzymes.  
 
“When I would go to the doctor’s and tell them about some of the exposures of over 50 chemicals 
that I was exposed to, the doctors would laugh and say no. Clearly they didn’t have any information about 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 191 
Prepublication Copy  environmental components [of disease]. They made me  feel small, they made me feel stupid and 
embarrassed even just asking the question.” Hope Grosse  
 
Le’Meshia Whittington (North Carolina Black Alliance) 
 
Le’Meshia Whittington discussed the perspectives an d needs of Black and Brown communities in 
North Carolina. Whittington emphasized that Black and Brown communities face cumulative impacts in 
addition to environmental health concerns, resulti ng in disparate burdens and concerns for exposed 
minority communities well beyond drinking water. Wh ittington exemplified this reality as related to 
PFAS exposure in the Cape Fear River system in sout heastern North Carolina. In 2017, the public learned 
about significant PFAS contamination in regional surf ace water and drinking water due to the industrial 
activities of Chemours in Fayetteville, North Carolina. Whittington highlighted that this news broke amid 
a history of climate-related disasters (e.g., hurricanes) that repeatedly damaged the regional water system 
over decades. As a result, with the occurrence of Hurricane Florence in 2018, regional communities were 
severely affected by floodwaters contaminated with coal ash, animal waste, and industrial wastes, as well 
as PFAS. However, the ramifications of PFAS-laden floodwaters were not addressed following Florence.  
Whittington described the multifaceted and overla pping exposure vectors of concern for Black 
and Brown communities, highlighting that the in terplay of these factors can cause undue cumulative 
exposure and subsequent harm. She highlighted that about 35 percent of North Carolinians are renters, 
leading to potential exposure from carpets, textiles, a nd building materials with no capacity to remove or 
replace these items. Whittington also pointed out 80 of the state’s 100 counties are considered food 
deserts or contain food deserts, where residents f ace significant hurdles accessing fresh fruits, vegetables, 
and other sustainable foods. In these areas, people may unduly rely on packaged, processed, and fast 
foods prepared using PFAS-laden water, following stor age or transport in food packaging materials that 
contain PFAS. This type of food sourcing leads to concentrated PFAS exposure. Whittington again 
highlighted the additive impact of many cumulative factors, noting many of these food desert areas in North Carolina are downstream from continued cont amination from Chemours and are also routinely 
affected by climate-related flooding events. 
Whittington also pointed out that occupational e xposures require increased health monitoring, 
considering the cumulative risk imposed when different  industrial activities collide in a given region. She 
stated that more information is needed describing how food service, essen tial, agricultural, and industrial 
workers may be exposed occupationally  given inherent contact with pot ential PFAS sources in those jobs, 
as well as increased risk to those wo rkers when their employment location is in a region rife with known 
contamination. For example, Whittington questioned how  agricultural and abattoir workers who work in 
PFAS-contaminated zones may be rout inely exposed through industrial air emissions and constant contact 
with PFAS-imbued agricultural products. Whittington s uggested increased institutional study and support 
for workers through the Occupational Safety and Hea lth Administration or other agencies, and the need 
for increased health care provisions for those closer in  proximity and more consis tently exposed to this 
group of chemicals.  
Whittington also highlighted high-priority po pulations within wider Black and Brown 
communities. She identified pregnant women and child ren as two such priority populations given the 
demonstrated opportunity for maternal transmissi on of PFAS to their childre n. Whittington stressed the 
need for blood testing for expecting parents and ch ildren, and increased attention to fertility concerns. 
Whittington also highlighted veterans, people in la w enforcement custody, people with disabilities, 
firefighters, residents of care and extended-s tay facilities, and students as underserved priority 
populations. She stated that blood testing for PFAS should be made available and accessible to these and 
all demographic groups, with a critical need for exposure assessment over time.  
Furthermore, Whittington stressed, it is important to have updated clini cal guidance about PFAS 
blood testing, health concerns, and standards of car e for health care professionals. This information must 
be disseminated among the wide range  of practitioners, agencies, and institutions serving high-priority 
populations and wider Black and Brown communities. Whittington stressed that such guidance is also 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  urgently needed to ensure health  insurance claims related to PFAS exposure are viable and compensable, 
increasing access to exposure-informed health care.  
 
 “This is what we are asking: our communities are willing to undergo testing, they will participate 
in studies, it just needs to be designed fo r our communities, alongside our communities.” 
Le’MeshiaWhittington  
 
Mike Watters (Gray’s Creek Residents United Against PFAS in Our Wells and Rivers) 
 
Mike Watters provided perspective as a resident of a community affected by the industrial 
activities of Chemours in Cumberland and Bladen counties in North Carolina. Watters described 
concerted efforts to engage his community to ensure  awareness and engagement. One such effort included 
a community health survey of 100 people that highlig hted shared community health concerns related to 
PFAS exposure, including thyroid function and hype rthyroidism, weight gain, arthritis, asthma, 
autoimmune disorders, skin cancer, chronic inflam matory conditions, vitamin D deficiency, type 2 
diabetes, prediabetes, hair loss, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, high triglycerides, irritable bowel 
syndrome, and itchy scalp. Watters emphasized that co ntinued measurements of PFAS in blood are urgent 
to associate these health concerns with PFAS concentra tions and to allow health studies to catch up with 
the state of exposure. Watters also stressed the va lue to the community of baseline exposure assessment 
and the importance of tracking exposure over time through continued blood testing given evolving 
exposure scenarios. This work is currently being don e through the North Carolina State University GenX 
(PFAS) Exposure Study with pa rticipation from people in the community, as well as pets from their 
homes. 
Watters also discussed understudied vectors of e xposure, such as fish, air, rain, locally grown 
vegetables, cooking water, cleaning water, clothing washed in contaminated water, and showers. The 
contribution of these sources to PFAS exposure and asso ciated health outcomes are poorly characterized. 
These understudied exposure sources therefore stand as sustained concerns for community members. 
Watters suggested the continued need for more monitoring to keep pace with the unique exposure 
scenario in North Carolina and to address these underst udied routes of exposure, given growing evidence 
that air emissions of novel PFAS continue to affect  a growing number of residents across the region. 
 
Emily Donovan (Clean Cape Fear) 
 
Emily Donovan provided insight about the commun ity experience of residents in southeastern 
North Carolina subject to high levels of PFAS e xposure. Donovan explained that regional communities 
have been overexposed to hundreds of novel and le gacy PFAS for decades because of regional industrial 
activities and that contamination is continuing. D onovan noted that existing health guidance does not 
adequately address the amount or types of ongoing PF AS exposure in the state. She also described the 
frustrating inability of state and federal agencies to  halt ongoing discharge of the complex PFAS mixture 
impacting the region. She noted the prevalence of  PFAS occurrence in regional wildlife, sediment, 
rainwater, and consumer products, pointing out that communities in the region are concerned about PFAS 
exposure from these and other sources given the ex cessive PFAS exposure from their drinking water. 
Donovan said that clinical guidance tailored to ongoi ng exposure in the state must consider this and 
protect community members from routes of exposures beyond drinking water.  
Donovan noted the community’s limited capacity to obtain blood testing for the suite of PFAS 
found in North Carolina as a major and exasperating ch allenge. Analytical methods that screen for all 
relevant PFAS are uncommon, and those that do exis t are expensive or possess detection limits that are 
too high to be useful. Donovan mentioned that she has heard commentary that the exposure profile experienced in southeast North Carolina is “too uniqu e” to warrant development of rigorous testing; she 
countered this idea by highlighting the use of PFA S produced by Chemours at manufacturing facilities 
across the nation.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 193 
Prepublication Copy  Donovan cited the GenX Exposure Study as an exampl e of blood testing that occurred regionally, 
which found a range of novel and leg acy PFAS in 400 local residents. Ho wever, she asserted that a larger 
proportion of the more than 300,000 people exposed should be included in further testing, citing the 
opportunity for the population to be used in larger health effects studies, given the long history of unique exposure across the area and documented health concer ns shared across the population. She asserted this 
overexposed, large population is the “statistical power” re quired to identify understudied health effects so 
far missed by institutional investigation.  
Donovan presented specific and heart-wrenching ex amples of personal contacts who are currently 
uncertain and worried about links between serious h ealth conditions and their history of exposure. She 
detailed a litany of regional health concerns, incl uding pediatric bone cancers, osteosarcoma and brain 
tumors, pediatric kidney cancers and diseases, bladder cancer, gallbladder dysfunction, testicular cancer, pancreatic cancer, liver cancer, nona lcoholic fatty liver disease, leukemia, blood cancers, colon cancer, 
thyroid cancer and dysfunction, autoimmune diseases, digestive issues, multiple sclerosis, skin disorders, 
infertility, premature births, developmental delays , learning disabilities, autism, breast cancer, and non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma.  
Donovan stated that the currently available data indi cate increased risk of negative health effects, 
including birth defects, kidney disease, and increased cholesterol related to PFOA exposure. However, 
many PFAS found in southeast North Carolina were  designed as replacements for PFOA, yet no such 
thresholds exist for these next-generation PFAS. D onovan stated that North Carolina communities and 
beyond need relevant clinical guidance that adequately  identifies, protects, and monitors those who have 
high levels of diverse PFAS exposure, as current c linician guidance falls well short of these goals. 
Donovan specified that the regional community needs information about relationships between specific 
health outcomes and cumulative serum levels for to tal PFAS in their blood. Health care guidance must 
consider the complex mixture of exposures experi enced by communities and go beyond clinical guidance 
for legacy PFAS. Donovan cited her current experien ce as an example, where she often finds herself 
informing her children’s pediatrician about the most cu rrent research rather than vice versa; she described 
this as counterintuitive and discouraging.  
Donovan exhorted the committee to investigate in formation gaps confoundi ng or limiting health 
studies, suggesting that underreporting of relevant to xicity and health data by corporate producers 
contributes to damaging data gaps. Donovan stated the committee and the public should have full access 
to industry data related to production, toxicity, and health outcomes to fully explore the range of linkages 
between human health and complex PFAS exposures in this region.  
 
“Sadly, it feels like guinea pigs are treated better, because at least their exposures are thoroughly 
studied for the betterment of humanity.” 
 
“At the moment I’m informing my pediatrician a bout the latest toxicity studies related to PFAS 
placental transfer and breast milk contamination. This is backwards and depressing.” Emily Donovan  
 
Cheryl Cail (South Carolina Indian Af fairs Commission/SC Idle No More) 
 
Cheryl Cail discussed her experiences as a Nativ e American community member and a member 
of a PFAS-impacted community in Horry County, South Carolina.  
The path to PFAS advocacy started for Cail when her 20-year-old son Trevor was diagnosed with 
testicular cancer. She shared a photo of her son’s b ack showing bright red spots indicative of unknown 
but acute dermatitis. Cail explained they went to the doctor to identify a cau se and solution; the local 
doctor was not aware of environmental health concer ns and did not ask the right questions to quickly 
arrive at a diagnosis. As a result, Trevo r’s cancer progressed unchecked for 9 months.  
Cail related that Trevor was working and attending school adjacent to Myrtle Beach Air Force 
Base, though at the time they did not realize the impor tance of this location and their regional exposure. 
Cail explained they then watched a movie entitled “T he Devil We Know” about  PFAS contamination in 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  West Virginia, and she started questioning if PFAS were  the cause of Trevor’s testicular cancer given the 
demonstrated link between this type of cancer and PFOA exposure. The family also found a map detailing 
PFAS contaminated sites around the United States and realized their community’s proximity to Myrtle 
Beach Air Force Base was problematic, as massive co ncentrations of PFAS had been found in the 
environment around the base despite remedial activit ies. Cail noted that right before the COVID-19 
pandemic more state agencies began mobilizing to ad dress the issue within her community and across the 
state, but this was only after years of inaction. Sh e noted that she had seen this before, as institutions 
prioritize “wealth before health.”  
With more information about regional PFAS expos ures, Cail and her family started trying to find 
answers from the medical community regarding how to  get PFAS blood testing and how to get treatment 
for their exposure and related health effects. Cail mentioned that while her community is only beginning 
to understand the scope of PFAS cont amination and related health effects, they have seen a concerning 
increase in cancers, autoimmune disorders, fertility is sues, and birth-related defects. She stated that 
regional physicians were una ware of PFAS, its effects, and even the regional exposure event itself. Cail 
also described searching for PFAS blood testing options  and the frustrating experience of trying to relay 
that information to a local physician. They found that regional testing was limited to people with 
occupational-related exposure, such as firefighters. Cail related that this left her son feeling defeated, but 
she saw a challenge that the committee and othe r PFAS-focused organizations could resolve.  
Cail closed her statements by detailing specifi c asks from the committee, such as establishing 
PFAS as an environmental health issue and educati ng those working in the medical community. This 
education should involve establishing testing and tr eatment protocols for those in affected communities 
and those with diagnosed medical conditions linked to PFAS. She also petitioned the committee to seek 
expansive data collection to meaningfully assess the fu ll scope of PFAS health effects in order to best 
design health-related services in exposed communities,  including monitoring for children. Cail also 
relayed a statement from a local physician who has no w treated thousands of exposed individuals in her 
community, who said that physicians need a protocol much like the protocol for lead poisoning; it is a nationwide issue, and so is PFAS poisoning.   
 
Stel Bailey (Fight for Zero) 
 
Stel Bailey offered perspectives as a cancer su rvivor and member of a military family from 
Florida’s space coast. Bailey first recounted her pers onal journey with PFAS exposure to explain her path 
to advocacy. She explained that while her husba nd was deployed, multiple family members were 
diagnosed with various cancers in a span of a few months. Given this unusual frequency, she herself was told by multiple doctors that it was “impossible” for her to have cancer, and six different doctors provided 
care prior to reaching a cancer diagnosis despite continued breathing problems and swollen glands. 
Within this harrowing process, Bailey was asked, “where did you grow up?” and subsequently 
made it her life’s work to figure out how and why he r background might be related to cancer outcomes. 
This endeavor took a major turn in 2018 with the release of a key report from the U.S. Department of 
Defense (DoD) explaining that the region around the facilities of the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, Cape Canaveral Air Force Base, a nd Patrick Air Force Base was highly contaminated 
with PFAS, with up to 4.3 milli on parts per trillion (ppt) of PFOS
7 and PFOA found in surrounding 
groundwater.  
As a result of that report and prior community work investigating autoimmune and cancer cases 
in the surrounding population, Bailey connected with oncologist Julie Greenwalt. This physician went to 
high school near Patrick Air Force Base and was awar e that dozens of high school classmates had since 
been diagnosed with cancer, starting at very young ages. Bailey stressed the importance of this advocate 
and resource for their community, stating “this suppo rt meant everything in our community.” Bailey 
suggested that without Greenwalt’s personal experi ence and concern, the surrounding community would 
                                                           
7 Perfluorooctanesulfonic aci d, a PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 195 
Prepublication Copy  still be woefully unaware of health issues related to their substantial PFAS exposure. Since 2018, Dr. 
Greenwalt has helped the community document 54 cases of various types of cancer in individuals under 
age 40, which served to bring awareness and resources to the issue. This comm unity health information 
also helped frame relationships between health outco mes and PFAS levels in dr inking water after it was 
discovered that regional drinking water was also gro ssly contaminated with PFAS. Bailey chronicled that 
a large group of people in the community helped cr owdsource community health information and address 
this issue, yet many have been lost since the 201 8 DoD report revealing the scope of contamination, 
including a girl who passed away from brain cancer just 3 days after her 17th birthday.  
Community efforts have more recently focu sed on mapping autoimmune and cancer cases 
surrounding Patrick Air Force Base. Using this crow dsourced data, the community was able to push 
forward their own health assessment in the county. The assessment found an increased risk of certain 
cancers, including urinary, bladder, leukemia, liv er, lymphoma, breast, and testicular cancer. Other 
concerns captured by the health assessment include li ver damage, increased risk of thyroid disease, and 
birth defects. Bailey also described continued rout es of exposure that concern the community, such as 
consumption of regional fish and wildlife and prod uce irrigated with contaminated water. Bailey 
mentioned that drinking water and groundwater cont amination remain problematic, noting the emergence 
of short-chain, understudied compounds such as PFBA8 in these sources.  
Bailey emphasized that her primary message to the committee centers on the fact that early 
detection of cancer saves lives and reduces health car e costs. Since learning about the PFAS problem in 
tandem with regional medical resources encouraging care, Bailey provided multiple examples of early 
interventions across the community that  served to detect or treat cancer or other health problems before 
severe disease. Bailey concluded by outlining speci fic community needs from health care providers, 
including physician education, medical monitoring, PFAS blood testing, preventive health screening and 
assessments, documentation on medical records of PFA S exposure and environmental health attributes, 
and recognized guidance that ensures insurance cove rage. Bailey particularly emphasized the need to 
normalize the inclusion of such questions as “Have yo u been exposed to any environmental toxins or 
chemicals in your home or workplace?” and “Where do you live?” on medical forms and records.   
“We are doing physicians a big disservice by not prov iding them the help or information. Lacking 
this guidance is only harming people . We need action to save lives now.” Stel Bailey  
 
Several other people at the Eastern Town Hall pr ovided public testimony, which is available on 
YouTube:
9  
 
Andrea Amico, Testing for Pease 
Katie L. Bryant, Clean Haw River 
Jovita Lee, Democracy Green Beth Markesino, North Carolina Stop GenX in Our Water Meg Seymour, National Center for Health Research Yolanda Taylor, Advance Carolina 
Sanja Whittington, Democracy Green 
     
 
                                                           
8 Perfluorobutanoic acid is a PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
9 See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YrYSj9B PbEQ&list=PLGTMA6Qkejf imvAGwR7o_7hP9nXbfF 
fcr&index=24 (accessed June 29, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  MIDDLE TOWN HALL 
 
Andi Rich (Save Our Water [S.O.H2O]) 
 
Andi Rich offered insight as a community member from Marinette, Wisconsin, home to the JCI 
Fire Technology Center. This site is considered th e third-largest PFAS contamination site in the United 
States. Rich described the extent of contaminati on around the site, stating that PFAS levels in 
groundwater around the site reach 400,000 ppt, and th e contamination plume has spread for miles around 
the site. Rich mentioned community concern about di scharge of PFAS-laden effluent into regional surface 
waters, application of contaminated biosolids on agri cultural lands, and potential air contamination related 
to continued onsite outdoor testing involving unknown PFAS.  
Rich also described an ongoing class action la wsuit focused on PFOA and PFOS levels in well 
water, noting that the suit does not consider peopl e exposed through other, more complex exposure 
pathways that affect the community. Rich indi cated this leaves residents poorly informed and 
inadequately prepared to make d ecisions in the lawsuit, which in turn affects the fairness of payout 
claims. She said that lawsuit participants and co mmunity members have repeatedly requested blood 
testing and medical monitoring to further understand their exposure. These requests have been met with 
sustained resistance. Rich indicated  that the community has been told that PFAS exposure does not equate 
to illness, that blood testing would not be useful, and that blood testing is not recommended. Rich pointed 
out that blood testing would be highly useful to en sure lawsuit payouts are based on internal exposure, as 
payouts are currently slated to be distributed arbitrarily.  
Rich shared some personal health history to fu rther highlight the utility of PFAS blood testing 
and care guidelines for practitioners. She related th at a physician recommended bloodwork to check 
thyroid function, which overwhelmed  and frustrated Rich given her awareness of the association between 
PFAS exposure and thyroid health. The doctor tried to  comfort Rich, but Rich found out the doctor was 
visiting from Nashville and had no know ledge of local exposure issues. Ri ch stated that practices such as 
traveling practitioners makes blood testing, medical monitoring, and results-based guidelines that much more imperative to ensure environmental health fact ors are comprehensively and continuously considered 
by transient health care providers. Rich also stated  that she has not yet sought the recommended thyroid 
bloodwork, due to logistical constraints, though she said she would be far more likely to prioritize follow-
up if blood testing indicated PFAS exposure. Rich compared the utility of PFAS blood testing to the 
breast cancer gene ( BRCA ) test that detects a person’s genetic pr oclivity for the disease. Each test serves 
as an indication of the increased potential for illn ess that can inform prev entive care routines.  
Rich went on to state that Marinette is an impove rished community where fe w can afford the cost 
of PFAS blood testing. The majority of community members have been denied covered testing through 
state agencies and insurance providers. Rich sai d that the committee’s recommendations have the 
potential to improve care and community health ou tcomes by making sought-after care accessible and 
affordable, and she urged the committee to reco mmend blood testing and medical monitoring for 
residents in exposed communities, ensuring those expo sed through complex pathways are included. Rich 
also emphasized that the committee should actively a void “not doing anything b ecause of lack of data, 
and not collecting data because of a lack of evidence of harm.” 
 
“How can above average incidence of PFAS-rela ted illness be identified in a community where 
the doctors aren’t in town long enough to identify the trend?” 
 
 “We need help putting a stop to the contamina tion, as the corporate polluters are far more 
powerful than our voices.” Andi Rich 
 
  
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 197 
Prepublication Copy  Laura Olah (Citizens for Safe Water Around Badger) 
 
Laura Olah commented as a community member a ffected by the Badger Army Ammunition Plant 
in Wisconsin. Olah’s remarks focused  on the major lack of exposure information available to the public 
and the urgent need for medical monitoring. Olah st ated that minimizing PFAS exposure leads to reduced 
health risks, but communities and physicians trying to accomplish this run into challenges trying to obtain 
PFAS exposure information in individuals and in the environment. She provided several examples 
illustrating the pervasive institutional secrecy that pr events transparency about exposure and risk.  
She described a public meeting ho sted by the U.S. Army to discuss groundwater contamination 
that has migrated offsite, contaminating rural drinki ng water wells and discharging into the Wisconsin 
River. Hydrogeological experts recommended testing drinking wells beyond the currently monitored area, 
including on the other side of the Wisconsin Rive r. Army personnel argued against this, saying there 
would be no way to ensure PFAS in well water was derived from the base, and they were not certain 
which wells should be tested. Olah highlighted this as “ridiculous,” pointing out that all wells should be 
tested given uncertainty about which wells are most at  risk as there are no offsite groundwater data. Olah 
also described several frustrating experiences seeking existing information about PFAS in drinking water. 
For example, a request for information about PFAS in drinking water around Volk Air National Guard base required a formal Freedom of Information Act request, which has now been pending for 3 years. 
Another request for a written report describing PFA S contamination around a military base in Tennessee 
was also unmet, and is now 2 years old. Olah also hi ghlighted that this lack of transparency was not 
limited to the military, as private corporations refer to PFAS products like AFFF formulations as 
proprietary mixtures or confidential business inform ation and do not disclose PFAS content in their 
products. This lack of information makes it impossibl e to assess and prevent exposure and possible health 
risks.  
Olah asserted that we cannot predict the potential implications and future benefits of medical 
testing today, but without this data, exposed communi ties face battles akin to Vietnam War veterans who 
are still fighting for presumptive care based on expo sure to Agent Orange and other toxicants. PFAS 
blood testing helps baseline exposures and raises aw areness so people can take steps in reducing 
exposures. Baseline testing could help answer health qu estions in the future and help secure health studies 
in communities at risk  
 
 “Given all these barriers [to PFAS exposure info rmation], the public and the medical community 
cannot identify which patients are at greatest risk to and harm from PFAS; therefore, our care must be 
presumptive.”  
 
“Without medical monitoring data now, presumptive care will be out of reach for civilians and 
service members and children exposed to  PFAS now and in 50 years from now.” Laura Olah 
 
Samraa Luqman (Concerned Residents for South Dearborn) 
 
Samraa Luqman offered insights as an environmental advocate and a Yemeni-American 
community member from the South End in Dearbor n, Michigan. Luqman framed her remarks by 
providing context about her community, describing the South End of Dearborn as a community that grew 
around Ford Motor Company. The continued need for cheap labor attracted immigrant populations over 
time, with a more recent influx of Middle Easter n immigrants. A high percentage of the population 
possess limited English skills, are considered low inco me, rely on some kind of food or government 
assistance, and rent their homes. The surrounding area is also home to various industrial activities, in 
addition to the Ford Motor Company, that use diverse types of environmental pollution. PFAS contamination has recently been identified in the area, resulting in the inclusion of the town on 
Michigan’s PFAS Action Response Team website.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Luqman went on to highlight the importan ce of considering PFAS exposure beyond drinking 
water, including inhalation, dermal contact, and maternal offloading of PFAS from mother to child. These 
understudied exposure vectors are ongoing in the South End, along with continuous air quality issues, 
lead exposure, and other environmental health concerns. Luqman emphasized the importance of 
considering such cumulative multiple exposures, c iting sustained community concern about deciphering 
causality or relationships between observed health effects and PFAS in what is clearly a complex 
exposure scenario. Luqman highlighted that PFAS bl ood testing can help clarify required follow-up care 
by identifying exposed individuals most prone to  PFAS-related health effects. Luqman expressed 
particular concern about the relationship between PFA S exposure and immune impacts in the context of 
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. She stated that COVID-19 outcomes have been worse for her community compared with nonexposed  communities. She also stated that a lack of PFAS exposure 
information for her community affects behavioral c hoices with real-world consequences. Luqman offered 
the example that someone from the South End expo sed to PFAS may be more vulnerable to COVID-19 
and require more diligent mask use compared with  someone residing 10 miles away, but would never 
know this given the ongoing lack of exposure information.  
Luqman also discussed the need for medical prof essionals to have awareness about environmental 
contamination and its potential implications, even decades after a person’s leaving a contaminated area. 
She highlighted that health risks from environmenta l exposures must be assessed and considered by state 
agencies and health care practitioners; then this inform ation must be provided to residents and patients to 
ensure full awareness of exposure. She provided an  example of a community member who moved away 
from the South End area and is now dealing with cancer approximately 20 years later. Luqman stated that 
this person’s doctor explained to them that despite  moving away, the carcinogens and pollutants accrued 
while in the area do not go away. Luqman also unders cored the need for health and exposure information 
to be communicated in culturally appropriat e ways, acknowledging and overcoming language and 
sociocultural barriers. 
 
Cathy Wusterbarth (Need Our Water) 
 
Cathy Wusterbarth offered insights as a comm unity member from Oscoda, Michigan. This 
community is adjacent to the Wurtsmith Air Force Base and is subject to major contamination of regional 
groundwater and surface water from AFFF use on the b ase. This widespread contamination has resulted 
in historical and ongoing PFAS exposure for service and community members, as well as the area’s fish 
and wildlife.  
Wusterbarth’s remarks focused on several prim ary community needs: PFAS blood testing, 
improved guidance for health care practitioners, expos ure assessment in the environment, and exposure 
mitigation. Wusterbarth highlighted the movie No Defense  as a crucial example of the health effects of 
PFAS contamination. The film chronicles the serio us lifelong health effects experienced by Mitchell 
Minor and his family, residents of Oscoda. Wusterbarth also introduced James Bussey, a service member in Oscoda. Wusterbarth explained that Bussey was t oo ill to present to the committee, but had asked her 
to provide his medical records for committee consideration. These records include a long list of ailments 
and physician recommendations based on his expos ure to PFAS, which was documented through blood 
testing.  
Wusterbarth emphasized that these real-world examples capture a crucial disconnect between 
exposure information and health outcomes, which can easily be rectified by improved access to PFAS 
blood testing. Wusterbarth declared testing should begin immediately to establish baseline exposure levels. Annual testing should occur thereafter, just as is done for other risk factor measurements, such as 
cholesterol. Wusterbath also identified that give n the presence of PFAS in 98 percent of the U.S. 
population, everyone should have access to blood tes ting. However, priority should be given to 
communities and individuals with identified or hypot hesized high-level PFAS exposure. Wusterbarth also 
suggested that testing should be implemented usi ng simple, affordable labs , highlighting a recently 
opened laboratory in Oscoda as an example. Wusterba rth also recommended that all PFAS be included in 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 199 
Prepublication Copy  blood testing, unless specific PFAS measurements ar e required to discern the role and liability of a 
specific polluter or product.  
Wusterbarth further described a crisis of trust,  stating that her community was experiencing the 
degradation of trust with the very institutions th ey believed would protect them, such as EPA, other 
government agencies, and the military. She detaile d discouraging recent information from the DoD, 
noting that more than 700 military installations ha ve now been recognized as PFAS hot spots, starting 
from just one in 2012. She also stated that hea lth care providers have a duty to discern the causes of 
disease in their patients, but without guidance from the CDC or other medical authorities, practitioners are 
unaware of health risks associated with PFAS exposure to the detriment of patient care. Wusterbarth also 
emphasized the gravity of the committee’s recommendati ons based on the town halls, stating that state 
agencies and communities are relying on the forthc oming guidance document to inform physicians and 
care. She shared a personal experience in which she provided PFAS information to her doctors, only to be 
told this information was too lengthy to review d espite her history of cancer and immunological disease. 
Wusterbarth stressed the need for swift action by th e committee to immediately curtail ongoing harm in 
exposed communities.   
“We’ve tested the fish; we’ve t ested the deer; we’ve tested th e groundwater, the waterways, and 
the foam. When are we going to test the people?” 
 
“The only risk [of testing] is to the polluters who do not want us to link them to our exposure.” 
“This study is a result of the PFAS communities telling you changes are needed.” 
Cathy Wusterbarth 
 
Sandy Wynn Stelt (Wolverine Co mmunity Advisory Committee,  
Michigan PFAS Action Response Team) 
 
Sandy Wynn-Stelt lives in a PFAS-impacted co mmunity, Belmont, Michigan. Stelt opened her 
remarks by sharing her own story of PFAS exposure.  Wynn-Stelt and her husband moved to Belmont in 
1992, seeking an idyllic and quiet home. They were not aware that the Christmas tree farm adjacent to the 
property was a dumping site for a major PFAS user, Wo lverine Worldwide. In 2016 her husband’s health 
rapidly deteriorated, and after only a few short w eeks, he died of liver cancer, which Wynn-Stelt 
described as an unbelievable loss. Shortly thereafter, the Michigan Department of Environment, Great 
Lakes, and Energy tested her drinking water, and Wynn-Stelt learned the well water she and her husband 
had drank for more than 20 years was contaminated  with PFAS at levels up to 80,000 ppt. On learning 
about her exposure, Wynn-Stelt sought blood testing.  She described this process as challenging. She 
ultimately paid $800 for blood testing through a comm ercial laboratory in California. Her bloodwork 
indicated alarmingly high levels of PFHxS, PFOA, and PFOS, well above levels seen in blood studies as 
part of the National Health and Nutrition Examina tion Survey (NHANES) and in some other exposed 
communities.  
Wynn-Stelt followed up with her community doctor regarding her bloodwork results; she 
described this physician as “very proactive and engage d.” She stated that her doctor reviewed the ATSDR 
physician and patient guidance about PFAS that was available at the time. They concluded the guidance 
was not helpful and instead agreed on a plan to m onitor those things listed as potential risks of PFAS 
exposure. As a result, when Wynn-Stelt experienced br eathing problems several years later, this physician 
recommended thyroid testing based on their knowledg e of Wynn-Stelt’s PFAS exposure, although this 
diagnosis would normally be an unlikely candidate. Th is testing resulted in the identification of thyroid 
cancer. Wynn-Stelt credits this diagnosis and quick ac tion to prior PFAS blood testing, adding this vital 
information to her medical history for consideration by her physician.  
Wynn-Stelt provided an additional example of a neighbor exposed to PFAS from the same 
groundwater source. This neighbor’s child received PFAS blood testing and was found to have elevated 
levels of PFOS. This information was provided to th e child’s pediatrician, who then monitored vaccine 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  response given the child’s exposure history. The ch ild was found to have reduced vaccine responses and 
required some boosters not normally required. Wynn-S telt reported similar examples of adverse health 
effects across the community, with cases of thyroi d disease, cancer, kidney disease, liver disease, and 
cholesterol issues in children and adults. Wynn-Stelt also highlighted the mental and emotional toll of 
exposure and the lack of discussion of this in exposed communities and in care guidelines.  
Wynn-Stelt also took time to address often-cited statements used to deny community access to 
PFAS blood testing. Wynn-Stelt countered the assertion “that it is not ethical to test for something we can’t treat” by explaining knowledge of environmental health and exposure is just as medically relevant 
as asking any patient for a history of diabetes or heart disease. All these pieces of information are required 
for patients and physicians to monitor potential pr oblems and reduce risk. Wynn-Stelt also addressed the 
concern that patients may panic given hard-to-frame  PFAS information: she countered that exposed 
patients are not fragile, and knowledge is power. Wy nn-Stelt labeled the assertion that PFAS levels in 
blood cannot be definitively linked to health effects,  and therefore should not be monitored as circular 
logic, stating if testing is not occurring at vari ous scales, links cannot be identified, further and 
erroneously justifying a lack of testing.  
Wynn-Stelt closed her remarks by stating explic itly her community’s needs, including accessible 
PFAS blood testing for people in various exposed comm unities. She also urged expansive testing for the 
entire class of PFAS, rather than a few targeted ch emicals. Wynn-Stelt also requested research about 
possible mechanisms to lower PFAS body burdens in exposed individuals and further research to better 
understand how PFAS levels may impact health care choices, such as blood or organ donation.  
 
Tom Johnson (Clean Water Action) 
 
Tom Johnson shared his perspectives with th e committee as an environmental advocate and 
organizer working with exposed communities acro ss Minnesota and beyond. Johnson explained that 
much of his work involves public education, seekin g to inform people about toxic chemicals overall. 
When conducting educational activities in the East Me tro region of Minnesota, Johnson indicated that 
PFAS are a central topic of interest, as this area is rife with PFAS producers and users whose activities have massively contaminated the re gional environment. This contamination resulted in an $850 million 
legacy settlement. Johnson suggested that communiti es are increasingly aware that, although this 
settlement sum will cover long-term drinking water treat ment for all area residents, there will be little or 
no money left for regional remediation.  
Johnson attested to high levels of frustration from exposed communities in the region, with 
unanswered questions about the like lihood of current or future hea lth effects for families and their 
children. Despite the lack of citable research, the community possesses large amounts of anecdotal and 
experiential evidence observed over decades that sugg ests links to health effects and informs the 
community concerns. Johnson described the experience of a mother of a low-birthweight baby, who is 
now concerned about a similar outcome with her sec ond pregnancy. Her doctor has no ability to comment 
on the likelihood of this outcome given vast uncertainties surrounding her exposure and risk due to a lack of needed exposure assessment and health effects research. Johnson also discussed the importance of 
accessible and expansive biomonitoring for exposed co mmunities and more broadly. In the case of the 
East Metro contaminated area, biomonitoring was ava ilable for some people in this community, but it is 
not available for all Minnesotans, leaving data gaps for those who have moved from the area and for other 
exposed communities. Johnson also highlighted the utilit y of testing to assess the efficacy of interventions 
over time and the ability of testing to illuminate links  between exposure and understudied health effects. 
 
Vicki Quint (Foam Exposure Committee) 
 
Vicki Quint is a firefighter advocate through he r work as a co-chair with the Foam Exposure 
Committee. Following a massive tire fire in Watert own, Wisconsin, and her husband’s death due to 
cancer, Quint learned about significant exposure to PFAS  in the fire service. Firefighters are exposed to 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 201 
Prepublication Copy  PFAS through AFFF use and the use of PFAS-containi ng protective gear. Quint provided further details 
about PFAS in AFFF and current activities, highlig hting the current availability of fluorine-free 
alternatives to AFFF. She noted that there are severa l sites in Wisconsin contaminated with PFAS as a 
result of the use or product of AFFF.  
Quint followed this information about firefighter  exposure and AFFF use by describing the plight 
of exposed firefighters seeking PFAS blood testing. M ilitary firefighters are now eligible for PFAS blood 
testing, but retired military firefighters and civilians  are not. Quint related concerns from the fire service 
community regarding the ramifications of blood testing results and options to lowe r PFAS levels in blood. 
Quint emphasized the need for all fire departments to  discontinue use of all fluorine-containing AFFFs, as 
there are no regulations requiring muni cipal fire departments to use AFFF. 
 
Art Schaap (fourth-generation dairy farmer) 
 
Art Schaap described his experience as a dairy fa rmer in New Mexico whose farm and family 
were unknowingly subjected to severe PFAS c ontamination due to military AFFF use.  
Schaap stated he has been on his farm for more than 30 years and considered investments in his 
farm as his version of a 401(k). When he was appr oached about PFAS water testing, Schaap stated he 
readily agreed without prior knowledge about PFAS. T hose tests revealed levels of PFAS up to 30,000 
ppt in drinking well water from his property. Th ese findings led Schaap to contact the New Mexico 
Department of Agriculture asking for PFAS testing in  milk. The department informed Schaap that if 
PFAS were found in his milk, Schaap would need to dum p the load. He insisted on the testing despite that 
risk, stating he did not want to distribute produc ts with PFAS to customers around the nation. Schaap 
stated that PFAS testing in milk from his cows s ubsequently revealed PFAS concentrations ranging 
between approximately 800 and 2,500 ppt; this testin g has been ongoing for more than 2.5 years.  
The contamination has resulted in the devastation of his livelihood, as the cows can only be 
minorly rehabilitated, pose an economic burden, and refl ect a major investment that will be devastating to 
lose without any possible profit. Schaap has limited op tions available to get rid of the contaminated 
animals in any profitable way. Dairy, beef, and rendering industries do not want PFAS-contaminated 
animals. Schaap described his efforts to filter water for his cows, only to  find that it takes years for cows 
to eliminate PFAS from their body (also described by John Kern, below). PFAS have also been found in 
the soil on Schaap’s farm, further exposing his herd be yond drinking water. This untenable situation has 
unfolded tragically for Schaap and has resulted in the stranding of at least 4,000 cows, the deaths of 
1,200, and the dumping of 1,500 loads of milk.  
Schaap enumerated a number of institutional failu res that have left him with few resources to 
rectify his situation. He said that multiple governme nt agencies continue to eschew responsibility for the 
situation and other PFAS exposure c oncerns, related to DoD pressure and the lack of actionable EPA 
standards. Schaap pointed out that if FDA provi ded standards for PFAS in food products, under the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensati on, and Liability Act (Superfund), contamination 
on his farm would require action and remediation.  He also mentioned the lack of discussion and 
accountability about this topic across the dairy industry at large.  
Schaap concluded his remarks by recounting health  effects he has observed over time in cattle, 
including decreased lactation, premature births, dw arf calves, reduced pregnancy rates, poor body 
condition, and increased mortality. He also describ ed health concerns from his family, including high 
cholesterol, hypertension, kidney damage, kidney stones, diabetes concerns, and infertility. 
 
John Kern (RuttenKern Policy Group) 
 
John Kern offered comments to the committee from the perspective of a litigator and 
environmental advocate residing in New Mexico. Kern  explained that in addition to concerns over 
drinking water, they also focus on PFAS exposure in the water relied on agriculture and a lack of 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  associated safety standards needed to protect the food chain. Kern’s testimony dovetailed with the 
testimony of the previous presenter, Art Schaap.  
Kern framed his perspectives by providing info rmation about Cannon Air Force Base near the 
city of Clovis. AFFF contamination at the milita ry based resulted in groundwater contamination 
spreading 5–6 miles from the base. The region is hom e to multiple dairies and cheese plants. Water from 
this source is provided to livestock, which are then  the source for milk, cheese, and meat. This water is 
also used to cultivate silage vegetation and other crops. PFAS-contaminated groundwater has resulted in 
PFAS contamination of regional livestock, leading to sundry economic and health questions and concerns 
unrelated to drinking water exposure.  
Kern displayed data from a regi onal dairy with high levels of PFAS in groundwater; these data 
show a decrease in lactation in dairy cows over time . Kern also described increasing mortality and birth 
defects over time in cattle from the same farm. A dditionally, Kern presented data about PFAS in milk, 
stating that the FDA cites 400 ppt as an acceptable leve l of PFAS in milk. Measurements in milk from the 
Highland Dairy Farm varied between approximately  900 and 4,600 ppt from November 2018 to August 
2020; the data show that dairy milk slowly refl ected reduced PFAS exposure. A shorter-term study 
conducted by the Food Safety Inspec tion Service showed increased variability and a faster rate of PFAS 
elimination in dairy milk from exposed cattle compar ed with data from a longer-term study conducted on 
the same farm. Kern pointed out these rates have se rious implications regarding how quickly cattle are 
considered rehabilitated from PFAS exposure and allowed for market purchase or dairy use. The slow 
elimination rates in the longer-term study also pose severe economic ramifications for farmers, given the 
average lifespan of cattle is around 6 years.  
Kern concluded his remarks by describing a frust rating current impasse with the DoD regarding 
standards. Federal legislation compelled the DoD to  clean up agricultural waters in 2018, yet the DoD 
responded that they would take no action until a federa l agency tasked with ensuring food safety (e.g., 
FDA or the U.S. Department of Agriculture) set st andards for PFAS in food products. Kern emphasized 
the need for agencies to set st andards to allow effective action on PFAS at multiple scales. 
Two other people at the Middle Town Hall provide d public testimony, which is available on 
YouTube:10 
 
Pam Ladds, Don’t Undermine Memphremagog’s Purity 
Beth Markesino, North Carolina Stop Genx in Our Water 
 
WESTERN TOWN HALL 
 
Liz Rosenbaum (Fountain Valley Clean Water Coalition) 
 
Liz Rosenbaum provided testimony as an AFFF-expo sed community member in El Paso County, 
Colorado. Rosenbaum described hearing about region al drinking water contamin ation in a group setting 
based on The New York Times  reporting. Following the initial news of exposure, the community focused 
on learning about PFAS and government agencies that  could assist in an appropriate response. The 
community response also entailed building partnershi ps with water districts and assuaging community 
anger toward these entities, who learned about the cont amination at the same time as the community with 
no prior knowledge of the issue. Since 2018, Rosen baum stated, the community has been focused on 
navigating the regulatory and legislative system to reap meaningful action as soon as possible, turning 
their anger into action through state legislation. This  has involved building connections to EPA, state and 
county health departments, and elected officials at city and state levels. Rosenbaum reported that, as a 
result of these organizing efforts, legislation has been  adopted increasing fines for polluting corporations.  
                                                           
10 See https://www.youtube.com /watch?v=mGeABDDTCuI&list=PL GTMA6Qkejfg1GIgAPeqkMCDncdx 
04qHN&index=16. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 203 
Prepublication Copy  Beyond detailing the exposure reality for her community, Rosenbaum descr ibed priority groups 
that require increased attention in further PFAS studi es. She stated that military families move frequently 
and may be exposed at multiple sites; care must be provided to military families, as well as service 
members, from all branches. Rosenbaum also suggest ed that service members require assistance from the 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) like th at provided to Vietnam veterans. Rosenbaum also 
indicated the need for equity in  exposure assessment and mitigati on for Black, Brown, and Indigenous 
families, as well as rural families, mentioning that rural families in her county are not being offered 
drinking water at the same nondetect level offere d to households in PFAS-exposed municipalities. 
Rosenbaum stated that a recent ATSDR community-lev el exposure assessment rev ealed that this clean 
municipal water facilitated a decrease in PFHxS11 levels in the blood of municipal residents.  
Rosenbaum also pointed out the limited number of h ealth care options in El Paso County, stating 
there are no hospitals in the southern half of the c ounty. This lack of health  care facilities exacerbates 
contamination issues because there is no capacity to m onitor health outcomes, as families seek health care 
in the northern part of the county where doctors may not be able to identify localized health outcome 
patterns. Rosenbaum emphasized the immediate need fo r blood testing to establish a baseline that serves 
as evidence of contamination and an indicator of potential health effects. Rosenbaum concluded by 
emphasizing the need for continued patience and e ngagement between health care practitioners and 
researchers on this issue to find shared vocabular y. She explained that communities are living through 
frightening and unfamiliar exposures but may not have  the appropriate technical vocabulary to describe 
their concerns or ailments.   
“Half the battle for the community has involved learning how to ask the right questions to get 
what we need to have clean and saf e communities for our working families.” Liz Rosenbaum  
 
Martha Dina Argüello (Physicians for Social Responsibility) 
 
Martha Dina Argüello provided perspectives as a Latina and an environmental advocate in 
California with experience connecting health care providers and communities. Argüello posited that 
guidance from the committee must include provisio ns for increased biomonitoring as many communities 
facing exposure are as yet unaware of the problem. She also discussed the distinct legacy of industrial 
contamination in Los Angeles. This history has resu lted in community exposures to multiple pollutants, 
which means that approaches that focus on one chemical at a time do not address the lived reality of 
complex contamination. Argüello pointed out that th ese factors have led to distrust of water quality, 
particularly in the Latino community. She highlighted  that Latino communities often pay more for water 
per capita than for fuel as a result of their relian ce on bottled water. Comprehensive testing and proper 
health education for communities and practitioners is key to rebuild tr ust in water quality and address the 
comprehensive reality of complex environmental exposures.  
Argüello also explained that communities ofte n face the downplaying of anxieties and risks 
surrounding exposure; this reflects a lack of training that  leads to an inability by clinicians to validate the 
lived experiences of exposed communities. This dynamic further compromises exposed communities. 
Argüello emphasized that it is essential for clinical guidance about PFAS exposure to include instruction 
about how to help concerned patients minimize expos ure rather than brush off environmental health 
concerns.  
Argüello cited the dynamics of PFAS regulation in  California as an example illustrating how to 
avoid this paradigm of patient treat ment. Argüello highlighted that helpful legislative efforts have been 
under way, yet early warning systems detecting PFA S in drinking water and through biomonitoring 
studies have not been appropriately heeded. She specifi cally flagged the response of a physician who is a 
member of the state legislature, who stated that exposure should not be quantified for patients as the worry is worse than the exposure. Argüello stated th is exemplifies how physicians are trained to respond 
                                                           
11 Perfluorohexanesulfonic aci d, a PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  to environmental health concerns, and yet this lack of training and understanding of exposure often leads 
to minimizing people‘s experience with exposures.  
Argüello also urged that clinical guidance should ta ke an anticipatory approach to ensure health 
care practitioners are provided some education a nd literacy surrounding the PFAS issue and complex 
exposure scenarios: health care practitioners should be  capable of some interpretation of water quality 
results and be able to comment on options for filtra tion. Argüello also specified that clinical guidance 
must provide intervention options accessible to differe nt socioeconomic and cultural backgrounds. This 
stratification of intervention is critical to ensure a ppropriate guidance is provided for all types of exposed 
communities as many cannot “buy their way out of bei ng exposed.” Argüello also highlighted tools that 
allow tailored exposure assessment and risk reducti on strategies, citing how doctors are now writing 
prescriptions for new carpeting or other household materi als to aid rental tenant s in substandard housing. 
Argüello also touted the use of a geospatial tool th at allows physicians to assess cumulative exposure risk 
based on patient location overlaid with informa tion about multiple ambient environmental health 
exposures.  
 
“When scientists fear speaking truth to power, we know that truth dies.” 
 
“We need physicians to step fo rward because we have regulatory agencies that are actually not 
preventing exposure.” 
 
“We can’t change this broken system without the partnership of science and physicians.”  
Martha Dina Argüello  
 
Mark A. Favors (Fountain Valley Clean Water Coalition) 
 
Mark A. Favors provided commentary as an Army veteran and community member from 
Colorado Springs, Colorado. Favors and his family lear ned of serious PFAS contamination affecting their 
region from activities at Peterson Air Force Base and other regional military bases, prompting Favors to assume an ardent advocacy role seeking safe water. Favors pointed out that while important state legislation regulating PFAS has been passed in Co lorado (also discussed by Liz Rosenbaum, above), DoD 
is exempt from most state legislation. This exempti on stands despite the fact the Air Force admitted to 
dumping AFFF into regional water resources th ree times per year for multiple decades. 
Favors detailed that sustained contamination from AFFF exposure has led to high levels of 
PFHxS in the blood of people in the community: measu red levels were the highest in the country except 
for individuals who directly manufactured the chemic al. With this exposure in mind, Favors chronicled 
harrowing details about his family’s struggle with h ealth problems. For example, there have been many 
cases of kidney disease and cancer in family members of many ages in the contaminated zone, some 
requiring kidney transplants that were further comp licated by development of cancer in the donated 
kidney. Favors stated that the abundance of serious ki dney ailments in his family in Colorado Springs is 
particularly striking considering that no family me mbers who live outside the contamination zone have 
encountered these issues.  
Favors explained that these health issues assumed ur gent relevance for his family in 2016 when 
the Air Force disclosed dumping PFAS into drinking water sources, given the known links between PFOA and kidney issues found at other locations. Favors reported that DoD also revealed the detection of 
PFAS in some community drinking water sources at c oncentrations up to 8,000 ppt, well above the EPA’s 
health advisory limit of 70 ppt. Favors indicated that despite these levels, the state of Colorado has not 
provided expansive PFAS blood testing to all resident s, even knowing the inherent value of blood testing 
as an indicator of exposure and potential health eff ects. Favors emphasized the particular importance of 
transparent information and access to testing when considering the transitory lifestyles of military 
members and other community residents. He pointed out that he did not find out about the contamination in his hometown until 2018 while visiting his mother  in the region. Favors provided an additional 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 205 
Prepublication Copy  example of a cousin who previously lived in the co ntaminated zone and has since moved, only to find 
unexplained liver tumors in one of their young children years later. 
Favors also stressed the need for transparency and education in the health care community and 
shared his experience as a health professional in endo scopy. He stated that despite evidence linking PFAS 
to irritable bowel disease, gastroenterologists in  his department were unaware of PFAS. Favors 
highlighted that such transparency  and access to exposure informati on is key for both practitioners and 
community members, especially for exposed child ren and their families who are concerned about 
developing health problems in the future.  
 
“I have family members … buried at Fort Logan National Cemetery after surviving combat tours 
in Vietnam, Korea, and Afghanistan…. They’re now buried in the National Cemetery from cancer after 
the military admitted dumping this toxic chemical into their water.” Mark A. Favors 
 
Andria Ventura (Clean Water Action) 
 
Andria Ventura provided context about past and ongoing actions addressing PFAS in California 
from the vantage point of an environmental advo cate. Ventura opened her remarks by describing her 
continued struggle engaging with the medical communi ty about environmental health concerns as a long-
time advocate, describing it as difficult for clinicians to make the connection between exposure and health 
outcomes. Ventura hypothesized that this stems from re luctance or avoidance by clinicians to assume an 
advocacy role. As a patient and a resident of a PFAS- affected city, she also stated she has never been 
asked about toxic exposure or environmental hea lth background by her doctors or other medical 
caregivers, despite dealing with several chronic con cerns over decades. She had to actively broach this 
topic with providers, likening this experience to the testimony of ot her presenters to the committee. 
However, it has been clear that doctors and nur ses are not trained to take toxic exposure into 
consideration.  
Ventura went on to provide abundant inform ation about the PFAS problem overall. She 
highlighted the multifaceted ways humans can be e xposed to PFAS, including through drinking water, 
surface waters, consumption of wildlife, or consumpti on of agricultural products exposed to PFAS in soil 
or water. She also reiterated the importance of c onsidering PFAS as a class, stating thousands of PFAS 
have been identified and all are considered pers istent, accumulative, mobile, and hazardous to some 
degree. Ventura also showed that multiple PFAAs have been linked to health effects that affect immunity, 
development and reproduction, fat and metabolism, liver function, endocrine function, and blood systems. 
She stressed the potential for additive and synergistic  effects related to exposure to multiple PFAS, 
flagging this as a required point of awareness for heal th care practitioners. Ventura also emphasized that 
lack of research on novel PFAS should not hinder cons ideration of their health effects, stating that 
evidence is mounting that newer, short-chain PFAS have negative health effects. Ventura also stated that 
many novel PFAS degrade or transform into PFAAs.  
Ventura went on to elaborate about specific acti ons and concerns in California, describing the 
recent position of the state to implement phased dri nking water monitoring and site investigation. She 
added the caveat that this phased approach has failed to assess small water systems and private wells: this 
is a key data gap considering health care practitione rs need detailed information about exposure to 
adequately consider environmental health concerns during care. Despite  data collection limitations, data 
thus far indicate catastrophic PFAS contamination prob lems across the state that have so far not been 
addressed by sluggish regulatory efforts. Ventura also  stressed key data gaps, such as uncertainties about 
PFAS levels in surface waters, PFAS in fish and wild life consumed by humans, and implications for 
crops grown in PFAS-laden bios olids or irrigation water.  
Ventura concluded her remarks by delineating key exposure assessment and health care needs in 
California. She emphasized the need for expanded und erstanding of the scope of the problem, including 
all PFAS in assessment efforts, as well as improve d understanding about PFAS health effects. She 
suggested such fact-finding efforts should include  expanded water monitoring; PFAS monitoring in 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  diverse environmental media; assessment of diverse expos ure vectors; identification of those most at risk 
of harm from exposure; expanded health studi es, including mixture exposure scenarios; and 
communication of health risks in culturally appropriate ways. 
 
Linda Shosie (Mothers for Safe Air & Safe Water) 
 
Linda Shosie provided perspective as a Latina and exposed community member in the South Side 
neighborhood of Tucson, Arizona. Shosie provided in formation to the committee collected as part of 
community-based exposure and health assessment effort s, highlighted egregious environmental justice 
issues, and explained her own path to advocacy. Shosie explained that her community is affected by 
PFAS contamination from military sites and airport activities, resulting in PFAS concentrations in 
drinking water up to 13,000 ppt. This high level of PFAS exposure is plaguing a majority-Latino 
community across a 3-mile contamination plume; Sh osie provided a number of maps providing geospatial 
context about the extent of contamination. She described leading health  assessments within the 
community, which revealed high rates of cancer  and immune system disease around the Tucson 
International Airport and Morris Air Force Base. Th ese community-derived results  led the county health 
director to conduct a more in-depth epidemiological study in 2017. Shosie stated this study indicated “significant invasive cancer incidence rates” compared  with people living in other areas around Tucson.  
Shosie expressed frustration, sadness, and a nger at the lack of action addressing PFAS 
contamination in her community and at other Superf und sites, saying, “environmental justice provisions 
continue to fail meanwhile thousands of contaminated  sites remain unclean for more than 40 years.” She 
also stated that those sites that  have been remediated are in Wh ite or upper-class neighborhoods, while 
sites like the one in her low-income community remain  unresolved to the detriment of community health 
and trust in governing institutions. Shosie also shared emotional details about losing her daughter, 
prompting her own path to find answers about environmental health issues in her community. 
 
“We cannot rely on state, CDC, and other local government officials who continue to turn their 
backs on the people who are affected.” 
 
“Many people asked me why I got involved in  the fight for … clean water, and demand 
government transparency and accountability. I got i nvolved because I witnessed th e death of my daughter 
out of this devastation I knew that I needed to find out why my daughter got so sick. Linda Shoshie 
 
Aaron Maruzzo (University of California,  Berkeley, School of Public Health) 
 
Aaron Maruzzo commented as a voice representing PFAS-contaminated communities in Western 
U.S. territories like Saipan in the Northern Mariana Islands. Maruzzo was born in Saipan and returned to 
work in the territory as a water quality analyst. Maruzzo framed the PFAS contamination problem in 
Saipan by leveraging data collected as part of the EPA’s Third Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule 
program. These program data capture PFAS concentr ations in select public water systems from around 
the United States. Maruzzo comparison revealed ma jor contamination in Saipan, with an average 
concentration of 1,700 ppt in territory drinking wa ter, well above EPA health advisory limits and the 
levels observed in other U.S. states and territories. Th e highest detectable concentration of PFOS was also 
found in Saipan. Maruzzo said these data have been hi ding in plain sight for many years and illustrate an 
ongoing environmental injustice.  
Maruzzo went further to explain that PFAS c ontamination across the small island is unevenly 
distributed, with the highest levels found in water resources adjacent to the only airport found on the 
island, home to firefighting training facilities that used AFFF. Sixteen villages along the south and southwest margins of the island were disproportionall y exposed to PFAS from this drinking water source, 
including the village where Maruzzo grew up. The sout hern portion of the island tends to include more 
non-White, noncitizens who may be easily missed in hea lth data collection efforts as a result of frequent 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 207 
Prepublication Copy  immigration and emigration. Health effects in this po pulation may be also missed because of reluctance to 
seek medical care due to costs and accessibility. Despite these data co llection challenges, preliminary 
reports suggest deep impacts on morbidity and mortal ity in the region, including heart disease, cancer, 
abnormal birth outcomes, hypertension, obesity, and cholesterol issues.  
Maruzzo indicated that environmental justice issues are a key concern for his community, as 
“toxic exposures to hazardous chemicals continue to be disproportionately placed on communities of 
color and the poor working class.” Maruzzo also stre ssed the continued systemic exclusion of U.S. 
territories like Saipan from continued dialogue about issues like PFAS.  
With all this context, Maruzzo explained that  the community needs further information about 
PFAS exposure routes specific to a small island setting.  He indicated the need for further information 
about PFAS in the water of neighboring islands in the Northern Mariana Islands and the levels in private 
water systems, bottled water, and wastewater. Ma ruzzo flagged information gaps surrounding AFFF, 
questioning when AFFF was first used on the island  and the composition of AFFFs over time. Maruzzo 
also questioned how military testing, imperialism, and globalization affect the contamination crisis today. 
Additionally, Maruzzo pointed out a lack of info rmation describing PFAS in many consumer products, 
such as textiles and food packaging. Maruzzo indicated data gaps surrounding PFAS in fish and highlighted this as a problem, considering the cultural and economic importa nce of fishing on the island.  
Following discussion of the unique exposure scenario ongoing in Saipan, Maruzzo offered 
comments, recommendations, and questions for the committee to consider while drafting clinical 
guidance. He explained that monitoring in humans can help answer questions about the importance of all 
these exposure gaps, while establishing an important b aseline perspective. Maruzzo also argued for the 
importance of biomonitoring for optimal health care, as it allows families to make informed health care 
and lifestyle choices while empowering individuals to take action in th eir communities and environments. 
Biomonitoring studies also help constrain health eff ects, even as the candidate list of health effects 
explicitly related to PFAS requires further study. Maruzzo suggested that despite many unknowns 
plaguing our understanding of health effects relate d to PFAS, biomonitoring should be prioritized as it 
enables a precautionary approach to allow identifi cation of unknown PFAS and health effects. Maruzzo 
mentioned the highly persistent natu re of PFAS, pointing out that it is unadvisable to allow highly 
persistent chemicals to remain in our body only to fi nd out about health effects later. Maruzzo also said 
this characteristic should be emphasized to physicia ns to help them understand the complexity of PFAS 
given typically low awareness about the issue in  health care settings and in communities.  
Maruzzo echoed other participants by pointing out that highly exposed and vulnerable 
populations should be prioritized for PFAS blood test ing, using equity as a guide to design testing 
protocols. He further suggested that inclusion in these categories should be constrained by occupation, 
location, and biosocial vulnerabilities.  Maruzzo stressed the importance of considering who is in the 95th 
or 99th percentile of exposure, while questioning who is missing from the dataset, to maximize 
understanding of the issue while mini mizing exposure harms. Maruzzo raised the issue that there is also a 
moral component to blood testing that must be c onsidered by the committee, asking how physicians will 
be prepared to educate exposed community members who do not already know about issues related to 
PFAS exposure. He asked if an established protocol, cost considerations, or health care access would 
drive such decisions. Maruzzo also discussed the n eed to develop guidelines describing how to care for 
transient populations like migrants and military pe rsonnel. He asked the committee to consider how 
testing programs and rigorous exposure assessment should account for high loss of follow-up and 
discontinuity of care for these populations. Maruzzo also  highlighted the value of culturally appropriate 
guidance and communication, stating that general scr ipts about risk reduction are “useful for a broad 
audience but there should be a mechanism to specify what’s known into a local context.” 
 
“If there’s one takeaway today, I think it’s importa nt to consider the implications of what happens 
when you don’t listen to the voices at the margins.” 
 
“The absence of evidence or th e absence of consensus doesn’t mean a PFAS compound is safe.” 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  “One of the most PFAS-polluted places in the Unite d States is a U.S. territory, and this is a 
serious environmental injustice.” 
 
“Risk communication should prioritize not solely action but meaningful action which is guided 
through the lens of equity.” Aaron Maruzzo  
 
Pamela Miller (Alaska Community Action on Toxics)  
 
Pamela Miller spoke as a community member a nd environmental health advocate in Alaska. 
Miller provided abundant context about the unique e xposure and community dynamics present in Alaska, 
while offering clear recommendations to the committee about Alaskan health needs and concerns. Miller 
explained that Alaska’s strategic military importance h as resulted in the establishment of multiple military 
installations across Alaska that have used AFFF. M iller also explained that Alaska is a very aviation-
dependent state, with AFFF-using airports situated  directly adjacent to communities and their water 
resources. Miller stated that PFAS have been found in at least 100 different sites across 30 locations 
spanning the entirety of the state, with multiple communities exposed to unsafe amounts of numerous PFAS. A total of 11 current and former military inst allations are currently under investigation for PFAS 
contamination, with results to date indicating the environmental occurrence of PFAS above health 
advisory levels. Despite the abundance of known sites,  and the likelihood of as-yet-unidentified sites, 
Miller explained that there is no cohesive state pl an to measure PFAS in the environment, fish, and 
wildlife, or in people. Miller mentioned an overall failure of regulatory efforts to guide the state’s 
response to PFAS contamination, despite the support of  attempted legislative efforts by associations of 
health care professionals, such as the Alaska Nurses Association. Only a handful of the 33 communities 
relying on water likely contaminated by AFFF or other PFAS sources have been  able to access drinking 
water testing, contributing to widespread una wareness of the problem across the state.  
Miller stated that limited assessment of drinki ng water and other environmental factors is 
matched by a lack of health assessments probing th e effects of PFAS in exposed communities; only two 
health assessments have been conducted. One of these studies found positive correlations between the 
PFAS found in drinking water and those compounds found  in serum, indicating an influence of drinking 
water contamination on human body burdens. Miller high lighted the particular plight of Alaskan remote 
regions as a hemispheric sink for persistent organic pollutants like PFAS. Remote polar regions receive 
undue burdens of mobile pollutants as a result of glob al distillation processes that transport pollutants to 
remote areas, including PFAS. Marine mammals and fi sh from polar regions therefore contain some of 
the highest burdens of persistent organic cont aminants in the world because of these transport 
mechanisms and the bioaccumulative nature of PFAS.  She shared the results of a community-based study 
in an Indigenous community on the island of Sivuqaq (St. Lawrence Island) in the Northern Bering Sea. 
This study tested the blood of community members relia nt on traditional diets incorporating polar fish and 
marine mammals. The assessment found 13 PFAS in  the blood of 85 people, as well as correlated 
concentrations of select PFAS to thyroid disruption.  
Miller urged the need for biomonitoring in Alask an communities with known or suspected PFAS 
contamination, including remote communities e xposed through water sources, traditional foods, 
firefighting workers, and other exposed workers. Miller stated that human biomonitoring should be paired 
with assessments investigating exposure from water, dus t, produce, fish, and wild game. These data are 
vital to inform health care providers and the wider community about exposures, possible associations with 
adverse health effects, appropriate risk reduction interventions, and relevant  health care options. These 
data are also vital to inform policy.  
Miller provided examples that emphasized the need to ensure that clinical guidance about PFAS 
is made accessible to diverse health care providers  through various communication and training avenues. 
She explained that in Alaska health care needs are often addressed by community health aides as many 
communities lack doctors or nurses. Health aides in  Alaska require the same clinical guidance and 
education afforded physicians, given their central role  in meeting community health needs. Current, clear 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 209 
Prepublication Copy  synthesis of scientific information, as well as an ab ility to execute biomonitoring and medical monitoring, 
is needed for physicians, nurses, and community h ealth aides to allow these health care providers to 
inform and protect their patients from PFAS. Miller suggested that provider education should occur 
through professional organizations, as well as continui ng education credits offered through public health, 
medical, and community training programs tailored to different provider types, including the Indian Health Service and regional health care providers.   
“PFAS are contaminating groundwater, surface waters, fish, wild game, garden produce, and 
people throughout Alaska.” 
 
“The burden of proof should not be on our communiti es, and this must change so that laws reflect 
current scientific understanding and are protective of public health.” 
 
“Health care professionals must be informed to become even more eff ective advocates for their 
patients and for ending nonessential uses of PFAS.” Pamela Miller  
 
Randy Krause (Port of Seattle Fire Department) 
 
Randy Krause, the port fire chief, provided comme ntary as a veteran firefighter and fire chief 
who previously used AFFF. Krause detailed his career  as a firefighter, spanning experience with the DoD, 
private industry, and a public-serving fire department . Krause explained that fire training activities with 
the DoD involved regular training with military-g rade AFFF or “mil-spec” foams. Training scenarios 
were enacted and AFFF was sprayed abundantly onto th e training props and into the wider environment. 
Krause also related that, in 1985, these foams were us ed routinely to clean floors and wash trucks, and 
were thrown on other firefighters during training exercises.  
When he moved to private industry, Krause found a similar approach to training, where an open 
pit was used to stage fire scenario s, and AFFF was thrown on training fires. Krause clarified that at the 
time firefighters were assured these mil-spec foams were  safe, biodegradable, and did not pose a risk to 
the environment, which has seen been learned to be  incorrect. Krause became fire chief at Seattle 
International Airport in 2010. While the department had at one time used a similar open pit training set-up 
with mil-spec foams for fire training activities, Krause  indicated this approach was not in practice when 
he arrived. The department refrained from use of fluo rine-containing AFFFs for training due to state bans.  
Krause emphasized that the safety of his team is a top priority as fire chief and described an 
opportunity to contribute to the Firefighter Cancer  Cohort Study. This study is a multicity, long-term 
national research effort focused on assessing cancer in fi refighters across the nation. Participation in this 
study provided Krause and several other departme nt members access to PFAS blood testing. Krause 
shared his blood testing data in graphical and chart format detailing concentrations of isomers of PFOA, 
isomers of PFOS, PFHxS,
12 PFDeA,13 PFNA, PFUA,14 and Me-PFOSA-AcOH.15 His results varied in 
proximity to provided benchmarks, but showed leve ls of linear PFOS and PFHxS close to or surpassing 
the nationwide 95th percentile. Krause explained he does not know  what these results means at this time, 
but discussion with Dr. Jeff Burgess from the University of Arizona suggests high levels of PFOS and 
PFHxS are commonly elevated in other firefighters. Krause also highlighted that the reporting techniques 
used by the Firefighter Cancer Cohort Study were particularly helpful, providing his exposure data, 
average amounts in firefighters from his department, the 50th and 95th percentiles based on NHANES 
data, and the range of all amounts measured  in the firefighters in his department. 
 
                                                           
12 Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid or perfluorohexane sulfonic acid, PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
13 Perfluorodecanoic acid, a PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
14 Perfluoroundecanoic acid, a PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
15 2-N-methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonami do acetate, a PFAS; see Chapter 1. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Jean Mendoza (Friends of Toppenish Creek) 
 
Jean Mendoza spoke as a community member from the Lower Yakima Valley in Washington. 
Mendoza stated her community and organization have  concerns about PFAS because of the prolific 
application of PFAS-imbued biosolids in agricultural fields across the area. Washington state statutes 
require biosolid application to the fullest extent po ssible. This raises concern as the area is highly reliant 
on agricultural activities and is home to large dairy cow populations; no information has yet investigated 
crop and livestock safety in response to biosolid-driven PFAS exposure in this area.  
Mendoza conveyed discontent and frustration about blatant disregard of environmental health 
concerns in her community. Mendoza cited efforts by  state agencies to measure PFAS in some areas 
across the state, but noted that PFAS measurement s in central Washington and across the Yakima 
watershed seem to be intentiona lly omitted. Mendoza also pointed out that Yakima County ranks poorly 
in the state with respect to health outcomes and health  factors, reflecting poor environmental health in an 
area home to tribal communities and majority Latino populations. In light of these findings, Mendoza 
stated that the state seems to be blatantly neglec ting the exposure of people of the Yakima Valley.  
Mendoza listed community health issues, includi ng asthma, myocardial infarction, and low 
birthweights, noting the region is home to multiple complex exposures including PFAS, air pollution, nitrates, and pesticides that are associated with a numb er of adverse health outcomes. Mendoza raised the 
point that it is challenging for Yakima Valley resident s to attribute health effects to any one pollutant, 
given the cumulative exposure to so many pollutants in the region. Mendoza also stated that concern 
about social maladies often trumps  concern about PFAS in the region, given limited awareness of the 
problem in the community and inaction on the issue by the Yakima Health District. Mendoza moreover 
detailed that some elected officials take an “ignoran ce is bliss” approach and opt to avoid investigating 
the regional PFAS problem to avoid taking action on the issue.  
Mendoza enumerated several challe nges observed in her community that should be considered by 
the committee when formulating clinical guidance about PFAS for her community and beyond. She noted 
that many patients do not understa nd public health and risk assessment, and clinicians in the area receive 
no support from local health districts about PFAS. She also highlighted that many of the most exposed are 
poor households that live paycheck to paycheck, with  limited capacity to worr y or plan for long-term 
illness. She also cited the intangible nature of the PFAS problem, with no ability for folks to see, taste, or 
smell the issue. Mendoza offered recommendations as well, asking the committee to consider educating 
and informing clinicians about  PFAS and other environmental health risks through professional 
organizations, to support biomonitoring studies, to recommend PFAS testing in fish, and to encourage a 
moratorium on biosolid application.   
“We pay lip service to scientific evidence over here, but very often in Yakima Valley science is 
suppressed.” Jean Mendoza 
 
Rebecca Patterson (Vietnam Veterans of America) 
 
Rebecca Patterson presented commentary as a Navy  veteran and veteran advocate, highlighting 
the importance of PFAS blood testing for veteran’s health  care. Patterson explained that one of the largest 
sources of PFAS exposure for service members and military communities is the use of AFFF. These firefighting products have been used since 1970 to fi ght petroleum fires; legacy AFFFs contain PFAAs 
like PFOS and PFOA. While these are no longer in ser vice, the DoD continues to use AFFF formulations 
containing PFAS despite the availability of fluorine- free alternatives. Patterson pointed out that use of 
these firefighting foams readily introduced PFAS into the environment and the water cycle and has led to 
widespread environmental contamination now do cumented at hundreds of military bases around the 
United States.  
Patterson stated that her presentation was intende d to educate the committee regarding how blood 
testing could help PFAS-exposed ve terans gain access to VA health care. To accomplish this, Patterson 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B 211 
Prepublication Copy  shared information about the Veterans Health Admini stration (VHA). The VHA is tasked with providing 
care to eligible veterans, though not all veterans access health care through the VHA. This means 
community health care practitioners may be serving ve terans without knowledge of their service history 
and related exposure; this necessitates that health car e providers ask patients about their service history. 
Patterson also explained that after basic eligibility criteria are met, service members qualify for VHA care 
based on several factors, including service-connected disability, income, and exposure to toxicants and environmental hazards.  
Service-connected disability is of particular  importance to the veteran community; this 
designation typically requires specific evidence subs tantiating the connection between the given disease 
or injury and military service. Since medical concerns can  arise years after service, it can be difficult for a 
veteran to connect an ailment to military service or e xposure incurred through service. Disability approval 
results in tiered compensation and priority access to  VHA care. With this context, Patterson concluded 
that access to health care and disability compensati on can have a tremendous impact on a veteran’s 
quality of life. PFAS blood testing can provide eviden ce of exposure that enables veterans to access vital 
health care. Patterson also asserted that PFAS blood t esting can lead to more informed health care, 
allowing service members and veterans to screen for a nd potentially prevent health conditions specifically 
associated with PFAS exposure.  
Bucky Bailey (son of former DuPont Washington Works plant employee) 
 
William “Bucky” Bailey III provided perspectiv e as a community member from Parkersburg, 
West Virginia. Bailey was born with multiple birth de fects, including only one nostril, a keyhole eyelid, a 
serrated eyelid, and breathing difficulties. The family had no idea what caused the defects, given the lack 
of similar issues in Bailey’s siblings. However, Ba iley’s mother worked as a full-time employee at the 
DuPont Washington Works plant in Parkersburg, where she controlled the production of PFOA in a 
confined area. Upon returning to work from maternity  leave, Bailey’s mother found that other pregnant 
women were removed from the Teflon production process. She also discovered that studies had been previously conducted by 3M that showed the same bi rth defects in laboratory animals exposed to PFAS. 
Despite these lines of evidence, DuPont denied that Bailey’s birth defects were a result of his mother’s 
occupational exposure, and the Bailey family found lit igation impossible to pursue given DuPont’s stature 
in the community. 
Years later, Bailey met Rob Bilott, the lawyer who uncovered DuPont’s malfeasance and pursued 
settlements for exposed residents of Parkersburg. Ba iley described feeling relief finding out about links 
between PFOA exposure and health effects, following  years of surgeries and underlying uncertainty 
regarding the cause of his deformities. Yet Bailey expl ained that joy following these revelations was also 
met with disheartenment and discouragement, knowin g that the contamination that likely caused his 
deformities was entirely out of his control and had cau sed other health problems and untimely deaths in 
his family and wider community.  
Bailey indicated that the C-8 Health Project di d not find concrete links between his specific 
deformities and PFOA exposure, despite admission by  DuPont scientists that the compound can cause 
birth defects. Bailey was also told his children woul d have a 50 percent chance of inheriting his health 
issues, which Bailey described as a tough and deeply  troubling finding considering his marriage and his 
love of children. Bailey stated he struggled deeply w ith the decision to have kids, not wishing to put his 
children through what he went through as a child. Baile y and his wife ultimately decided to have children 
after wrestling with the question for over 10 years, and he  reported he is the happy father to a healthy son 
and daughter. Bailey pointed out that  knowledge of his contamination and related health risks delayed 
their family’s decision to have children, which u ltimately occurred after his father passed away. This 
timing deprived his children a relationship with th eir grandfather and deprived Bailey’s father the 
opportunity to meet his grandkids. Bailey stated that  his concerns now center on potential health effects 
like kidney and testicular cancer that he may encounter in the future given his significant PFOA contamination.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  “It was joy for me to learn some of the things the scientific study found out.”  
 
“I hope we can all acknowledge that we need to m ove in the same direction at the same time and 
not point fingers and not fight and not quarrel but fi nd out what we can do to stop this from happening 
because it is going to cost us our lives.” Bucky Bailey  
 
One other person at the Western Town Hall provi ded public testimony, which is available on 
YouTube:16 Gina Solomon.  
                                                           
16 See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WghqL6u rt6w&list=PLGTMA6Qkejf jVRybfjFf-vRkIQnEh 
Ob0a&index=22. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Prepublication Copy   213  Appendix C 
 
Public Meeting Agendas 
 
COMMITTEE ON THE GUIDANCE ON PFA S TESTING AND HEALTH OUTCOMES 
 
The Keck Center, 500 Fifth Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20001 
 
FEBRUARY 4, 2021 
 
VIRTUAL MEETING 
 
1:00  Purpose of Open Session and Introduction of Committee Members 
 Bruce N. Calonge , Committee Chair 
 
1:15–2:00  ATSDR Perspectives on Stud y Scope, Background, and Objectives 
 Patrick Breysse , Director, National Center for Envir onmental Health/Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry  
 
2:00–2:45  NIEHS Perspectives on Stud y Scope, Background, and Objectives 
 Brian R. Berridge , Scientific Director, Division of th e National Toxicology Program, 
Associate Director, National Toxicology Program 
 
2:45–3:35  Committee Discusses the Statement of Task with the Sponsor  3:35–3:40  Break 
 
3:40–3:45  Instructions for Public Comment Session 
 Bruce N. Calonge 
 
3:45–4:45  Opportunity for Public Comment  on Committee’s Charge (must preregister, 
 1 person per organization, 3 minutes each) 
 
4:45  ADJOURN  
APRIL 7, 2021 
EASTERN COMMUNITIES TOWN HALL (ATSDR REGIONS I–IV) 
VIRTUAL MEETING 
 
2:00–2:10 Welcome and Introductions 
 Bruce N. Calonge , Committee Chair 
 
SESSION A—Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region I 
 
2:10–3:10 Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region I  Alan Woolf , Moderator , Harvard Medical School/Boston Children’s Hospital 
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  2:10–2:20 Laurene Allen , Merrimack Citizens for Clean Water  
 
2:20–2:30 Teresa Gerade , Don’t Undermine Memphremagog’s Purity (DUMP) 
 2:30–2:40 Ayesha Khan , Nantucket PFAS Action Group 
 2:40–2:50 Kristen Mello , Westfield Residents Advocating For Themselves (WRAFT) 
 
2:50–3:10 Discussion  
 
SESSION B—Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region II 
 
3:10–3:45 Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region II 
 Laurel Schaider , Moderator , Silent Spring Institute 
 3:10–3:20 Tracy Carluccio , Delaware Riverkeeper Network 
 3:20–3:30 Loreen Hackett , PFOA Project New York 
 
3:30–3:45 Panel Discussion   3:45–3:55 Break 
 
SESSION C—Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region III 
 
3:55–4:30 Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region III  Maida Galvez , Moderator , Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai 
 3:55–4:05 Patrick Elder , Military Poisons 
 
4:05–5:15 Hope Grosse , Buxmont Coalition for Safe Water 
 4:15–4:30 Panel Discussion  
 
SESSION D—Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region IV 
 
4:30–5:40 Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region IV 
Linda Birnbaum , Moderator , National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
National Toxicology Program (retired) 
 
4:30–4:40 La’Meshia Whittington , North Carolina Black Alliance 
 4:40–4:50 Mike Watters , Grays Creek Residents United Against PFAS in our Wells & Rivers 
 4:50–5:00 Emily Donovan , Clean Cape Fear 
 
5:00–5:10 Cheryl Sievers-Cail , South Carolina Indian Affairs Commission/SC Idle No More 
 5:10–5:20 Stel Bailey , Fight For Zero 
 5:20–5:45 Panel Discussion  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C  215 
Prepublication Copy  5:40–5:45 Break 
 
SESSION F—OPEN COMMENT PERIOD  
 
5:45–6:45 Public Comments  6:45 ADJOURN 
 
MAY 6, 2021 
MIDDLE COMMUNITIES TOWN HALL (ATSDR REGIONS V–VII) 
VIRTUAL MEETING 
 
3:00–3:10 Welcome and Introductions   Bruce N. Calonge , Committee Chair   
 
SESSION A—Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region V 
 
3:10–3:55  Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region V   Phil Brown , Moderator , Northeastern University  
 Andi Rich , Save Our Water (S.O.H20) 
 Laura Olah , Citizens for Safe Water Around Badger (CSWAB) 
 Samraa Luqman , Concerned Residents for South Dearborn 
 Cathy Wusterbarth , Need Our Water (NOW) 
 
3:55–4:15 Panel Discussion with Session B Speakers  
 
SESSION B—Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region V (continued) 
 
4:15–4:50  Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region V  
 Courtney Carignan , Moderator , Michigan State University  
 Sandy Wynn-Stelt , Belmont, Michigan, resident 
 Tom Johnson , Clean Water Action 
 Vicki Quint , Foam Exposure Committee/Code PFAS 
 4:50–5:10 Panel Discussion  
 
5:10–5:20 Break  
 
SESSION C—Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region VI and VII 
 5:20–5:55 Community Perspectives fr om ATSDR Regions VI and VII  
 Alan Ducatman , Moderator , West Virginia University  
 Art Schaap , Highland Dairy, Cedar Rapids, Iowa Resident  
 John Kern , Clean Water Partnership  
 5:55–6:15 Panel Discussion  
 
6:15–6:20 Break   6:20–7:00 Public Comments  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  7:00  ADJOURN 
 
MAY 25, 2021 
WESTERN COMMUNITIES TOWN HALL (ATSDR REGIONS VIII–X)  
VIRTUAL MEETING   
 
1:00–1:10  Welcome and Introductions   Bruce N. Calonge , Committee Chair   
 
SESSION A—Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region VIII and IX 
 
1:10–2:00 Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region VIII and IX  
 Elizabeth Neary , Moderator , Wisconsin Environmental Health Network  
 Liz Rosenbaum , Fountain Valley Clean Water Coalition  
 Martha Dina Argüello , Physicians for Social Responsibility, Los Angeles  
 Mark A. Favors , Army Veteran  
 1:40–2:00 Panel Discussion   
SESSION B—Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region IX 
 
2:00–2:30  Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region IX   Lenny Siegel , Moderator , Center for Public Environmental Oversight  
 Andria Ventura , Clean Water Action Fund  
 Linda Shosie , Environmental Justice Task Force, Tucson, Arizona 
 Aaron Maruzzo , University of California, Berkeley, School of Public Health  
 2:30–2:50 Panel Discussion   
2:50–3:00 Break 
 
SESSION C—Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region X 
 
3:00–3:30  Community Perspectives from ATSDR Region X   Anna Reade , Moderator , Natural Resources Defense Council  
 Pamela Miller , Alaska Community Action on Toxics  
 Randy Krause , Port of Seattle/Washington State Association of Fire Chiefs  
 Jean Mendoza , Friends of Toppenish Creek  
 3:30–3:50 Panel Discussion   
SESSION D—Additional Community Perspectives  
 
3:50–4:20  Additional Community Perspectives   Celeste Anne Monforton , Moderator , Texas State University  
 Rebecca Patterson , Vietnam Veterans of America  
 Bucky Bailey , Son of former DuPont Washington Works plant employee  
 4:20–4:40 Panel Discussion with Session E Speakers   4:40–4:45  Break  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C  217 
Prepublication Copy  4:45–5:00  Public Comments  
 
5:00  ADJOURN 
 
JULY 13–14, 2021 
INFORMATION-GATHERING SESSION, MEETING 5  
VIRTUAL MEETING 
 Thursday, July 13, 2021 
 
1:30–1:40 Welcome and Introductions   Bruce N. Calonge , Committee Chair   
 
SESSION A—Patient Perspectives on PFAS Testing and Health Outcomes  
 
1:40–1:55  Patient Perspectives on PFAS Testing and Health Outcomes  
 Andrea Amico , Testing for Pease  
 
SESSION B—Human Exposure Sources  
 
1:55–2:25 Current Knowledge About the C ontribution of PFAS Exposure Sources to  
Human Exposure  
 Elsie M. Sunderland , Harvard University  
 2:25–2:55 Panel Reflection and Q&A from Committee  
 Chris Wiant , Moderator , Committee Member  
 Bruce H. Alexander , Colorado State University  
 Thomas F. Webster , Boston University School of Public Health  
 Laurel Schaider , Silent Spring Institute  
 Elsie M. Sunderland , Harvard University  
 
2:55–3:05 Break 
 
SESSION C—Human Exposure Reductio0m 
 
3:05–3:35  Clinical Principles for Advising Patients to Reduce Exposure  
 Sheela Sathyanarayana , University of Washington  
 3:35–4:05 Panel Reflection and Q&A from Committee   Brian Linde , Moderator , Committee Member  
 Judy LaKind , LaKind Associates  
 Andrea Amico , Testing for Pease  
 Sheela Sathyanarayana , University of Washington  
 4:05–4:35 Open Comment Period   4:35  ADJOURN    
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  HEALTH EFFECTS  
Wednesday, July 14, 2021 
 1:00–1:10 Welcome, Purpose of Open Session  
 Bruce N. Calonge , Committee Chair  
 
SESSION D—Overview of Putative Health Effects  
 1:00–1:10 Epidemiology: David Savitz , Brown University  
 Toxicology: Jamie DeWitt , East Carolina University  
 2:10–2:40 Panel Reflection and Q&A from Committee   Jane Hoppin , Moderator , Committee Member  
 Linda Birnbaum , National Institute of Environm ental Health Sciences, National 
Toxicology Program (retired)  
 Joseph M. Braun , Brown University  
 Matthew Longnecker , Ramboll  
 David Savitz , Brown University  
 Jamie Dewitt , East Carolina University  
 2:40–2:55 Break  
 
SESSION E—Evidence Synthesis and Its Application 
 2:55–3:25 Methods for Evidence Synthesis  
 Jonathan Samet , Colorado School of Public Health  
 3:25–3:55  Making Useful Recommendations   Rebecca L. Morgan , McMaster University  
 
3:55–4:25 Panel Reflection and Q&A from Committee   Bruce N. Calonge , Moderator , Committee Member  
 Ellen Chang , Exponent  
 Nicholas Chartres , University of California, San Francisco  
 Holger Schünemann , McMaster University  
 Rebecca L. Morgan , McMaster University  
 Jonathan Samet , Colorado School of Public Health  
 4:25–4:55 Open Comment Period   
4:55  ADJOURN 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C  219 
Prepublication Copy  AUGUST 11–12, 2021 
INFORMATION-GATHERING SESSION, MEETING 6 
VIRTUAL MEETING   
Wednesday, August 11, 2021  
 
1:25–1:35 Welcome and Introductions   Bruce N. Calonge , Committee Chair   
 
SESSION A—Frameworks for Making Decisions on Clinical Evaluation and Biomonitoring 
 
1:35–2:05 Principles for Making Decisions on Clinical Evaluation and Biomonitoring   David Resnik , National Institute of Envir onmental Health Sciences  
 
2:05–2:35  Application of Decision-Making Fram ework in the C-8 Medical Monitoring Panel  
 Dean Baker , University of California, Irvine  
 2:35–3:05  Panel Reflection and Q&A from Committee   Kevin Elliott , Moderator  
 Courtney Carignan , Michigan State University 
 Ayesha Khan , Nantucket PFAS Action Group 
 Jeffrey Brent , University of Colorado 
 Dean Baker , University of California, Irvine 
 David Resnik , National Institute of Envi ronmental Health Sciences 
 
SESSION B—Clinician Perspective on Advisi ng Patients in PFAS-Exposed Communities 
 
3:05–3:25  Clinician Perspective on Advi sing Patients in PFAS-Exposed Communities  
 Alan Ducatman , West Virginia University  
 
3:25–3:55  Panel Discussion with Clinicians  Who Have Advised Patients in PFAS-Exposed 
Communities  
 Laura Anderko , Moderator   
 Katie Huffling , Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments 
 Stewart Reed , University of California, Los Angeles 
 Maida Galvez , Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital 
 Alan Ducatman , West Virginia University 
 3:55–4:25 Open Comment Period   4:25  ADJOURN   
Thursday, August 12, 2021  
 
1:00–1:10 Welcome, Purpose of Open Session   Bruce N. Calonge , Committee Chair   
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220 Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  SESSION C—Clinical Principles for Communicating Biomonitoring  
Results and Relationship with Clinical Care   
 
1:10–1:40  Biomonitoring Results: Communication   Julia Brody , Silent Spring Institute  
 1:40–1:55  PFAS Clinical Guidance   Phil Brown , Northeastern University  
 
1:55–2:25 Panel Reflection and Q&A from Committee   Erin Haynes , Moderator , Committee member  
 Marc A. Nascarella , Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
 Jessica Nelson , Minnesota Department of Health 
 Gary Ginsberg , New York Department of Health 
 Julia Brody , Silent Spring Institute 
 Phil Brown , Northeastern University 
 2:25–2:55  Open Comment Period  
 
2:55  ADJOURN 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Prepublication Copy  221  Appendix D 
 
Evidence Review: Methods and Approach 
 
This appendix describes the approach and met hods that the committee used to address the 
portions of the Statement of Task that asked for “an objective and authoritative review of current evidence 
regarding human health effects of those PFAS be ing monitored in the CDC’s [Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention’s] National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals” (see Box 1-
3 in Chapter 1). The Statement of Task  specifically asked the committee to:  
 
Assess the strength of evidence for the spect rum of putative health effects suggested 
by human studies (including immune res ponse, lipid metabolism, kidney function, 
thyroid disease, liver disease, glycemic para meters and diabetes, cancer, and fetal and 
child development) to establish a basis fo r prioritized clinical surveillance or 
monitoring of PFAS health effects. This assessment should charact erize the likelihood 
of those health effects occurring (qualitative probability) given real world human exposures and identify the human populations at most risk (consider life stage, health 
status, exposure level). Data/evidence gaps th at contribute to uncertainty about health 
effects of most concern should be annotated. 
 
The committee decided that this portion of the Statement of Task required three different 
determinations:  
 
 qualitative categories that describe the strength of evidence of PFAS putative health effects 
that can be used to prioritize c linical surveillance or monitoring, 
 identification of the human populations at most risk (considering life stage, health status, 
exposure level) from PFAS exposure, and  
 a scoping review that maps the data or eviden ce gaps that contribute to uncertainty about 
health effects of most concern.  
 
To produce these outputs, the committee developed a multistage process. The first stage was to 
catalog what is known about PFAS and their health effects. The committee identified all authoritative 
reviews of the PFAS identified by the CDC (see Table 1-1 in Chapter 1) and all human health outcomes. 
The second stage was to identify any recent, high-qua lity systematic reviews between PFAS and any 
human health outcome; as noted below, the results of  this stage were uninformative for the committee’s 
goals. The third stage was to review the published research articles describing the association between 
exposure to PFAS and human health outcomes, based on the authoritative and systematic reviews. The 
committee’s review approach improved efficiency wh ile minimizing the risk of excluding scientific 
findings that would inform the committee’s recommendations.  
The committee was charged with assessing 
 
the strength of evidence for the spectrum of  putative health effects suggested by 
human studies (including immune response, lipid metabolism, kidney function, thyroid disease, liver disease, glycemic para meters and diabetes, cancer, and fetal and 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  child development) to establish a basis fo r prioritized clinical surveillance or 
monitoring of PFAS health effects. 
 
However, the committee did not restrict its evalua tion to only the listed putative health effects.  
The next section of the appendix covers the committe e’s analysis of the authoritative reviews; the 
following section covers its original literature review , and the final section covers the committee strength-
of-evidence determination.  
AUTHORITATIVE REVIEWS 
 
The committee defined authoritative reviews to be  reviews produced by government agencies or 
other bodies that publish strength-of-e vidence determinations through a process that includes peer review. 
The committee focused on national or international organizations or agencies that influence other 
organizations. The following organizations met these criteria for authoritative reviews:  
 
 C-8 Science Panel Reports 
 European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) 
 International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) 
 Organisation for Economic Co-opera tion and Development (OECD)  
 National Toxicology Program (NTP) 
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) 
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
 
Table D-1 summarizes the authoritative re views found by the committee. Among the 
authoritative reviews, the ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls  included the greatest 
number of PFAS included in the committee’s Statement of Task (MeFOSAA not included) and was the 
most recent (literature search conducted in Septem ber 2018). The other authoritative reviews were older 
and included chemicals that were also included in the ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for 
Perfluoroalkyls. Therefore, the ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls was used by the 
committee as the basis for the next  stages of the review process.  
 
 
TABLE D-1  Authoritative Reviews Found by the Committee 
Review PFAS Chemicals 
Covered in Review Health Endpoints Covered in Review Date of Last Literature Search by 
the Organization 
ATSDR 
Toxicological 
Profile for Perfluoroalkyls  PFBA, PFHxA, PFHpA, 
PFOA, PFNA, PFDA, 
PFUnA, PFDoDA, PFBS, PFHxS, PFOS, FOSA Not limited September 2018 
EFSA: Risk to 
Human Health Related to the Presence of Perfluoroalkyl Substances in Food  PFOA, PFNA, PFHxS, 
PFOS Fertility and pregnancy outcomes, 
development effects, neurotoxic outcomes, immune outcomes, endocrine effects, metabolic effects, kidney function, cardiovascular disease and mortality, bone mineral density March 2013 
EPA Health Effects 
Document (PFOA) PFOA Serum lipids, cardiovascular disease, liver 
disease, kidney di sease, diabetes, 
developmental toxicity, thyroid effects, 
immunotoxicity, cancer: testicular and kidney, neurotoxicity, steroid hormones 2015 
EPA Health Effects 
Document (PFOS) PFOS Serum lipids, cardiovascular disease, liver 
disease, kidney di sease, diabetes, 
developmental toxicity, thyroid effects, 2015 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D  223 
Prepublication Copy  immunotoxicity, cancer: testicular and 
kidney, neurotoxicity, steroid hormones 
IARC Monograph PFOA Cancer June 2014 
NTP Monograph PFOA, PFOS Immunotoxicity May 2016 
OECD Synthesis 
Paper PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, 
PFNA, PFDA, PFBS, 
PFBA, PFHxA, PTFE, 
PVDF, PFBE Developmental toxicity, 
hypocholesteremia, ulcerative colitis, 
thyroid diseases, testicular cancer, kidney 
cancer, preeclampsia Not presented, published 2013 
C-8 Science Panel 
Probable Link 
Reportsa PFOA Heart disease, kidney disease, liver 
disease, osteoarthritis, Parkinson’s 
disease, autoimmune disease, infectious 
disease, neurodevelopm ental disorders in 
children, respiratory disease, evaluation of 
stroke, thyroid disease, cancer, diabetes, 
birth defects, pregnancy induced 
hypertension, miscarriage and stillbirth, 
preterm birth and low birthweight Last report published in 2012 
a See http://www.c8sciencepanel.org/prob_lin k.html (accessed July 1, 2022). 
NOTE: ATSDR = Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; EFSA = European Food Safety Authority; EPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; IARC = In ternational Agency for Research on Cancer; NTP = 
National Toxicology Program; OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 
 
 
The committee’s review did not assess the quality of th e authoritative reviews, but it notes several 
areas where the ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls  could be strengthened. First, the 
toxicological profile does not provide a detailed d escription of the evidence identification methods and 
does not document decisions as to why specific studies may have been excluded. Second, the study quality assessment does not appear to follow a standa rd approach and in some cases it is difficult to 
identify the study designs that were included in the review. Third, the process to assess the strength of the 
evidence is not always clear.  
 
REVIEW OF SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS 
 
The committee’s review of systematic reviews consis ted of the following steps: literature search, 
screening of abstracts, full text review of studies iden tified in the abstract screening, evaluation of a final 
set of relevant studies, evidence assessment, and synthesis.  
 
Literature Search 
 
Systematic reviews were identified through sear ches of the medical and scientific literature on 
three databases: Embase Update, Medline, and Scopus. These three searchable databases index biological, 
chemical, medical, and toxicological publications. S earch terms included full and abbreviated chemical 
names, common and manufacturer trade names, Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) numbers, and MeSH
1 
descriptors for each of the PFAS species of interest. Systematic reviews were included regardless of when 
they were published or where they were conducted. Syst ematic reviews were considered if they reviewed 
human studies, were classified as review papers, a nd were published in Englis h. The databases were 
searched on June 28, 2021.  
  
                                                 
1 MeSH descriptors are sets of terms naming descriptors in a hierarchical structure that permits searching at 
various levels of specificity. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Ovid Embase Update Search Terms  
1 (“335-76-2” or “335-67-1” or “375-92-8” or “ 375-95-1” or “355-46-4” or “1763-23-1” or “2058-
94-8”).rn. 3673 
2 Limit 1 to (human and Eng lish language and “review”) 154 
3 exp perfluorooctanesulfonic acid/ or exp perfl uorohexanesulfonic acid/ or exp perfluorononanoic 
acid/ or exp perfluorooctanesulfonic acid/ or exp perfluorodecanoic acid/ or exp perfluorooctanoic 
acid/ or exp perfluoroundecanoic acid/ or (“Methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamide” or 
“Methylperfluorooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid” or “Perfluorodecanoic acid” or 
“Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid” or “perfluorohexane sulfonic acid” or “Perfluorohexanesulfonic 
acid” or “Perfluorononanoic acid” or “Perfluoroo ctane sulfonic acid” or “Perfluorooctanesulfonic 
acid” or “Perfluorooctanoic acid” or “perfluoroundecanoic acid”).mp. or (“MeFOSAA” or 
“PFHxS” or “n-PFOA” or “Sb-PF OA” or “PFOA” or “PFDA” or “PFUnDA” or “n-PFOS” or “Sm-
PFOS” or “PFOS” or “PFNA” or  “Perfluorinated chemical” or  “perfluorinated compound” or 
“perfluorinated chemicals” or “perfluorinated compounds”).mp. 7814 
4 Limit 3 to (human and Eng lish language and “review”) 352 
 
 
MEDLINE Search Terms 
1 (“335-76-2” or “335-67-1” or “375-92-8” or “ 375-95-1” or “355-46-4” or “1763-23-1” or “2058-94-
8”).rn. 331 
2 Limit 1 to (English language and “review articles” and humans) 1 
3 Limit 1 to (English language humans and “review” or “scientific integrity review” or “systematic 
review”) 1 (same article ) 
4 (“Methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamide” or “M ethylperfluorooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid” or 
“Perfluorodecanoic acid” or “Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid” or “perfluorohexane sulfonic acid” or 
“Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid” or  “Perfluorononanoic acid” or “Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid” or 
“Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid” or  “Perfluorooctanoic acid” or “perfluoroundecanoic acid”).mp. 4159 
5 Limit 4 to (English language and “review articles” and humans) 77 
6 (“MeFOSAA” or “PFHxS” or “n-PFOA” or “Sb-PF OA” or “PFOA” or “PFDA”  or “PFUnDA” or “n-
PFOS” or “Sm-PFOS” or “PFOS” or “PFNA” or “Perfluorinated chemical” or “perfluorinated 
compound” or “perfluorinated chemicals”  or “perfluorinated compounds”).mp. 5852 
7 Limit 6 to (English language and “review articles” and humans) 192 
8 Limit 4 to (English language humans and “review” or “scientific integrity review” or “systematic 
review”) 81 
9 Limit 6 to (English language humans and “review” or “scientific integrity review” or “systematic 
review”) 203  
10 (“Methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamide” or “M ethylperfluorooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid” or 
“Perfluorodecanoic acid” or “Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid” or “perfluorohexane sulfonic acid” or 
“Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid” or  “Perfluorononanoic acid” or “Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid” or 
“Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid” or  “Perfluorooctanoic acid” or “perfluoroundecanoic acid”).rn. 2896 
11 Limit 10 to (English language an d “review articles” and humans) 49 
12 Limit 10 to (English language humans and “review”  or “scientific integrity review” or “systematic 
review”) 51 
 
Scopus Search Terms  
( ( ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ”MeFOSAA”  OR “PFHxS”  OR “n-PFOA”  OR “Sb-PFOA”  OR “PFOA”  
OR “PFDA”  OR “PFUnDA”  OR “n-PFOS”  OR “Sm-PFOS”  OR “PFOS”  OR “PFNA”  OR 
“Perfluorinated chemical*”  OR “perfluorinated compound*”  ) ) OR ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ”Methyl-
perfluorooctane sulfonamide”  OR “Methylperfluorooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid”  OR 
“Perfluorodecanoic acid”  OR “Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid”  OR “perfluorohexane sulfonic acid”   
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D  225 
Prepublication Copy  OR “Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid”  OR “Perfluorononanoic acid”  OR “Perfluorooctane sulfonic 
acid”  OR “Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid”  OR “Perfluorooctanoic acid”  OR “perfluoroundecanoic 
acid”  ) ) OR ( CHEMNAME ( ”Methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamide”  OR “Methylperfluorooctane 
sulfonamidoacetic acid”  OR “Perfluorodecanoic acid”  OR “Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid”  OR 
“perfluorohexane sulfonic acid”  OR “Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid”  OR “Perfluorononanoic acid”  
OR “Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid”  OR “Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid”  OR “Perfluorooctanoic acid”  
OR “perfluoroundecanoic acid”  ) ) OR ( CASREGNUMBER ( ”335-76-2”  OR “335-67-1”  OR “375-
92-8”  OR “375-95-1”  OR “355-46-4”  OR “1763-23-1”  OR “2058-94-8”  ) ) ) AND 
( INDEXTERMS ( human*  ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( human*  ) ) ) AND NOT INDEX ( medline  ) 
AND ( LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , “ar”  ) ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( LANGUAGE , “English”  ) )  
 
Screening of Abstracts 
 
The literature search identified 639 potentially releva nt systematic reviews. The publications were 
imported into PICO Portal, a web-based tool for co llaborative citation screening for systematic reviews.2 
After importing to PICO Portal, 119 articles were  identified as duplicates, leaving 520 for title and 
abstract screening. The review used the following population exposure comparison and outcome (PECO) 
statement:   
Population:  Systematic reviews of health effects of PFAS in humans 
Exposure: PFAS species measured in the CDC’s National Report on Human Exposure to 
Environmental Chemicals  (see Chapter 1, Table 1-3) 
Comparison: Any comparison groups, including internal controls 
Outcome:  Any human health outcome  
 
The inclusion and exclusion criteria related to the PECO statement were as follows:  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  Includes human evidence; includes th e PFAS species measured in the CDC’s 
National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals ; assesses the evidence for an 
association of PFAS and a health outcome in humans; and has a methods section  
Exclusion Criteria: Did not review health effects of PFAS;  reviewed only animal or mechanistic 
studies; reviewed chemicals other than the PFAS included in the Statement of Task; reviewed 
generic classes of chemicals such as “endocrine di sruptors” or “persistent organic pollutants;” or 
reviewed the ecological effects of PFAS or PFAS exposure pathways 
 Title and abstract screening was completed by two screeners. Disagreements were resolved by an 
adjudicator who helped facilitate a consensus decisi on. Fifty-four articles were included for full-text 
review.   
Full Text Review 
 
For the full text review, articles were excluded because they did not include human studies (n = 
2), did not include relevant PFAS (n = 5), did not have a methods section (n = 18), or did not evaluate the 
association of PFAS exposure with a human health outco me (n = 3) (see Figure D-1). Thus, the full text 
review covered 26 articles.  
                                                 
2 See https://picoportal.net (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE D-1  Preferred reporting items for systematic revi ews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) diagram for the 
committee’s review of reviews on health effects of PFAS. 
 
 
Evaluation and Evidence Assessment 
 
The quality of the 26 included systematic re views was evaluated using the AMSTAR-2 (A 
MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews) (S hea et al., 2017), which has been used by several 
other committees of the National Academies of Scie nces, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM, 2019, 
2021). AMSTAR-2 includes several critical appraisal domains (see Box D-1). The quality assessment was 
conducted by a staff member and was confirmed by a committee member. The committee conducted a 
critical appraisal of the systematic reviews because systematic reviews can be subject to a range of biases.  
 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D  227 
Prepublication Copy  BOX D-1  
AMSTAR-2 Critical Domains and Ov erall Confidence in the Results  
 
Critical Domains 
 Protocol registered before commencement of the review (item 2) 
 Adequacy of the literature search (item 4) 
 Justification for excluding individual studies (item 7) 
 Risk of bias from individual studies being included in the review (item 9) 
 Appropriateness of meta-analytical methods (item 11) 
 Consideration of risk of bias when interp reting the results of the review (item 13) 
 Assessment of presence and likely impact of publication bias (item 15) 
 
Rating: Overall Confidence in  the Results of the Review 
 High : No or one noncritical weakness:  the systematic review provides an accurate and comprehensive 
summary of the results of the available stud ies that address the question of interest. 
 Moderate: More than one noncritical weakness: the system atic review has more than one weakness but 
no critical flaws. It may provide an  accurate summary of the results of  the available studies that were 
included in the review. 
 Low: One critical flaw with or without noncritical weaknesses: the review  has a critical flaw and may not 
provide an accurate and comprehensive summary of th e available studies that address the question of 
interest. 
 Critically Low: More than one critical flaw with or without noncritical weaknesses: the review has more 
than one critical flaw and should not be relied on to provide an accurate and comprehensive summary of 
the available studies. 
 
 
Synthesis: Results 
 
 Of the 26 systematic reviews identified by the committee, 9 included studies published after the 
ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls (Bartell and Vieira, 2021; Boesen et al., 2020; Deji et 
al., 2021; Dzierlenga et al., 2020; Ferrari et al., 201 9; Luo et al., 2020; Petersen et al., 2020; Steenland 
and Winquist, 2020; Xie et al., 2020; Zare Jeddi et  al., 2021). Although all we re of moderate quality, 
some reviews covered the same original data and papers, and the comm ittee found it challenging to 
synthesize across them. As a result, the systematic reviews were used as sources for reference in the 
committee’s determination of the biologic plausibilit y between PFAS and a health effect, but they were 
not formally included as part of the fina l strength-of-evidence determination.  
 
ORIGINAL LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
The original literature review consisted of the following steps: literature search, screening of 
abstracts, full text review of studies identified in the abstract screening, evidence mapping and evaluation, 
and data abstraction.  
 
Literature Search 
 
As was done for the review of reviews, the lite rature for the original literature review was 
identified through searches of the medical and scienti fic literature on three databases: Ovid Embase, Ovid 
Medline, and Scopus. These three searchable datab ases index biological, chemical, medical, and 
toxicological publications. Search terms included fu ll and abbreviated chemical names, common and 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  manufacturer trade names, the CAS numbers, and MeSH3 descriptors for each of the PFAS species of 
interest. There were no time constraints or geogr aphic constraints included in the search. The only 
constraints were human studies and English language  only. The databases were searched on March 30–
31, 2021.  
 
 
Ovid Embase Search Terms4 
1 (“335-76-2” or “335-67-1” or “375-92-8” or “ 375-95-1” or “355-46-4” or “1763-23-1” or “2058-
94-8”).rn. 3547 
2 exp perfluorooctanesulfonic acid/ 3114 
3 exp perfluorohexanesulfonic acid/ 625 
4 exp perfluorononanoic acid/ 890 
5 exp perfluorooctanesulfonic acid/ 3114 6 exp perfluorodecanoic acid/ 713 7 
exp perfluorooctanoic acid/ 3493 
8 exp perfluoroundecanoic acid/ 386 
9 (“Methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamide” or “M ethylperfluorooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid” or 
“Perfluorodecanoic acid” or “Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid” or “perfluorohexane sulfonic acid” or 
“Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid” or  “Perfluorononanoic acid” or “Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid” or 
“Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid” or  “Perfluorooctanoic acid” or “perfluoroundecanoic acid”).mp. 5503 
10 (“MeFOSAA” or “PFHxS” or “n-PFOA” or “Sb- PFOA” or “PFOA” or “ PFDA” or “PFUnDA” or 
“n-PFOS” or “Sm-PFOS” or “PFOS” or “PFNA” or  “Perfluorinated chemical” or “perfluorinated 
compound” or “perfluorinated chemicals”  or “perfluorinated compounds”).mp. 6579 
11 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 7610 
12 (exp animal/ or nonhuman/) not exp human/ 6205240 13 11 not 12 5435 
14 
Limit 13 to english language 5232 
15 Limit 14 to “ pubmed/medline” 540 
16 14 not 15 4692 
17 Limit 16 to article 3517 
 
 
Scopus Search Terms5 
 ( ( ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( ”MEFOSAA”  OR “PFHXS”  OR “N-PFOA”  OR “SB-PFOA”  OR “PFOA”  
OR “PFDA”  OR “PFUNDA”  OR “N-PFOS”  OR “SM-PFOS”  OR “PFOS”  OR “PFNA”  OR 
“PERFLUORINATED CHEMICAL*”  OR “PERFLUORINATED COMPOUND*”  ) ) OR ( TITLE-
ABS-KEY ( ”METHYL-PERFLUOROOCTANE SULFONAMIDE”  OR 
“METHYLPERFLUOROOCTANE SULFONAMIDOACETIC ACID”  OR 
“PERFLUORODECANOIC ACID”  OR “PERFLUOROHEPTANESULFONIC ACID”  OR 
“PERFLUOROHEXANE SULFONIC ACID”  OR “PERFLUOROHEXANESULFONIC ACID”  OR 
“PERFLUORONONANOIC ACID”  OR “PERFLUOROOCTANE SULFONIC ACID”  OR 
“PERFLUOROOCTANESULFONIC ACID”  OR “PERFLUOROOCTANOIC ACID”  OR 
“PERFLUOROUNDECANOIC ACID”  ) ) OR ( CHEMNAME ( ”METHYL-PERFLUOROOCTANE 
SULFONAMIDE”  OR “METHYLPERFLUOROOCTANE SULFONAMIDOACETIC ACID”  OR 
“PERFLUORODECANOIC ACID”  OR “PERFLUOROHEPTANESULFONIC ACID”  OR 
“PERFLUOROHEXANE SULFONIC ACID”  OR “PERFLUOROHEXANESULFONIC ACID”  OR 
                                                 
3 MeSH descriptors are sets of terms naming descriptors in a hierarchical structure that permits searching at 
various levels of specificity.  
4 Not all chemical names mapped to a heading. 
5 The search was limited to articles and English language. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D  229 
Prepublication Copy  “PERFLUORONONANOIC ACID”  OR “PERFLUOROOCTANE SULFONIC ACID”  OR 
“PERFLUOROOCTANESULFONIC ACID”  OR “PERFLUOROOCTANOIC ACID”  OR 
“PERFLUOROUNDECANOIC ACID”  ) ) OR ( CASREGNUMBER ( ”335-76-2”  OR “335-67-1”  
OR “375-92-8”  OR “375-95-1”  OR “355-46-4”  OR “1763-23-1”  OR “2058-94-8”  ) ) ) AND 
( INDEXTERMS ( HUMAN*  ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( HUMAN*  ) ) ) AND NOT 
INDEX ( MEDLINE  ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , “AR”  ) ) AND ( LIMIT-
TO ( LANGUAGE , “ENGLISH”  ) )  
 
 
Ovid Medline Search Terms  
1 (“335-76-2” or “335-67-1” or “375-92-8” or “ 375-95-1” or “355-46-4” or “1763-23-1” or “2058-94-
8”).rn. 330 
2 (“Methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamide” or “M ethylperfluorooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid” or 
“Perfluorodecanoic acid” or “Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid” or “perfluorohexane sulfonic acid” or 
“Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid” or  “Perfluorononanoic acid” or “Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid” or 
“Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid” or  “Perfluorooctanoic acid” or “perfluoroundecanoic acid”).mp. 4050 
3 (“MeFOSAA” or “PFHxS” or “n-PFOA” or “Sb-PF OA” or “PFOA” or “PFDA”  or “PFUnDA” or “n-
PFOS” or “Sm-PFOS” or “PFOS” or “PFNA” or “Perfluorinated chemical” or “perfluorinated 
compound” or “perfluorinated chemicals”  or “perfluorinated compounds”).mp. 5700 
4 (“Methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamide” or “M ethylperfluorooctane sulfonamidoacetic acid” or 
“Perfluorodecanoic acid” or “Perfluoroheptanesulfonic acid” or “perfluorohexane sulfonic acid” or 
“Perfluorohexanesulfonic acid” or  “Perfluorononanoic acid” or “Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid” or 
“Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid” or  “Perfluorooctanoic acid” or “perfluoroundecanoic acid”).rn. 2837 
5 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 6194 
6 Animals/ not (Animals/ and Humans/) 4772259 
7 5 not 6 4664 
8 Journal Article/ 30061095 
9 7 and 8 4548 
10 Limit 9 to English language 4379 
 
 
Abstract Screening 
 
The literature search identified 5,172 potentially relevant studies. The studies were imported into 
PICO Portal, a web-based tool for collabora tive citation screening for systematic reviews.6 After 
importing the studies to PICO Portal, 112 articles were  identified as duplicates, leaving 5,060 articles to 
be screened. The titles and abstracts were screened for relevance to the research questions for the review. 
The review used the following PECO statement:   
Population:  Studies of health effects of PFAS in humans  
Exposure: PFAS species measured in the CDC’s National Report on Human Exposure to 
Environmental Chemicals  
Comparison: Any comparison groups, including internal comparisons 
Outcome:  Any health outcome measured in humans 
 
The inclusion and exclusion criteria related to the PECO statement were as follows:  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  Is an epidemiologic or human study;  includes a quantitative measure of the 
PFAS species measured in the CDC’s National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental 
                                                 
6 See https://picoportal.net (accessed July 1, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Chemicals ; assesses the evidence for an association of  PFAS and a health outcome in humans; 
and English language only 
Exclusion Criteria: Did not review health effects of PFAS;  reviewed only animal or mechanistic 
studies; was about chemicals other than the PFAS included in the Statement of Task; did not include a quantitative measure; or was on the ecological effects of PFAS or PFAS exposure pathways 
 The literature search identified 5,172 potentially relevant studies. After removal of duplicates (112 
articles), 5,060 articles were subject to title and ab stract screening by two independent reviewers. 
 
Full Text Review 
 
For the full text review, 4,434 of the articles identified in the literature search were excluded 
because the titles and abstracts did not meet the inclusi on criteria, so 626 articles were subject to full text 
review. During that review, additional articles were ex cluded if they were publis hed before 2018 or listed 
in the references to the ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls  (n = 320); were cross-
sectional in design (n = 160); were not published in  English (n = 1); did not provide risk estimates 
associated with PFAS exposure (n = 3); or were not  studies in humans (n = 3) (see Figure D-2). Cross-
sectional studies were largely excluded because this  study design measures exposure and disease at the 
same time so cannot determine cause and effect. Thus, the full text review covered 139 articles. 
 
Evidence Mapping and Evaluation 
 
The committee then categorized the 139 articles acco rding to the human health outcomes studied. 
The committee mapped the evidence with  the goal of determining evidence gaps and to inform strategies 
for the evidence evaluation and evid ence synthesis (see Figure D-3).  
The committee focused on those endpoints for wh ich additional review might change the 
committee’s understanding of the association betw een PFAS exposure and health outcomes.  
The committee conducted a narrative evaluation of th e study quality and considered factors that 
may contribute to the study’s risk of bias (see Box D-2) using a tool adapted from the Navigation Guide 
(Woodruff and Sutton, 2014). Bias is a systematic erro r that leads to study results that differ from the 
actual results. Bias can lead to an observed effect when  one does not exist or to no observed effect when 
there is a true effect. Risk of bias is the a ppropriate term, as a study may be unbiased despite a 
methodological flaw (Higgins et al., 2019). The risk-of-b ias assessment in a systematic review is based on 
the quality of the individual component studies (Eick et al., 2020).  
A trained reviewer from ICF International, the EPA, the National Academies, or Johns Hopkins 
University abstracted the critical domain informati on from each study that the committee used to support 
its judgment determinations regarding a study’s risk of  bias, and the committee made the final risk of bias 
judgments for each study.
7 Each paper was given an overall assessment of its risk of bias (low, probably 
low, probably high, or high risk of bias).  
 
                                                 
7 For some studies included in the co mmittee’s review, the data had been pr eviously abstracted by ICF or the 
EPA to support the EPA’s ongoing assessments of PFAS; newer evidence was abstracted by ICF or consultants at 
Johns Hopkins. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D  231 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE D-2  Preferred reporting items for systematic revi ews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) diagram for the 
committee’s reviews on the health effects of PFAS. 
 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
  
FIGURE D-3  Evidence map describing the number of studies found by PFAS for each health outcome category.   
 
232                  Prepublication Copy 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D  233 
Prepublication Copy  BOX D-2  
Critical Domains Used by the Co mmittee to Assess Risk of Bias 
 
Exposure Measures:  Assay information, quality control measures, repeat measures, validation studies 
 
Outcome Measures:  Sources of the effect measure, blinding to exposure status or level, methods of 
measurement or classification, in cident versus prevalent disease,  evidence from validation studies 
 
Participant Selection:  Study design, where and when was the study conducted, and who was included? 
Recruitment process, exclusion and in clusion criteria, type of controls, total eligible, comparison between 
participants and nonparticipants (or followed and not fo llowed), final analysis group. Does the study include 
potential vulnerable/susceptible groups or life stages?  
 
Potential Confounding:  Potential confounders and outcome; degree  of exposure to the confounder in the 
population 
 
Analysis:  Extent (and, if applicable, treatment) of missing data for exposure, outcome, and confounders, 
approach to modeling, classification of exposure and outcome variables (continuous versus categorical), testing 
of assumptions, sample size for specific analyses, and relevant sensitivity analyses 
 
Selective Reporting:  Are results presented with adequate detail for all of the endpoints of interest? Are results 
presented for the full sample as well as for specified s ubgroups? Were stratified analyses (effect modification) 
motivated by a specific hypothesis?  
 
Sensitivity:  What exposure range is spanned in this study? What are the ages of participants (e.g., not too young 
in studies of pubertal development)? What is the length of follow-up (for outcomes with long latency periods)? 
Choice of referent group and the level of exposure contrast between groups (i.e., the extent to which the 
“unexposed group” is truly unexposed, and the prevalence of exposure in the group designated as “exposed”) 
 
Source of Funding:  Description of the disclosed sources of funding for the paper 
 
 
Data Abstraction 
 
Data abstraction was completed by a trained scientist from ICF, the EPA, the National 
Academies, or Johns Hopkins.8 The data abstraction form included the following:  
 
Reference:  Author year and DOI number if relevant 
Chemical:  Acronym of specific PFAS 
Endpoint:  Name of the specific outcome for the risk estimate  
Subpopulation:  Description of the specific subpopulation for the risk estimate 
N: sample size that informs risk estimate 
Exposure Levels:  that apply to the risk estimate 
Comparison:  Description of type of risk estimate, such as “SMR for bladder cancer in the high 
exposure group compared to no workplace exposur e” or “change in ln (TSH) per standard unit 
increase in serum PFOA.” Risk/Effect Estimate:  Reported number 
Lower Confidence Interval:  Reported number  
Upper Confidence Interval:  Reported number 
                                                 
8 For some studies included in the co mmittee’s review, the data had been pr eviously abstracted by ICF or the 
EPA to support the EPA’s ongoing assessments of PFAS; newer evidence was abstracted by ICF or consultants at 
Johns Hopkins University. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Effect estimates from the individual studies included in  the review were extracted into a database and 
uploaded to a public website (Tableau Public) to a llow for visualizations, such as evidence maps and 
forest plots.9 The effect estimates in the Tableau repre sent those from the model most adjusted for 
confounders.  
STRENGTH-OF-EVIDENCE DETERMINATION 
 
To assess the strength of evidence regarding the po tential for PFAS to cause a particular health 
effect, the committee then integrated the evidence reviewed  in the ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for 
Perfluoroalkyls  and other authoritative reviews with the evid ence from the original literature review from 
the epidemiologic studies.  
The synthesis of available data was guided by a framework based on the Hill considerations (Hill, 
1965), which help to determine whether associations  are causal (see Box D-3). The committee did not 
consider the Hill considerations to be a heuristic for assessing causation in isolation, that is, as a checklist 
where each item must be met to est ablish causality. Rather, the committe e considered them as a list of 
possible considerations meant to generate thoughtful discourse by th e committee to help inform its 
determinations for the strength of evidence (Fedak, 2015; NASEM, 2018).    
BOX D-3  
Bradford Hill Considerations 
 
Strength:  A small association does not mean that there is not  a causal effect, though the larger the association, 
the more likely that it is causal. 
 
Consistency:  Consistent findings observed by different pe ople in different places with different samples 
strengthens the likelihood of an effect. 
 
Specificity:  Causation is likely if there is a very specific po pulation, at a specific site, with a specific disease 
with no other likely explanation. 
 
Temporality:  The effect has to occur after the cause. 
 
Biological Gradient:  Greater exposure should generally lead to gr eater incidence of the effect. In other cases, 
greater exposure leads to lower incidence. 
 
Plausibility:  A plausible mechanism between cause and effect is helpful.  
 
Coherence:  Coherence between epidemiological  and laboratory findings increases  the likelihood of an effect 
but “lack of such [laboratory] evidence cannot nullify the epidemiological effect on associations” (Hill, 1965, p. 
298). 
 
Experiment:  Occasionally it is possible to a ppeal to experimental evidence. 
 
Analogy:  The effect of similar factors may be considered. 
 
SOURCE: Hill, 1965. 
                                                 
9 The committee’s public Tableau is available at 
https://public.tableau.com /app/profile/nationalacademies/viz/NASE MPFASEvidenceMaps/ PFASEvidenceMap 
(accessed July 1, 2022). The information may be viewed as an evidence map or as a forest plot. Within forest plots, 
filters can be accessed using the “toggle filters” function in orde r to restrict the view to da ta on specific health effect 
categories and other factors (such as reference, chemical, study design, study population).  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D  235 
Prepublication Copy  Animal and Mechanistic Studies 
 
The Statement of Task called for the committe e to “assess the strengt h of evidence for the 
spectrum of putative health effects suggested by human studies.” The committee focused on more recent 
epidemiological literature in line with its Statemen t of Task. However, the committee recognizes the 
importance of toxicologic evidence in making st rength-of-evidence conclu sions and relied on the 
toxicological data included in the ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for Perfluoroalkyls , other authoritative 
reviews, and systematic reviews that provide integr ative conclusions based on mu ltiple lines of evidence. 
In synthesizing evidence in this manner, the committee acknowledges that animal evidence greatly 
improves the interpretation of the human studies.  
An observed association between PFAS exposure an d a health effect does not necessarily mean 
that the exposure is the cause of that outcome. Toxico logic evidence, whether it supports or conflicts with 
evidence from epidemiologic studies, provides insigh ts about biologic processes and informs how an 
observed association might be interpreted. The degree of biologic plausibility itself influences whether the 
committee perceives positive findings to be indicativ e of a pattern or the product of statistical 
fluctuations. Ultimately, the results of the toxicolo gy studies should be consistent with what is known 
about the human disease process if they are to supp ort a conclusion that the development of the disease 
was influenced by an exposure (NASEM, 2018).  
Categories of Association 
 
Sufﬁcient Evidence of an Association 
 
For effects in this category, a positive association between PFAS and the outcome must be 
observed in studies in which chance, bias, and confou nding can be ruled out with reasonable confidence. 
For example, the committee might re gard as sufficient evidence of an  association evidence from several 
small studies that is unlikely to be  due to confounding or to otherw ise be biased and that shows an 
association that is consistent in magnitude and di rection. Experimental data supporting biologic 
plausibility strengthen the evidence of an association but  are not a prerequisite, nor are they sufficient to 
establish an association without corresponding epidemiologic findings.  
 Limited or Suggestive Evidence of an Association 
 
In this category, the evidence must suggest an  association between exposure to PFAS and the 
outcome in studies of humans, but the evidence can be li mited by an inability to rule out chance, bias, or 
confounding with confidence. One high-quality study may indicate a positive association, but the results 
of other studies of lower quality may be inconsistent. 
 
Inadequate or Insuf ﬁcient Evidence to Determine an Association 
 
If there was not enough reliable scientific data to  categorize the potential association with a health 
effect as “sufficient evidence of an association,” “lim ited or suggestive evidence of an association,” or on 
the other end of the spectrum, “limited or suggestive evidence of no association,” the health outcome was 
placed in the category of “inadequate or insufficient ev idence to determine an association” by default. In 
this category, the available human studies may have in consistent findings or be of insufficient quality, 
validity, consistency, or statistical power to support a conclusion regarding the presence of an association. 
Such studies may have failed to control for confou nding factors or may have had inadequate assessment 
of exposure. 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Limited or Suggestive Evidence of No Association 
 
A conclusion of “no association” is inevita bly limited to the conditions, exposures, and 
observation periods covered by the available studies, a nd the possibility of a small increase in risk related 
to the magnitude of exposure studied can never be  excluded. However, a change in classification from 
inadequate or insufficient evidence of an asso ciation to limited or suggestive evidence of no association 
would require new studies that corrected for the methodologic problems of previous studies and that had samples large enough to limit the possible study results attributable to chance. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bartell, S. M., and V. M. Vieira. 2021. Critical review on PFOA, kidney cancer, and testicular cancer. 
Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association  71(6):663–679. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10962247.2021.1909668. 
Boesen, S. A. H., M. Long, M. Wielsoe, V. Mustieles,  M. F. Fernandez, and E. C. Bonefeld-Jorgensen. 
2020. Exposure to Perflouroalkyl acids and foet al and maternal thyroid status: A review. 
Environmental Health  19(1):107. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-020-00647-1. 
Deji, Z., P. Liu, X. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Luo, and Z. Huang. 2021. Association between maternal 
exposure to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances and risks of adverse pregnancy 
outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Science of the Total Environment 783:146984. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146984. 
Dzierlenga, M. W., L. Crawford, and M. P. Longne cker. 2020. Birth weight and perfluorooctane sulfonic 
acid: A random-effects meta-regression analysis. Environmental Epidemiology  4(3):e095. 
https;//doi.org/10.1097/EE9.0000000000000095. 
Eick, S. M., D. E. Goin, N. Chartres, J. Lam, and T. J. Woodruff. 2020. Assessing risk of bias in human 
environmental epidemiology studies using three tool s: different conclusions from different tools. 
Systematic Reviews  9(1):249. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-020-01490-8. 
Fedak, K. M., A. Bernal, Z. A. Capshaw, and S. Gr oss. 2015. Applying the Bradford Hill criteria in the 
21st century: How data integration has changed causal inference in molecular epidemiology. 
Emerging Themes in Epidemiology  12:14. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12982-015-0037-4. 
Ferrari, F., A. Orlando, Z. Ricci, and C. Ronco. 20 19. Persistent pollutants: Focus on perfluorinated 
compounds and kidney. Current Opinion Critical Care  25(6):539–549. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/MCC.0000000000000658. 
Higgins, J. P. T., J. Thomas, J. Chandler, M. Cump ston, T. Li, M. J. Page, and V. A. Welch. 2019. 
Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
Hill, A. B. 1965. The environment and disease: Association or causation? Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of Medicine  58(5):295–300. 
Luo, Y., Z. Deji, and Z. Huang. 2020. Exposure to perfluoroalkyl su bstances and allergic outcomes in 
children: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Environmental Research  191:110145. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110145. 
NASEM (National Academies of Sciences , Engineering, and Medicine). 2018. Advances in Causal 
Understanding for Human Health Risk-Based D ecision-Making: Proceedings of a Workshop—in 
Brief . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
NASEM. 2019. Review of DOD’s Approach to Deriving an Occupational Exposure Level for 
Trichloroethylene . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
NASEM. 2021. The Use of Systematic Review in EPA’s Toxic Substances Control Act Risk Evaluations . 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
Petersen, K. U., J. R. Larsen, L. Deen, E. M. Flachs, K.  K. Haervig, S. D. Hull, J. P. E. Bonde, and S. S. 
Tottenborg. 2020. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and male reproductive health: A 
systematic review of the epidemiological evidence. Journal of Toxicology Environmental Health 
B Critical Reviews  23(6):276–291. https://doi.o rg/10.1080/10937404.2020.1798315. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D  237 
Prepublication Copy  Shea, B. J., B. C. Reeves, G. Wells, M. Thuku, C. Hame l, J. Moran, D. Moher, P. Tugwell, V. Welch, E. 
Kristjansson, and D. A. Henry. 2017. AMSTAR 2: A critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews 
that include randomised or non-randomised st udies of healthcare interventions, or both. British 
Medical Journal  358:j4008. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j4008. 
Steenland, K., and A. Winquist. 2021. PFAS and cancer , a scoping review of the epidemiologic evidence. 
Environmental Research  194:110690. https://doi.org /10.1016/j.envres.2020.110690. 
Woodruff, T. J., and P. Sutton. 2014. The Naviga tion Guide systematic review methodology: A rigorous 
and transparent method for translating environmenta l health science into better health outcomes. 
Environmental Health Perspectives  122(10):1007–1014. https://doi .org/10.1289/ehp.1307175.  
Xie, W., W. Zhong, B. M. R. Appenzeller, J. Zh ang, M. Junaid, and N. Xu. 2020. Nexus between 
perfluoroalkyl compounds (PFCs) and human th yroid dysfunction: A systematic review 
evidenced from laboratory investigations and epidemiological studies. Critical Reviews in 
Environmental Science and Technology  1–46. doi: 10.1080/10643389.2020.1795052. 
Zare Jeddi, M., R. Soltanmohammadi, G. Barbieri, A. S.  C. Fabricio, G. Pitter, T. Dalla Zuanna, and C. 
Canova. 2021. To which extent are per- and poly-fl uorinated substances associated to metabolic 
syndrome? Reviews in Environmental Health 37(2):211–228. https://doi .org/10.1515/reveh-2020-
0144.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238  Prepublication Copy  Appendix E 
 
White Paper: Review of the PFAS Pe rsonal Intervention Literature 
 
Prepared for: 
 
Elizabeth B. Boyle 
Senior Program Officer 
Board on Environmental Studies and Toxicology  
Board on Population Health and Public Health Practice 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
 
and 
 
Committee on the Guidance on PFAS Testing and Health Outcomes 
Washington, DC, USA 
 
 
Prepared by:  
 
Judy S. LaKind, Ph.D. 
LaKind Associates, LLC 
Catonsville, MD, USA 
 
Josh Naiman, B.A. 
LaKind Associates, LLC 
Philadelphia, PA, USA  
 
    
 
 
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  239 
Prepublication Copy  Contents 
 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  ............................................................................................... 240 
 ABSTRACT  .............................................................................................................................. ............... 242 
 
E-1 INTRODUCTION  .......................................................................................................................... 243 
 E-2 METHODS  .............................................................................................................................. ....... 246 
Literature Identification, 246 
Literature Review and Data Extraction, 246 
Assessment of Evidence, 247 
 
E-3 RESULTS  .............................................................................................................................. .......... 248 
Food Preparation: Fish, Shellfish, and Mollusks, 248 
Food Preparation: Other, 251 Local Food Consumption Advisories, 252 
Drinking Water, 253 
Breast Milk and Infant Formula, 256 Indoor Dust, 262 Other Potential Interventions, 262 Modeled Intakes as the Basis for Recommenda tions for Reducing Exposure to PFAS, 263 
 E-4 DISCUSSION  .............................................................................................................................. ... 269 
 REFERENCES  .............................................................................................................................. .......... 271 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Acronyms and Abbreviations 
 
AC   activated carbon 
ATDSR  Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry  CI   confidence interval 
 
EPA   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Et-PFOSA-AcOH 2-(n-ethyl-perfluor ooctane sulfonamido) acetic acid 
EtFOSAA  2-(n-ethyl-perfluorooc tane sulfonamido) acetic acid 
 
FDA   U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
 GAC    granular activated carbon  H2PFDA   2H,2H-perfluorodecanoic acid  H4PFOS   1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctane sulfonic acid  
H4PFUnDA   2H,2H,3H,3H-perfluoroundecanoic acid  
H PFHpA   7H-dodecafluoroheptanoic acid   L-PFHpS   sodium perfl uoro-1 heptanesulfonate 
LOD   limit of detection 
LOQ   limit of quantitation 
 
Me-PFOSA-AcOH 2-(
n-methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamido) acetic acid 
MeFOSAA   2-(n-methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamido) acetic acid 
MRL   Minimum Reporting Level  
n-EtPFOSAA    n-ethyl-perfluoro-1 octanesulfonamido acetic acid.  
n-MePFOSAA    n-methylperfluoro-1 octanesulfonamido acetic acid 
n-PFOA   n-perfluorooctanoic acid n-PFOS   n-perfluorooctane sulfonic acid NEtFOSE  N-ethyl perfluorooctane sulfonamidoethanol  NHANES  National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
NIEHS   National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 
 PBDE   polybrominated diphenyl ether PCB    polychlorinated biphenyl PFAA   perfluoroalkyl acid 
PFAS    per- and polyfl uoroalkyl substances  
PFBA    perfluorobutanoate PFBS    perfluorobutane sulfonic acid PFC   perfluorinated compound PFCA   perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acid PFDA    perfluorodecanoic acid 
PFDcA    perfluorodecanoate 
PFDoA (PFDoDA)  perfluorododecanoic acid PFDeA   perfluorodecanoic acid  PFDS    perfluorodecane sulfonate PFHpA   perfluoroheptanoic acid  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  241 
Prepublication Copy  PFHpS    perfluoroheptane sulfonate  
PFHxA   perfluorohexanoate 
PFHxS    perfluorohexane sulfonic acid  
PFNA    perfluorononanoic acid PFOA    perfluorooctanoic acid PFOS    perfluorooctane sulfonic acid  PFOSA or FOSA  perfluor ooctane sulfonamide  
PFPeA    perfluoropentanoate 
PFTeA   perfluorotetradecanoate 
PFTeDA   perfluorotetradecanoic acid 
PFTrA   perfluorotridecanoate 
PFTrDA   perfluorotridecanoic acid  PFUA    perfluoroundecanoate  PFUnA   perfluoroundecanoic acid 
PFUnDA  perfluoroundecanoic acid  
POE    point of entry POTW    publicly owned treatment work POU    point of use  
RO    reverse osmosis 
 Sb-PFOA   branched perfluorooctanoic acid  SD   standard deviation Sm-PFOS   perfluoromethylheptane sulfonic acid   
UCMR   Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule 
 ww    wet weight 
 
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Abstract 
 
This white paper provides an overview of the pu blished literature on whet her personal behavior 
modifications can demonstrably reduce exposure to pe r- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) (e.g., by 
showing decreases in serum levels). The reviewed  studies are presented by exposure source. The 
preponderance of the identified literature relates to diet  and drinking water. Lite rature on interventions for 
other exposure sources, such as dust and consumer products, is more limited. Breastfeeding is an 
important potential source of exposure for infants; th e effect of lactation on mothers’ PFAS levels is 
unclear. For communities with high levels of PFAS in drinking water, interventi ons related to tap water 
filtration showed some efficacy in reducing PFAS levels in the water. It is possible that an intervention 
may reduce PFAS levels in a particular medium, but if this medium is not a major source of overall 
exposure, then that intervention may not contri bute significantly to reduction in human exposures. 
Overall, the intervention literature is sparse and has many limitations. Thus, the committee may have to 
rely on assumptions and other bodies of evidence to make recommendations to individuals and 
communities about exposure reduction.  
  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  243 
Prepublication Copy  E-1 
 
Introduction 
 
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) ar e anthropogenic chemicals that have been 
produced and utilized globally since the 1940s.1 PFAS have garnered attention for several reasons, 
including their ubiquitous presence in the environm ent (Ahrens and Bundschuh, 2014; von der Trenck et 
al., 2018) and in humans (Calafat et al., 2019; Göcken er et al., 2020; Health Canada, 2019; Kannan et al., 
2004), and because—as their epithet “forever chem icals” suggests—many of these chemicals are 
persistent both in the environment and in humans, with  half-lives estimated to be several years (Li et al., 
2018; Myers et al., 2012). Exposure to PFAS has been linked with such health endpoints as reduced 
immune response, lipid metabolism, and kidney function; thyroid disease; liver disease; glycemic 
parameters and diabetes; cancer; and impair ed fetal and child development (ATSDR, 2020). 
Activities to limit the production and use of exposure to PFAS compounds include regulatory 
limits, voluntary reductions in manufacture (Butenhof f et al., 2006) and use in products, cleanup of 
contaminated sites, and modifications to publicly  owned treatment works (POTWs) to reduce PFAS in 
drinking water. However, as evidenced by studies of measurements of PFAS in serum from nationally 
representative populations in the United States (Calaf at et al. 2019), as well as serum measurements in 
communities near sites with known contamination (H errick et al., 2017), exposure to PFAS is ongoing. It 
has been well documented that PFAS are present in numerous media and products, including drinking 
water; breast milk; other foods and food packag ing material; cosmetics; and household products, 
including carpets, stain- and water-repellent fabri cs, nonstick products, polishes, waxes, paints, and 
cleaning products (D’Hollander et al., 2010; EFSA, 2020; Eichler and Little, 2020; Fromme et al., 2009; 
Sajid and Ilyas, 2017; Sunderland et al., 2019).2 
Communities impacted by PFAS exposure would like advice on how they can prevent its 
potential health effects. To help clinicians respond to  patient concerns about PFAS exposure, the Agency 
for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) has published PFAS: An Overview of the Science 
and Guidance for Clinicians on Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (referred to hereafter as the ATSDR 
PFAS Clinical Guidance) (ATSDR, 2019). This guid ance summarizes general information about PFAS 
and PFAS health studies and suggests answers to ex ample patient questions. Some people living in 
PFAS-impacted communities have voiced frustrati on that the clinical guidance lacks clear 
recommendations to their physicians about what people can do to protect their health, which prompted the 
ATSDR and the National Institute of Environmental H ealth Sciences (NIEHS) to request that the National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine convene a committee to provide advice for clinicians 
about PFAS testing, such as when to test, whom to test , how to test, what to test for, and the risks of 
testing. The committee is also charged with developi ng principles clinicians can use to advise patients on 
exposure reduction.3 The committee commissioned this white pape r to determine whether evidence exists 
that supports the effectiveness of these types of behavi or changes. The literature review in this white 
paper is intended to help th e National Academies committee ev aluate possible evidence-based 
recommendations for improving the ATSDR’s PFAS Clini cal Guidance. This white paper is not intended 
to be a comprehensive review of human exposure to PFAS; the National Academies have other sources 
for that information. 
Various organizations have provi ded suggestions for personal ac tions to lower individual PFAS 
exposure. These include avoiding contaminated water or fish and selecting personal care products that do 
                                                           
1 See https://www.epa.gov/pfas/basic-in formation-pfas (accessed May 12, 2021). 
2 See also https://www.epa. gov/pfas/basic-information-pf as (accessed May 12, 2021). 
3 See the committee’s full Statement of  Task at https://www.na tionalacademies.org/our- work/guidance-on-pfas-
testing-and-health-outcomes (accessed May 19, 2021).  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.244  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  not contain PFAS and related compounds (ATSDR,  2020; EWG, 2016; Loria, 2019; ODH, 2020). 
Reducing intake of PFAS should reduce exposure, but people may not necessarily know whether their 
foods, beverages, or products contain PFAS. This  review addresses the following question: Based on 
current research, are there interventions or personal  changes that individuals can make to effectively  
reduce their PFAS exposure? This question includes two key concepts. First, “personal” indicates that the 
focus is on research related to media and products that people may be able to control partly or wholly (see 
Figure E-1) as opposed to activities that occur on a larger scale, such as contaminated site cleanup, 
changes in occupational exposures, or modifications to publicly owned water treatment plants. Second, 
“effectively” refers to changes in personal behavior that can result in measurable or substantial reductions 
in exposures. 
 
 
 
FIGURE E-1 Human PFAS exposure pathways. The area inside the dashed red line denotes pathways for which 
individual actions may lower PFAS exposures.   
NOTE: PFC = per-/polyfluorinated chemical ; WWTP = wastewater treatment plant.  
SOURCE: Adapted from Oliaei et al., 2013. CC BY 4.0 
 
 
To answer the above question, it is important to  consider several factors related to reducing 
human PFAS exposure. First, PFAS must be present in  the media or products of interest. While this 
seems like a straightforward notion, information on PFAS concentrations in local media (e.g., local 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  245 
Prepublication Copy  drinking water) and specific products (e.g., cookware) ma y in fact be sparse or unavailable. Second, there 
must be a complete exposure pathway between the me dium or product and humans. In other words, if 
PFAS are present in a medium or product but there is no human contact, then exposure will not occur. 
Third, an exposure pathway may be complete but no t contribute substantially to overall human exposure. 
In this case, a reduction in the PFAS source may not result in a meaningful reduction in human PFAS 
exposure. Fourth, actions to reduce PFAS exposure fro m one pathway may result in exposure to PFAS or 
other chemicals from a new pathway (e.g., an action to remove exposure to one food item with known 
PFAS levels may result in exposure to another food item  that has not yet been analyzed for PFAS or other 
chemicals). Finally, PFAS tend to have long physiologi cal half-lives; thus, interventions or changes in 
behavior may not produce near-term changes in internal PFAS levels (i.e., serum levels).  
Taking these issues into consideration, this wh ite paper explores the following three questions: 
 
1. Is there research that links sp ecific interventions or chang es to reductions in human 
exposures? This paper focuses on studies seeking to  establish that an intervention or 
behavioral change produces a quantifiable reduction in human exposure as evidenced by 
measurements of PFAS in the media of inter est or directly in humans. As noted above, 
studies relying on biomonitoring to assess the efficacy of an intervention must consider the long half-lives of many PFAS and must be of appropriate duration to enable observation of 
postintervention decreases in serum levels. 
2. Can information from exposure assessments  that estimate human intakes from multiple 
pathways of exposure and exposure routes be used  as the basis for individual or community 
recommendations? In this type of study, measurements of PFAS in various media are used to 
model human PFAS intake (i.e., nanograms [ng] per day or ng/kilogram [kg] per day). If 
sufficient measurement data are available, it may be possible to estimate the relative 
importance of various pathways of exposure.  
3. Is the available research sufficiently robust su ch that recommendations for modifications to 
behavior can be made? Studies differ in terms of their quality and generalizability (i.e., how 
well the results translate from the studied popul ation and conditions to other populations and 
conditions). They therefore also differ in term s of the confidence one can place in the results. 
Factors impacting confidence in studies can incl ude sample size, quality assurance, inter- and 
intrastudy consistency in results, and comp leteness of reporting. In addition, for 
recommendations applicable to the United States,  it is important to consider whether the 
studies reflect conditions that apply to be haviors and exposures in this country.  
 
The remainder of this paper first describes our approach to identifying and reviewing the 
literature. We then provide results by medium. Next, we discuss efforts to model relative contributions of 
media and products to overall PFAS intakes in the United States.  
We note that there are more than 9,000 PFAS compounds (NASEM, 2021), and any given study 
generally examines only a very small subset of these. We focus here on the 16 PFAS
4 chemicals included 
in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) National Report on Human Exposure to 
Environmental  Chemicals  (CDC, 2009).  
 
                                                           
4 PFBS: perfluorobutane sulfonic acid; PFDA: perfluorodecanoic acid; PFDoA: perfluorododecanoic acid; 
PFHpA: perfluoroheptanoic acid; PFHxS: perfluorohexane sulfonic acid; PFNA: perfluorononanoic acid; PFOA: perfluorooctanoic acid; n-PFOA: n-perfluorooctanoic acid; Sb-PFOA: branched perfluorooctanoic acid; PFOS: 
perfluorooctane sulfonic acid; n-PFOS: n-perfluorooctane sulfonic acid; Sm-PFOS: perfluoromethylheptane sulfonic 
acid; PFOSA or FOSA: perfluorooctane sulfonamide; EtFOSAA: 2-(n-ethyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamido) acetic acid; MeFOSAA: 2-(n-methyl-perfluorooctane sulfonamido) acetic acid; PFUnDA: perfluoroundecanoic acid. The 
various PFAS abbreviations used in this paper are defined in the listing at the beginning of the paper. For brevity, 
these abbreviations are not spelled out further in the text of this paper. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.246  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  E-2 
 
Methods 
 
This review is a scoping review that aims to (1 ) “identify the types of available evidence in a 
given field,” (2) “report on the types of evidence that  address and inform practice in the field and the way 
the research has been conducted,” (3) “examine how r esearch is conducted on a certain topic,” and (4) 
“identify and analyze gaps in the knowledge base” (Munn et al., 2018).  
 
LITERATURE IDENTIFICATION 
 
Online data sources, including PubMed, EMBASE, a nd Google Scholar, were used to conduct the 
initial literature searches. We used such keywor ds as “(PFBS OR PFDA OR PFDoA OR PFHpA OR 
PFHxS OR PFNA OR PFOA OR n-PFOA OR sb-PFOA OR PFOS OR n-PFOS OR Sm-PFOS OR PFOSA OR FOSA OR EtFOSAA OR MeFOSAA OR PFUnDA OR PFAS),” “PFAS,” “perfluoroalkyl,” 
“human,” “exposure,” “cooking,” “dust,” “fish,” “sh ellfish,” “water,” “nail polish,” “cleaning,” 
“consumer products,” “filter,” “water filter,” “filtra tion,” “intervention,” “determinant,” “reduction,” 
“diet,” “vacuum,” “popcorn,” “biomonitor,” “breast milk,” “breastfeeding,” “infant formula,” “milk 
powder,” “carpeting,” “packaging,” “indoor,” “bottled water,” “air conditioning,” “fabrics,” “well water,” 
“water treatment,” “apparel,” “inhalation,” “ventilati on,” “cosmetics,” “dental floss,” and “personal care 
products,” as well as various combinations of these a nd related keywords. We selected articles describing 
interventions designed to reduce human exposure to PFAS , specifically interventions that could be carried 
out by individuals (e.g., excluding site cleanups, mo difications of publicly owned treatments works 
[POTWs]). Secondary references of retrieved artic les were reviewed to identify publications not 
identified by the electronic search. Additional literatu re searches were conducted to identify reviews that 
contained estimates of human PFAS intakes using the following keywords in different combinations: 
“(PFBS OR PFDA OR PFDoA OR PFHpA OR PFHxS OR PFNA OR PFOA OR n-PFOA OR sb-PFOA 
OR PFOS OR n-PFOS OR Sm-PFOS OR PFOSA OR FOSA OR EtFOSAA OR MeFOSAA OR 
PFUnDA),” “PFAS,” “exposure,” “review,” “biomonito r,” “PFOA,” and “human.” The final search date 
was March 5, 2021. 
The criteria for inclusion in the review were as follows: studies of interventions related to 
personal modifiable behavior a nd English-language publications. Exclusion criteria included the 
following: occupational studies and those interv entions requiring professional activities, such as 
modifications to POTWs. For publications on modeled in take estimates, we were interested primarily in 
PFAS intakes in the United States. Rese arch focused on clinical interventi ons is outside the scope of this 
review (e.g., Ducatman et al., 2021; Genuis et al., 2014). 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW AND DATA EXTRACTION 
 
Each study that met the above inclusion criteria was examined by both authors. The data from 
each intervention study were tabulated. Informa tion extracted from each study included (where 
available
5) the following: 
 
 description of the study population: si ze, composition, source, and location; 
 study design: laboratory and population; 
 type of specimen and number of samples; 
                                                           
5 Because of the disparate nature of the identified studi es, it was often possible to include only a portion of the 
elements. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  247 
Prepublication Copy   PFAS and concentrations or cha nges in concentrations; and  
 results: percent decrease/increase, concentration decrease/increase, and a measure of 
precision (e.g., 95% confidence interval [CI], st andard deviation [SD]). (For publications 
with results reported qualitatively, the text  was extracted and reproduced verbatim.) 
 
ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE 
 
We evaluated the overall strength of evidence for each medium, considering such elements as 
overall study design, participant selection, sample size, and exposure assessment (LaKind et al., 2014; 
Vandenbroucke et al., 2007). For studies using bi omonitoring data to assess the efficacy of an 
intervention, we considered whether sampling interval s were designed to capture potential effects of the 
intervention. To assess the utility of  the available evidence for providing recommendations for behavior 
modifications to reduce PFAS exposures, we examined such factors as (1) the number of available studies 
for each medium/PFAS chemical/intervention type combin ation, (2) the quality of the individual studies, 
(3) the intra- and interstudy consistency in results, and (4) the generalizability of the information to U.S. 
populations.  
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.248  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  E-3 
 
Results 
 
Studies with the potential to provide information on methods that could be used by individuals for 
reducing exposure to PFAS were identified. The inte rvention areas include preparation of fish and other 
foods, reduction of exposure to PFAS in  drinking water either via water filtration at point of entry (POE) 
or point of use (POU) or via consumption of bottled water, selection of cookware, minimization of indoor 
dust exposure through modification of indoor products, a nd use of personal care products or dietary fiber. 
Literature on breast milk/infant formula and bot h mother and infant PFAS exposure reduction is 
discussed. Finally, studies on source contributions to overall PFAS intake in the United States were 
identified. Each of these bodies of literature  is described in the following sections. 
 
FOOD PREPARATION: FISH, SHELLFISH, AND MOLLUSKS 
 
Fish, shellfish, and mollusks have been studied for their potential as a source of PFAS exposure 
in humans. Nine studies examining the effect of various fish and seafood preparation methods on PFAS 
levels were identified. The studies included differe nt species, cooking practices, and PFAS. We briefly 
summarize these studies here. 
Alves and colleagues (2017) measured PFOS a nd PFUnA levels in mackerel and flounder 
purchased in markets in Spain, It aly, and the Netherlands (25 samples per species/location). PFAS were 
measured in raw samples and from samples steamed at 105°C for 15 minutes. No significant differences 
in concentrations were found between the steamed a nd raw samples. Mean concentrations of PFOS in 
flounder for raw and steamed samples were 24±1.5 na nograms per gram (ng/g) wet weight (ww) and 
22±1.5 ng/g ww, respectively. Mean concentrations of PFUnA in mackerel for raw and steamed samples 
were 3.1±0.2 ng/g ww and 2.9±0.1 ng/g ww, respectively.  
The 16 PFAS compounds identified previously (PFBA, PFPeA, PFHxA, PFHpA, PFOA, PFNA, 
PFDcA, PFUnA, PFDoA, PFTrA, PFTeA, PFBS, PFHxS, PFHpS, PFOS, and PFDS) were measured in 
raw and steamed tuna, hake, plaice (n = 25 each; fille ts), and mussels (n = 50) purchased in European 
markets (Barbosa et al., 2018). Steaming was perfo rmed at 105°C for 15 minutes (fish) or 5 minutes 
(mussels). The effects of steaming varied considerab ly by both species and compound. Selected results 
shown in Figure E-2 illustrate these differences.  
 
 
FIGURE E-2 Examples of PFAS content (micrograms per kilogram [ μg/kg] wet weight [ww]) in raw and steamed 
seafood samples and percentages of PFAS content increase (+) and decrease ( −) after steaming (mean ± standard 
deviation [SD]).  
NOTE: * = significant differences (p <0. 05) between raw and steamed samples.  
SOURCE: Partially reprinted from Barbosa et al., 2018.  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  249 
Prepublication Copy  Bhavsar and colleagues (2014) measured various  PFAS (including perfluoroalkyl carboxylic 
acids, perfluoroalkane sulfonic acids, perfluoroalkyl phosphonic acids, perfluoroalkyl phosphinic acids, 
and polyfluoroalkyl phosphoric acid diesters) in fresh-caught Chinook salmon, lake trout, common carp, 
and walleye obtained in Ontario, Ca nada (fillets from four or five fi sh per species). PFAS levels in the 
cooking oil were below the limit of detection (LOD). Fillet samples were placed on a layer of canola oil 
and fried, baked, or broiled for 10–15 minutes. PFO S was by far the dominant PFAS in each species; 
thus, the results were focused on the effects of cooking methods on PFOS fish concentrations. All 
cooking methods resulted in mostly statistically si gnificant increases in concentrations of PFOS in 
salmon, trout, and walleye (the increase in walleye after frying did not appear to be statistically 
significant). For example, PFOS concentrations in raw,  baked, broiled, and fried chinook salmon (mean ± 
standard deviation [SD]) were, r espectively, 12.70±12.61 ng/g ww, 16.56±18.00 ng/g ww, 16.45±15.63 
ng/g ww, and 16.03±15.19 ng/g ww. For carp, broiling and frying resulted in no significant changes. The 
authors also assessed the change in amount of PFOS (in contrast with the concentration change) to 
account for loss in mass due to cooking. With this approach, results were mixed in directionality and 
mostly nonsignificant.  
Del Gobbo and colleagues (2008)  analyzed fish and shellfish species purchased in Canadian 
markets for PFOA, PFNA, PFDA, PFUA, PFDoDA,  PFTeDA, and PFOS. Species included catfish, 
cuttlefish, grey mullet, grouper, monkfish, octopus, red snapper, sea squirt, skate, whiting, and yellow 
croaker. Composites from each species were comprised of at least three individuals from three different 
sources or markets (total of nine). The fillets (sometim es with skin) were baked, boiled, or fried in water, 
sesame oil, rice wine, or vegetable oil. PFAS levels in the cooking oil were below the LOD. Baking and 
frying times were 15 minutes at 163°C or 325°C. All c ooking interventions were found to decrease PFAS 
concentrations, with boiling and fr ying reducing total PFAS concentrations by an average of 79 percent 
and 54 percent, respectively. Baking reduced all measured PFAS to below the LOD (0.03–10 ng/g ww). 
Boiling appeared to increase concentrations of PFOS in octopus (from nondetect to 0.23 ng/g ww) but not 
in red snapper, skate, or yellow croaker. The aut hors hypothesize that large loss of mass in the boiled 
octopus (87 percent) may have resulted in  an increase in levels above the LOD.  
Hu and colleagues (2020) measured 13 PFA S compounds (PFBA, PFPeA, PFHxA, PFHpA, 
PFOA, PFNA, PFDA, PFUnDA, PFDoDA, PFBS, PFHxS, PFOS, and FOSA) in grass carp taken from 
Tangxun Lake, China (n = 5). The fillets were either steamed, boiled, fried, or grilled, with cooking 
temperatures for the various processes ranging from 100 C to 210°C. The authors note that in the 
“cooking blank juice samples all PFAS were below the MLQs [Method Quantitation Limit] except PFBS 
and PFOS. The concentrations of PFBS and PFOS in  cooking blank samples were 1.31–2.43 ng/g and 
0.131–0.169 ng/g, respectively” (Hu et al., 2020, p. 4). The effects of the cooking methods on 
concentrations of various PFAS compounds were f ound to be inconsistent. For example, median PFOS 
concentrations increased from 71.3 ng/g ww in uncooked fish to 146 ng/g ww in fried fillets. In contrast, 
median PFBS concentrations decreased from 20.3 ng/ g ww in raw fish to 8.08 ng/g ww after grilling. 
These results exemplify the difficu lty in characterizing the direc tionality and magnitude of the 
effectiveness of cooking fish as a proposed type of intervention. 
Kim and colleagues (2020) measured 19 PFA S (PFOS, PFDS, PFHxS, PFTeDA, PFTrDA, 
PFDoA, PFUnDA, PFBS, PFDA, PFNA, PFOA, PFHpA, PFHxA, PFPeA, PFOSA, N-EtPFOSAA, N-MePFOSAA, L-PFHpS, and PFBA) in mackerel bought from a market in Korea (n = 10). Composited 
fillets from three mackerels each were prepared with various washing, soaking, and cooking (grill, braise, 
steam, or fry) methods (two composites each). The fish were cooked between 6 and 25 minutes with 
various ingredients including oil, water, potato, so y sauce, pepper paste, sugar, garlic, and ginger. 
Preparation methods included such traditional Korean  practices as soaking the fillets in sake or rice-
washed solutions. These soaking practices reduced PFAS levels by 51 to 80 percent. Washing the 
mackerel with water resulted in  a reduction in PFAS of 74 percent.  Similarly, all cooking methods 
reduced total PFAS content compared  with the raw samples: grilling— 91 percent, steaming—75 percent, 
frying—58 percent, and braising—47 percent. While c ooking with potatoes further reduced PFAS levels 
in the mackerel, it also increased the levels in the potatoes.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.250  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Luo and colleagues (2019) assessed the effect of pr etreatments and cooking on levels of 19 PFAS 
(PFOA, PFOS, PFBA, PFPeA, PFHxA, PFHpA, PFNA, PFDA, PFUnDA, PFDoDA, PFTrDA, PFTeDA, 
PFBS, PFHxS, L-PFHpS, PFDS, PFOSA, N-MePFOSAA, and N-EtPFOSAA) in fish cakes (n = 4 
brands) and swimming crabs (n = 100) purchased in mark ets in Korea. The effects of a wide range of 
cooking methods were evaluated. Additional foods u sed in the cooking processe s included soybean oil, 
two types of soy sauce, and Korean radish. Blanchin g, commonly used as a pretreatment before cooking 
fish cakes, did not yield significant changes in PFAS levels. Significant reductions in total PFAS were 
observed after boiling, frying, and stir-frying fish cakes (total PFAS in control, boiled, fried, and stir-fried 
fish cakes, respectively, were as follows: 2.96 ± 0.6 ng/g, 1.60 ± 0.16 ng/g, 1.93 ± 0.19 ng/g, and 1.94 ± 
0.07 ng/g). For the crabs, presoaking reduced PFA S levels. PFAS in the crabs were significantly 
decreased after steaming and stewing.  
Taylor and colleagues (2019) collected school pr awn, blue swimmer crab, and dusky flathead 
from contaminated or reference estuaries in New South Wales and analyzed them for 20 PFAS 
compounds (PFAS above the limit of quantitation [L OQ] were PFHxA, PFHpA, PFOA, PFNA, PFDA, 
PFUnDA, PFDoDA, PFBS, PFHxS, PFOS, PFDS, FOSA , and NEtFOSE) before and after cooking. 
Dusky flathead fillets were baked or pan-fried in oliv e oil, while the crab and prawn were boiled in salted 
water. PFAS were below LODs in the cooking water a nd oil. Five or six replicates were used for each 
species and each cooking treatment (for prawns, each replicate was comprised of a composite of 10 
individuals). The effect on PFAS concentrations vari ed with species, cooking method, and chemical. For 
instance, PFOS concentrations showed no change in crab following boiling, whereas PFHxS and PFOA 
concentrations were reduced. Howe ver, PFOS, PFHxS, and PFOA concentrations increased in prawns 
after cooking. For the dusky flathead, PFOS levels did not change significantly after frying, but baking 
resulted in a small but significant increase. The au thors conclude that “cooking does not consistently 
reduce PFAS concentrations, and cannot mitigate diet ary exposure” (Taylor et al., 2019, p. 280).  
Vassiliadou and colleagues (2015) obtained sever al species of fish (anchovy, bogue, hake, 
picarel, sardine, sand smelt, and striped mullet) and shellfish (Mediterranean mussel, shrimp, and squid) 
from local markets in Greece and mussels from a ma riculture farm. Twelve PFAS compounds (PFBA, 
PFPeA, PFHxA, PFHpA, PFOA, PFNA, PFDA, PFUn DA, PFDoA, PFBS, PFHxS, and PFOS) were 
measured in raw or washed samples that were then fried (in virgin olive oil at 170°C) or grilled (at 
180°C). Total PFAS concentrations we re found to be mostly higher after grilling and after frying, but 
changes in individual PFAS were inconsistent.  
In general, there appear to be numerous factors related to preparation of fish, shellfish, and 
mollusks that can impact changes (increases or decr eases) in concentrations of PFAS. Taylor and 
colleagues (2019) observe that whether cooking re duces PFAS concentrations in fish depends on the 
physicochemical properties of the chemical, the cooki ng method used, and the species. They note several 
processes that could impact changes in PFAS levels in fish from food preparation: losses to the cooking 
medium (e.g., cooking oil), moisture loss during c ooking, PFAS precursors in fish tissues transforming 
during cooking to PFAAs, protein loss, or protein increase. Additional factors possibly affecting changes in concentration are the size, shape, and thickness of fish fillets (Hu et al., 2020). 
Overall, robust recommendations for fish prep aration interventions would ideally be based on 
consistent intra- and interstudy results; use of fi sh species and preparation methods common to the United 
States; and well-powered, replicated studies. The resu lts from the studies reviewed here indicate that the 
effects of preparation of fish and shellfish on PFAS le vels are inconsistent (examples are shown in Figure 
E-3). It is therefore difficult to use this informati on to inform recommendations regarding the efficacy of 
fish and shellfish preparation for reducing PFAS intake.   
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  251 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE E-3 Examples of inconsistent changes in selected PFAS concentrations af ter fish and shellfish preparation 
(arrows indicate direction of concentration change).  SOURCES: Blue swimmer crab information is from Taylor et al., 2019. Carp information is from Hu et al., 2020. 
Crab photo: Judy S. LaKind, CC BY SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=4963391. Carp 
photo: Dezidor—Self-photographed, CC BY 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=12661115. 
 
 
Furthermore, some of the fish species and prepar ation methods included in this body of research 
are not common to the United States, limiting the generalizability of results for U.S. communities. 
Additionally, because very few of these studies used the same cooking methods and species, it is difficult 
to corroborate even the instances in which a particular intervention appears to have  been effective (within 
this small group of studies, various cooking prep aration approaches included soaking followed by 
stewing, steaming, boiling, frying, or stir-frying; gr illing, steaming, baking, boiling, or frying without 
presoaking; and baking in rice wine or vegetable oil) . Furthermore, several of the studies included very 
small sample sizes. Finally, while some studies consider ed the effect of moisture or mass variations on 
PFAS concentration changes, others reported only concen tration data. A more relevant metric in terms of 
human exposure would be the mass of PFAS rema ining in the samples after preparation.  
 
FOOD PREPARATION: OTHER 
 
Two studies were identified that examined the eff ect of preparation on PFAS levels in foods other 
than fish (Binnington et al., 2017; Jogsten et al ., 2009). Jogsten and colleagues (2009) measured several 
PFAS in various uncooked and cooked foods (see Table E-1).6 Specifically, composite samples (n = 2) of 
beef, pork, or chicken were cooked in an oil mi xture using nonstick cookware. Only PFHxS, PFOS, 
PFHxA, and PFOA were detected in at least one of two composite samples. PFOS levels increased in 
grilled pork, grilled chicken, and fried chicken compared with the raw samples. In contrast, levels did not 
increase in cooked veal or fried pork. The results from th is study are not directly relevant for intervention 
recommendations. First, foods were purchased outside of the United States, and it is not known whether 
PFAS in these foods are similar to those in foods fo und in the United States. Second, only two samples 
per food type were included; there was no inform ation on brands and limited information on cooking 
procedures; and results were in consistent regarding the effica cy of cooking in reducing PFAS 
concentrations. Finally, it is not clear whether the e ffects of cooking can be disentangled from those of the 
Teflon-coated cookware used in this study. 
                                                           
6 Jogsten and colleagues (2009) also measured PFAS in foods wrapped in different types of packaging. The 
foods were purchased in Spain, and the brands were not iden tified, so the relevance to the U.S. population is unclear. 
Egeghy and Lorber (2011) note that while fluorochemical-tr eated food packaging can be a source of PFAS in food, 
it appears that PFAS levels in packaging such as  fast-food wrappers have decreased over time.  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.252  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Binnington and colleagues (2017) studied the effect s of preparation of beluga whale blubber on 
nutrients and environmental chemicals, including PFAS. They collected samples from two male whales 
(aged 24 and 37 years) from the Northwest Territories  and prepared them using traditional approaches. 
Measured PFAS (detected in ≥50 percent of the samples) were PFNA, PFDA, PFUnDA, PFDoDA, and 
PFOS. PFAS were measured in raw and prepared ( boiled, roasted, and aged) samples. Roasting increased 
concentrations of some of the PFAS compared with cer tain other treatments (e.g., air-drying, hang-drying, 
and boil pot), but were reduced in oil (Table E-1 in cludes concentration results for PFOS). According to 
the authors, issues with sample preparation may prevent these results from being considered 
representative of the overall mixture. 
 
 
TABLE E-1 Summary of Results of Studies Examining the Effect of Food Preparation on PFAS Levels  
Source PFAS Study 
Location Food  
Type Number Concentration 
Jogsten et al., 2009 PFBuS  
PFHxS  
PFOS  
PFHxA  
PFHpA  
PFOA  
PFNA  PFDA  
PFUnDA  
PFDoDA Spain Beef, pork, 
chicken  Two composite samples from at 
least six subsamples for each food 
type from each of two sampling 
locations PFOS, ng/g fresh weight 
(standard deviation) 
Veal 
raw: <0.015 
grilled: <0.008 
fried: <0.018 
Pork  
raw: <0.008 
grilled: 0.011 (0.009) 
fried: <0.008 
Chicken 
raw: <0.008 
grilled: 0.012 (0.01) 
fried: 0.010 (0.007) 
Binnington et al., 2017 PFNA 
PFDA 
PFUnDA 
PFDoDA 
PFOS Canadian 
Arctic Male 
beluga 
whale 
blubber Blubber sample divided into 
portions for different preparation 
processes  nanograms per gram wet 
weight (ng/g ww)
a 
 
PFOS: nondetect (ND) to 
<1 
PFNA: ND to <4 
PFDA: ND to <4  
PFUnDA: ND to <4  
PFDoDA: ND to <4 
a Estimated from publication figures. 
  
In summary, only two studies of changes in PFAS levels associated with cooking foods were 
identified. These studies included small sample  sizes and yielded inconsistent results. 
 
LOCAL FOOD CONSUMPTION ADVISORIES 
 
State advisories for guidance on consumption of  locally grown foods could be a source of 
information to inform exposure reduction decisi ons. Eleven states have advisory guidelines for 
consumption of fish, wildlife, a nd other foods (California [seafood], Connecticut, Hawaii [in process], 
Maine [fish, beef, and milk], Michigan [fish and deer], Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New 
York, Washington [in process], Wisconsin [fish and deer]) to protect human health from exposure to 
PFAS.7 These advisories offer guidance on limiting the quantity of these foods consumed. Depending on 
the state-specific PFAS and concentrations, different  consumption levels are indicated, ranging from do 
not eat (e.g., fish or deer in Michigan with PFOS con centrations of more than 300 parts per billion [ppb]) 
                                                           
7 See https://www.ecos.org/wp-content/uploads/20 21/04/Updated-Standards-Wh ite-Paper-Apr il-2021.pdf 
(accessed June 30, 2022). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  253 
Prepublication Copy  to unlimited consumption (e.g., fish in New Jersey with  0.56 ng/g PFOS). While fish consumption has a 
role in a healthy diet (Mozaffarian et al., 200 6), weighing the risks of PFAS exposure from fish 
consumption against the benefits of fish consump tion is a complex process, and no intervention studies 
were identified that evaluated the impact of redu ced consumption of fish on PFAS levels in blood and 
urine.  
DRINKING WATER 
 
Ingestion of drinking water is thought to be  a major pathway for PFAS exposure (Domingo and 
Nadal, 2019). Research on two types of drinking water in terventions is described in this section. The first 
addresses whether—and the extent to which—the use of water filters at POE into the home, under the 
sink (POU), or in water pitchers reduces PFAS exposure. The second addresses whether the use of 
purchased bottled water results in lower PFAS exposur e compared with the use of tap water. Because 
PFAS levels in water can vary widely, we focus on st udies that measured PFAS in tap and bottled water 
obtained from the same geographic area.  
Six publications and one agency report evalua ting possible drinking water interventions were 
identified. Four (Ao et al., 2019; Iwabuchi and Sato, 2021; MDH, 2008; Patterson et al., 2019) evaluated 
use of POE, POU, and water pitcher filtration devices;  and three (Ao et al., 20 19; Gellrich et al., 2013; 
Heo et al., 2014) evaluated differences in PFAS con centrations between tap water and bottled water. 
These studies are summarized here. Also discussed is one association paper assessing the relationship between drinking water source and ser um levels in a highly contaminated area (Emmett et al., 2006). 
 
POE, POU, and Water Pitcher Filtration 
 
Ao and colleagues (2019) (also discussed in th e next section) measured six PFAS compounds 
(PFOA, PFOS, PFNA, PFBS, PFHpA, and PFHxS) in tap (n = 9), filtered (n = 9), and bottled (n = 9) 
water in Shanghai, China. Paired tap and filtered water samples were collected from each of nine homes 
served by three different water sources.  The filtered water samples were co llected from the effluent of the 
home’s water purification device. No further informat ion on sampling or quality control in the field was 
given, nor was information on the type or brand of filter provided. ΣPFAS median concentrations in tap 
water and filtered water were 4.44 nanograms per Liter (ng/L) and 3.13 ng/L, respectively, but the 
differences were not statistically significant.  
Herkert and colleagues (2020) tested municipal, we ll, and filtered (n = 89) and unfiltered (n = 87) 
tap water in residences (n = 73) in North Caro lina for 11 PFAS compounds (GenX, PFBS, PFBA, PFHxS, 
PFOS, PFPA, PFHxA, PFHpA, PFOA, PFNA, PFDA). The 89 POE and POU filters tested varied in both 
type (e.g., pitcher, under sink, faucet, whole house) and filtration method (reverse osmosis [RO], granular 
activated carbon [GAC], single-stage, two-stage). Nota bly, RO filters and dual-stage filters were found to 
consistently remove most measured compounds  (except PFNA and GenX) at an average of ≥90 percent 
efficiency. On the other hand, GAC filters had more variable performance and we re far less effective in 
removing short-chain PFAS compounds, with an average removal efficiency of just 41 percent for those 
chemicals. Whole-house activated carbon POE systems resu lted in increased levels of PFAS in half of the 
tests (n = 4). The authors did not observe any correla tions between removal efficiency and brand, source 
water, loading, or filter age.  
Iwabuchi and Sato (2021) t ested pitcher-type water filte rs for their ability to reduce 
concentrations of six PFAS compounds (PFOA, PFOS, PFHxA, PFDA, PFDoA, and PFHxS). Four 
different models from four manufacturers were eval uated—two with a carbon, ceramic, and hollow fiber 
membrane design; and two with an activated carbon (AC) and ion exchange design (brand names not 
given). One liter of the test water was applied to th e water filters 200 times, with filtrate analyzed after 10 
L, 100 L, and 200 L had been passed through the filters. For each model, filtration effectiveness 
decreased with prolonged use, but three of the four mode ls were effective in removing the majority of all 
PFAS compounds. Removal efficiency did not appear to  be related to filter material type. Removal 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.254  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  efficiency varied by carbon-chain length (i.e., mo re efficient removal was observed for longer-carbon-
chain PFAS) and the PFAS functional group (PFOS >PFOA, and PFHxS >PFHxA). All tests were 
performed with initial PFAS concentrations of 50 ng/L . It is possible that filter effectiveness may vary 
with initial concentration levels. Iw abuchi and Sato (2021)  conclude that household water purifiers are 
effective at reducing PFAS levels in drinking water.  
Patterson and colleagues (2019) tested five co mmercially available POU/POE water treatment 
systems for six PFAS (PFOS, PFOA, PFHpA, PFHxS, PFBS, and PFNA). These included three RO systems (iSpring RCS5T, HydroLogic Evolution RO1000, and Flexeon LP-700) and two GAC systems 
(Calgon Filtrasorb 600 AR+ and Evoqua 1230CX). The filte rs were tested at various flow rates. The 
authors found that both RO and GAC systems had th e potential to remove PFAS to below the LOD under 
their experimental water quality and operational c onditions. They note, though, that performance was 
variable and that the long-term performance of the systems was not tested.  
In addition to the publications described above , the Minnesota Department of Health (MDH, 
2008) conducted a survey of POU water filtration devices for PFAS. Fourteen filters were lab-tested, and 
11 of these that passed initial testing were field-tested  using water from municipal wells. The brands were 
AC (n = 8)—Aquion Rainsoft Hydrefiner P-12 9878, Kinetico MACguard 7500, and Sears Kenmore Elite 
625.385010; and RO (n = 6)—GE Smartwater GXRM10G BL and Watts Premier WP-4V. The four AC 
devices removed PFAS compounds to below the analytical reporting level (0.2 micrograms [ μg]/L). The 
RO devices also removed PFAS to below the reporting limit. In terms of use by consumers, MDH notes, 
AC filters, RO membranes, and othe r filter elements have a limited service life and must be periodically 
replaced. Manufacturer recommendations vary, but many  suggest replacing filters after 500 gallons of 
treatment or every six months (MDH, 2008). 
MDH also tested a small, inexpensive, fa ucet-mounted carbon filter (PUR models FM-2000B, 
FM-3333B) using chlorinated and unchlorinated wate r with levels of PFAS that exceeded the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Lifetime He alth Advisory Levels. The filter removed all PFAS 
from the unchlorinated water to below the LODs (w hich ranged from 5 to 10 ng/L). Some breakthrough 
of PFBA occurred for the chlorinated water test, but  even at the filter capacity recommended by the 
manufacturer (100 gal), the filter was still removing 73 percent of the PFBA.
8  
In the course of their work sampling private well water in Washington County, Minnesota, MDH 
staff collected incidental samples of water treated by homeowner-ins talled carbon and RO systems. While 
many of these systems performed quite well, others ac hieved only partial removal of PFAS or none at all. 
MDH did not have the capacity to investigate furt her regarding the reasons for poor performance, but 
suspected that inadequate system  maintenance may have been the main cause. When conveying the 
results of such tests, whether the system was pe rforming well or not, MDH cautions homeowners that no 
guarantee can be made regarding long-term effectiven ess of the system and recommends that they work 
with a qualified water treatment company to ensure  proper maintenance of their system (Virginia 
Yingling, personal communication, July 14, 2021). 
For those homes that exceed the state’s drinking  water guidance values, the Minnesota Pollution 
Control Agency (MPCA) installs and maintains w hole-house GAC filter systems consisting of two 90 lb 
carbon canisters in series. As there are currently more  than 1,000 of these systems in place, the state does 
not manage them individually, but changes the carbon out annually (which is more frequent than needed 
for the levels of PFAS present in the groundwater). Testing shows that the state’s GAC systems remove 
all PFAS below reporting limits (4.4 ng/L). However, some trace levels, especially of PFBA, have been 
detected above the method detection limits (which range from 0.5 to 1.0 ng/L). In a few instances, the filter systems were found not to be working, but these cases were related to the homeowners having 
accidentally switched the bypass valve or altered the plumbing in a way that bypassed the filter. As a 
result, the state’s contractor now inspects every sy stem and plumbing at the annual filter changeout 
(Virginia Yingling, personal communication, July 14, 2021). 
                                                           
8 The information in this and the subsequent two paragraphs was provided by Virginia Yingling, Environmental 
Health Division, Minnesota Department of Health, Saint Paul, Minnesota.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  255 
Prepublication Copy  A study of residents living in an area served by the Little Hocking water system in Ohio—with 
water PFOA levels in the low ppb range at the time of  the study—examined whether a community relying 
on highly contaminated public water could significantly reduce exposure through the use of a carbon 
water filter (Emmett et al., 2006). Serum PFOA was measured in a random  sample of study participants 
(n = 324), who also provided information on their dri nking water habits. Those who used only water from 
the Little Hocking water system in their homes we re categorized as using a home carbon water filtration 
system (n = 64) versus no home water filtration system, a system not known to remove PFOA, or a 
system of unknown type (n = 209). Participants with  home carbon water filters  were shown to have 
statistically significantly (p = 0.008) lower median serum PFOA levels compared with those who did not 
(318 nanograms per milliliter [ng/ml] versus 421 ng/m l, respectively). The difference in serum PFOA 
levels in these two groups of participants was not as large as that seen for individuals using bottled, 
spring, or cistern water (see the next section for more  information). The authors ascribe this finding to the 
limited effectiveness of water filters, as well as reliabilit y issues associated with filter maintenance. They 
do not recommend use of home filtration systems that were available at the time. 
All but one of the studies reviewed here found that  various filtration methods showed evidence of 
their potential effectiveness. These studies suggest that  pitcher-type, POE, and POU filtration systems can 
reduce PFAS levels in drinking water under the conditions tested. It is worth noting that optimal filtration 
depends on the user’s actively maintaining these devi ces, and no study has yet looked at the effectiveness 
of these interventions in real-world circumstances.9  
 
Bottled Water (Versus Tap Water) 
 
Here we summarize three studies that included measu rements of PFAS in bottled, tap, or filtered 
water from the same area in order to compare leve ls across drinking water sources. This research was 
conducted in China, Germany, and Korea.  
Ao and colleagues (2019) measured six PFAS compounds (PFOA, PFOS, PFNA, PFBS, PFHpA, 
and PFHxS) in tap (n = 9), filtered (n = 9), and bottled (n = 9) water in Shanghai, China. Tap and filtered 
water samples were collected from each of nine families served by three different water sources. Paired tap and filtered water samples were taken from each  home. The filtered water samples were collected 
from the effluent of the home’s water purifica tion device. Bottled water was purchased from local 
markets and represented nine best-selling brands. No fu rther information on sampling or quality control in 
the field was given. ΣPFAS median concentrations in tap water,  filtered water, and bottled water were 
4.44 ng/L, 3.13 ng/L, and 2.36 ng/L, respectively; the differences were not statistically significant.  
Mineral water (n = 119), tap water (n = 26), and sp ring water (n = 18) samples were measured for 
10 or 19 (tap water only) PFAS compounds (PFB A, PFBS, PFPeA, PFHxA, PFHxS, HPFHpA, PFHpA, 
PFOA, H4PFOS, PFOS, FOSA, PFNA, H2PFDA, PF DA, PFDS, H4PFUnDA, PFUnDA, PFDoDA, and 
PFTeDA) (Gellrich et al., 2013). The mineral water sa mples were from Germany; spring water samples 
from Switzerland, the Czech Republic, and Germany; and tap water samples from homes in unidentified 
locations. No further information on water sampling was given. The highest ΣPFAS concentration was in 
tap water (42.7 ng/L). The proportions of individual PFAS differed across water type. For example, PFOS 
was below the LOD in all of the spri ng water samples but was detected in 9 percent of all of the mineral 
water samples. The authors note that the PFAS concentr ations in the three water types were similar and 
described the concentrations as “low.” For example, the median PFOA levels in mineral, spring, and tap 
water samples were 1.6 ng/L, 1.4 ng/L, and 2.6 ng/L, respectively. 
Heo and colleagues (2014) measured 16 PFA S compounds (PFBA, PFPeA, PFHxA, PFHpA, 
PFOA, PFNA, PFDA, PFUnDA, PFDoDA, PFTrDA, PFTeDA, PFBS, PFHxS, PFHpS, PFOS, and 
                                                           
9 Information on certified water filters can be found at  the following website: https://www.nsf.org/knowledge-
library/perfluorooctanoic-acid-and-perfluorooctanesulfonic-acid-in-drinking-water (accessed May 12, 2021). Note 
that the certification applies only to PFOA and PFOS, and the water filter must be able to reduce these chemicals to 
under 70 parts per trillion (ppt). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.256  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  PFDS) in tap (n = 34) and bottled (n = 8) water from Busan, Korea. The bottled water samples were 
purchased in markets, and the tap water samples were  collected from 16 districts in Busan (no further 
information on types of bottled water or samp ling methods for tap water was provided). PFAS 
concentrations and detection frequenc ies were higher in the tap water than in the bottled water samples. 
For example, mean ΣPFAS levels in bottled and tap water we re 0.48 ng/L and 41.3 ng/L, respectively. 
The authors do not provide information on whether the observed differences were statistically significant.  
A study of residents living in an area served by th e Little Hocking water system in Ohio suggests 
that a community relying on highly contaminated public water could significantly reduce exposure 
through the use of bottled water (Emmett et al., 2006) . Serum PFOA was measured in a random sample of 
study participants (n = 324), who also provided info rmation on their drinking water habits. Residents who 
reported drinking primarily bottled/spring/cistern wa ter had a median serum PFOA level of 71 ng/mL, 
compared with a statistically significantly higher level of 374 ng/mL for those who drank only Little Hocking system water. Overall, the authors obser ved a strong relationship between serum PFOA levels 
and PFOA concentrations in the drinking water source.  
For communities with highly contaminated water s upplies, the use of alternative drinking water 
sources has been shown to be associated with signi ficantly reduced exposures. However, none of the 
intervention studies reviewed here provide robust ev idence for the effectiveness of replacing tap water 
with bottled water for U.S. locations with background  levels of PFAS. The studies reviewed here were 
conducted in Europe and Asia, and th e water PFAS concentrations there may not be generalizable to the 
United States. Lack of brand information and sm all sample sizes present additional challenges for 
evaluating this intervention.  
Use of bottled water as a replacement for tap wate r can be expensive and inconvenient. To be 
confident that the use of bottled water will result in  a reduction in PFAS expos ure, an understanding of 
local water conditions in comparison with PFAS levels  in specific types of bottled water is needed. As 
described above, while PFAS levels in bottled water tend to be appr oximately between <LOD to <100 
ng/L, it cannot be assumed that levels in bottled water are always lower than those in tap water. Outside 
of highly contaminated areas, the degree of spatial granularity for concentration data required to ensure 
that replacing tap water with bottled water will re duce PFAS exposure is not well understood. However, 
based on public data from publicly owned treatment works (POTWs) (EPA, 2017), PFAS levels in treated 
water can vary widely within regions or states (e.g ., PFOS water concentrations in Delaware ranged from 
<MRL [Minimum Reporting Level] of 0.04 to 1. 8 µg/L, while PFOA water concentrations in 
Pennsylvania ranged from <MRL of 0.02 to 0.349 µg/L). 
The EPA’s Third Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule (UCMR) (EPA, 2017) includes 
monitoring data for PFOS, PFOA, PFNA, PFHxS, PFHpA, and PFBS (data from 2013 to 2015 from a representative sample of public water systems serving ≤10,000 people). Figure E-4 shows varying 
concentrations of these six PFAS across the United States for PFAS levels above the method reporting 
limits. Levels in drinking water can vary across the United States by at least an order of magnitude. The 
concentrations are in the low ng/L range, similar to reported levels in bottled water. Also note that for 
much of the United States, PFAS levels in drinki ng water are below the method reporting limit (see 
Figure E-5, green symbols) and so would possibly be similar to those in bottled water. 
 
BREAST MILK AND INFANT FORMULA  
 
In considering the idea of “intervention” as it pe rtains to breast milk, there are two underlying 
concepts. The first is whether there are interventi ons that could reduce exposure to the breastfeeding 
infant, and the second is whether lactating can be an effective method for reducing the mother’s levels of 
PFAS compounds. We discuss each of these concepts in this section. 
 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  257 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE E-4 Variation in PFAS levels above the method reporting limit in drinking water in the United States. 
NOTES: The relative sizes of the symbols correspond to the actual measured water concentrations. The legends 
show exemplar concentrations. Plotted: log 10(concentration), excluding data below minimum reporting levels. μg/L 
= microgram per Liter. 
SOURCE: Data were extracted from the U.S. Environm ental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) Third Unregulated 
Contaminant Monitoring Rule (UCMR 3) (2013–2015) database (EPA, 2017). Individual concentration data for each point on the graphics can be found at http://lakinda ssociates.com/interactive-ma p (accessed June 30, 2022).   
 
 
The Infant’s Exposure: Does Formula Feeding in Place of Breastfeeding Reduce Exposure? 
 
Many mothers choose to breastfeed rather than u se infant formula. Breastfeeding confers various 
health advantages to the infant and mother (AAP , 2012; WHO, 2020). At the same time, breast milk 
includes environmental chemicals (LaKind et al., 2001, 2018; Lehmann et al., 2018) that derive from the 
mother’s body and are transferred to the infant via breastfeeding. Thus, concern has been expressed about 
the possible health effects on the infant from tho se environmental chemical exposures. This concern 
raises the question of whether formula feeding would serve as a method for “intervening,” or reducing infant exposure to PFAS.  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.258  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE E-5 PFAS levels above (red) and below (green) the method reporting limit in drinking water in the United 
States.  
NOTES: The symbols represent a total of 215,963 measurem ents from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s 
(EPA’s) Third Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule (UCMR 3) for PFOA, PFOS, PFHxS, PFBS, PFHpA, and 
PFNA. MRL = Minimum Reporting Level. 
SOURCE: Data were extracted from the EPA’s UCMR 3 (2013–2015) database (EPA, 2017). 
 
 
At least two factors need to be taken into consid eration. The first is that infants’ exposures begin 
in utero. Some studies suggest that despite e nvironmental chemical exposures associated with 
breastfeeding, infants who are breastfed may do bette r in a number of health-related aspects compared 
with formula-fed infants (LaKind et al., 2008). The World Health Organization has stated, “in studies of infants, breastfeeding was associated with beneficial e ffects, in spite of the contaminants present. The 
subtle effects noted in the studies were found to be asso ciated with transplacental, rather than lactational, 
exposure” (WHO, 2000, p. 237). These conclusions are drawn from research on persistent chemicals, such as dioxins; to our knowledge, there is no PFAS- specific literature on health effects of breastfed 
versus formula-fed infants. At present, there does not appear to be sufficient PFAS-related research that 
would allow for a definitive conclusion regarding infa nt health and the choice between breastfeeding and 
use of infant formula. Thus, it is not clear that form ula feeding is a scientifically supported “intervention” 
that would prevent adverse health outcomes.  
The second factor is that in choosing formula f eeding to reduce infant exposure to PFAS, the 
assumption is being made that infant formulas do not themselves contain PFAS compounds. While studies have reported on detectable leve ls of PFAS in infant formula in other countries (e.g., Llorca et al., 
2010; Macheka et al., 2021), it is instructive to review  available data on levels of PFAS in breast milk 
versus infant formula in the United States to assess wh ether levels in formula are lower than those found 
in breast milk. As an additional complication, it is not uncommon to purchase powdered formula and 
reconstitute it with drinking water. Therefore, we provi de here a synopsis of U.S. levels of PFAS in breast 
milk, formula, and drinking water. 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  259 
Prepublication Copy  PFAS in Breast Milk in the United States  
  Reviews of PFAS in breast milk (Lehmann et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020) identify three studies 
reporting measurements of PFAS levels in breast milk in the United States. One of these studies (Kuklenyik et al., 2004) is an analytical methods study. No information on either the milk donors or the sampling procedures is reported; the information from this  study is not relevant to this discussion. In a 
second study, von Ehrenstein and colleagues (2009) co llected milk samples from 34 breastfeeding women 
in North Carolina at 2–7 weeks and 3–4 months postp artum. Nine PFAS were measured (PFOS, PFOA, 
PFNA, PFHxS, PFOSA, MeFOSAA, EtFOSAA, PFBS, and PFDA). Measurements below the LOD were 
assigned a value of LOD/sqrt2. PFAS levels were below the LOQ in most of the 34 milk samples collected at both sample times (note that the LOQs for PFAS in milk ranged from 0.15 to 0.60 ng/ml, or ppb). Specifically, PFAS were detected in samples fr om only 4 of the 34 women, and of these only three 
PFAS were above the LOQ: Et-PFOSA-AcOH (1.0 ng/ml) and Me-PFOSA-AcOH (0.7 ng/ml) in one 
woman, and PFOSA in three women (0.3 ng/ml, 0.5 ng/ml, and 0.6 ng/ml). The remainder of the milk 
samples from both collections were f ound to have concentrations <LOQ.  
In contrast, Tao and colleagues (2008a) meas ured PFAS (PFOS, PFOA, PFHxS, PFNA, PFHpA, 
PFDA, PFUnDA, and PFDoDA) in milk samples collected from 45 primiparous and multiparous women in Massachusetts. Levels that were below the detect ion limit were assigned a value of zero, while those 
detected but below the LOQ were assigned a value of  one-half the LOQ. Mean levels of PFOS and PFOA 
were 131±103 parts per trillion (ppt ) (mean±SD) and 43.8±33.1 ppt, respectively. Mean PFHxS and 
PFNA levels were 14.5±13.7 ppt and 7.26±4.70 ppt,  respectively. The remainder of the PFAS were 
detected in only ≤4 samples (<24 ppt). 
 
PFAS in Infant Formula in the United States  
 
 In a 2018 review of environmental chemicals in  breast milk and infant formulas (Lehmann et al., 
2018), only one publication is identified with measureme nts of PFAS in infant formula in the United 
States (Tao et al., 2008b). Tao and colleagues (2008b ) measured PFAS in 21 formula samples purchased 
in Washington, DC, and Boston, Massachusetts. The br ands represented >99 percent of the U.S. market. 
Most of the samples were organic or nonorganic milk- or soy-based powders and ready-to-use or 
concentrated liquids. PFOS was detected in one samp le (11.3 ppt; LOQ = 11.0 ppt). PFHxS was detected 
in two samples (1.36 ppt and 3.59 ppt; LOQ = 1.35 ppt). No other PFAS (PFOA, PFNA, PFBS, PFHpA, PFDA, PFUnDA, and PFDoDA)  were detected in any samples.  
 
PFAS in Drinking Water in the United States  
 
 An assessment of infant exposure to environm ental chemicals would not be complete without 
considering exposures via drinking water used to r econstitute infant formula (LaKind et al., 2005). The 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) (2019) has noted that a source of PFAS exposure to infants and toddlers is “f ormula mixed with PFAS contaminated  water.” It is important to be 
able to provide information on what is meant by “contaminated,” as PFAS le vels in tap water vary 
widely. For example, Andrews and Naidenko (2020), using national and state databases, estimated that 
18−80 million people in the United States use tap wate r containing at least 10 ng/L (ppt) PFOA and PFOS 
combined, and more than 200 million people may have  water with a combined PFOA and PFOS level of 
at least 1 ng/L.  
Formula may also be reconstituted with bottled wate r. There is a paucity of data on PFAS levels 
in bottled water in the United States. Akhbarizadeh  and colleagues (2020) reviewed the international 
literature on PFAS levels in bottled wa ter (with none from the United States) and report levels of various 
PFAS in the low ng/L range, with some levels as high as the low 100s ng/L depending on the type and 
number of PFAS included in the reporting. They note th at researchers have attributed the PFAS in bottled 
water to several possible sources, including  PFAS from the plastic bottles themselves; introduction of 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.260  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  PFAS to the water before bottling or during bottle clos ure; or contamination of contact materials during 
bottling, handling, and storage of the bottles. In a st udy of tap, spring, and mineral water from Germany, 
Gellrich and colleagues (2013) found PFAS levels  to be generally in the low ng/L range.  
Looking beyond the peer-reviewed literature, Consumer Reports  (Felton, 2020) conducted a 
study on PFAS levels in bottled water purchased in stores in the United States and from online retailers. 
The noncarbonated water levels in 31 br ands were less than 1 ppt, and tw o other brands had levels of 1.21 
ppt and 4.64 ppt. These results derive from the averages of two to four samples of each product, but it is not clear whether these were replicates from the sa me bottle or different bottles. The report does not 
include information on detection limits or specific PFA S compounds detected, but merely describes “total 
PFAS as the sum of average concentrations of all PFAS  detected in the samples tested of a product.”  
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) measured PFOA and PFOS in carbonated and 
noncarbonated bottled water (n = 30; brands not identif ied) and found that levels were below the lower 
LOQ in all samples (0.004 µg/L).
10  
Studies have also detected PFAS in bottled water from other countries (see, e.g., Le Coadou et al., 
2017). As brand names are not provided by these authors,  it is not clear how this information could be 
used for intervention recommendations for the United States.  
Based on these very limited data, it is possible that ready-to-use formulas may have lower PFAS 
levels than formulas reconstituted with tap or bo ttled water (see Figure E-6). However, the following 
caveats must be noted: data comparisons across st udies are complicated by differences in total PFAS 
included; measurements may include more legacy  PFAS compounds and not include PFAS compounds 
used to replace the older chemistries; studies use varying detection limits and approaches for assigning 
values to measurements below the LOD; and sampli ng in these studies is not representative of regions 
within the United States.  
 
 
 
FIGURE E-6 Limited data on PFAS levels in breast milk and infant formula in the United States show general 
overlapping concentrations, which also overlap with PFAS concentrations in drinking water that could be used to reconstitute formula.  
NOTES: Double-headed arrows indicate that these bars could extend in either direction as new data are obtained. 
Ppt = parts per trillion.  SOURCE: Author generated. 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
10 See https://www.fda.gov /media/130564/download ( accessed May 12, 2021).  

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  261 
Prepublication Copy  The Mother’s Exposure: Does Lactat ion Reduce Internal Exposure? 
 
There are two likely sources of persistent chemical s in breast milk: legacy stores in the mother 
from her lifetime exposure, and current sources of expos ure, such as diet (LaKind, 2007). So the question 
arises: If a mother lactates, can she lower the stores of  chemicals in her body, thus reducing her internal 
exposures? (If she disposes of her milk rather than  breastfeeding, a process referred to as pumping-and-
dumping, can she similarly reduce her exposure?) Th e reduction in chemical levels in the body via 
lactation, referred to as depuration, has been st udied for such persistent chemicals as dioxins, 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polybrominated di phenyl ethers (PBDEs), and chlorinated organic 
compounds (LaKind, 2007). Those studies have yielded mixed results (reviewed by LaKind et al., 2001), 
with some showing substantial declines in breast milk  levels over time (Klein et al., 1986; Yakushiji et 
al., 1978) and others showing either minimal declines,  no changes, or increasing levels over the course of 
lactation (Hooper et al., 2007; LaKind et al., 2009).  
If lactation is an effective process for reducing the legacy stores of PFAS in the mother, one 
would expect to see levels of PFAS in serum and breast milk decline as lactation progressed and the mother’s stores were depleted. We review  here the literature on this topic.  
In a review of the literature on breastfeeding and serum levels in mothers, VanNoy and 
colleagues (2018) conclude that the published studi es support an association between breastfeeding and 
serum PFAS concentrations among women. However, they  also observe that key aspects of breastfeeding, 
including duration, exclusivity, and timing of sample collection, should influence the breastfeeding–serum relationship, yet only one study in their review  included all three exposure variables. They further 
describe the importance of parity for predicting maternal serum PFAS levels and note that most of the studies reviewed were unable to disentangle the effect s of breastfeeding versus those of parity on PFAS 
exposure. The ability to fully assess the impact of br eastfeeding on maternal PFAS levels is therefore 
limited.  
Another approach to assessing the impact of br eastfeeding on maternal PFAS exposure is to 
examine changes in PFAS levels in breast milk over the course of lactation. If stores of PFAS 
predominate over current exposures via diet and other sources, and if lactation resulted in mobilization 
and excretion of those stores, then lactation (with either breastfeeding or “pump-and-dump”) could result 
in lower internal exposures for the mother. Three studi es were identified that followed individual women 
over the course of lactation and collected multiple br east milk samples, which were analyzed for PFAS. 
Lee and colleagues (2018) collected breast milk  samples (n = 293) from 127 mothers at four 
different times postpartum (<7, 15, 30, and 90 days) as part of the Children’s Health and Environmental 
Chemicals in Korea Cohort study. Samples were measured for 16 PFAS. Of the 127 women, only 15 provided samples across the lactation period, and samples from these women were pooled by sampling 
time. The concentrations of PFOS, PFOA, PFNA, and ΣPFAS 30 days postpartum were statistically 
significantly higher than in milk from sampling at <7 days postpartum.  
In a study in Norway with nine women (Thomsen et al., 2010), milk samples were collected 
monthly from approximately 2 weeks postpartum up to 1 year postpartum (n = 3–10 per woman). The authors found a consistent decrease in concentra tions of PFOS and PFOA, except for PFOS in one 
woman (these were the only PFAS >LOQ). The modele d depuration rates were reported as 7.7 percent 
and 3.1 percent reduction per month for PFOA and PFOS, respectively. Regarding generalizing these 
results, the authors note that because they did not ha ve information on changes in the mothers’ body 
weight or diet during the sampling timeframe, they could not evaluate the influence of these factors on 
depuration rates.  
Fromme and colleagues (2010) also measured PFA S in breast milk samples collected monthly 
over 5 months from seven women. No significant diff erences in PFOS levels over the 5 months were 
observed.  
In summary, our understanding of PFAS depurati on based on breast milk measurements rests on 
three studies with between 7 and 15 women that yielded conflicting results. This is not necessarily 
surprising as depuration rates likely depend on numerous  factors, such as current exposures, volume of 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.262  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  breast milk excreted, and initial levels of PFAS in the body. Thus, the value of lactation as an intervention 
is unknown and requir es additional study. 
 
Would “Real-Time” Testing of Milk Help Guide Decision Making Regarding Infant Feeding? 
 
It is unclear whether “real-time” testing of breast milk is an advantageous  approach to guiding 
new mothers in decision making regarding infant feeding. First, testing requires sampling, shipping to laboratories, and conducting the analyses, which com es with a monetary cost. But even with unlimited 
resources, the time component is a critical considera tion, as results may not be available until well into 
the infant’s first few weeks or months. Second, a si ngle measurement may not capture the infant’s actual 
exposure as PFAS levels in milk may change over the duration of lactati on, and the direction and rate of 
change are not well understood.   
INDOOR DUST 
 
Dust is a potential exposure pathway for PFAS co mpounds (Trudel et al., 2008). One dust-related 
PFAS intervention study was identified (Young et al., 2021). Dust samples were collected from floors by vacuum in “PFAS-free” refurbished rooms (7 with a full intervention and 28 with a partial intervention) 
and 12 control rooms at a university in the north eastern United States. Fifteen PFAS compounds were 
measured (PFOS, PFOA, PFHxA, PFHxS, FOSA, PFHpA, PFPeA, PFNA, PFBS, PFDS, PFBA, PFDA, 
PFUnDA, PFDoDA, and N-MeFOSAA), with detection limits ranging from 0.06 to 1.5 ng/g. PFAS levels 
in field blanks were either below the LOD or s ubstantially lower than levels in the samples.  
The geometric mean ΣPFAS levels were 481 ng/g (22 5–1140 ng/g) in rooms with no 
intervention, 252 ng/g (18.1–8310 ng/g) in rooms wi th partial interventions, and 108 ng/g (43.6–243 
ng/g) in rooms with full interventions. Use of PFAS-fr ee furnishing resulted in a statistically significant 
(78%, 95% CI: 38–92) ΣPFAS reduction in dust compared with control rooms. The results from this 
study suggest a possible intervention for reducing exposure to PFAS in dust.  
While not an intervention study, research conduc ted by Scher and colleagues (2019) examined 
associations between PFAS-contaminated soil outside of homes and dust concentrations inside of the 
homes. The authors collected dust samples from the in terior of the house and entryways to determine 
whether entryway dust levels indicate that “track-i n” is an important contributor to house dust PFAS 
levels. They observed higher PFAS levels in the in terior of the homes compared with soil levels, and 
suggest that soil track-in was not an important source of PFAS in interior dust.  
Interpretation of PFAS dust studies is complicated by the lack of standardized sampling 
techniques for dust collection; the impact of use of different sampling methods on PFAS concentrations is 
unknown (Scher et al., 2019). Furthermore, for interventions that reduce PFAS in dust, the extent to 
which overall human intakes of PFAS would be reduced is not known. Estimates of the PFAS intake via 
dust have varied considerably (Nadal and Domingo, 2014).  
OTHER POTENTIAL INTERVENTIONS  
 
Other possible actions that could be considered  interventions include limiting the use of PFAS-
containing household goods and personal care products and introduci ng substances to the diet specifically 
intended to remove PFAS from the body. No interv ention studies for these behavioral changes were 
identified, but here we describe one  study on nonstick cookware, one study related to use of dental floss, 
and one dietary modification approach in the context of future exploration.  
 
Nonstick Cookware   
 
Nonstick cookware has been studied as a source of  PFAS exposure. In terms of interventions, at 
issue is whether replacing nonstick cookware with ite ms that do not contain PFAS would result in a 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  263 
Prepublication Copy  measurable decrease in human PFAS exposures. While no intervention studies were identified, we briefly 
describe one study conducted in the United States that compared the release of PFAS into air and water 
from nonstick versus stainless steel frying pans. Sinclair  and colleagues (2007) purchased four brands of 
domestic and imported nonstic k frying pans and one brand of stainl ess steel frying pan (three to five of 
each brand) in New York. The pan brand names are no t identified. All pans were precleaned with hot, 
soapy water; rinsed with Milli-Q water; and dried wi th a towel. The stainless steel pans were used as 
controls. The authors report that under normal cooki ng conditions (179 C to 233°C surface temperature), 
PFOA in the gas phase was measured at 11–503 picograms per square centimeter (pg/cm2) from the 
nonstick frying pans. (Fluorotelemer alcohols were also  detected, but these are not chemicals of focus in 
this paper and are not discussed further.) Gas-phase PF OA decreased after repeated use of one brand of 
pan but not the others (n = 1 for each brand). The authors also measured PFOA in Milli-Q water boiled 
for 10 minutes in selected pans and found inconsistent r esults (certain pans resulted in measurable levels 
of PFOA in the water, while others did not).  
Since brand names are not included in the publica tion, this information cannot be used as the 
basis for specific intervention recommendations. Even  if brand names were in cluded, given the small 
sample size and the lack of study replication, it woul d be difficult to use this information as the basis for 
general recommendations. Finally, as neither air nor wa ter concentrations are provided, the extent to 
which this exposure source contribut es to overall intake is unclear.  
 
Dental Floss 
 
One study examined the association between use of dental floss and serum PFAS (PFOA, PFNA, 
PFDeA, PFHxS, PFOS, and Me-PFOSA-AcOH) levels (Boronow et al., 2019). Serum PFAS levels were 
measured in 178 middle-aged women. An administer ed questionnaire included one question on use of 
dental floss: “In the last month, how often did you  use Oral-B Glide dental floss?” Response choices were 
as follows: “Never or almost never, Several times a month, 2 or more times a week, Every day.” Only 
“ever” and “never” were used in the regression analys is. While five of the PFAS compounds did not show 
significant associations, a 24.9 percent (95% CI: 0.2– 55.7) higher level of PFHxS was found in subjects 
who used Oral-B Glide floss. It is worth noting th at the questionnaires were administered several years 
after blood sample collection.  
 The authors also analyzed 18 dental floss products (only one or two samples per brand were 
analyzed, except the Oral-B Glide brand [five sa mples]) for total fluorine (as an indicator for 
polytetrafluoroethylene or PTFE), 6 of which yielded detectable levels. Given the lag in time between 
blood collection and questionnaire administration, the small number of floss samples analyzed, and the 
mostly nonsignificant results, it is not clear whether de ntal floss is an important route of human exposure 
to PFAS.   
Fiber Intake 
 
Studies have observed relationships between highe r fiber intake and lower serum PFAS levels 
(e.g., PFOA, PFOS, and PFNA [Dzierlenga et al., 2021]; PFOS and PFOA [Halldorsson et al., 2008]; PFOS, PFOA, PFHxS, EtFOSAA, MeFOSAA, and PFNA [L in et al., 2020]). This finding is based on 
studies examining associations between dietary recall information and serum levels in cross-sectional 
study designs. Thus, it is unknown whether other factor s (e.g., whether diets with high fiber generally 
have lower levels of PFAS) in fluence this relationship.  
 
MODELED INTAKES AS THE BASIS FOR RECOMMENDATIONS  
FOR REDUCING EXPOSURE TO PFAS 
 
Well-conducted and generalizable in tervention studies can be considered the gold standard for 
recommending approaches to reductions in personal expos ure to PFAS. In the absence of such studies, it 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.264  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  may be informative to use results from studies design ed to model the relative contributions of exposure 
pathways to overall PFAS exposure. This approach would focus attention and intervention strategies on 
the most important exposure pathways. In this section, we discuss results from studies using 
concentration data from several media and products (e .g., soil, water, and food concentration data) in 
combination with generic intake factors (e.g., g inta ke/kg body weight per day) to model human intakes 
of PFAS. We explore whether any common, genera lizable themes emerge from such modeling studies 
regarding dominant intake pathways. 
Because of geographic differences in both envir onmental media and product concentrations, the 
emphasis here is on studies conducted for the U.S. popul ation. First, however, we provide a brief synopsis 
of reviews on studies conducted for populations outsi de of the United States. Although some of the 
modeling efforts included less well-studied PFAS (e.g., PFHxS), the most commonly assessed PFAS were PFOA and PFOS. Sunderland and colleagues ( 2019) recently compiled data from the literature on 
percent source contribution in adults. The results are summarized in Figures E-7 and E-8. The modeling 
approaches represented by the underlying papers incl uded different concentra tion data and intake 
assumptions. Regardless of the approach used, diet app ears to be the major pathway of exposure to PFOS, 
with the percent contribution ranging from 65 to 96 percent. For PFOA, the range of percentages for 
dietary contributions is wider (6–86 percent). While  these results point to the importance of diet, the 
location of a study and the presence or absence of poi nt sources will influence the relative contributions 
of various pathways to overall PFAS intake. Behavioral differences across countries can also impact the 
results and their generalizability to communities in the United States. We therefore focus on two studies 
that modeled source contributions for PFOA (Lorbe r and Egeghy, 2011) and PFOS (Egeghy and Lorber, 
2011) in the United States.  
For PFOA intake modeling, Lorber and Egeghy (2011) used the following data, assumptions, and 
approach. Their intakes were developed for adults and 2-year-old children. PFOA concentrations in 
various media from the published literature were used in combination with EPA exposure contact rates. 
The authors generated intake distributions by inputti ng different exposure media concentrations into the 
model. They assumed that PFOA concentrations in indoor air were 20 times higher than those in outdoor 
air, with outdoor air data being derived from  a study in Albany, New York. Whether these air 
concentrations represent more genera l U.S. exposures is not discussed. The authors also used dietary data 
from the Canadian Total Dietary Survey (Tittlemier et al., 2007); thus, it is not known whether this aspect 
of the model is representative of exposures to PFOA in the United States. PFOA levels in drinking water 
were estimated from surface water c oncentrations in various parts of the United States (New York, North 
Carolina, New Jersey [drinking water], Great Lakes,  Tennessee, and Florida). Dust concentration data 
were obtained from dust samples from homes and da y care centers in Ohio and North Carolina.  
While Figure E-7 shows point estimates for adult intakes for PFOA (from Sunderland et al., 
2019), Figure E-9 (reprinted from Lorber and Egeghy, 201 1) provides information on the distributions of 
sources. This more detailed graphic again suggests that  diet is a major contributor to PFOA intake for 
adults, with both dust and diet being influential s ources of exposure for young children. For both adults 
and children, there is substantial overlap of intake  estimates for diet, water, and dust oral intake.  
Lorber and Egeghy (2011) discuss numerous limitations around their estimates of intakes, 
including the following: no estimates of intake via di rect contact with consumer products (e.g., treated 
carpets or cosmetics), no inclusion of PFOA precursors,  and a lack of PFOA data for food in the United 
States. However, Lorber and Egeghy (2011) also  used a simple one-compartment, first-order 
pharmacokinetic model in combination with Nati onal Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES) 2003–2004 data and back-calculated intak es. Their central tendency intake estimates for 
adults and children (70 ng/day and 26 ng/day, resp ectively) are not dissimilar to the intakes back-
calculated from the NHANES data (56 ng/day and 37 ng/day for males and females, respectively). These 
models would benefit from the use of improved measurement data in food and other media specific to—
and representative of—the United States (or at least ar eas or regions of interest within the United States) 
and the use of more recent NHANES data.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  265 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE E-7 Relative contribution percentiles for various pathways of exposure to PFOA.  
NOTE: Values less than 1 percent were assigned a value of zero.  SOURCE: Data from Sunderland et al., 2019. 
 
 
 
FIGURE E-8 Relative contribution percentiles for various pathways of exposure to PFOS.  
NOTE: Values less than 1 percent were assigned a value of zero.  
SOURCE: Data from Sunderland et al., 2019. 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.266  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE E-9 Estimated pathway-specific intakes of PFOA under a typical environmental exposure scenario for (A) 
young children, and (B) adults.  
NOTES: The 5th and 95th percentiles are shown by the lowe r and upper whiskers, respectively; the 25th, median, 
and 75th percentiles are the bottom, middle, and top of the box, respectively. Open circles are extreme values. ng = 
nanograms. 
SOURCE: Reprinted from Lorber and Egeghy, 2011.  
 
 
FIGURE E-10 Estimated pathway-specific intakes for adults of (A) PFOS under a typical environmental exposure 
scenario, and (B) PFOS under a highly contaminated environment scenario.  
SOURCE: Reprinted from Egeghy and Lorber, 2011.   
 
   
 
 
Permission  
Pending 
 
   
 
 
Permission  
Pending 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  267 
Prepublication Copy  Egeghy and Lorber (2011) used a similar appro ach to model intakes of PFOS and its precursors. 
In addition to modeling of precursor s, this effort differs from the PFOA models described above in that 
the models were developed for both “typical” and “contaminated” scenar ios. (The contaminated scenario 
was similar to the background scenario except that much higher water con centrations were used.) In terms 
of available data on environmental concentrations  of PFOS and precursors, the authors note that 
“measurement of PFCs in exposure media in North Am erica was relatively sparse  for all media compared 
with European data with the possible exception of dust. Food data are sparse for both continents. No 
measurements of PFOS in uncontaminated soil could be found” (Egeghy and Lorber, 2011, p. 158). The 
authors found that diet was the main route of exposur e in the general population, while for children, dust 
ingestion was almost as important a contributor to inta ke as diet. Perhaps most important in the context of 
using modeled uptakes as the basis for recommendations  for modifying behaviors to reduce exposure, 
Egeghy and Lorber (2011) found that the pathway- specific contributions spanned several orders of 
magnitude and overlapped subs tantially (results for adults shown in Figure E-10).  
Use of model estimates of dominant pathways of PFAS exposure for making recommendations to 
individuals regarding exposure reduction faces a number  of challenges. First, while diet appears to be a 
major pathway of exposure, there is  little information on PFAS in co mmercial foods commonly consumed 
in the United States. The FDA has released PFAS data  for certain foods, which could be used in future 
studies involving modeling of source  contributions to PFAS intake.11 However, the FDA observed that its 
data for produce, meat, dairy, and grain products are based on a small sample size, and the results “cannot 
be used to draw definitive conclusion s about the levels of PFAS in the ge neral food supply” (para. 3). It is 
not currently well understood whether the data on comme rcial foods from other countries used in the intake 
models are representative of levels in the United St ates. Wu and colleagues (2015) state, “Information on 
dietary predictors in U.S. is still limited” and “more data are needed to determine the relative contributions 
of food and dust to serum PFCs for both adult and ch ild populations” (p. 265). A review of PFAS in foods 
by Domingo and Nadal (2017) identifies only two recent studies for the United St ates: one focused on PFAS 
uptake by lettuce and strawberries irrigated with reclaimed water (Bla ine et al., 2014) and the other on 
concentrations of PFAS in freshwater fish samples from urban rivers and the Great Lakes (Stahl et al., 
2014).  
Furthermore, the relative importance of different sources varies by study (see Figures E-7 and E-
8) and by demographic group and popu lation (Sunderland et al., 2019). In describing the findings of their 
recent review on nonoccupational intakes via backgr ound exposures, De Silva and colleagues (2021) 
observe that the inconsistency in the relative impor tance of different exposure sources from one study to 
the next may be due to differing concentrations of PF AS in media, as well as the assignment of different 
values for exposure intake factors (e.g., exposure frequency and duration). They conclude, “Without 
rigorously conducted exposure studies it is challenging to rank order the most important human exposure 
pathways and without these data, our ability to desi gn evidence-based exposure intervention strategies 
will be limited” (De Silva, 2021, p. 644).  
Within even a small geographic area, one could envision varying exposure characteristics that 
could, in turn, affect sources of PFAS intakes. Vest ergren and Cousins (2009) explored this possibility by 
estimating relative intakes for those with exposure to  background PFAS levels, exposure to higher levels 
in drinking water or drinking water impacted by a PFAS point source, or occupational exposures; they 
found substantial differences in the relative contri butions to overall intakes (see Figure E-11).  
 
                                                           
11 See https://www.fda.gov/food/cfsan-constituent-u pdates/update-fdas-continui ng-efforts-understand-and-
reduce-exposure-pfas-foods (accessed May 12, 2021). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.268  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy   
FIGURE E-11 Estimated daily intakes for male adults (D) and relative source contributions.  
NOTES: Data for sources are derived from different studie s and different countries. Bracketed numbers refer to 
citations in Vestergren and Cousins, 2009. (a) = background concentrations in drinking water (1.3 [nanograms per 
Liter [ng/L]); (b) = elevated concentrations in drinking water (40 ng/L); (c) = point sources of drinking water 
contamination (519 ng/L); and (d) = occupationally exposed individuals (indoor air concentrations 1 micrograms per 
cubic meter [ μg/m3]). FTOH = Fluorotelomer alcohols; ng/(kg day) = nanograms per kilogram per day . 
SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from Vestergren and Cousins, 2009. Copyright 2009 American Chemical 
Society. 
 
 
Another factor related to modeling principal s ources of exposure is the changes in production and 
use of individual PFAS over time. Sunderland and co lleagues (2019) describe the changes in serum PFAS 
levels following the phase-out of production of PFOS and its precursors, with PFOS declining, but other 
PFAS, such as PFHxS, increasing. They observe th at while exposures to PFOS and PFOA “have been 
successfully reduced by product phase-outs for many  populations, exposures to C-9-C-11 PFCAs have 
not followed the same trends” (Sunderland et al., 2019, p. 138). Thus, it is important to use recent 
environmental and consumer product and dietary data to develop robust estimates of current dominant 
pathways of exposure.  
 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  269 
Prepublication Copy  E-4 
 
Discussion 
 
In this review, we have sought to address the following question: Based on current research, are 
there interventions or personal  modifiable behavioral changes that individuals can make to effectively  
reduce their PFAS exposure? We have described resear ch on potential ways in which an individual could 
reduce exposure to PFAS. It is important to acknow ledge that communities across the United States have 
received guidance from state and federal agenci es regarding PFAS exposure reduction, including 
advisories around consumption of drinking water a nd fish. While it may seem obvious that avoiding 
exposure to sources of PFAS would result in reduced in take of PFAS and, in turn, lower internal PFAS 
levels, some caution in assuming that exposure and risk  reduction would ensue is warranted. For example, 
if one is advised to avoid locally caught fish b ecause of known PFAS contamination in that fish, such 
avoidance could result in reduced exposure. However, if  dietary fish is replaced by another food that is 
also high in PFAS, avoiding the fish may not result in  lower PFAS exposure. Another issue to consider is 
that avoiding one group of chemicals by changing diet or other behaviors can result in increased 
exposures to other chemicals. Finally, if a certain PFAS source is related to a small portion of overall 
exposure, then avoidance of that source may not result  in appreciable reductions in internal levels of 
PFAS. Thus, while avoiding known sources of PFAS exposure may be a useful approach to lowering 
overall exposure, these other consider ations should be taken into account; research on the efficacy of 
various interventions could help shed light on these complexities. 
The number of intervention studies available to  address the question of whether there are 
interventions or personal  modifiable behavioral changes that individuals can make to effectively  reduce 
their PFAS exposure ranged from 1 to 11, depending on the source of exposure; for some pathways, no 
studies were found (see Figure E-12). Overall, onl y the water filtration studies provided relatively 
consistent evidence of an effective reduction in PFA S levels. No studies were identified that confirmed 
reduction in human exposure via biomonitoring. To fully  demonstrate the efficacy of an intervention, a 
study would need to be conducted over a timeframe su fficient to account for the long half-lives of PFAS.  
Demonstration that PFAS exposures are reduced in a meaningful way through biomonitoring 
confirmation is an important step. It is possible that an intervention may reduce PFAS levels in a 
particular medium, but if this medium is not a ma jor source of overall exposure, then that intervention 
may not contribute significantly to reduction in human  exposures. Overall, the intervention literature is 
sparse and has many limitations. Thus, the committee may have to rely on assumptions and other bodies 
of evidence to make recommendations to individu als and communities about exposure reduction.  
We also considered whether intake models could assess with some degree of confidence the 
relative source contributions to ove rall intake and whether this appr oach could be used to inform 
decisions regarding community recommendations. While di et appears to be a major contributor to overall 
intake, dietary data from the United States were not used in these models. It is not known whether the 
Canadian data used are representative of levels  in the United States. As observed by Macheka-
Tendenguwo and colleagues (2018), “numerous investig ations have attempted to establish the main 
exposure pathway of PFAS in humans, but differing viewpoints make the results inconclusive” (p. 
36066).  
In conclusion, other than using certified point of entry (POE) or point of use (POU) water filters, 
the available intervention studies generally do not appear to be sufficiently robust to support 
recommendations for personal behavioral modificatio ns for communities in the United States. The studies 
reviewed here were limited by small sample sizes, generally inconsistent study designs and results, and a 
possible lack of generalizability to the United States. It  is also important to consider additional factors 
when developing recommendations for changes in pe rsonal behavior, such as the ease and cost of an 
intervention, associated trade-offs (i.e., If an interv ention lowers concentrations of PFAS, does it increase 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.270  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  exposures to other chemicals, including other PFAS? ), and whether enough is known about varying PFAS 
levels in the environment and c onsumer products to understand the necessary scale of an intervention 
recommendation (e.g., individual, local, or regional). Information will be needed on local levels of PFAS 
in drinking water, as well as levels  in breast milk, for any recommendations regarding infant nutrition to 
be well supported.   
 
FIGURE E-12 Summary of numbers of st udies identified for each PF AS exposure source.  
NOTE: “Other” includes nonstick cookware, dental floss, an d fiber intake, which these sources are described in the 
text but for which no intervention studies were identified.  
SOURCE: Author generated.   
 
 

Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  271 
Prepublication Copy  References  
 
AAP (American Academy of Pediatrics). 2012. Policy statement. Breastfeeding and the use of human 
milk. Section on breastfeeding. Pediatrics  129(3):e827–e841. https:// doi.org/10.1542/peds.2011-
3552. 
Ahrens, L., and M. Bundschuh. 2014.  Fate and effects of poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances in the 
aquatic environment: A review. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  33(9):1921–1929. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.2663. PMID: 24924660. 
Akhbarizadeh, R., S. Dobaradaran, T. C. Schmidt,  I. Nabipour, and J. Spitz. 2020. Worldwide bottled 
water occurrence of emerging contaminants: A review of the recent scientific literature. Journal 
of Hazardous Materials  392:122271. 
Alves, R. N., A. L. Maulvault, V. L. Barbosa, S. Cunha, C. J. A. F. Kwadijk, D. Álvarez-Muñoz, S. 
Rodríguez-Mozaz, Ò. Aznar-Alemany, E. Eljarrat, D. Barceló, M. Fernandez-Tejedor, A. 
Tediosi, and A. Marques. 2017. Preliminary assessme nt on the bioaccessibility of contaminants of 
emerging concern in raw and cooked seafood. Food and Chemical Toxicology  104:69–78. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2017.01.029. PMID: 28202359. 
Andrews, D. Q., and O. V. Naidenko. 2020. Popul ation-wide exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances from drinking water in the United States. Environmental Science & Technology 
Letters  7(12):931–936. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.estlett.0c00713.  
Ao, J., T. Yuan, H. Xia, Y. Ma, Z. Shen, R. Shi, Y. Tian, J. Zhang, W. Ding, L. Gao, X. Zhao, and X. Yu. 
2019. Characteristic and human exposure risk assess ment of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances: 
A study based on indoor dust and drinking water in China. Environmental Pollution  254(Pt 
A):112873. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. envpol.2019.07.041.  PMID: 31369910. 
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). 2019. PFAS: An overview of the science 
and guidance for clinicians on per- an d polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS).  
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/pfas/docs/ clinical-guidance-12-20-2019.pdf. 
ATSDR. 2020. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) and your health.  
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/pfas/ health-effects/exposure.html (accessed March 10, 2021). 
Barbosa, V., A. L. Maulvault, R. N. Alves, C.  Kwadijk, M. Kotterman, A. Tediosi, M. Fernández-
Tejedor, J. J. Sloth, K. Granby, R. R. Rasmussen, J. Robbens, B. De Witte, L. Trabalón, J. O. 
Fernandes, S. C. Cunha, and A. Marques. 2018. Effects of steaming on contaminants of emerging 
concern levels in seafood. Food and Chemical Toxicology  118:490–504. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2018.05.047. PMID: 29787848. 
Bhavsar, S. P., X. Zhang, R. Guo, E. Braekevelt, S. Petro, N. Gandhi, E. J. Reiner, H. Lee, R. Bronson, 
and S. A. Tittlemier. 2014. Cooking fish is not effective in reducing exposure to perfluoroalkyl 
and polyfluoroalk yl substances. Environment International  66:107–114. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2014.01.024. PMID: 24561272.  
Binnington, M. J., Y. D. Lei, L. Pokiak, J. Pokiak, S. K. Ostertag, L. L. Loseto, H. M. Chan, L. W. Y. 
Yeung, H. Huang, and F. Wania. 2017. Effects of preparation on nutrient and environmental 
contaminant levels in Arctic beluga whal e (Delphinapterus leucas) traditional foods. 
Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts  19(8):1000–1015. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c7em00167c. PMID: 28752885. 
Blaine, A. C., C. D. Rich, E. M. Sedlacko, K. C. Hyland, C. Stushnoff, E. R. V. Dickenson, and C. P. 
Higgins. 2014. Perfluoroalkyl acid uptake in lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and strawberry (Fragaria 
ananassa) irrigated with reclaimed water. Environmental Science & Technology  48:14361–14368. 
Boronow, K. E., J. G. Brody, L. A. Schaider, F. Graham , G. F. Peaslee, L. Havas,  A. Barbara, and B. A. 
Cohn. 2019. Serum concentrations of PFASs and exposure-related behaviors in African American 
and non-Hispanic white women . Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology 
29:206–217. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41370-018-0109-y. 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.272  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Butenhoff, J. L., G. W. Olsen, and A. Pfahles-Hutche ns. 2006. The applicability of biomonitoring data for 
perfluorooctanesulfonate to the envi ronmental public health continuum. Environmental Health 
Perspectives  114(11):1776–1782. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.9060. PMID: 17107867; PMCID: 
PMC1665413. 
Calafat, A. M., K. Kato, K. Hubbard, T. Jia, J. C. Botelho, and L. Y. Wong. 2019. Legacy and alternative 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in the U.S. general population: Paired serum-urine data from 
the 2013–2014 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Environment International  
131:105048. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. envint.2019.105048 . PMID: 31376596. 
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2009. National report on human exposure to 
environmental chemicals . https://www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/pdf/fourthreport.pdf. 
De Silva, A. O., J. M. Armitage, T. A. Bruton, C. Dassuncao, W. Heiger-Bernays, X. C. Hu, A. Kärrman, 
B. Kelly, C. Ng, A. Robuck, M. Sun, T. F. We bster, and E. M. Sunderland. 2021. PFAS exposure 
pathways for humans and wildlife: A synth esis of current knowledge and key gaps in 
understanding. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry  40(3):631–657. PMID: 33201517. 
Del Gobbo, L., S. Tittlemier, M. Diamond, K. Pepper, B. Tague, F. Yeudall, and L. Vanderlinden. 2008. 
Cooking decreases observed perfluorinated  compound concentrations in fish. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry  56(16):7551–7559. https://doi.o rg/10.1021/jf800827r. PMID: 
18620413.  
D’Hollander, W., P. de Voogt, W. De Coen, and L. Bervoets. 2010. Perfluorinated substances in human 
food and other sources of human exposure. Reviews of Environmental Contamination and 
Toxicology  208:179–215. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-6880-7_4. PMID: 20811865.  
Domingo, J. L., and M. Nadal. 2017. Per- and polyfl uoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in food and human 
dietary intake: A review of the recent scientific literature. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry  65(3):533–543. https://doi.org/10. 1021/acs.jafc.6b04683. PMID: 28052194. 
Domingo, J. L., and M. Nadal. 2019. Human exposur e to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) 
through drinking water: A review of the recent scientific literature. Environmental Research  
177:108648. https://doi.org/10.1016 /j.envres.2019.108648. PMID: 31421451. 
Ducatman, A., M. Luster, and T. Fletcher. 2021. Perfl uoroalkyl substance excretion: Effects of organic 
anion‐inhibiting and resin ‐binding drugs in a community setting. Environmental Toxicology and 
Pharmacology  85:103650. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.etap.2021.103650. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih .gov/pubmed/33819618. 
Dzierlenga, M. W., D. R. Keast, and M. P. Longneck er. 2021. The concentration of several perfluoroalkyl 
acids in serum appears to be reduced by dietary fiber. Environment International  146:106292. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106292. PMID: 33395939. 
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). 2020. Risk  to human health related to the presence of 
perfluoroalkyl substances in food. EFSA Journal  18(9):6223. 
Egeghy, P. P., and M. Lorber. 2011. An assessment of the exposure of Americans to perfluorooctane 
sulfonate: A comparison of estimated inta ke with values inferred from NHANES data. Journal of 
Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology  21(2):150–168. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/jes.2009.73. PMID: 20145679. 
Eichler, C. M. A., and J. C. Little. 2020. A frame work to model exposure to  per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances in indoor environments. Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts  22(3):500–511. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c9em00556k. PMID:32141451.  
Emmett, E. A., F. S. Shofer, H. Zhang, D. Free man, C. Desai, and L. M. Shaw. 2006. Community 
exposure to perfluorooctanoate: Relationships between serum concentrations and exposure 
sources. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine  48(8):759–770. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.jom.0000232486.07658.74. PMID: 16902368; PMCID: PMC3038253.  
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 2017. The Third Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring 
Rule (UCMR 3): Data summary, January 2017.  https://www.epa.gov/dwucmr/ 
occurrence-data-unregulated-contaminant-m onitoring-rule#3 (accessed March 12, 2021). 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  273 
Prepublication Copy  EWG (Environmental Working Group). 2016. How can I avoid PFAS chemicals?  
https://www.ewg.org/avoidpfas (accessed March 10, 2021). 
Felton, R. 2020, September 24. What’s really in your bottled water? Consumer  reports found toxic PFAS 
chemicals in several popular water brands, especially carbonated ones. Consumer Reports . 
https://www.consumerreports.org/bottled-water /whats-really-in-your-bottled-water (accessed 
March 22, 2021). 
Fromme, H., S. A. Tittlemier, W. Völkel, M. Wilhelm, and D. Twardella. 2009. Perfluorinated 
compounds—Exposure assessment for the gene ral population in Western countries. International 
Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health  212(3):239–270. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2008.04.007. PMID: 18565792.  
Fromme, H., C. Mosch, M. Morovitz, I. Alba-Aleja ndre, S. Boehmer, M. Kiranoglu, F. Faber, I. 
Hannibal, O. Genzel-Boroviczény, B. Koletzko, and W. Völkel. 2010. Pre- and postnatal exposure to perfluorinated compounds (PFCs). Environmental Science & Technology  
44(18):7123–7129. https://doi.org/10.1021/es101184f.  
Gellrich, V., H. Brunn, and T. Stahl. 2013. Perfluor oalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in 
mineral water and tap water. Journal of Environmental Science and Health, Part A 
Toxic/Hazardous Substances and Environmental Engineering  48(2):129–135. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10934529.2013.719431. PMID: 23043333. 
Genuis, S. J., Y. Liu, Q. I. Genuis, and J. W. Martin. 2014. Phlebotomy treatment for elimination of 
perfluoroalkyl acids in a highly exposed family: A retrospective case ‐series. PLoS One 
9(12):e114295. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0114295. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25504057. 
Göckener, B., T. Weber, H. Rüdel, M. Bücking, and M. Kolossa-Gehring. 2020. Human biomonitoring of 
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in Germ an blood plasma samples from 1982 to 2019. 
Environment International  145:106123. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.envint.2020.106123. PMID: 
32949877.  
Halldorsson, T. I., C. Fei, J. Olsen, L. Lipworth, J. K. McLaughlin, and S. F. Olsen. 2008. Dietary 
predictors of perfluorinated chemicals: A study from the Danish National Birth Cohort. 
Environmental Science & Technology 42(23):8971–8977. https://d oi.org/10.1021/es801907r. 
PMID: 19192827. 
Health Canada. 2019, November. Fifth report on human biomonitoring of environmental chemicals in 
Canada. Results of the Canadian Health Measures Survey Cycle 5 (2016–2017). 
https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/doc uments/services/environmental-workplace-
health/reports-publications/environmental-cont aminants/fifth-report-human-biomonitoring/pub1-
eng.pdf (accessed March 21, 2021). 
Heo, J. J., J. W. Lee, S. K. Kim, and J. E. Oh . 2014. Foodstuff analyses show that seafood and water are 
major perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs) sources to humans in Korea. Journal of Hazardous Materials  
279:402–409. https://doi.o rg/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.07.004. PMID: 25093550. 
Herkert, N. J., J. Merrill, C. Peters, D. Bollinger, S. Zhang, K. Hoffman, P. L. Ferguson, D. R. U. Knappe 
and H. M. Stapleton. 2020. Asses sing the Effectiveness of point-of-use residential drinking water 
filters for perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs). Environmental Science & Technology Letters  
7(3):178–184. 
Herrick, R. L., J. Buckholz, F. M. Biro, A. M. Calafat, X. Ye, C. Xie, and S. M. Pinney. 2017. 
Polyfluoroalkyl substance exposure in the Mid-Ohio River Valley, 1991–2012. Environmental 
Pollution  228:50–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2017.04.092. PMID: 28505513; PMCID: 
PMC5540235. 
Hooper, K., J. She, M. Sharp, J. Chow, N. Jewe ll, R. Gephart, and A. Holden. 2007. Depuration of 
polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in breast milk 
from California first-time mothers (primiparae). Environmental Health Perspectives  
115(9):1271–1275. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp. 10166. PMID: 17805415; PMCID: PMC1964891.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Hu, Y., C. Wei, L. Wang, Z. Zhou, T. Wang, G. Liu, Y. Feng, and Y. Liang. 2020. Cooking methods 
affect the intake of per- and polyfluor oalkyl substances (PFASs) from grass carp. Ecotoxicology 
and Environmental Safety  203:111003. https://doi.org/10.101 6/j.ecoenv.2020.111003. PMID: 
32678765. 
Iwabuchi, K., and I. Sato. 2021. Effectiveness of household water purif iers in removing perfluoroalkyl 
substances from drinking water. Environmental Science and Poll ution Research International  
28(9):11665–11671. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-11757-1. PMID: 33410030. 
Jogsten, I. E., G. Perelló, X. Llebaria, E. Bigas, R. Martí-Cid, A. Kärrman, and J. L. Domingo. 2009. 
Exposure to perfluorinated compounds in Catalonia,  Spain, through consumption of various raw 
and cooked foodstuffs, including packaged food. Food and Chemical Toxicology  47(7):1577–
1583. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2009.04.004. PMID: 19362113.  
Kannan, K., S. Corsolini, J. Falandysz, G. Fillmann, K. S. Kumar, B. G. Loganathan, M. A. Mohd, J. 
Olivero, N. Van Wouwe, J. H. Yang, and K.  M. Aldoust. 2004. Perfluorooctanesulfonate and 
related fluorochemicals in hum an blood from several countries. Environmental Science & 
Technology  38(17):4489–4495. https://doi.org /10.1021/es0493446. PMID: 15461154.  
Kim, M. J., J. Park, L. Luo, J. Min, J. H. Kim, H. D.  Yang, Y. Kho, G. J. Kang, M. S. Chung, S. Shin, and 
B. Moon. 2020. Effect of washing, soaking, and cooking methods on perfluorinated compounds 
in mackerel ( Scomber japonicus ). Food Science & Nutrition  8(8):4399–4408. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/fsn3.1737. PMID: 32884720; PMCID: PMC7455985. 
Klein, D., J. C. Dillon, J. L. Jirou-Najou, M. J. Gagey, and G. Debry. 1986. The kinetics of the 
elimination of organochlorine compounds dur ing the 1st week of breast feeding. Food and 
Chemical Toxicology 24(8):869–874.  
Kuklenyik, Z., J. A. Reich, J. S. Tully, L. L. Needham, and A. M. Calafat. 2004. Automated solid-phase 
extraction and measurement of perfluorinated organic acids and amides in human serum and 
milk. Environmental Science & Technology  38(13):3698–3704. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es040332u. PMID: 15296323.  
LaKind, J. S. 2007. Recent global trends and physiolo gic origins of dioxins and furans in human milk. 
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology  17:510–524.  
LaKind, J. S., C. Berlin, and D. Q. Naiman. 2001. Infant exposure to chemicals in breast milk in the 
United States: What we need to learn from a breast milk monitoring program. Environmental 
Health Perspectives  109:75–88.  
LaKind, J. S., R. L. Brent, M. L. Dourson, S. Kacew, G. Koren, B. Sonawane, A. J. Tarzian, and K. Uhl. 
2005. Human milk biomonitoring data: In terpretation and risk assessment issues . Journal of 
Toxicology and Environmental Health  68(20):1713–1770. 
LaKind, J. S., C. M. Berlin, Jr., and D. R. Mattis on. 2008. The heart of the matter on breastmilk and 
environmental chemicals: Essential points fo r healthcare providers and new parents. 
Breastfeeding Medicine  3(4):251–259. 
LaKind, J. S., C. M. Berlin, Jr., A. Sjödin, W. Turner, R. Y. Wang, L. L. Needham, I. M. Paul, J. L. 
Stokes, D. Q. Naiman, and D. G. Patterson, Jr. 2 009. Do human milk concen trations of persistent 
organic chemicals really decline during lactation?  Chemical concentrations during lactation and 
milk/serum partitioning. Environmental Health Perspectives  117(4):500–507.  
LaKind, J. S., M. Goodman, and D. R. Mattison. 2 014. Bisphenol A and indicators of obesity, glucose 
metabolism/type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease: A systematic review of epidemiologic 
research. Critical Reviews in Toxicology  44(2):121–150. 
LaKind, J. S., M. Davis, G. M. Lehmann, E. Hines, S. A. Marchitti, C. Alcala, and M. Lorber. 2018. 
Infant dietary exposures to environmental chemical s and infant/child health: A critical assessment 
of the literature. Environmental Health Perspectives  126(9):96002. 
Le Coadou, L., K. Le Ménach, P. Labadie, M. H. Dévier, P. Pardon, S. Augagneur, and H. Budzinski. 
2017. Quality survey of natural mineral water a nd spring water sold in France: Monitoring of 
hormones, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, perfluoroalkyl  substances, phthalates, and alkylphenols at 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  275 
Prepublication Copy  the ultra-trace level. Science of the Total Environment  603–604:651–662. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.11.174. PMID: 28343692. 
Lee, S., S. Kim, J. Park, H. J. Kim, G. Choi, S. C hoi, S. Kim, S. Y. Kim, S. Kim, K. Choi, and H. B. 
Moon. 2018. Perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in  breast milk from Korea: Time-course trends, 
influencing factors, and infant exposure. Science of the Total Environment  612:286–292. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.08.094. PMID: 28865262. 
Lehmann, G. M., J. S. LaKind, M. Davis, E. Hines, S. A. Marchitti, C. Alcala, and M. Lorber. 2018. 
Environmental chemicals in breast milk and form ula: Exposure and risk assessment implications. 
Environmental Health Perspectives  126(9):96001. 
Li, Y., T. Fletcher, D. Mucs, K. Scott, C. H. Lindh , P. Tallving, and K. Jakobsson. 2018. Half-lives of 
PFOS, PFHxS and PFOA after end of exposur e to contaminated drinking water. Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine  75(1):46–51. https://doi.org/10.1136/oemed-2017-104651. PMID: 
29133598; PMCID: PMC5749314. 
Lin, P. D., A. Cardenas, R. Hauser, D. R. Gold, K.  P. Kleinman, M. F. Hivert, A. F. Fleisch, A. M. 
Calafat, M. Sanchez-Guerra, C. Osorio-Yáñez, T. F. Webster, E. S. Horton, and E. Oken. 2020. 
Dietary characteristics associated with plasma concentrations of per-  and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances among adults with pre-diabetes: Cros s-sectional results from the Diabetes Prevention 
Program Trial. Environment International  137:105217. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2019.105217. PMID: 32086073; PMCID: PMC7517661. 
Liu, Y., A. Li, S. Buchanan, and W. Liu. 2020. Ex posure characteristics for congeners, isomers, and 
enantiomers of perfluoroalkyl substances in mothers and infants. Environment International  
144:106012. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. envint.2020.106012 . PMID: 32771830. 
Llorca, M., M. Farré, Y. Picó, M. L. Teijón, J. G. Alvarez, and D. Barceló. 2010. Infant exposure of 
perfluorinated compounds: Levels in br east milk and commercial baby food. Environment 
International  36(6):584–592. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2010.04.016. PMID: 20494442. 
Lorber, M., and P. P. Egeghy. 2011. Simple inta ke and pharmacokinetic modeling to characterize 
exposure of Americans to perfluoroctanoic acid, PFOA. Environmental Science & Technology  
45(19):8006–8014. https://doi.org/10.1021/es103718h. PMID: 21517063. 
Loria, K. 2019. To reduce PFAS levels in food, cook at home. Consumer Reports . 
https://www.consumerreports.org/food-safety/to-reduce-pfas-levels-in-food-cook-at-home 
(accessed March 10, 2021). 
Luo, L., M. J. Kim, J. Park, H.-D. Yang, Y. Kho, M.-S. Chung, and B. Moon . 2019. Reduction of 
perfluorinated compound content in fish cake and swimming crab by different cooking methods. 
Applied Biological Chemistry  62:44. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13765-019-0449-x. 
Macheka, L. R., J. O. Olowoyo, L. L. Mugivhisa, and O. A. Abafe. 2021. Determination and assessment 
of human dietary intake of per and polyfluoroalkyl su bstances in retail dairy milk and infant 
formula from South Africa. Science of the Total Environment  755(Pt 2):142697. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142697. PMID: 33065506. 
Macheka-Tendenguwo, L. R., J. O. Olowoyo, L. L. Mugivhisa, and O. A. Abafe. 2018. Per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances in human breast  milk and current analytical methods. Environmental 
Science and Pollution Research International  25(36):36064–36086. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-018-3483-z. PMID: 30382519. 
MDH (Minnesota Department of Health). 2008, January. MDH evaluation of point-o f-use water treatment 
devices for perfluorochemical removal interim report.  Fact Sheet. 
https://wrl.mnpals.net/islandora/object/WRLrepos itory%3A1862/datastream/PDF/view (accessed 
March 21, 2021). 
Mozaffarian, D., and E. B. Rimm. 2006. Fish intake , contaminants, and human health: Evaluating the 
risks and the benefits. Journal of the American Medical Association  296(15):1885–1899. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.296.15.1885. Erratum in Journal of the American Medical 
Association  2007; 297(6):590. PMID: 17047219.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.276  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Munn, Z., M. D. J. Peters, C. Stern, C. Tufanaru , A. McArthur, and E. Aromataris. 2018. Systematic 
review or scoping review? Guidance for authors when choosing between a systematic or scoping 
review approach. BMC Medical Research Methodology  143. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-018-
0611-x (accessed March 21, 2021). 
Myers, A. L., P. W. Crozier, P. A. Helm, C. Brimacombe, V. I. Furdui, E. J. Reiner, D. Burniston, and C. 
H. Marvin. 2012. Fate, distribution, and contras ting temporal trends of perfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFASs) in Lake Ontario, Canada. Environment International  44:92–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2012.02.002. PMID: 22406021. 
Nadal, M., and J. L. Domingo. 2014 . Indoor dust levels of perfluoroalk yl substances (PFASs) and the role 
of ingestion as an exposure pathway: A review. Current Organic Chemistry  18(17):2200–2208. 
https://doi.org/10.2174/1385272819666140804230713. 
NASEM (National Academies of Sciences , Engineering, and Medicine). 2021. Federal government 
human health PFAS research workshop: Pro ceedings of a workshop—in brief. Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press. h ttps://doi.org/10.17226/26054.  
ODH (Ohio Department of Health). 2020. How to reduce your exposure to PFAS. Health assessment 
section.  https://epa.ohio.gov/Portals/28/docum ents/pfas/PFASHowtoReduceExposure.pdf 
(accessed March 10, 2021). 
Oliaei, F., D. Kriens, R. Weber, and A. Watson.  2013. PFOS and PFC releases and associated pollution 
from a PFC production plant in Minnesota (USA). Environmental Science and Pollution 
Research International  20(4):1977–1992. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-012-1275-4. PMID: 
23128989. 
Patterson, C., J. Burkhardt, D. Schupp, E. R. Kris hnan, S. Dyment, S. Merritt, L. Zintek, and D. 
Kleinmaier. 2019. Effectiveness of point-of-use/point-of-entry systems to remove per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substan ces from drinking water. AWWA Water Science  1(2):1–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/aws2.1131. PMID: 31338490; PMCID: PMC6650157. 
Sajid, M., and M. Ilyas. 2017. PTFE-coated non-stick cookware and toxicity concerns: A perspective. 
Environmental Science and Po llution Research International  24(30):23436–23440. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-0095-y. PMID: 28913736. 
Scher, D. P., J. E. Kelly, C. A. Huset, K. M. Barry, and V. L. Yingling. 2019. Does soil track-in 
contribute to house dust concentrations of perfluoroa lkyl acids (PFAAs) in areas affected by soil 
or water contamination? Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology  29:218–
226. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41370-018-0101-6. 
Sinclair, E., S. K. Kim, H. B. Akinleye, and K.  Kannan. 2007. Quantitation of gas-phase perfluoroalkyl 
surfactants and fluorotelomer alcohols released  from nonstick cookware  and microwave popcorn 
bags. Environmental Science & Technology  41(4):1180–1185. https://doi.org/10.1021/es062377w. 
PMID: 17593716. 
Stahl, L. L., B. D. Snyder, A. R. Olsen, T. M. Kincaid, J. B. Wathen, and H. B. McCarty. 2014. 
Perfluorinated compounds in fish from U.S. urban rivers and the Great Lakes. Science of the 
Total Environment  499:185–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.07.126. PMID: 
25190044. 
Sunderland, E. M., X. C. Hu, C. Dassuncao, A. K. Tokranov, C. C. Wagner, a nd J. G. Allen. 2019. A 
review of the pathways of human exposure to poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) and 
present understanding of health effects. Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental 
Epidemiology  29(2):131–147. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41370-018-0094-1. PMID: 30470793; 
PMCID: PMC6380916. 
Tao, L., K. Kannan, C. M. Wong, K. F. Arcaro, a nd J. L. Butenhoff. 2008a. Perfluorinated compounds in 
human milk from Massachusetts, U.S.A. Environmental Science & Technology  42(8):3096–3101. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es702789k. PMID: 18497172. 
Tao, L., J. Ma, T. Kunisue, E. L. Libel, S. Tana be, and K. Kannan. 2008b. Pe rfluorinated compounds in 
human breast milk from several Asian countries, and in infant formula and dairy milk from the 
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E  277 
Prepublication Copy  United States. Environmental Science & Technology  42(22):8597–8602. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es801875v. PMID: 19068854. 
Taylor, M. D., S. Nilsson, J. Bräunig, K. C. Bowles, V. Cole, N. A. Moltschaniwskyj, and J. F. Mueller. 
2019. Do conventional cooking methods alter c oncentrations of per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFASs) in seafood? Food and Chemical Toxicology  127:280–287. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2019.03.032. PMID: 30905867. 
Thomsen, C., L. S. Haug, H. Stigum, M. Frøshaug, S. L. Broadwell, and G. Becher. 2010. Changes in 
concentrations of perfluorinated compounds , polybrominated diphenyl ethers, and 
polychlorinated biphenyls in Norwegian breast -milk during twelve months of lactation. 
Environmental Science & Technology  44(24):9550–9556. https://d oi.org/10.1021/es1021922. 
Erratum in Environmental Science & Technology  2011; 45(7):3192. PMID: 21090747. 
Tittlemier, S. A., K. Pepper, C. Seymour, J. Moisey , R. Bronson, X. L. Cao, and R. W. Dabeka. 2007. 
Dietary exposure of Canadians to perfluorinate d carboxylates and perfluorooctane sulfonate via 
consumption of meat, fish, fast foods, and food items prepared in their packaging. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry  55:3203–3210. 
Trudel, D., L. Horowitz, M. Wormuth, M. Scheri nger, I. T. Cousins, and K. Hungerbühler. 2008. 
Estimating consumer exposure to PFOS and PFOA. Risk Analysis  28(2):251–269. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2008.01017.x. Erratum in Risk Analysis  2008; 28(3):807. 
PMID: 18419647.  
Vandenbroucke, J. P., E. von Elm, D. G. Altman, P. C. Gøtzsche, C. D. Mulrow, S. J. Pocock, C. Poole, J. 
J. Schlesselman, and M. Egger for the STROBE Initiative. 2007. Strengthening the reporting of 
observational studies in epidemiology (STROBE): Explanation and elaboration. Epidemiology  
18:805–835. 
VanNoy, B. N., J. Lam, and A. R. Zota. 2018. Breast feeding as a predictor of serum concentrations of 
per- and polyfluorinated alkyl substances in reproductive-aged women and young children: A 
rapid systematic review. Current Environmental Health Reports  5(2):213–224. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40572-018-0194-z. PMID: 29737463.  
Vassiliadou, I., D. Costopoulou, N. Kalogeropoulos, S. Karavoltsos, A. Sakellari, E. Zafeiraki, M. 
Dassenakis, and L. Leondiadis. 2015. Levels of perfluorinated compounds in raw and cooked 
Mediterranean finfish and shellfish. Chemosphere  127:117–126. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.12.081. PMID: 25676497.  
Vestergren, R., and I. T. Cousins. 2009. Tracking the pa thways of human exposure to perfluorocarboxylates. 
Environmental Science & Technology  43(15):5565–5575. https://doi.org/10.1021/es900228k. 
PMID: 19731646. 
von der Trenck, K. T., R. Konietzka, A. Biegel-Engl er, J. Brodsky, A. Hädicke, A. Quadflieg, R. 
Stockerl, and T. Stahl. 2018. Significance th resholds for the assessment of contaminated 
groundwater: Perfluorinated and polyfluorinated chemicals. Environmental Sciences Europe  
30(1):19. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-018- 0142-4. PMID: 29930891; PMCID: PMC5992233. 
von Ehrenstein, O. S., S. E. Fenton, K. Kato, Z. K uklenyik, A. M. Calafat, and E. P. Hines. 2009. 
Polyfluoroalkyl chemicals in the serum and milk of breastfeeding women. Reproductive 
Toxicology 27(3–4):239–245. https://doi .org/10.1016/j.reprotox.20 09.03.001. PMID: 19429402. 
WHO (World Health Organization). 2000. Consultation on assessment of the health risks of dioxins; re-
evaluation of the tolerable daily intake (TDI): Executive summary. Food Additives & 
Contaminants 17:223–240. 
WHO. 2020. Infant and young child feeding . https://www.who.int/en/news-r oom/fact-sheets/detail/infant-
and-young-child-feeding (accessed May 12, 2021).  
Wu, X. M., D. H. Bennett, A. M. Calafat, K. Kato, M. Strynar, E. Andersen, R. E. Moran, D. J. Tancredi, 
N. S. Tulve, and I. Hertz-Picciotto. 2015. Se rum concentrations of perfluorinated compounds 
(PFC) among selected populations of children and adults in California. Environmental Research  
136:264–273. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.envres.2014.09.026.  PMID: 25460645; PMCID: 
PMC4724210.  
Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up
Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.278  Guidance on PFAS Exposure, Testing, and Clinical Follow-Up 
Prepublication Copy  Yakushiji, T., I. Watanabe, K. Kuwabara, S. Yoshida,  K. Koyama, I. Hara, and N. Kunita. 1978. Long-
term studies of the excretion of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) through the mother’s milk of 
an occupationally exposed worker. Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology  
7(4):493–504. 
Young, A. S., R. Hauser, T. M. James-Todd, B. A. Cou ll, H. Zhu, K. Kannan, A. J. Specht, M. S. Bliss, 
and J. G. Allen. 2021. Impact of “healthier” mate rials interventions on dust concentrations of per- 
and polyfluoroalkyl substances, polybrominated diphenyl ethers, and organophosphate esters. 
Environment International  150:106151. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.envint.2020.106151. PMID: 
33092866; PMCID: PMC7940547. 
