 
 
 
Testimony of Ron Phillips, Animal Health Institute  
To the  
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
In Support of  
RE: L.D. 242, An Act to Clarify that Animal Health Products are Exempt from the PFAS Reporting Law  
February 15, 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative  Gramlich  and Members of the Committee  on Environment & Natural 
Resources : 
I am Ron Phillips, Senior Vice President of Policy at the Animal Health Institute and I am here today in 
support of LD 242 , An Act to Clarify that Animal Health Products Are Exempt from the PFAS Reporting 
Law.  The Animal Health Institute is the trade association for companies that make medicines, 
vaccines, flea and tick products and medical devices used to keep both food animals and  companion 
animals healthy.   Our products, by keeping animals healthy, help protect public health, promote the 
human -animal bond, allow pets to live longer, healthier lives and contribute to a safe food supply.  
 
Since the Maine statute uses the  broad defi nition of “PFAS” as substances “ containing at least  one fully 
fluorinated carbon atom ,” many animal health products contain PFAS substances either as an active 
ingredient (AI) or an essential, function component of product packaging .  No current alternatives to 
PFAS are available for these products, making the use of PFAS unavoidable . For example, some active 
ingredients approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) are fluorinated molecules  that are administered in animals, either orally or 
topically. Other veterinary products contain fluorinated molecules as essential, functional components , 
,of their administering components (e.g., vaccine syringes) that are federally evaluated and approv ed 
together with the health product.   AHI recognizes that the PFAS statute provides for a possible  
exemption from the 2030 ban for those products for which there is no safer available alternative. While 
we believe that describes our products, that is  a decision to be made at some unknown point in the 
future by the DEP and one that companies cannot count on in our long -term planning .   For all of the 
reasons that follow, an exemption for animal health products  from 38 MRSA Section 1612  is both 
warrante d and important to the continued availability of these essential products.   
 
 
 

 
Unlike human drugs  and medical devices (including diagnostics) , which are all regulated by FDA, our 
members’ animal health products are overseen and regulated by three distinct fed eral agencies:  
• Small molecule pharmaceuticals and medical devices (including diagnostics)  at FDA under the 
FFDCA.  
• Biologics (including vaccines and certain diagnostic kits)  at the Animal and Plant Health 
Inspection Service (APHIS) within the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) under the VSTA; 
and  
• Flea and tick preventatives administered topically (including via collars) at EPA under FIFRA.  
While regulatory responsibility  is divided among the above agencies, animal health products are all 
subject to intense federal oversight and regulatory frameworks focusing on product safety . Importantly, 
this review process includes consideration of the presence of PFAS in those product s and an analysis of 
risk versus benefits to animal and human health.  
The potential removal of such animal health products from the market jeopardizes the availability of 
safe and effective animal treatment options and should receive the same careful consi deration from 
DEP as for human health products. These products are important to  Maine’s  farmers , veterinarians, and 
pet owners  to protect the health and welfare of their livestock and companion animals . These products 
also provide  vital human  public  health  benefits . Preventing and controlling  pests in  livestock and  
companion animals is an essential component of preventing the spread of zoonotic diseases , which can 
be transmitted to humans via animals , like  cat scratch disease and Lyme disease . The challenge  of 
keeping animals  and humans safe from these diseases grows as climate change expands  the habitable 
regions of the pests and lengthens their breeding season . The health of food -producing  animals  is also 
integral to a safe food supply.  In short, these ani mal health products provide vital public health and 
commercial benefits to end users in Maine.  
The broad definition of the Maine statute  is based purely on chemical structure and nomenclature, 
without any consideration of risk data . Simply being categorize d as a PFAS substance does not equate 
to being harmful. In fact, the Maine definition of PFAS covers thousands of substances and only two of 
those substances -- Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA) and Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS)  – have been 
widely studied.  The health effects of the remaining thousands of substances varies widely or is 
unknown, and many of these substances may pose no harm to human health or the environment at 
all. The unintended impact of the statute, which would remove from the market now any products 
that contain intentionally added PFAS that have not been reported to the DEP, is dire. For some 
diseases or conditions, active molecules that contain a limited number of fluorine atoms deliver 
superior treatment efficacy or provide the only tr eatment option. The safety and efficacy of both 
veterinary and human medicines have been extensively evaluated and reviewed prior to authorization 
under regulatory frameworks by federal agencies (e.g., FDA, USDA). Further, it is not just some 
important med icines that contain PFAS but also certain medical devices  (including diagnostics ) and f lea 
and tick preventatives , which are governed by comprehensive federal regulatory frameworks and 
programs.  
The reporting requirements of the law require companies in their notification to state “[t]he amount 
of each of the PFAS, identified by its chemical abstracts service registry number, in the product, 
reported as an exact quantity determined using commercia lly available analytical methods or as falling 
within a range approved for reporting purposes by the department.” As DEP has  acknowledged, 
collecting the analytical information from manufacturers and suppliers is both time and labor 
intensive. Moreover, t he type of analytical testing required to obtain the information is not readily 
 
available and would impose significant costs and disruptions to an already -strained product supply 
chain. This is assuming such analytical information can even be obtained withi n a reasonable degree of 
certainty. In fact, US EPA is still in the process of developing and validating analytical methods for 
wastewater, groundwater, certain PFAS in drinking water, and other environmental media.  
Furthermore, federally approved animal health products contain a low level of PFAS and provide 
essential public health outcomes for humans, livestock, and companion animals by stopping the spread 
of flea and tick diseases. Current reporting requirements will result in duplicate reporting of PFA S and 
fail to provide DEP with an accurate assessment of the amount of PFAS substances entering the state , 
and of the health risks associated with those substances . The statute  requires manufacturers to notify 
the state of products they sell in Maine that contain PFAS where “product” means an item sold or 
distributed to customers for personal, residential, commercial, or industrial use, “including for use in 
making other products.” This definition indicates that both manufacturers of bulk ingredients and 
finished product manufacturers will be required to report sales of products containing PFAS substances 
to the state, resulting in inaccurate and overreporting.  
 
We also have concerns about the lack of protection of confidential business information (CBI), i ncluding 
the levels of PFAS in products. Suppliers may be hesitant or unwilling to provide information on the type 
and amount of each of the PFAS  in the ir product s because doing so would reveal the formulaic 
composition of their products and put them at a  competitive disadvantage, making it difficult if not 
impossible for manufacturers selling into Maine to comply with the notification requirements . 
 
Last year, the legislatures in California and Colorado both passed legislate requiring PFAS reporting, 
similar to that in the Maine statute.  While the California bill was eventually vetoed  by Governor 
Newsom , both bills exempted animal health products from the reporting requirements for the reasons 
stated above.  
Thank you for the opportunity to present these c omments and for your consideration.  
 
