§;% 
.2, . . . ,,iI 
I" W J“ :2’/I;,”",f-,‘/, 1->515’ ’~‘rI4» -;'>, ~/ 
< 1»»~, it 
L FE? ff’?/i r;.§, '; - Hg ./- .» t ,,..s 5 W‘ I’ 
l-*/ 
solutions for0 
Toxic-Free Tomorrow 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
ln OPPOSITION of LD 242, “An Act to Clarify That Animal Health Products Are Exempt from the 
Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Reporting Law" 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
February 15, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment 
and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Sarah Woodbury. l am the director of advocacy 
for Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health's mission is to make sure that everyone has equal 
access to safe food and drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-free and 
climate friendly. l am here to testify in opposition of LD 242, “An Act to Clarify That Animal 
Health Products Are Exempt from the Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Reporting 
Law“. 
Maine is currently in the midst of a PFAS contamination crisis. You have all heard the stories of 
contaminated farmland issues across Maine. As a result of state-sanctioned spreading of 
industrial and municipal sludge, there are farms that are practically worthless. DACF and DEP 
have reported that there are over 50 farms and 345 wells that have been contaminated with 
toxic PFAS. Because of this crisis, the 130th legislature passed LD 1503 “An Act To Stop 
Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Pollution ” which requires manufacturers of 
products with intentionally added PFAS to report the presence of those substances in those 
products to the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) beginning in 2023. This bill also 
prohibits the sale of residential carpets or rugs, and fabric treatments, that contain intentionally 
added PFAS beginning in 2023. lt allows the DEP to name other categories of products to 
phase-out the use of PFAS and, effective in 2030, products containing intentionally added PFAS 
may not be sold unless the use of PFAS in a product is specifically designated as a currently 
unavoidable use by the department. LD 1503 passed this committee unanimously and passed 
the legislature with only two legislators opposing it. 
We will continue to deal with the issue of PFAS in our soil, our water, and our bodies unless we 
work to reduce the sources of exposure. All sources of exposure. That includes products that 
are designed for animals. The products law is not a blanket ban on all uses of PFAS outright. lt 
has a mechanism built in that allows manufacturers to make the argument to the DEP that the 
use of PFAS in their product is unavoidable. It states that “Effective January 1, 2030, a person 
may not sell, offer for sale or distribute for sale in this State any product that contains 
intentionally added PFAS, unless the department has determined by rule that the use of PFAS 
in the product is a currently unavoidable use" . The manufacturers of the products in LD 242 will 
have that opportunity. There is nothing about these products that currently requires a blanket 
exemption. The federal government does not govern the presence of PFAS in these products, 
making an exemption necessary. There is only one product that the federal government governs 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 I (207) 6996795 i info@defendourhealth.org l defendourhealthorg
,\,:_..IL'i;A' _¢:<2§.s: “-—;>~=§ 
33% :1?!-2;-<5 ifs 
:1'§T¢<.Ji':§5 ’;~¢§:.E"!I 
if 
the presence of PFAS in the product and that is Aqueous film forming ﬁreﬁghting foam (AFFF) 
and even that is being phased out by the Department of Defense because of the toxicity of 
PFAS. 
The manufacturers of the products listed in LD 242 should have to follow the law, just like every 
other manufacturer. They have the opportunity under the products law to make the case to the 
DEP that the use of their product is “currently unavoidable ” and “essential for health, safety or 
the functioning of society and for which alternatives are not reasonably availab|e ” as defined 
under title 38 of Maine statute. The point of the products law is to reduce sources of PFAS to 
protect the health and safety of all Mainers. Granting blanket exemptions and bypassing the law 
will not help us reduce the source of this toxic chemical. All manufacturers have until 2030 to 
either move away from uses of PFAS in their products or prove to the state that the use of 
PFAS in their products is unavoidable. lf we really want to reduce the sources of PFAS and 
protect the health, environment, and food supply of all Mainers, no one manufacturer or product 
should be exempt from this process. 
We urge you to vote unanimously “ought not to pass” on LD 242. 
Thank you. 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 l (207) 699-5795 I info@defendourhealtlmorg I defendourhealthbrg
