April 28, 2023 
Ruth Alden 
(Z389 to 1481 
Greetings Senators, 
Thank you for your time and attention. Throughout this past year, my second year of 
motherhood, my family has been under state-mandated lead abatement order. I will try to 
encapsulate this very complicated situation into three minutes. 
I drove here today from Portland to advocate for emergency passage of this bill (LD 1481) 
because the laws as they currently stand created what I now refer to as a "mandated lead 
abatement crisis" for my family. I support this bill because, while established to protect young 
children in Maine, existing lead laws have cut our family off from income we depend on to pay 
our mortgggg, throwing us into ﬁnancial crisis and overwhelming us with chronic stress. This all 
compounds the fear, anxiety, and confusion of being told our baby is being "lead poisoned" in 
the midst of the pandemic. 
As ﬁrst-time homeowners, we felt fortunate to buy our 2-Unit house in Portland and move in 
2018, but our mortgage loan is based on monthly rental income from our second unit. 
Suddenly being ordered to abate our property was daunting enough, estimated to cost upwards 
of $50,000. Then to be told that we cannot rent out our empty unit downstairs until the entire 
property (including the basement, and 6-8 inches of soil surrounding the house) is completely 
abated — it is hard to believe and harder to accept. We thought: there must be room for some 
emergency exemption, why would the State of Maine, in the name of helping a child, puta 
family at risk of losing their home? ln attempting to solve one problem, State law as it is 
currently written, creates others. 
We are small-scale landlords of a livable rental unit that has been sitting empty on the 
Peninsula for almost a year during a massive housing crisis in Portland. Moreover, the interior 
of the rental apartment has been fully abated since January 2023 because we slowly paid for 
the work, burning through savings and a loan. This highlights another dimension of the urgent 
need to pass LD 1481. Current laws need adjusting because they haven't supported swift 
progress on our abatement. lf property owners cannot rent out an abated unit immediately, 
there is limited incentive for multi-unit owners to pay for what work they can, as quickly as they 
can. Facing an uncertain amount of time without rental income, one is not inclined to invest 
savings in anything extra. Moreover, the cost of lost rental income and of an abatement 
project makes it hard to provide "affordable" long-term rental units. For the ﬁrst time we've 
considered starting an AirBnB to recoup our ﬁnancial losses more quickly. Allowing people in 
our situation to get housing units back on the market, beneﬁts everyone. 
There is undisputed medical evidence that postpartum mental health and a new mother's 
stress hormones have a tremendous impact on the well-beingof her baby. The State of Maine 
(CDC/DHHS) needs to consider this medical data in their approach to both lead poisoning AND
abatement orders being mandated to families. Our daughter was born in the thick of the 
pandemic, and because of this we were anxious about our baby's health and safety from early 
in my pregnancy. And then to learn that our baby was being exposed to toxic lead in the 
environment... This all was a recipe for the postpartum anxiety, depression, and insomnia I've 
struggled with. While were initially glad to have our home inspected by DEP, wanting to trace 
the lead dust to its source, when the ofﬁcial abatement order arrived in the mail, it came across 
as punitive, threatening hefty ﬁnes if the abatement of our entire property wasn't completed in 
30 days. Cutting off rental income exacerbates chronic stress for families already struggling 
through the chaos and economic consequences of the pandemic. The state of Maine needs to 
move beyond single-tack medical testing to consider the holistic well-being of a family, 
particularly a postpartum mother and her baby. 
There is a lack of consistent enforcement of federal lead-safe construction practices. Many 
contractors are not being monitored, cited, or ﬁned for spreading lead in the environment 
while homeowners with young children are being scrutinized. This is discriminatory 
enforcement of federal lead-safety standards. Contaminated soil and sloppy construction 
practices pollute our streets and sidewalks and re-contaminate our property on windy days. 
Lead particles are tracked in on our shoes from the street and sidewalk. Singling out young 
families — discriminatory. 
Believe me, I am completely in favor of cleaning up lead pollution in our communities, but that 
cannot happen if only homes where babies and tots reside are being regulated. Everyone, 
including city management, responsible for the streets and sidewalks we walk on every day, 
needs to be held equally accountable for lead contamination. 
The toxicity of the soil on almost all of the properties on the peninsula is shocking, and yet most 
homeowners are too afraid of consequences to get their soil tested. 
The Governor has declared interest in attracting a qualiﬁed workforce of young professionals to 
the state. Prior to being laid off during the pandemic, I had a career as a Kindergarten teacher. 
My husband Atiim Boykin was also laid off during the pandemic, and has since been hired by 
the State of Maine. He is now, ironically, working with DHHS as an intensive case manager, 
spending every day supporting Maine people in crisis. Many young professionals are, like us, 
ﬁrst-time homebuyers, planning to start families in Maine. The lead contamination of Portland, 
and other Maine cities, most impacts the same families Maine is trying to attract. Lead 
abatement orders are then compounding the burden on many of these families. 
Today l have only a few minutes of your time, and we have been struggling to stay aﬂoat 
through this situation after almost a full year now. Maine state lead laws need to be carefully 
reviewed, particularly in light of the post-pandemic reality. 
Thank you for your attention and consideration.
Additional Notes: 
Discourages landlords from renting to families with young children - they are 
afraid of being cited for lead contamination in their rental units. These fears also 
discourage many homeowners from having their soil tested for lead. Most of the 
soil on the Portland Peninsula is lead-toxic 
Legislative change needs to happen in disclosures at time of house sale - train 
realtors - demand transparency at time of house sale 
DEP certiﬁed Lead Abatement Contractor list (distributed/mandated by state) - is 
problematic in many ways, no consequences enforced by DEP for contractor 
incompetency or trying to price gouge - please contact me for further explanation 
of this. 
Confusion about grant money availability has held us up 
Portland Preservation Compliance Coordinator now delays us. 
Lack of holistic understanding of laws and interdepartmental need for think-tank— 
bring in input from families actually wading through an abatement order. 
Blood-lead level tests subject to inaccuracy - With persistent inquiry I came to know 
that the blood-tests Pediatricians are administering to assess lead-levels are not 100% 
accurate, and test results indisputably vary seasonally, as well as in the course of a day. 
This is according our pediatrician at lnterMed, as well as a Doctor who is a Maine State 
consultant on lead~poisoning. 
Recent changes to deﬁnition of “Childhood Lead Poisoning ” set new limits to 
acceptable blood-lead levels — this increased number of children deﬁned as "lead 
poisoned" 
Pandemic related supply chain issues and labor shortages (for example, it takes at least 
6 weeks for the new windows we've ordered to come in) continue to hinder swift 
abatement.
