ii‘ Dead River Company — Delivering on A promise 
Testimony of: Al Bugbee February 7, 2023 
Dead River Company — Vice President of Operations 
Resident of Falmouth, ME 
Before the Maine Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
Concerning: LD 105 - An Act to Prohibit Minimum Usage or Tank Rental Fees for Certain Propane 
Customers 
Position: Opposed 
I respectfully request the committee vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 105. 
lam opposed to LD 105 for the following reasons: 
1. The propane industry is not a regulated utility. There are numerous propane providers 
throughout the state for consumers to choose from. This free-market system benefits 
Mainers via a competitive business environment allowing them to choose who they purchase 
their propane from. LD 105, if passed, would diminish this environment and likely result in 
higher costs for consumers. 
2. In most cases in lVlaine, propane marketers provide the storage tank(s) for customers and 
recover the cost of their investment through the sale of propane. In the case of applications 
where propane is used solely for backup power, propane sales are often times extremely low, 
thus not allowing for an adequate recovery of the cost of the storage tank(s). lf assessing tank 
rental fees becomes prohibited as proposed in LD 105, propane providers will be forced to 
seek other means to recover the cost of tank(s), or remove them entirely and redeploy them 
to applications with greater predictability of usage. 
3. If LD 105 were to pass, consumers who attempt to acquire propane and storage tanks for 
backup generator use in the future will likely be faced with much higher out-of-pocket costs. 
Passage of LD 105 would likely lead to consumers having to pay for the tanks and their 
installation up front, which can exceed $2,000, and can be a much greater burden than an 
annual rental fee. 
About Dead River Company 
Dead River Company was founded in Maine 114 years ago, operates 60 retail stores along with 10 
wholesale fuel supply hubs, and employees over 1,300 people. Two—thirds of our infrastructure 
and employees are based here in Maine. We serve customers in all 16 Maine counties with 
critical heating fuels and provide maintenance and repairs to customer heating systems and 
appliances. 
1|Page
