Testimony of:  Casey Cramton       February 6, 2023  
Dead River Company – President and CEO  
Resident of Gorham  
 
Before the Maine Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business  
Concerning:  LD 105 - An Act to Prohibit Minimum Usage or Tank Rental Fees for Certain 
Propane Customers  
 
Position:  Opposed  
 
I respectfully request the committee vote Ought Not to Pass  on LD 105 . 
 
I am opposed to LD 105 for the following reasons:  
1. The propane industry is not a regulated utility.  There a re numerous propane providers 
throughout the state for consumers to choose from.   This free -market system benefits 
Mainers via a competitive business environment allowing them to choose who they 
purchase their propane from.  LD 105, if passed, would dimini sh this environment and 
likely result in higher costs for consumers.  
2. In most cases in Maine, propane marketers provide the storage tank(s) for customers 
and recover the cost of their investment through the sale of propane.  In the case of 
applications wher e propane is used solely for backup power  generation , propane sales 
are often times extremely low , thus not allowing for an adequate recovery of the cost of 
the storage tank(s).  If assessing tank rental fees becomes prohibited as proposed in LD 
105, propa ne providers will be forced to seek other means to recover the cost of tank(s ) 
or remove them entirely and redeploy them to applications with greater predictability 
of usage.  
3. If LD 105 were to pass, consumers who attempt to acquire propane and storage tank s 
for backup generator use in the future will likely be faced with much higher out -of-
pocket costs.  Passage of LD 105 would likely lead to consumers having pay for the tanks 
and their installation up front, which can exceed $2,000, and can be a much great er 
burden than an annual rental fee.  
 
 
About Dead River Company  
Dead River Company was founded in Maine 114 years ago, operates 60 retail stores along 
with 10 wholesale fuel supply hubs, and employees over 1,300 people.  Two -thirds of our 
infrastructure an d employees are based here in Maine.  We serve customers in all 16 Maine 
counties with critical heating fuels and provide maintenance and repairs to customer 
heating systems and appliances.  
