February 6, 2023
TESTIMONY OF LESLIE ANDERSON                   
President and CEO of the Propane Gas Association of New England
 
BEFORE THE MAINE COMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT AND 
BUSINESS
Concerning LD 105 An Act To Prohibit Minimum Usage or Tank Rental Fees for Certain Propane Customers
The Propane Gas Association of New England (PGANE) is pleased to have the opportunity to offer its 
comments regarding LD 105 An Act To Prohibit Minimum Usage or Tank Rental Fees for Certain Propane 
Customers.
We respectfully request that the committee vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on this bill LD 105.
PGANE is a regional alternative energy trade association representing members of the propane industry in 
the six New England States. We exist to serve the propane industry by promoting safety, education, and 
public awareness of the uses of propane. Our membership includes propane companies and suppliers, 
including numerous small companies who are often family owned and operated, many for several 
generations. Propane is a recognized clean alternative fuel by EPA under the 1990 Clean Air Act, and it is an 
essential backup for our ever-increasing use of the electric grid. Using clean propane energy accelerates 
decarbonization and access to clean propane ensures environmental equity.
Our industry is not a regulated utility.  We have over 35 different propane company members operating 
competitively in a free marketplace system within state of Maine.  This free-market system benefits Mainers. 
Maine consumers are free to choose companies and they may change companies if they are unhappy.  Our 
companies are all unique and consumers can pick the company that suits their needs best.  If a company is 
charging a consumer a minimum usage or tank rental fee the consumer has options to change companies or 
invest in their own tank.
Propane is the perfect partner for wind and solar because it is clean and blessed by chemistry as the ideal on-
site energy and back up energy source.  Resiliency and energy security are of fundamental importance to 
protect the critical infrastructure within our state, ranging from commercial and municipal needs such as 
backup power generation for hospitals to residential needs during power outages for boiling water, cooking, 
heating, and home generator usage. 
Propane generators supply power when the electricity fails and there are many citizens who depend on 
propane as a reliable source of power for medical reasons in addition to the luxury of its comfort and security.  
If a consumer does not use propane for hot water, cooking, heating, clothes drying, fireplaces, or other uses 
and only has a backup generator, some companies will charge the consumer a minimum usage fee or a tank 
rental fee.  This is because a generator only account will not use enough gallons of propane to offset the cost 
of the tank investment. Generators need a minimum of 2–120-gallon propane tanks for on-site supply and the 
cost of these tanks is between $1,700 - $2,500.  Because of the expense, companies generally supply the tanks 
and amortize their expenses over time through the purchase of propane by the customer.  If the customer 
uses a small amount of propane, the company will have to charge a fee for tank rental, minimum usage, or a 
much higher price per gallon.  In addition to the expense of the tank, the propane company also delivers the 
propane to the customer’s home in a $150,000-$200,000 propane bobtail truck.
The price of propane varies depending on annual usage.  The more that is used, the lower the cost.  Just like 
buying milk, it is less expense per gallon to by a whole gallon of milk rather than a single serving, or a half 
gallon.  
If consumers do not want to pay minimum usage fees, they can change companies or they can buy their own 
tanks.  However, eliminating the option for minimum usage fees or tank rental fees will result in more 
companies requiring consumers to buy their own tanks and these up-front costs will burden consumers.  In 
addition to high up-front costs, there are also homeowner insurance concerns for the consumer.  Owning your 
own tank may require additional insurance and may limit the number of insurance choices that are available.
For these reasons, we respectfully request that the committee vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on this bill.
Thank you for your consideration.
