WA LIZ 81 SO/\/S PIQCDFA/ “‘JE' 
February 7, 2023 
TESTIMONY OF SUE WALTZ 
Owner/ CFO of Waltz & Sons Propane 
BEFORE THE MAINE COMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC 
ADVANCEMENT AND BUSINESS 
Concerning LD 105 An Act To Prohibit Minimum Usage or Tank Rental Fees for Certain 
Propane Customers 
I am pleased to have the opportunity to offer my comments regarding LD 105 An Act To 
Prohibit Minimum Usage or Tank Rental Fees for Certain Propane Customers. 
I, on behalf of my company, Waltz & Sons Propane, respectfully request that the 
committee vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on this bill LD 105. 
We are a family owned and operated Propane company located in Buxton. Our 
customer base is 98% residential usage, with 1120 customers that have a generator. Of 
these 1120 customers, 278 use propane for their generator only and therefore are 
subject to a tank usage fee. The equipment costs, at our cost, is $379,000. In 2022, we 
sold 9364 gallons to 139 of these 278 customers. The other 139 customers used zero 
gallons. In addition to the equipment costs for the 278 customers, we also provide, as 
part of their tank usage fee, a tank monitor that we monitor remotely to ensure they 
always have propane in case of a power outage. Our cost for tank monitoring is $36- 
$48/annually per monitor. 
The electrician ’s cost of an average generator installation ranges from $ 7,000 for a 10K 
generator to $12,000 for a 22K generator. The propane companies ’ installation cost to 
service that generator is approximately $ 1,100 which brings a total installation cost to 
$8,100 — $13,100. Small generators, up to 12K, can operator with a single 100-gallon 
tank but anything larger must have 2, or more, 100-gallon tanks. We have been finding 
the trend for larger capacity generators being installed due to the popularity of heat 
pumps. _
With every free quote for a generator only installation, we offer the consumer a choice 
to purchase the equipment. We also will inform the customer who chooses to paya 
tank usage fee that if they ever add propane appliances that meet the minimum usage 
for their equipment, we will cease charging a tank usage fee. They can purchase their 
equipment at any time. They also have the choice to change companies. 
The benefits of paying a tank usage fee versus owning your own equipment are 
numerous: 
0 Eliminate the need to purchase tank and equipment. 
¢ Includes repairs and maintenance on the tank(s) and equipment. Many tanks 
that are located along the coast are prone to rusting. We will replace those tanks 
at no additional costs to the customer. 
0 includes a remote tank monitor which ensures you always have propane in your 
tank when you need it most. 
0 At our company, we monitor power outages on the CMP website, and monitor 
customer locations for outages. If we find a customer that is on the outage list, 
and therefore running their generator, they are made a priority deliver if 
needed. 
lf you own your own tank: 
0 Ensure your homeowners insurance covers your tank and equipment. 
0 If you own an underground propane tank, the cathodic protection must be 
tested a minimum of every 3 years. If it fails, you must replace the cathodic 
protection. 
v You are responsible for any work performed on your home, including calling Dig 
Safe and marking your property where there are underground lines. 
0 You must provide proof of purchase, and have a company perform a leak test on 
your system before they can legally sell you propane. During an outage, this has 
proven to be burdensome for those who are not our customers. 
0 You are responsible for all maintenance on your tank(s) and equipment. 
For these reasons, I, on behalf of my company, respectfully request that the committee 
vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on this blll. 
Thank you for your consideration.
