James Libby, Ph.D.
Senator, District 22THE MAINE SENATE
131st Legislature3 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333
Testimony of Senator James D. Libby
Sponsor of L.D. 77, “An Act to Require the Bureau of Parks and Lands to Maintain Public Restrooms 
at State Parks” 
Public Hearing: Wednesday, January 25, 2023
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Plueker, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. 
My name is Jim Libby, and I am a State Senator representing Senate District # 22, comprised of the towns 
of Naples, Sebago, Baldwin, and Standish in Cumberland County; Hiram and Porter in Oxford County; and, 
Limington, Limerick, Cornish, Parsonsfield, Newfield, Acton, and Shapleigh, in the County of York.
It is my honor to bring to your attention the contents of L.D. 77, “An Act to Require the Bureau of Parks 
and Lands to Maintain Public Restrooms at State Parks.”
Committee members, I will not keep you too long.  The genesis of this bill was a personal visit to the 
beautiful State Historic Park, Fort McClary, in Kittery Point.  
This incredible site is a former defense fortification of the United States Military.  It is located at the mouth 
of the Piscataqua River.  The site dates back to 1804, and the Blockhouse dates to 1844.  Three impressions 
from our State Website and Wikipedia follow:

The Blockhouse is known to be the last blockhouse built in Maine.  It is truly a Maine treasure.
The site lies on the Maine/New Hampshire border, and it has many yearly visitors each year, from Memorial 
Day though Indigenous Peoples’ Day.
This site is incredibly beautiful.  
As you know, the State of Maine acquired the property from the federal government in 1924, and I for one 
and very thankful for the forethought.  Everything about this site is amazing.  The Blockhouse serves as a 
museum, and a visit up the stairs into the Blockhouse will yield an incredible view of the acreage, the bay, 
the Shipyard, and the State of New Hampshire.
I for one am pleased with its designation as an historic site.  Its condition is good.  The historical integrity is 
intact.
However, the condition of restroom facilities is entirely another matter.  As I sat at a granite bench on the 
site, I enjoyed the bay view while doing some online work for my employer.   Guests streamed in. Soon, my 
attention was diverted from the beautiful view.  
It is a simple fact that following often long trips to State Parks, often the first place that visitors want to stop 
at is the restroom facility before they begin their visit.  I think, as a host, we should be aware of this fact.  As 
I remained seated some distance from this site’s facility, which is an outhouse, I noticed many travelers who 
attempted to use it.  It is a rustic outhouse at best.  As I remember, the wooden doors do have paint.  That is 
where the maintenance stopped.
One-by-one, those visitors (many of which were seniors, with some physical challenges to be sure) 
attempted to use the outhouse.  And, one-by-one, they opened the door, only to quickly close it and head in 
the opposite direction.  So, I got up to see what all of the fuss was about.  What I encountered was very 
embarrassing for our State.
Coming out of the pit, or the hole in the ground around which a seat was constructed, hundreds of insects 
flew out at me, as they had to previous visitors.  The stench was heavy.  It was virtually impossible to use 
this facility.  
When pits like this one fill up, it is customary to move the pit to another location.  I do not believe that this 
has been done recently…perhaps never.
In any event, the ideal circumstance would be to build a flush toilet away from the historical artifacts, near 
the gate entrance to this historic site. 
The United Nations General Assembly Resolution 70/169 provides an interesting perspective on this matter.  
According to Resolution 70/169, the right to sanitation entitles everyone “to have physical and affordable 
access to sanitation, in all spheres of life, that is safe, hygienic, secure, and socially and culturally acceptable 
and that provides privacy and ensures dignity.”  That statement is often referred to in discussions about 
third-world country conditions.  Unfortunately, this statement has applicability to the condition of the 
outhouse at Fort McClary. 
That is all I have for this esteemed Committee today.  I do not know what other Maine park locations’ 
facilities are like.  I have visited some, and noted running water, showers, electric outlets, with a water 
fountain nearby.  So, I know that the problem is not overwhelming, and I doubt very much that the level of 
investment would be prohibitive for the State.  I urge the members to consider simple policy provisions that 
will allow us to be good hosts, which is, of course, is a wonderful Maine tradition to begin with.
