Andrew Dalrymple
Monhegan
LD 380
I, Andrew Dalrymple, Second Assessor for Monhegan Plantation, testify in favor of 
LD 380.
I have worked for the Monhegan Water Company for over 5 years, assisting in 
seasonal operations, collecting and submitting water samples to the DWP, and writing
grants and managing projects to help protect Monhegan's natural ground water supply
and distribution system from the impacts of rising sea levels.
The purpose of this Bill originates from within the Monhegan Water Company Board 
and a motion passed unanimously at a meeting of the Water Company Board of 
Directors on January 23, 2023 to move forward with drafting the language for LD 
380.
Since the Water Co. exists as a private corporation with 100% of it's shares owned by 
the Plantation, the dissolution of the Water Co. and transfer of the Water Co.'s assets 
to the Plantation to be managed as a Muncipal Department makes practical sense for 
several reasons, and will not negatively impact any share holders or annual 
operations.
The Transfer will allow for the public water supply operations and administration to 
proceed with greater levels of efficiency and transparency since the Board of 
Assessors and Plantation officials will be the primary managers of the Water 
Department budgeting, spending, billing, and potential grant related funding sourcing.
Since the Board of Assessors meets monthly, water quality testing results can be 
presented publicy on a more routine basis, resulting in a broader scope of 
transparency between water supply operations and public consumers.
The dissolution of the Monhegan Water Company and the transfer of its assets to the 
Plantation was brought forth to the Monhegan Plantation registered voters at the 
annual Town Meeting on April 8th, which was publicly posted in line with State 
requirements for holding municipal meetings, in the form of a warrant article. The 
article passed after discussion confirming that the legislation action would be 
followed through with and that Plantation spending related to water supply 
maintenance and operations would not need to be raised through taxation since the 
transfer includes the transfer of the existing money in the Water Company checking 
account.
Thank you
