 
April 24, 2023 
 
 
Sen. Reny, Rep. Crafts, and members of the State and Local Government Committee,  
 
My name is Carley Feibusch and I am the Municipal Administrator for Monhegan Plantation. I am 
testifying in favor of LD 380. On April 8th at the Plantation Annual Meeting, the following warrant article 
passed with none opposed: Art. 32.   To see if the Plantation will vote to dissolve the Monhegan Water 
Company and transfer the Company’s assets to Monhegan Plantation. The article prompted thoughtful 
discussion among residents. 
Monhegan Water Company has been working closely with the Plantation to secure grant funding for 
various projects aimed at researching the current water system and planning for the future upgrades to the 
water company taking special consideration of the effect sea level rise and drought conditions will have 
on the public water system. In the past, the Plantation has loaned the water company emergency funds to 
help with a cash flow situation due to a delay in the billing cycle. The Plantation has supported the Water 
Company while they applied for a rate increase through the PUC by assisting with public postings and 
hosting meetings.  
Throughout these collaborations, it has become clear that dissolving the Water Company and transferring 
the assets to the plantation will make managing the public water system more streamlined. The public 
water system would be managed as a department of the plantation which will have the oversight of the 
board of assessors. Accounts payable and receivable, payroll, insurance, and communications with the 
public would be folded into the plantations current systems and policies. The consolidation of these 
important components of the public water system will allow the employees to operate more efficiently 
and will have more transparency with the public. When the public water system becomes a department of 
the Plantation, there will be more opportunities for grant funding and/ or other methods of borrowing if 
the need arises. As both a resident and employee of the plantation, I do not see a reason why this 
legislation should not pass.  
 
Thank you for your time,  
Carley Feibusch, Municipal Administrator 
Monhegan Plantation  
 
