i 
LElN|$TON-AU_BURuN 
February 28, 2023 
Honorable Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Honorable Stanley Paige Zeigler, House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities & Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 640, An Act to Update the Charter of the Lewiston-Auburn Water Pollution Control 
Authority 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the EUT Committee: 
The Lewiston Auburn Water Pollution Control Authority (LAWP CA) appreciates the 
opportunity to provide comments in respectful support to LD 640. 
About LAWPCA - The Lewiston Auburn Water Pollution Control Authority was created by an 
act of the Maine Legislature in 1967 to provide wastewater treatment services to the Cities of 
Lewiston and Auburn. The plant started operation in 1974. Our mission is to serve the public by 
protecting public health and enhancing the Androscoggin River water quality. 
Discussion about the bill —The LAWPCA charter was originally created with emergency 
preamble language, as well as language designed to assign initial construction and annual 
expense apportiomnent, which was necessary to be included during creation, but is no longer 
applicable given the facility has been operational for nearly 50 years. 
The original charter also included language that references determining proportionate shares of 
annual expenses based on the previous years ﬂow and strength of waste, and assessing a cost for 
the following ﬁscal year based on such. The facility has been using a cost apportionment formula 
that was developed by a contracted engineering ﬁrm in l992 that uses actual current daily ﬂow 
and strength of waste to determine the amount each entity is charged each month, and year. This 
model has been evaluated numerous times over the past 30 years, and it continues to prove to be 
fair and representative of expenses to the City of Lewiston, and Auburn Sewerage District users. 
We therefore request that all charter language reﬂect how the Authority currently determines and 
assesses expenses. 
The other requested changes are to: delete the title of Secretary/Clerk and maintain just the title 
of Clerk; to update the title of the Superintendent to General Manager; to reﬂect the current 
practice of providing annual report of activities to both Cities; and to change the term of the 7‘h 
board member from being able to serve a 3-year term and then an additional 3-year term, to 
being able to serve additional 3-year terms.
LD 640 
February 28, 2023 
Page2 
Conclusion. Thank you for your time and attention in considering our testimony. We were 
created to provide a vital service by cleaning water and improving the enviromnent as a whole, 
and believe we have done a tremendous job of doing so. Over the nearly 50 years since creation, 
some language in our original charter has since become obsolete, whereas others needed 
clariﬁcation, which is why we respectfully request that you vote LD 640 “ought to pass” to allow 
our charter to reﬂect our current operation. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
Sincerely, 
Paula Drouin 
Assistant General Manager 
Lewiston Auburn Water Pollution Control Authority
