Kristen Cloutier
33 Charles St. 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
Phone: (207) 807-1637 
Kristen.Cloutier@legislature.maine.gov
H
OUSE OF
R
EPRESENT ATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
March 7, 2023
Testimony of Rep. Kristen Cloutier in support of 
LD 640, An Act to Update the Charter of the Lewiston-Auburn Water 
Pollution Control Authority 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy , Utilities and T echnology
Good afternoon Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and distinguished members of the
Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee. Please accept this testimony in support of
LD 640, 
An Act to Update the Charter  of the Lewiston-Auburn Water Pollution Contr ol Authority .
LD 640 amends the charter of the Lewiston-Auburn Water Pollution Control Authority to 
remove irrelevant language and clarify existing language regarding the operations of the
authority .
The authority is a quasi-municipal entity responsible for the wastewater treatment system that
serves the cities of Lewiston and Auburn and other surrounding communities that is focused on 
protecting public health and the environment by treating the residential, commercial and local
industrial wastewaters, including Lake Auburn.
Lake Auburn is the sole potable public water source for an estimated 39,000 residents within the 
greater Lewiston-Auburn area and a portion of Poland. Not only is this a crucial source of fresh
drinking water , but also a source of high-quality sport fishing.
Due to its long history of excellent water quality , Lake Auburn’ s water supply has been granted a 
coveted waiver by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EP A) for nearly 30 years, in which 
the need for a costly filtration plant has been bypassed, saving the local towns and residents who
utilize the water million of dollars.
However , within the past 10 years, the lake has been faced with declining water quality . In 2010, 
levels of phosphorus increased to above 10 parts per billion, which has since elevated the risk of
algae blooms, which can have severe impacts on human health and the health of our aquatic
ecosystems.
Naturally-occurring phosphorus is derived from soil, plants, fungi, rocks and animal waste. It can
also reach the environment in unnatural ways that includes the use of fertilizers, old septic
systems and chemicals from consumer products, which can enter the lake through storm water
runof f.
District 94: Part of Lewiston

The fear is that if the water quality of Lake Auburn deteriorates further , to the point that it may 
no longer meet the standards to maintain the EP A water filtration waiver , the cost of remediation 
and a filtration system would likely be passed on to the towns and residents who utilize the lake
for their water .
By removing irrelevant language and clarifying existing language within the Lewiston-Auburn
Water Pollution Control Authority charter , we can better or ganize the operations of the authority 
to maintain and improve sewage treatment and dispose of the wastewaters dischar ged by the 
sewage systems of the City of Lewiston and the Auburn Sewerage District.
Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely ,
Rep. Kristen S. Cloutier
Assistant House Majority Leader
District 94: Part of Lewiston

