Joshua Styles
Bath
LD 933
 My name is Josh Styles and I live in Bath. 
I support Bill 933 required endorsement for motorcycle registration.  Ridercoach 
since 2019 and riding motorcycles on the road since 1988. 
Motorcycles are unique on the public road. 29 times more likely to be in a collision. 
Without any safety measures except what the rider chooses. Without a helmet law to 
protect against the number one cause of crash death. The narrow profile of a 
motorcycle makes it harder to identify on the road. Especially since other motorists 
typically only identify threats. The small contact patch of a motorcycle’s tire and 
reliance on balance make rough road surfaces, potholes, and debris a threat requiring 
constant attention and path variation. “A rider should have more than basic 
knowledge about riding and be able to evaluate their personal knowledge, skills, 
attitude, habits, and values related to safe motorcycle operation.” MSF
Training on a motorcycle is important on the road. Fatalities in automobiles are 
declining but fatalities on motorcycles are rising. There is Mandated safety for cars 
and seat belt laws, while motorcycles offer larger and more powerful machines 
implementing race technology on to road bikes. There is no guarantee of safety but 
when risks are elevated it must be mitigated to keep a level of safety. 
     While the basic operation of motorcycles can be learned in the dirt the strategies to
operate on public roads safely is not intuitive. A large portion of crashes happen in 
curves and are single vehicles. The behavior in automobiles that inspire road rage 
such as speeding, tailgating, impaired or distracted driving are the leading factors of 
fatalities on motorcycles. Habits and thinking need to be different. 
     Over half of the states in America, including Maine, use MSF training. Safety is 
the priority, which means sometimes we don’t ride. Self evaluation, constant 
improvement of motor skills to bond with a motorcycle, and implementation of an 
overall safety strategy- Search, Evaluate, Execute are the foundation of safe 
motorcycle operation. MSF again says “A rider needs to have more skills with their 
eyes and mind than with their hands and feet”. A safety margin of time and space 
combine with skill in operation to create the ability for a variety of practiced evasive 
maneuvers. 
As an example, a basic survival instinct such as braking when too fast in a curve will 
cause a motorcycle to crash. The required response is to press more on the handlebar 
in the desired direction. Something that requires practice. 
Training for riding on the road changed almost a decade ago in Maine to include 
practice of evasive maneuvers among other requirements on a motorcycle. That 
change was brought on by a large number of fatalities. Those numbers have declined 
proving the value of training. In order to prove my training I have a motorcycle 
endorsement on my drivers license which I carry with me on the road. Upon 
completion of training students receive a state controlled form to bring to BMV and 
provide when operating on the road, as well as, a MSF completion card with a control
number. Making both documents viable proof of completion. Insurance companies 
require no proof for a policy. 
There is an option for 1 day endorsement training which also uses the student’s 
motorcycle. This reduces cost to both the student and school owners. 
 Motorcycles are unique on the road. For that reason they have unique requirements 
for safe operation.  Automobiles have had several safety upgrades in the past, all 
meeting the goal of reducing fatalities. In what ways can we do the same for 
motorcyclists? Implementing this bill would not require a burden on any state 
registration agency, the burden of proof being on the registrant. It would be less time 
and money if the one day training option was offered. May is Motorcycle Awareness 
month. Make a statement about how Maine values life on the road. 

