Maine Heallh Care Association 
Testimony of Angela Cole Westhoff, President and CEO 
Maine Health Care Association 
May 2, 2023, 1:00 pm 
To the Committee on innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
in Support of LD 1797 
An Act to Expand Maine's Health Care Workforce by Expanding Educational Opportunities 
and Providing Tax Credits 
Good afternoon Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business. My name is Angela Westhoff, 
and I am the President & CEO of The Maine Health Care Association. We represent 
approximately 200 nursing, assisted living, and residential care facilities (also known as Private 
Non-Medical Institutions or PNMls) across the state. Our mission is to empower members to 
ensure the integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term care in Maine. 
l am pleased to testify in support of LD 1797, An Act to Expand Maine's Health Care Workforce 
by Expanding Educational Opportunities and Providing Tax Credits. Highlights of this bill include 
establishing the Maine Health Care Education Training and Medical Residency Fund, which 
would support, among other things, statewide rural health care learning platforms and 
programs that seek to develop local health care education leaders. LD 1797 would also createa 
new income tax credit of up to $500 a year for new nurses, for 3 years per eligible nurse, for 
employment in a licensed health care facility in the State. 
The CO\/lD-19 pandemic disrupted our industry, resulting in a nationwide thirteen-year low of 
long term care workers in the United States. 85% of Maine's recently surveyed facilities are 
facing a staffing shortage. Even before 2020, recruiting and retaining employees at long-term 
care facilities had been incredibly difficult when employers from other industries offer more 
pay and benefits.
This workforce shortage has major implications for our health care system. We estimate that 
we lost between 10 and 15% of the direct care workforce, including CNAs, RNs and LPNs. The 
limited supply of workers has led labor costs to skyrocket, especially with facilities having to 
hire temporary nurse agency workers. Anything that I\/laine can do to incentivize recruitment 
and retention of well-trained healthcare workers should be explored. We believe this new 
nurse retention tax credit is an innovative approach to try and address the workforce crisis. 
Taking no action is not an option. We have experienced 15 long term care facilities closing since 
2020, with a recent announcement that more facilities are closing in the coming months. Maine 
already has the oldest population in the United States, and we are projected to get older. Now 
is not the time to be losing nursing homes and residential care facilities. Increased staffing and 
adequate funding are the only two ways to prevent more facility closures from happening. 
ln summary, LD 1797 is a critical piece of legislation that will help address Maine's health care 
worker shortage and we thank Senate President Jackson for sponsoring this bill. By expanding 
educational opportunities and providing tax credits to health care providers, we can help 
ensure that Maine has a well-trained workforce that can meet the needs of our communities. 
Thank you, and l urge you to support this bill.
