LD 1797, An Act to Expand Maine's Health Care Workforce by Expanding 
Educational Opportunities and Providing Tax CreditsI 
Public Hearing: Tuesday, May 2, 2023 1:00 PM, Cross Building, Room 206 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Imiovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business: 
I’m Austin Vaughan, a student completing my second year at the University of New England 
College of Osteopathic Medicine. My third-year rotation will be in Lewiston, after which I hope 
for a residency and ultimately a medical practice in rural Maine. I’m privileged to provide the 
following testimony on behalf of both the college and the Maine Osteopathic Association. 
l’d like to share some personal background relevant to this topic. I grew up in a suburb of Tampa 
as one of four children with an incredible family pediatrician, so I wasn’t exposed to disparities 
in healthcare until I volunteered in northern Florida during my time at Florida State University. 
There, the unevenness of the landscape was laid bare as I saw inequities such as a single nurse 
practitioner attempting to care for an entire town. After graduation, I worked for the Muscular 
Dystrophy Association in New Jersey, where I saw the juxtaposition of 30-person care teams at 
Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia against families who couldn’t even access travel to a 3-staff 
team in Newark. Those experiences shaped my desire to be a physician for the-underserved, and 
as a National Health Service Corps Scholarship recipient, I have cornmitted my service to 
communities like those I came across years ago. 
According to the Maine CDC, Maine is the most rural state in the nation and 40% of its 
population lives in a rural county.‘ Compared to other states, Maine is above average in rates of 
physicians per population, ranking 9th in 2018. However, there are concerning caveats to that 
statistic:- 
l. More than half of Maine’s physician Workforce is older than 55. 
2. More than one-third of the doctors in rural areas are older than 60.2 
This suggests a near future in which access to care will be even more limited for many rural 
residents — unless we can ﬁnd innovative ways to bring new healthcare providers to these areas. 
At the University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine, only about one-third of my 
classmates will stay in Maine to do their third-year rotations, either at one of four clinical 
campuses or at Longitudinal Integrated Clerkships (LIC), which are singular, rural training spots 
dispersed throughout the state. But there is demand for more opportunities! Three of the most 
requested spots were in Maine (Augusta, Lewiston, and Biddeford), and the LIC program has an 
interview process in order to meet demand properly. Those students who don’t get selected for
Maine must choose rotations elsewhere in New England — losing an additional touchpoint with 
Maine and speciﬁcally with our rural communities. 
Data shows only 17% of students who do undergraduate medical education in Maine end up 
practicing here, but over 50% of those who do graduate medical education remain.3 There are 
other inﬂuencing factors for each case, but the fact that students who train in Maine are 3 times 
more likely to stay is not a coincidence. Third- and fourth-year rotations, along with residencies, 
are the time that future doctors make connections in the ﬁeld, put down roots, and even start 
families. It should be a concerted effort of all who have the welfare of Mainers at heart to keep 
those healthcare providers in the state, and LD 1797 is a way to do just that. 
LD 1797 is an investment in Maine’s healthcare system that has the potential to save money in 
the long run. As an example, The Teaching Health Center Graduate Medical Education Program, 
started a decade ago under HRSA, has increased opportunities for providers to train in rural 
areas, where they are statistically more likely to stay and practice than peers who did not 
participate. Additional analysis shows the program could save up to $2 billion nationally in 
public program savings by improving access to low-cost care for underserved communities, as 
well as teaching students how to provide cost-effective care.4 An investment now will beneﬁt not 
only health outcomes of patients and access to care but will have the potential to save the state 
money long-term. 
Granting medical students and residents increased access to these rural communities will 
heighten their understanding of the social determinants of health that disproportionately impact 
rural areas. It will increase their comiections to communities that are at increased need of 
longitudinal care providers. And it will allow those who already have a desire to serve those 
communities additional opportunities to follow that passion to the benefit of Mainers across the 
state. For these reasons, I ask you please to support LD 1797. 
Thank you. 
1.https:1 ’/wwwmaine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/public-health-systems/rhpc/rural-health.shtmlA 
2.https:/fmainepolicy.org/how-will-maine-address-its-shortage-of-medical-professionals/ 
3 .httpszf/www.aamcorg/data-reports/stucients-residents/data/table-c6-physician-retention-state- 
residency-training-state 
4.https://wwwhrsa.gov/sites/detault/ ﬁles/l1rsa/advisory-committees/graduatemedical- 
edu/reports/cogme-april-2022-report.pdf
