 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
 
In SUPPORT of : LD 1797, An Act to Expand Maine ’s Health Care Workforce by Expanding 
Educational Opportunities and Providing Tax Credits  
 
Public Hearing: Tuesday, May 2 , 2023 at 10:00 AM, Cross Building, Room 206  
 
Senator Curry , Representative Roberts  and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business : 
 
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse  of nearly 45 years , President of the Maine 
State Nurses Association, Vice- President of National Nurses United, and a resident of Brewer. I 
am providing testimony supporting LD 1797 on behalf of Maine State Nurses Association/  
National Nurs es United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 nurses and caregivers across the state 
of Maine . On behalf of MSNA/NNU, I  ask you to vote  “Yes” on LD 1797. 
 LD 1797 includes  positive provisions to support nursing educators and students. LD 1797 
provides funding for Maine’s existing loan repayment program for nurse educators and extends 
funding eligibility to part -time faculty. LD 1797 also appropriates funds to support preceptors. 
Nursing schools often cannot educate all the students who are inte rested in becoming nurses due 
to an insufficient number of nurse educators and precep tors and clinical sites for clinical 
experience. Nursing educators are often underpaid relative to their expertise and what they can 
earn at the bedside.  The expansion of the loan repayment plan may allow more nurses to serve as 
faculty and allow more students to be educated as nurses.  
 
LD 1797 also creates a tax credit  of up to $500 per year  for newly licensed nurses working in a 
licensed health care facility in Maine. New nurses are often paying off student loans . We 
appreciate the provision to give these new nurses a break on their taxes and reduce their financial 
burden as they start their careers at the bedside.  
 
The Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United thanks the committee for accepting our comments . 
  Sincerely,  
 
 
Coralie Giles, RN  
President, Maine State Nurses Association  
Vice -President, National Nurses United  

Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 1797
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business
In SUPPORT of: LD 1797, An Act to Expand Maine’s Health Care Workforce by 
Expanding Educational Opportunities and Providing Tax Credits
Public Hearing: Tuesday, May 2, 2023 at 10:00 AM, Cross Building, Room 206 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business:
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse of nearly 45 years, President of the 
Maine State Nurses Association, Vice-President of National Nurses United, and a 
resident of Brewer. I am providing testimony supporting LD 1797 on behalf of Maine 
State Nurses Association/ National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 
nurses and caregivers across the state of Maine. On behalf of MSNA/NNU, I ask you 
to vote “Yes” on LD 1797.
LD 1797 includes positive provisions to support nursing educators and students. LD 
1797 provides funding for Maine’s existing loan repayment program for nurse 
educators and extends funding eligibility to part-time faculty. LD 1797 also 
appropriates funds to support preceptors. Nursing schools often cannot educate all the 
students who are interested in becoming nurses due to an insufficient number of nurse
educators and preceptors and clinical sites for clinical experience. Nursing educators 
are often underpaid relative to their expertise and what they can earn at the bedside. 
The expansion of the loan repayment plan may allow more nurses to serve as faculty 
and allow more students to be educated as nurses.
LD 1797 also creates a tax credit of up to $500 per year for newly licensed nurses 
working in a licensed health care facility in Maine. New nurses are often paying off 
student loans. We appreciate the provision to give these new nurses a break on their 
taxes and reduce their financial burden as they start their careers at the bedside.
The Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United thanks the committee for
accepting our comments.
Sincerely,
 
Coralie Giles, RN
President, Maine State Nurses Association
Vice-President, National Nurses United
