northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1797 An Act to Expand Maine's Health Care Workforce by Expanding Educational 
Opportunities and Providing Tax Credits 
 
Testimony in Support 
May 2, 2023  
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Dr. James Jarvis M.D.  I 
am the Medical Director of Clinical Education at Northern Light Eastern Maine Medical 
Center, and   I am here today providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health 
and our member organizations speaking in support of this bill.   
 
This bill establishes the Maine Health Care Education Training and Medical Residency 
Fund, invests in loan repayment support for nursing faculty and health professionals, 
supports clinical preceptorships and establishes a tax credit to support new nurses in 
the first 3 years of practice.  Combined these investments will significantly address the 
critical needs for doctors, nurses and other health professionals to care for the people of 
Maine.   
 
Despite the work being done at EMMC and other health centers and systems across the 
state to train the next generation of physicians, the current physician workforce 
shortage is only going to become worse unless some fundamental changes are made for 
the availability of medical school and residency opportunities to Mainers interested in 
pursuing medicine as a career.  According to a 2018 report from the Center for Health 
Workforce Studies, nearly 43% of Maine’s physicians were over the age of 55.  That 
number rises to over 50% in our most rural counties. 
 
According to the Graham Center and the American Medical Association, we know that 
more than half of practicing physicians work within 100 miles of where they trained 
either in medical school or residency.  Under a grant from the Maine Department of 
Health and Human Services, a collaboration between Northern Light Eastern Maine 
Medical Center, Maine Medical Center, Central Maine Medical Center, and the Maine-
Dartmouth Family Medicine Residency Program was created with a mission to increase 
the number of clinical rotations in rural Maine communities for residents and fellows in 
accredited graduate medical education programs.  While this work is just beginning, we 
have already built the framework for five new sites, create training programs for faculty 
at these and future sites, and expand education in social determinants of health and 
inclusion.  This collaborative will serve as a model for future initiatives, but only if 
funding is available to sustain and grow such opportunities. 
 
We also know that Maine has a shortage of registered nurses, progress is being made 
but we still do not have the number of new nursing graduates needed each year to fill 
positions needed to meet increased need for nursing care and replace nurses retiring 
from the profession.  Resolving the nursing shortage is a partnership between 
hospitals/health systems in Maine and our nursing education programs.  Throughout 
 Northern Light Health we are making significant investments supporting nursing 
education including: 
 
 •Partnerships with every nursing program in Maine to support on site clinical 
 experiences  providing 200,000 training hours for students annually.   
 •Northern Light Health nurses serve as adjunct faculty and clinical preceptors 
 for the nursing education programs. Northern Light Health financial impact  
 exceeds $500,000. 
 •Four Northern Light Hospitals (Mayo, CA Dean, Sebasticook Valley and Maine 
 Coast Hospitals) provide rural education via the EMCC RN Satellite program.  
 Northern Light Health local masters prepared staff serve as faculty for the RN 
 students to complete their associate degree education on site at the hospital.  
 •Community College Public Private Partnership to double the number of nursing 
 graduates from 240 to 480 students annually.  Leveraging $2.5 million in state 
 funding with $1.25 million each from Northern Light Health and Maine Health. 
 •Nursing simulation center at Northern Light Inland Hospital in partnership with 
 Purdue Global School of Nursing  
 •Working with the Community Colleges to expand LPN nursing education 
 •Nursing Sponsorships – Support nurses in the final years of education with 
 tuition and full-time benefits with pay 
 
Resolving the nursing shortage also requires state investments and we thank all of you 
for your support for loan repayment for nursing faculty and health professions.  This bill 
continues these investments into the future.   
 
We ask that you support this important legislation.  Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
