 
 
To: Senator Chip Curry , Representative Tiffany Roberts  
The Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
From:  Dr. Janet Sortor, Vice President  and Chief Academic Officer; JSortor@MCCS.me.edu  
Re: Statement in support of LD 1797 An Act to Expand Maine’s Health Care Workforce by Expanding 
Opportunities and Providing Tax Credits  
Date:  May 2, 2023  
 
Please accept this testimony in support of  the Nurse Education Loan Repayment portion of  LD 1797  on behalf 
of the Maine Community College System. As you have undoubtedly heard, Maine has a nursing crisis. The 
Maine Community College System recognizes this crisis and is working to mitigate the shor tage of skilled, 
high-quality nurses. However, we face a shortage of qualified instructors.  
Thanks to a $2.5 million appropriation during the 130th, all seven colleges  now offer a nursing program,  and our 
colleges are working diligently to expand those programs . However, the  average age of our full -time, master’s 
prepared nursing instructors is 60 years old. That means we face a high likelihood of many instructors retiring 
in the next five to 10 years. We must act now to attract, train, develop , and nurture the next generation of 
instructors. However, it can be difficult to recruit nurse educators. The discrepancy between potential earnings 
for a floor nurse vs. a nursing educator is significant and meaningful ; loan forgiveness may provide the finan cial 
incentive for nurses to consider entering the teaching profession.  This is why we continue to support the 
Nursing Education Loan Repayment Program.  
Nursing educators are required by accrediting bodies to be credentialed at the master’s level, MSN .  The Maine 
State Board of Nursing will provide an exemption upon request by the MCC Nursing Chair that allows newly 
hired nurse educators the time, usually two years,  to earn an MSN. However, it is often difficult to find BSN’s 
willing to make that commitme nt due to the cost. This opportunity would remove a significant barrier to pursuit 
of an MSN and recruiting nurse educators. Moreover, while up to 50% of the clinical requirements in a nursing 
program can be met through simulation, the remaining 50% must b e met through a traditional clinical 
placement which is supervised by a nurse educator. Nurse educators are the l inchpin in our ability to educate the  
nurses Maine needs so desperately.  We cannot educate the nurses of the future without them.   
Though some employers support educational reimbursement, a robust loan forgiveness program would also 
allow nurses to take more classes each semester , thus completing their degrees faster and ultimately entering the 
teaching profession sooner.  New nursing educators c ould focus on their teaching, rather than having to work on 
the side to pay off their student loans.  This opportunity could go a long way towards filling Maine’s immediate 
nursing demand.  
In closing, LD 1 797 would help MCCS as we strive to fill the ever -widening gap between the workforce 
demand for qualified nurses and what we are able to provide.  It is our sincere hope that you vote “Ought to 
Pass” on LD 1 797. 
