1 
 
 
C/O  P.O. Box 647. Kennebunk, ME 04043                               May 2, 2023 
To: Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: 
o Senator Chip Curry, Chair 
o Senator Stacey Guerin 
o Senator Joseph Rafferty 
o Representative Tiffany Roberts- Chair 
o Representative Amanda Collamore 
o Representative Ed Crockett 
o Representative Lucas Lanigan 
o Representative Raegan LaRochelle 
o Representative Caleb Ness 
o Representative Dan Sayre 
o Representative Katrina Smith 
o Representative Mark Walker 
o Representative Bruce White 
From: Juliana L’Heureux, B.S., M.H.S.A., R.N., President ANA-Maine/ Juliana.Lheureux@anamaine.org 
Testimony in support of LD 1797: An Act to Expand Maine's Health Care Workforce by Expanding 
Educational Opportunities and Providing Tax Credits 
 
Thank you Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Committee on Innovation , 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
My name is Juliana L’Heureux and I am a Registered Nurse and the President of the American Nurses 
Association of Maine.  We support LD 1797 “An Act to Expand Maine’s Health Care Workforce by 
Expanding Educational Opportunities and Providing Tax Credits”. Nurses throughout Maine are appreciative 
of Senator President Troy Jackson’s lead to sponsor for this important initiative. 
The ANA-Maine is a 501© 3 membership association with 702 members and representing all of Maine’s 
licensed nurses. ANA-Maine is a state affiliate of the American Nurses Association.   
Among the ANA-Maine members are students and faculty from all of Maine’s schools of nursing and several 
of whom serve on the association’s Board of Directors.  We are proud of the quality education our state 
nursing programs have provided to educate and support the needed workforce to care for our state’s 
population, wherever they live and regardless of socioeconomic demographics. We have participated in 
several of Maine’s nursing workforce seminars where the data demonstrates how badly new nurses are 
needed to help sustain the health care required in every area of the state. 

2 
 
We are confident that appropriations described in LD 1797, will provide Maine’s  health care educational 
programs with essential financial resources needed to help recruit and train nurses and physicians to help 
resolve the shortages, especially in rural areas of the state.  Nurses that qualify for the tax credits will be 
encouraged to remain in Maine. The Maine State Board of Nursing is the appropriate licensing Board to 
oversee the tax credit provision as proposed.   
The summary page included in this legislation clearly describes the important direct supports to be provided: 
This bill provides for the following important incentives to support Maine’s nursing and health care 
workforce: 
• Makes part-time faculty eligible for the nursing education loan repayment program, with loans of up 
to $10,000 for a master's degree and up to $20,000 for a doctoral degree.  
• Provides for $1,000,000 in ongoing annual appropriations to the nursing education loan repayment 
program. 
• Establishes the Maine Health Care Education Training and Medical Residency Fund and 
appropriates $4,885,000 annually to the fund to establish clinical training opportunities for 3rd-year 
and 4th-year medical students in the rural parts of the State. 
• Provides for $4,000,000 in ongoing annual appropriations to the Maine Health Care Provider Loan 
Repayment Program Fund. 
• Provides for $1,000,000 in ongoing annual appropriations to the Doctors for Maine's Future 
Scholarship Program.  
• Establishes a new income tax credit of up to $500 a year for new nurses, for 3 years per eligible 
nurse, for employment in a licensed health care facility in Maine.  
• Directs the State Board of Nursing to certify eligible nurses for the tax credit.   
• Limits the tax credit to 1,000 nurses per year 
• Provides for $300,000 in ongoing annual appropriations to support incentives for clinical 
preceptorships. 
Please vote ought to pass. Thank you.   
 
