  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester, Maine 04351-0227  
Ph: 207-213-6125  |  Fax: 207-213-6127 
www.HomeCareAlliance.org 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, 
my name is Laurie Belden, a resident of Durham and the Executive Director of the 
Home Care & Hospice Alliance of Maine (Alliance).  The Alliance is a network of 
home health care, hospice, home care and personal care providers across our 
State delivering in-home care to older adults and disabled individuals of all ages, 
allowing them to stay in their home and community.  
I’m here today to testify in support of LD 1797, An Act Expand Maine's Health 
Care Workforce by Expanding Educational Opportunities and Providing Tax 
Credits and I thank President Jackson for bringing this important legislation 
forward. 
Hospitals, nursing homes, and home-based care are like a 3-legged stool in the 
state's healthcare landscape. Caring for Mainers in the home is essential to 
relieving the stress on facilities by keeping patients out of acute and long-term 
care settings or allowing them to return home after a facility stay. Since these 
three systems are so closely intertwined, it’s important to ensure that each one is 
well-resourced, so that we don’t put undue pressure on the other two.  
Currently, all three systems – hospitals, nursing homes, and home care – are 
dealing with acute workforce shortages, and it is causing bottlenecks and 
hindering care across systems. For reference, see the March 5 article in the 
Portland Press Herald titled, “With no place to go, some patients in Maine spend 
months in hospitals.”  In this article, the reporter details how staffing shortages at 
nursing homes are causing patients to stay in hospitals for months on end 
without hope of being transferred to a long-term care facility. The lack of 
adequate staffing in home care also contributes to this problem of long hospital 
stays. 
 
Workforce shortages exist across health professions and throughout our 
healthcare delivery system, and if we don’t take bold action to lessen the 
shortages, patient care will worsen. In home care, we are particularly concerned 
with shortages of nurses and direct care workers such as Certified Nursing 
Assistants.  
 
In February, the Maine Department of Health and Human Services released their 
Second Annual Report on “Efforts and Progress in Implementing the 
Recommendations of the Commission to Study Long-term Care Workforce 
Issues.” This report indicates that one-third of MaineCare beneficiaries are only Board of Directors 
 
President 
Colleen Hilton  
Northern Light Home Care  
 
Vice President 
Daryl Cady 
Hospice of Southern Maine 
 
Treasurer 
RJ Gagnon 
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice 
 
Secretary 
Laurie Bourgoin 
Home Hope & Healing 
 
 
Members 
Ken Albert 
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice 
 
Patricia Aprile 
MaineHealth Care at Home 
 
Kyra Chamberlain 
Hospice of Southern Maine 
 
Elaine Collins 
MaineHealth Care at Home 
 
Chris Costello 
CHANS Home Health& Hospice 
 
Zetta Fogg 
McKesson Medical-Surgical 
 
Lisa Harvey-McPherson 
Northern Light Home Care & Hospice 
 
Adam LaMonica 
Maxim Healthcare Services 
 
Amy McVety 
Mount Desert Nursing Association 
 
Greg Pizzo 
MaineGeneral HomeCare & Hospice 
 
Amy Shawley 
St. Joseph Homecare and Hospice 
 
Testimony in Support of 
LD 1797, An Act Expand Maine's Health Care Workforce by Expanding 
Educational Opportunities and Providing Tax Credits 
 
May 2, 2023  
 
  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester, Maine 04351-0227  
Ph: 207-213-6125  |  Fax: 207-213-6127 
www.HomeCareAlliance.org 
 receiving partial or no care at all under Section 19 (Home and Community Benefits for the Elderly and Adults 
with Disabilities); and, even more alarming is the nearly 50 percent of Section 96 beneficiaries (Private Duty 
Nursing and Personal Care Services) receiving partial or no care at all. This lack of access to care for MaineCare 
beneficiaries in need of home care services is directly attributable to workforce shortages in nursing and direct 
care.   
The package of incentives offered in this legislation would go a long way toward addressing Maine’s 
healthcare workforce challenges. The bill supports many tools in the toolbox – loan repayment for students 
and educators, funding for essential clinical training, and a new tax credit for nurses early on in their careers. 
Taken together, these opportunities and incentives will help us train additional healthcare professionals, and 
help us keep them here in Maine after their training is complete. 
With proper staffing across systems, Mainers will be able to receive the high-quality care they need, whether 
it be at a hospital, a long-term care facility, or within their own home. LD 1797 will be an important step to 
help us get there and we urge you to support it. 
 
Laurie Belden, Executive Director 
laurie@homecarealliance.org  
