Testimony in Support of LD 1797, An Act to Expand Maine’s Health Care Workforce by 
Expanding Educational Opportunities and Providing Tax Credits  
 
May 2, 2023  
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Joint Standing Committee  
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business .  My name is Ravin Davis. I 
completed my undergraduate education at the University of New England and am honored to 
say that I have so far completed my first two years of my medical education  also at the 
University of New England .  Thank you for considering my testimony in support of LD 1797.  
 
I grew up in Madison, Maine and continue to call t hat small town my home. My mother moved 
two houses down when she started out on her own, and my father only a few blocks away as 
well. That is just what people do from my town. Leaving for Biddeford, Maine when I entered 
higher education was like “moving to the big city,” as my family would put it. I was a first -
generation student to leave and enter university, something few people do in my area. Without 
realizing at the time of my childhood, being embedded within central Maine provided me a 
vantage point of the average Mainer’s healthcare experiences that is a driving force for my 
goals.  
 
I received care myself,  saw the care those around me received, and completed majority of my 
shadowing and clinical experiences pre -medical school in central Maine . The common 
denominator within almost all of my healthcare experiences, not just within the past few years 
but throu ghout my entire life, has been the lack of providers serving the area. Turnover in 
practitioners and healthcare offices has always been  high. I remember my family being so 
relieved to just be accepted as patients at a local family practice, never mind wish  for the 
privilege  to choose between providers that fit their specific needs or match ed the doctor -
patient relationship they want ed. My epileptic father has had at least eight different 
neurologists throughout my life, and I have seen first -hand the physic al struggle in not having a 
lasting relationship with your doctor; because many doctors  just do not stay around here.  
 
My connection to Maine and my healthcare career are deeply interwoven . It is my biggest goal 
as a physician is to ultimately serve  the co mmunity that raised me , much like the many 
providers I have seen come and go. The only difference in my situation is that I intend to grow 
old a few streets over from my family home and serve the same patients for years. That is just 
what people do from my  town.  
 
When I received an email that I was selected as a 2021 Doctors For Maine’s Future scholar, I was 
honored and grateful, but even more relieved ; because this designation carried a guarantee  that 
my third year clinical education must be completed in t he state of Maine. This meant for sure 
that I wouldn’t have to leave  for at least one more year. It meant that I would  learn with  the 
exact population that I hope to complete my residency with  and care for long term . 
 
As I am entering my third -year  clinica l education starting at Maine Medical Center (UNE’s 
newest pilot clinical rotation  site), I am already looking ahead towards residency and my hope 
to match here  with in the limited available spots. Efforts to expand residency placements in the 
state of Maine would mean that students like me are better able to do just that . I fought to stay 
here for my undergraduate education, I fought to stay here for medical school, and I’m still 
fighting to stay he re for residency and beyond.  My passion is unfortunately not enough to 
guarantee my goal  even with an overwhelming shortage of physicians to go around . Please 
consider this opportunity for students like me and the Mainers I hope to make my patients.  
 
Thank  you,  
 
Ravin Davis  
(Madison , Maine)  
