My name is Stephen C. Shannon. I am President Emeritus of the American Association of Colleges of 
Osteopathic Medicine, former dean of the University of New England (UNE) College of Osteopathic 
Medicine, and a current member of the UNE Board of Trustees.  I write in support of LD 1979.  
I spent nearly 30 years in my professional life assessing and supporting policies and institutions to create 
an adequate physician and health care workforce for Maine and the nation. I want to address one 
aspect of Maine’s health care challenges that this legislation addresses--the shortage of primary care 
physicians.  
We know: 
1. There is a shortage of physicians in Maine, and it is projected to get worse.i 
2. Maine’s older and large rural population creates unique challenges to providing adequate 
health care to its population.ii 
3. A robust primary care system is fundamental to providing quality health care in Maine.iii 
4. A primary determinant of where a physician will practice is the location of their clinical training 
as a medical student and a resident.iv 
5. To address the shortage of primary care physicians now and in the future, support is needed for 
Maine’s physician clinical training environment. LD 1797 will help tackle this issue. 
This legislation is designed to support the development of the health care workforce for Maine’s people. 
It helps address the shortages of physicians and other health care workers in Maine. Without this 
legislation, despite the best efforts of Maine institutions to train more physicians, too many will leave to 
practice elsewhere. I urge you to pass LD 1979. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony.  
 
Stephen C. Shannon, DO, MPH 
Biddeford, ME 
 
 
i Maine Health Workforce Forum. (2019). Maine's Primary Care Physician Workforce: Opportunities to 
Improve Access and Quality of Care. Retrieved from https://www.mainequalitycounts.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/06/Maines-Primary-Care-Physician-Workforce-Opportunities-to-Improve-Access-
and-Quality-of-Care.pdf  
ii Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020 Maine Health Equity Report. Accessed May 2, 
2023, from https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/population-health-equity/ph-data-reports  
iii Maine Health Access Foundation. "Primary Care in Maine: A Call to Action." March 2019. Accessed May 
2, 2023, from https://www.mehaf.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Primary-Care-in-Maine-A-Call-to-
Action-March-2019.pdf  
iv Bushy A, et al. The Association of Rural Clinical Training With Primary Care Physician Practice Location: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. J Rural Health. 2020;36(2):213-223; Association of American Medical 
Colleges. 2018 Physician Specialty Data Report. Accessed May 2, 2023, from 
https://www.aamc.org/system/files/reports/1/2018-specialty-data-book-complete.pdf ; Xierali IM, et al. 
 
Factors Affecting Family Medicine Residents’ Choice of Practice Location. J Grad Med Educ. 2014;6(3):520-
526. 
Stephen Shannon
Biddeford
LD 1797
My name is Stephen C. Shannon. I am President Emeritus of the American 
Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine, former dean of the University of 
New England (UNE) College of Osteopathic Medicine, and a current member of the 
UNE Board of Trustees.  I write in support of LD 1979. 
I spent nearly 30 years in my professional life assessing and supporting policies and 
institutions to create an adequate physician and health care workforce for Maine and 
the nation. I want to address one aspect of Maine’s health care challenges that this 
legislation addresses--the shortage of primary care physicians. 
We know:
1.There is a shortage of physicians in Maine, and it is projected to get worse. 
2.Maine’s older and large rural population creates unique challenges to providing 
adequate health care to its population. 
3.A robust primary care system is fundamental to providing quality health care in 
Maine. 
4.A primary determinant of where a physician will practice is the location of their 
clinical training as a medical student and a resident. 
5.To address the shortage of primary care physicians now and in the future, support 
is needed for Maine’s physician clinical training environment. LD 1797 will help 
tackle this issue.
This legislation is designed to support the development of the health care workforce 
for Maine’s people. It helps address the shortages of physicians and other health care 
workers in Maine. Without this legislation, despite the best efforts of Maine 
institutions to train more physicians, too many will leave to practice elsewhere. I urge 
you to pass LD 1979.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony. 
Stephen C. Shannon, DO, MPH
Biddeford, ME
