Testimony in Support of LD 1797, An Act to Expand Maine’s Health Care Workforce by 
Expanding Educational Opportunities and Providing Tax Credits  
 
May 2, 2023  
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Joint Standing Committee  
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business , my  name is Tristan Brunet  
and I am a second -year medical student at University of New England College of Osteopathic 
Medicine (UNE COM). Thank you for allowing me to  share my perspective on an iss ue that I 
know much about as a born -and-raised Mainer; the continued shortage of health care providers 
in Maine.  
 
During my time as a medical student, I have already overcome many hurdles. However, soon I 
will be forced to address  an unforeseen hurdle; dec iding if I will end up staying in Maine as a 
practicing physician. I am now finishing my second year of medical school and next year , I will be 
sent to a clinical site, where  I will be located at for a full year. As has been previously mentioned 
by Dean Ca rreiro, the two best predictors of where a physician will practice is where they do 
their clinical training and where they do their residency. Due to the current lack of clinical sites 
in Maine for third -year students, I will be stationed in Utica, New Yor k. In light of this, many of 
my first connections in the clinical world will be in the New York area, and I will likely spend 
even more time there during my final year of medical school. These factors will end up 
impacting where I match for residency, whic h in all likelihood could end up being outside of the 
state of Maine, considering the limited number of residencies and resident positions the state 
currently holds.  
 
When it comes time to decide on where I end up practicing after residency, most of it com es 
down to a financial decision. With the combination of an undergraduate degree and medical 
school, I am projected to owe about half of a million dollars. Even though I originally decided to 
enter the medical field for the purpose of providing medical car e to my community, there may 
come a time directly after residency where I must choose to practice somewhere other than 
Maine in order to help pay back my school loans. However, if there were more programs set in 
place to lighten this debt, it would be an e asy decision to practice and stay in Maine.  
 
As a future physician, I want nothing more than to be able to practice medicine in Maine. I just 
hope that the State of Maine can show that it wants me and other health care professionals to 
be here through expa nding scholarships, residencies, clinical sites, and loan repayment 
programs.  
 
Thank you for your time.  
 
Tristan Brunet  
(Gorham , Maine)  
 
 
