Huyanna Clearwater
Augusta
LD 1200
Senator Chipman and Representative Williams, and honorable members of the 
Transportation Committee: My name is Huyanna Clearwater, and I live in Augusta, 
Maine. I work as a Lived Experience Engagement Specialist with the Children's 
Bureau. I am also a member of Maine’s Youth Leadership Advisory Team, which is a
group of current and former youth from Maine’s foster care system. In YLAT we help
each other learn new skills and advocate for change that will ultimately help in our 
journey, and our younger peers, to achieve our future goals. As a young person who 
transitioned from Maine’s foster care system, I am here today in support of LD 1200: 
Resolve, to Convene a Driver Education Working Group to Evaluate Hardships to 
Underserved Populations and Low-income Families. I grow up in the Maine Child 
welfare system. In my teens as a youth in care one of the milestones you often dream 
of is obtaining your license. The thought of driving to school or trips to the mall with 
friends, that freedom you grow up seeing in the movies and on tv. But as a youth in 
care and in families of low income, this dream seems to happen to everyone around 
you. You left in a state of not fitting in even more than you had. It becomes another 
burden on the family rather than an exciting right of passage. In a rural place like 
Maine, it’s not practical to not have your license. I was not lucky enough to 
participate in driver's education as a teen in care. As time went on it because even less
of a chance to be able to get my license as I got older and money and needs to survive
every day as an adult because more important. By the time I had my son at 27, I knew
that I needed to find a way to get my license one way or another. All these years of 
having to rely on someone else for transportation were hard and at times shameful. 
But I know at that time it was what I had to do and could afford. This is why LD 1200
is important, Maine families can't afford to not have adequate transportation. Often 
public transportation is lacking the support and retention it needs to truly serve the 
communities it’s designed to. It is all our duty to help our communities thrive. And to 
thrive they need to get to appointments, and stores for food, medicines, and everyday 
need.
Thank you for your time and commitment to figuring out how to support underserved 
populations and low-income families to obtain a license. I welcome any questions and
can be reached at 207-944-5716.

