Steven Farr
Troy
LD 1200
Dear Members of the Transportation Committee,
As a rural citizen of Maine with four children, I am writing to encourage you to vote 
in favor of LD1200, and to thank Senator Curry for co-sponsoring this Resolve. My 
second-oldest is now taking driver's education, and the classroom instruction portion 
has largely been converted to an online process through the AAA "How to Drive" 
curriculum. The information in it is helpful, accurate, and important. It has covered 
several topics that I might not have thought of myself. However, as an experienced 
driver, I could guide her through the online learning myself and teach her how to 
drive safely without a formal driving school. We have to drive 45 minutes to get to 
the in-person driving and classroom sessions in the city. The online course costs $50, 
while the rest of the program costs over $500. This is a major expense for us, as well 
as a huge time commitment (we will have spent probably 20 hours just driving to and 
from classes by the time we're done). However, precisely because we live so far away 
from everything, especially employment opportunities, it would be a major hindrance 
to our kids to not get them their drivers' licenses until after they're 18, so we feel like 
we have to do it. 
I hope that the working group formed by this Resolve will produce some additional 
options for us, including an option for parents to teach their own kids to drive in 
conjunction with the good curriculum that's already available. Sensible regulations 
could be constructed for this process, such as requiring the parent/guardian to have a 
clean driving record, no OUI convictions, a minimum amount of driving experience, 
etc.
I would like to see the language of this Resolve strengthened as follows:
Section 2, #5: Include "Rural Families" as a required category of people represented, 
and require a higher minimum number of representatives from the affected groups 
listed in #5, e.g. at least 1 members from each of the affected groups. I volunteer to 
serve on the working group if this Resolve passes!
Section 4: Add a mandate for the working group similar to the following: "Identify 
and propose at least one strategy for enabling parent-taught driver education as one 
possibly way of removing barriers to driver education." 
Thank you for taking the time to consider my input on this important issue.
Sincerely,
Steve Farr

