TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 28, 2023 
LD 984 - An Act to Expand Access to the Homestead Property Tax Exemption 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -}---_----------- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 984 - A n Act to Expand 
Access to the Homestead Property Tax Exemption. 
This bill is similar to bills you have heard earlier this session that expand 
homestead property tax exemption eligibility for homeowners who arranged their 
affairs away from direct ownership of their homestead to achieve other purposes, 
for example estate tax considerations or healthcare beneﬁts. Bringing those 
decisions into the homestead property tax program, however, departs from the 
longstanding basic principle of direct home ownership under the homestead 
exemption program, adds complexity to the homestead program, and raises 
inconsistencies with other property tax beneﬁt programs. 
Turning to speciﬁcs, the bill appears to intend to treat LLCs the same as 
cooperative housing corporations. The structure of the two entities, however, are 
different. A "cooperative housing corporation" is deﬁned under the homestead 
program statute to mean an entity organized for the purpose of owning residential 
real estate in which residents own shares that entitle the shareholder to inhabit a 
certain space within a residential dwelling. An LLC, on the other hand, is a legal
entity category much broader in scope: an LLC under Maine law is a legal entity 
distinct ﬁ"om its members, has no maximum number of members, has perpetual 
duration, and may have any lawful purpose, regardless of whether for proﬁt. 
As written, the bill would allow a homestead exemption on properties with 
multiple units or even multiple uses, such as a building with a commercial tenant in 
one unit and individuals living in other units. Moreover, the bill contains no 
requirement that the LLC members who reside in the property be responsible for 
the property taxes. 
The proposed expansion in this bill goes beyond direct ownership of a homestead 
and represents a signiﬁcant shift in policy for the homestead exemption. It would 
also create inconsistency between the ownership eligibility requirements in other 
taxpayer beneﬁt programs, such as: 
0 The property tax exemption for veterans 
0 The property tax exemption for legally blind persons 
Q The Deferred Collection of Homestead Property Taxes program 
Q The Municipal Property Tax Assistance program 
Q The Property Tax Fairness Credit 
It should also be noted that broadening the homestead program away from direct 
ownership by a resident raises the risk — and confusion among both homeowners 
and municipal assessors — that an individual may claim a homestead exemption on 
more than one property. This will make it more difficult for both taxpayers in 
understanding and accessing the program and require a more involved review by 
municipal assessors and MRS. 
Given the nature of the expansion in the homestead program proposed by this bill, 
and its inconsistency with key aspects of existing property tax relief programs, and
2
other proposed changes to the homestead exemption this session, we respectfully 
request that the Committee hold this bill until later in the session so that it can be 
considered along with other bills affecting the homestead program and other 
property tax relief programs. 
Finally, because the bill represents an expansion in eligibility for the homestead 
exemption, there will be a corresponding increase in costs to the State to reimburse 
the municipalities for a portion of the lost tax revenue under the statute and under 
other tax beneﬁt programs that refer to the same deﬁnition of homestead. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
3
