GI
W 
Bureau 0fC0rp0rat1ons, Elections and Commissions 
'il¥"\@i 
Shenna Bellows 
Secretary of Stale Department of the Secretary of State 
Julie L. Flynn 
Deputy Secretary of S tale 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
April 05, 2023 
Testifying In Opposition to 
L.D. l07l, “An Act to Allow Political Candidates to Be Nominated by Multiple Parties for the Same 
Office" 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows, and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
officer. I am speaking today in opposition to L.D. 1071. 
Under this bill, a candidate would not need to be enrolled in the paity to serve as the pa1ty’s nominee 
for that office. We assume that a candidate who seeks the nomination of multiple parties would need to 
circulate a petition for that party in order to be placed on the paity’s primaiy election. The candidate 
would appear on the primary ballot for each paity in which the candidate circulated petitions. If the 
candidate Won one or more primary nominations, the candidate would appear on the general election 
ballot with the name of each party that nominated the candidate. 
This bill could potentially increase the number of candidate petitions that the Secretary of State would 
need to review and ceitify by the filing deadline for primary nomination petitions — March 15th of the 
general election year. Currently, a party candidate must file nomination petitions that are signed by 
voters enrolled in the same party as the candidate. A candidate can only file petitions for one office. 
The numbers of signatures required varies based on the office sought — a candidate for State 
Representative must file at least 25 signatures, a candidate for State Senate must file at least 100 
signatures and a candidate for Governor must file at least 2,000 signatures. If a candidate is seeking an 
endorsement from two parties, the candidate would need to submit a set of nomination petitions from 
each paity, signed by the applicable number of voters from that party. There cuirently are four 
qualified parties — Democratic, Green Independent, Libeitaiian and Republican and there are three 
other patties that are attempting to qualify in order to participate in the 2024 primary election. 
I0] State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.g0v/sos/cec; tel. 207~624~7736
This bill does not address the provision of law‘ that allows a candidate who is nominated at a primary 
election to withdraw by the second Monday in July to be replaced by the party who nominated the 
candidate. If a candidate who had been nominated by two parties withdrew, would each party be able 
to name a replacement candidate? 
Lastly, this bill would likely require appropriate funding as our Elections Division would need to 
undertake a public education campaign in order to make sure voters are made aware of these proposed 
changes to avoid voter confusion at the polls. Additionally, more names could mean a bigger ballot and 
thus, more cost to the state. 
For the above reasons, we oppose L.D. 1038. Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions 
that the committee may have. 
1 Title 21-A, section 374-A. 
I01 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.g0v/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
