 
  
 
 
Testimony In Support  Of 
LD 1638, An Act t o Lower the State’s Individual Income Tax  
 
May 3 , 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the Taxation  Committee,   
 
My name is Alexander Price . I am submitting  this testimony  on behalf of the Maine Jobs Council  in support of LD 
1638, An Act to Lower the State’s Individual Income Tax .  The Maine Jobs Council is a statewide, nonpartisan, 
member -driven advocacy organization that advances public policies to support the creation and preservation of 
foundational jobs in Maine.  
Maine is currently ranked last in New England  in terms of economic ranking. Massachusetts is #4, New Hampshire 
is #5, Connecticut is #25, Rhode Island is #36, Vermont is #41, and Maine is #44. One of the reasons for this is 
because we already have high taxes. Maine currently has the 3rd highest tax b urden in the nation. This is a 
combination of high property taxes , high income tax es, and high sales and excise taxes . One of the states that is 
higher than us is New York, where notably the incomes are much higher.  
 
As a country, we are on the verge of a recession. It is important to note that the last time we had a recession, 
Maine’s economy responded slower once it was over than the rest of the country. From 2009 to 2019, the U.S. 
economy grew by 25% -  an annual gro wth of 2.3%. Maine’s economy grew 10% in that time, an annual growth of 
1%. Maine grew less than half of the national average and was already starting from a very low base.  
 
• Maine ranks #46 (5th worst) for business environment –  U.S. News & World Report  
• Maine ranks #43 (8th worst) for top states for business –  CNBC  
• Maine ranks #42 (9th worst) for venture capital investment –  National Venture Capital Association  
• Maine ranks 3rd highest for over tax burden –  WalletHub  
• Maine ranks 9th highest for per capita h ealth care spending – Kaiser Family Foundation  
• Maine ranks 10th highest in income tax – Tax Foundation  
• Maine ranks 13th highest for energy expenditures per capita –  U.S. Energy Information Administration  
• Maine has a stagnant population: we have an aging workforce and young people are not moving to or 
staying in Maine.  
• Maine ranks #42 (9th worst) in personal income – U.S. D epartment of Commerce. 
 
The reason to highlight this data is to show the complex issues we have as a state. Maine has a serious workforce 
issue. We need to start taking a more comprehensive look at how taxes, regulation, infrastructure, workforce 
challenge s, and other issues act as a barrier to job creation in our state. Maine needs to develop and follow a long -
term strategic plan that helps our workforce and keeps jobs in Maine. As previously stated, Maine earners already 
have one of the highest tax burden s in the nation . Rather than giving them reasons to leave Maine or discouraging 
more workers  from coming here, we should be attracting them and reducing our need for higher taxes by cutting 
the cost of government and making it considerably more efficient.  
 
Foundational jobs exist in industries such as manufacturing, construction, farming, fishing, forestry, 
transportation, energy, and tourism. They add value, create wealth, and pay for service and public sector jobs. LD 
1638 would  make Maine more competitive with other states and it will be more likely that workers  will move to 
or stay in Maine.  Maine is not the only safe, rural state  in the nation, and i f we continue to tax our workers at such 
high rates, those individuals looking to relocate to Maine may look elsewhere. Maine could be a destination state 
and that is a better way to grow the tax base.  Finally, we believe LD 1 638 falls in line with Governor Mills’ 10 -Year 
Economic Development Strategy and the goal of attracting 75,000 people to Mai ne’s talent pool.  
 
The MJC thanks the committee for it s time and consideration of this issue , and we would welcome any opportunity 
to discuss it with you . 
 
Thank you,  
 
Alexander Price, Pierce Atwood 
On behalf of the Maine Jobs Council  
