Date: March 16, 2023 
To: Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry Committee 
From: Cole Cochrane, Maine Youth Action 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 993, An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input 
Regarding Forest Policy in Maine 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and the honorable members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry Committee. My name is Cole Cochrane, I am from Saco, and I am 
here representing Maine Youth Action, a statewide youth advocacy group that represents 
hundreds of young Mainers across the state from varying backgrounds. I am here to testify in 
support of LD 993, An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest Policy in Maine. 
I have lived in Saco my entire life. Throughout my childhood, I always loved exploring through 
the forests in my backyard, climbing mountains with my family and kayaking Maine’s rocky 
coasts, which I highly recommend visiting Wolfe’s Neck if you haven’t gotten the chance. Whilst 
being around Maine’s pristine environment, my mother always told me that the forests we 
explore, the waters we kayak, and the mountains we climb are all ours to take care of. Words 
never rang truer than what she said, and seeing this room today, I can say conﬁdently that those 
words are reaffirmed. I believe strongly that we must be stewards of our environment and it is 
therefore imperative that we take measures to strengthen our role in protecting our forests. This 
is why I see LD 993 as a critical piece of legislation, especially during these times. We are facing 
an existential crisis from climate change, and it has signiﬁcant impacts on all sectors of our life; 
in this case, the integrity of our forests. Its biodiversity has diminished greatly with the situation 
expected to worsen as climate change effects compound. In fact, ‘/3 of the 442 plants and animals 
in Maine are going to experience a 66% population decline by 2100, with another ‘/3 vulnerable 
(NRCM). Furthermore, the current state of our forests impairs our response to the climate crisis. 
Although our forests sequester 60% of our annual carbon emissions, it lags behind per acre in 
comparison to our New England counterparts (Maine Monitor). Carbon sequestration isa 
foundation of climate action, and we are shamefully underutilizing our forests in light of this.I
mention these facts not because I am some sort of expert in forest management; rather, it serves 
as a reminder that we have critical problems facing our forest presently, and it will be my 
generation that will take on this burden. We may ignore these problems now, but they will still be 
here in the future, and instead with more impact and damage than there needs to be. You are the 
decision makers, the ones that need to make the right decision for my generation. The creation of 
a Forest Advisoiy Board allows us all to be at the table and to discuss the much needed solutions 
from a diverse perspective, which will mitigate the damages caused thus far and empower our 
response to climate change. 
So speaking as a youth advocate that will deal with the future impacts from decisions made 
today, and speaking as a Mainer who cherishes the integrity of our environment, I encourage the 
committee to vote “ought to pass” on LD 993. I thank you for your time and your service. i} 
it 
l‘ 
M
9 
I v‘
l
