 
 
Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee,  Chair  * Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
Committee  * Government Oversight Committee , Chair  
 
State House  (207)  287-1515  * Fax (207) 287-1585  * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900  * TTY  711 
 
Craig.Hickman@legislature.maine.gov  * Web  Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate   
 
Craig  V. Hickman  
Senator,  District  14 THE  MAINE SENATE  
130th Legislature  3 State  House  Station  
Augusta,  Maine  04333  
 
Testimony of Senator Craig V. Hickman in Support of  
LD 993 , An Act To Facilitate Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest Policy in Maine   
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
 
Monday, March 20, 2023  
 
Good morning, Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and distinguished colleagues on the 
Joint  Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestr y. My name is Craig 
Hickman and I represent Senate District 14, 12  municipalities  in Southern Kennebec  County, in 
the Maine Senate. I stand before you today in support of  LD 993, An Act To Facilitate 
Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest Policy in Maine . 
 
This bill stri kes me as a common -sense approach to solving sometimes contentious issues. In my  
four terms  serving on the this committee, two of them as House Chair, we found ourselves faced 
with numerous forestry -related issues ranging from sustainable har vest levels on  public lands, to 
harvesting in the shoreland zone, to forestry practices, including t he application of herbicides in 
commercial forestry. As this committee knows, some of those is sues saw opponents squaring off 
over very different points of view.  
 
This or ganic farmer got a great education on matters of forestry, but I believe there is a better  
way to address these complicated, important, and controversial issues. Establishing a Maine  
Forest Advisory Board would create a forum for those many perspectives to  be heard, to look at  
the forest as a whole, and to find solutions that serve the common good.  
 
Maine is the most forested state in the nation. Our vast forests support not only an $8.5 billion  
forest products industry, but also more than half of the large st globally important bird area in the  
United States. Its cold waters support the last stronghold of wild native Brook trout in the nation.  
If we expect to leave those assets to future generations, we must take steps now to ensure their  
long-term health.  
 
Today, as we live with the impacts of climate change, we understand more fully than ever before  
the importance of our forests to our own survival. Maine’s forests absorb 60% of our annual  
greenhouse gas emissions. They absorb carbon pollution and return to  us life -giving oxygen. We  
must ensure their sustainability, for it is inexorably linked with ours.  
 

I think we would all be wise to heed the advice from the great Wendell Berry who wrote, “The  
care of the Earth is our most ancient and most worthy, and aft er all our most pleasing  
responsibility. To cherish what remains of it and to foster its renewal is our only hope.”  
 
We can do that by bringing together ecologists and loggers, land conservationists and  
commercial foresters, wildlife biologists and Indigen ous people with traditional knowledge. We  
can charge them with assessing the full picture of conditions and trends in the forest, and with  
contributing their expertise and perspectives to the development of policy that works for all  
Mainers, for the forest , and for the wildlife that depends on it.  
 
And so as we go away this morning, let us go away with the knowledge that we came together to  
value Maine’s forests for all they do. Let us draw upon the knowledge of Mainers from all walks  
of life in ensuring ou r forests will remain healthy, vibrant, whole ecosystems long into the future.  
I humbly encourage your unanimous vote on LD 1549 and I’d be happy to answer any questions  
you may have.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
