Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker  and distinguished members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry Committee , my name is Eugene Mahar. I am a Maine licensed P rofessional 
Forester, a resident of Hermon and the Forest Resources  Manager - Maine for LandVest, Inc. I am 
writing you in opposition to LD 993 An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest Policy in 
Maine.  I have 2 5 plus years in the forest industry and in my current role as Forest Resources  Manager 
for LandVest, Inc. I represent  and have management responsibilities for approximately 1. 2 million  acres 
of forestlands in the state of Maine covering a wide range of ownerships sizes and management 
objectives . 
I find  this bill extremely unnecessary a s it appears to be a solution looking for a problem that does not 
exist and  attempts to  assert legislative control over the development and implementation  of forest 
policy in Maine . As you consider LD 993, I ask you t o please keep the following points in mind:   
• Of Maine's 17.6 million forested acres, 15.9 million of those acres are privately  owned 
commercial forestland , so if you love and recreate in the  outdoors, you  likely have done so  on 
privately -owned forest land . 
• Maine has 8.3 million acres of forestland certified under one of the three nationally recognized  
voluntary forest sustainability certification programs, ranking  2nd in the  nation for most 
certified acres by state.  
• Maine 's private forest landowners work collaboratively with the state, University of Maine 
System and environmental advocacy groups on a number of successful initiatives to protect 
Maine's wildlife resources , that also have the added benefits of keeping forests as forest while 
supporting  Maine ’s economy  (contributing $8.1 billion and over 33,000 jobs ). These efforts 
include:  
o Maine Climate Coun cil  
o FOR/Maine  
o 30-year Bird Project  
o Maine Spruce Budworm Taskforce  
o Cooperative Forestry Research Unit  
o Fisheries Improvement Network (FIN)  
o Sustainable Forestry Initiative –  Maine Implementation Committee  
o Outcome Based Forestry Panel  
o Keeping Maine’s Forest  
• The practice of forestry is a science. Maine laws that regulate forestry practices do not 
necessarily reflect and promote sound scientific based management  and passing this bill would 
perpetuate that problem.   
It's time for both Maine’s legislative leaders and the general public to recognize that the 
use of Maine’s private lands is a privilege  and not a right . LD 993 would burden  private 
landowners with further unnecessary restrictions that will ultimately alien ate landowners, which will 
result in limitations on recreational opportunities  that many of us currently and respectively enjoy on 
these lands .   
I thank you for your consideration and respectfully ask  you to vote ought not to pass on LD 9 93. 
Respectively submitted,  
Eugene Mahar  
Hermon, ME  
