March 20, 2023 
Representative, Bill Pluecer, Senator Henry Ingwersen and other members of the Agricultural 
Conservation and Forestry Committee 
My name is Greg Foster, I am a Raymond resident and I have been a consulting forester since 1994.I 
have extensive experience managing forest property for private forest Iandowner ’s in southern Maine.I 
am here today to speak in opposition to LD 993, An act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest 
Policy in Maine. 
Upon review of the proposed board members, I find it interesting that of the 21 members, there are no 
professional foresters, no professional forester organization, or no non-industrial private small forest 
landowners represented. 
It seems that these are very important people that should be included. Consulting foresters who have 
many clients have extensive experience dealing with issues of concern for private non—industrial forest 
landowners. These issues include compliance with Tree Growth Taxation, complying with restriction for 
harvest in a shoreland zone and other timber harvesting restriction. We do timber appraisals, including 
appraisals following timber trespass. Within our legal limits, we provided boundary line services. We 
administer timber sales on behalf of our clients to meet the forest Iandowner ’s goal. The list goes on. 
Why would a consulting forester not be included? 
As for the purpose of the advisory board, it appears to miss the mark of what Maines forestry 
community really needs, which is a better business climate. Like many other industries in Maine, our 
forest community needs quality workers. We need more forest product markets. Most of the 
hardwood saw and veneer logsin southern Maine are sold to brokers, who resell most of these logs to 
Canadian Mills. Years ago we had hardwood mills in southern Maine, including Bethel Furniture stock, 
Saunders Brothers, CB Cummings and others. We recently lost Pixel paper mill, which had a huge 
negative impact in the forest community. 
As for the policy advice for the Maine Forest Service, it seems that they already have a good handle of 
this. I fear the outcome of policies created by this board will ultimately become legislation, of which 
have plenty. 
A better Maine Business climate keeping and attracting more forest products industries will result ina 
more prosperous landowner that can better afford to do long term good forestry. 
Gregory E. Foster 
29 Ledge Hill Road 
Raymond, Maine 04071 
Office 
Timberstate G. Inc. 
P. O. Box 157 
Gray, Maine 04039 
207-272-4270 ll 
Ii >
l
i
l
I5
