 
Fort Andross, Suite 202 A  14 Maine Street  Brunswick, ME 04011- 2030  
(207) 725- 2833 │ www.asf.ca /maine  Testimony of the Atlantic Salmon Federation on  
LD 993:  An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest Policy in Maine  
March 20, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker , and Honorable M embers of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry:  
My name is John Burrows, and I am the Executive Director of U.S. Operations for the Atlantic 
Salmon Federation (ASF), an international non- profit conservation organization de dicated to the 
conservation and restoration of wild Atlantic salmon and their ecosystems. I represent more than 2,500 members and volunteers with ASF, our Maine Council, and a  dozen local affiliates 
working on river and fisheries conservation and restorati on across  Maine.   
ASF is strongly in support of LD 993: An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest Policy in Maine . 
LD 993 would create the Maine Forest Advisory Board, comprised of 21 members with a broad suite of expertise, interests , perspectives, and backgrounds . The functions of the board are clearly 
defined within the bill and are purely advisory in nature . There  would be  no formal role  in 
rulemaking or permitting decisions , which is a difference between this proposed B oard and many 
of the  councils and boards that exist for Maine’s  other  natural resources and environmental 
agencies.  The Maine Forest Advisory Board would serve  to facilitate  communication, 
engagement, and dialogue amongst diverse stakeholders and to ensure b road input and 
participation  in the development and implementation of forest policy in Maine .  
The endangered wild Atlantic salmo n is an iconic Maine species that depend s on our state’s  
forested landscape for its survival . Without healthy, intact forests to provide shade, habitat , cold 
water, and nutrients, Atlantic salmon and our other native cold -water  fish species , like Eastern 
brook trout , would not  exist  in Maine. The same is true for myriad other bird, fish, and wildlife 
species : Maine’s great biological diversity – including 139 rare plants and animals, 21 of which 
are globally rare – is largely a result of us having the largest unfragmented forested landscape east of the Mississippi.   

 
Fort Andross, Suite 202 A  14 Maine Street  Brunswick, ME 04011- 2030  
(207) 725- 2833 │ www.asf.ca /maine  It is important for Maine to lo ok at our 17.5 million acres of forest comprehensively and 
holistically . We need to  consider biological diversity, recreation, climate change adaptation and 
mitigation, carbon sequestration, and recreation  along with sustainable  timber harvesting  that 
support s good jobs and our valuable forest products industry. Engagement  amongst and between  
those interested in all of these areas, the public,  and the Maine Forest Service is essential to 
having robust, comprehensive  forest policy in Maine  and t he Maine Forest Advisory Board will 
do just this.  
We urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 993. Thank you for your time and consideration.  
Sincerely , 
 
 
  
John R.J. Burrows  
Executive Director, U.S. Operations  
Atlantic Salmon Federation  

