“§"§.%§”%’ 
tf:lLlMlTEI§ 
Testimony in Support of LD 99§_:_ 
An Act To Facilitate Stakeholder lnput RegardingForest Policy in Maine 
C, E, (Mac) MoGinley, Legislative Affairs, Maine Council of Trout Unlimited 
Senator lngwerson, Representative Plueker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry: 
My name is Mac McGinley, and l am here today on behalf of Trout Unlimited (TU),a 
national conservation organization whose mission is to conserve, protect and restore 
North America’s trout and salmon and their watersheds. I am testifying on behalf of our 
6 Maine chapters and over 2000 members in support of LD 993: An Act To Facilitate 
Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest Policy in Maine. 
Like Maine’s wildlife and ﬁsh, Maine’s forests are a state resource of enormous value, 
critical to Maine’s economy and quality of life. We are the nation’s most forested state. 
Maine's forest is the largest unfragmented forested block east of the Mississippi; is 
critical to supporting the nation's last populations of Atlantic salmon and landlocked 
Arctic charr and most robust population of Canada lynx; supports the east’s stronghold 
populations of moose, marten, brook trout, landlocked salmon and lake whiteﬁsh; and 
the largest expanse of dark sky in the East. Through a combination of long tradition and 
hard work to secure conservation easements, Mainer’s enjoy better access to hunting, 
fishing and other forest-based recreation on private land than any state in the country. 
And it supports one of Maine’s oldest industries, sen/ing as a wood and ﬁber basket for 
the world. According to the Maine Forest Products Council, Maine’s forests support an 
$8 billion industry and more than 30,000 jobs. (2016) Whether we are "Vacationland, ” 
“The Way Life Should Be,” or the bidhplace of Paul Bunyan, Maine’s forests are central 
to our identity, our economy and our way of life. 
Unlike Maine’s wildlife and fish, Maine’s forests do not have any advisory body to seek 
the public‘s input and expertise on policy and management. The Maine Department of 
inland Fisheries and \Nldlife has a 10-member Advisory Council. The Maine 
Department of Marine Resources has a 13-member Advisory Council, and 7 additional 
Councils that focus on speciﬁc resources (lobster, seaweed, scallops, aquaculture, 
etc.). 
The Maine Department of Environmental Protection and Land Use Planning 
Commission each have citizen boards to oversee permitting and rulemaking. For 
Agriculture, we have an Agriculture Water Management Board, a Maine Milk 
Commission, a Nutrient Management Review Board, and a Pull Events Commission.0 
C. E. (Mac) lVlcGinley, Legislative Affairs, Maine Council TU 
§_emcginleiL1;953@gmail.c ﬂm 207 432 1910 (cell
There is no equivalent for the Maine Forest Service and it shows. Three years ago, TU 
provided comments on both the DlFWs Strategic Fisheries Management Plan and the 
MFS’s Draft Forest Action Plan. lnput on the Fisheries Plan started way back in 2016, 
with a comprehensive angler survey, public meetings, a dedicated website, a Steering 
Committee, and eight Advisory Groups for specific ﬁsh species. The ﬁsheries 
management plan has since been approved and published. Literally thousands of 
people were engaged, and dozens provided extensive comments throughout the 
process The ﬁnal plan is a much better product in part because of that public input. 
By contrast, for the Maine Forest Action Plan, the Maine Forest Service put out a draft 
report on December 2 and asked for written comments just two weeks later on 
December 16. 
This bill will establish an Advisory Board. its functions are clearly established and are 
purely advisory. Unlike the DIFW, DMR, DEP and LUPC Councils and Boards, it will not 
have a formal role in rulemaking or permitting. Its role is solely to engage both experts 
and the general public to provide input and advice to the Maine Forest Service. 
Thank you 
C. E. (Mac) McC-iinley, Legislative Affairs, Maine Council TU 
Cemcginley1,953@gmail.c@l ‘13 207 432 1910 (cell
