To: Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry
From:  Marina Melo de Miranda
Date: 03/20/2023
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 993: An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input 
Regarding Forest Policy in Maine 
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Marina Melo de 
Miranda. I am testifying as an individual currently living in the town of Fort Kent. Fort 
Kent is a beautiful town surrounded by forest and is located at the southern shore of the 
Saint John River, that separates the United States and Canada. There are beautiful 
rivers. While Fort Kent is surround by beautiful nature that is worth preserving, Fort 
Kent’s greatest source of income is logging. I am very passionate about combating 
climate change while simultaneously providing a just and sustainable economy for Fort 
Kent, which means helping environmentalists build a working relationship with loggers. 
To that end, I urge you to support LD 993: An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input 
Regarding Forest Policy in Maine.
After finishing my degree, I decided to fulfill my dream of 20 years of adopting Maine as 
my home. When I relocated to Maine in the Fall of 2020, I had no awareness of the 
North Maine Woods. The first time I ever traveled to Fort Kent was when I got to learn 
about North Maine Woods. It was late at night that I decided leave and go back to 
Houlton where I was staying at the time. After taking a wrong turn, I ended up in North 
Maine Woods and struggled to find my way out. Running out of gas forced me to spend 
the night in those woods. After waking up in the car in the middle of the woods, I saw 
what the North Maine Woods looked like during the day and fell in love with it. This 
experience changed me significantly. It hadn’t occur to me to advocate for forest 
conservation, but I have become passionate ever since.
I moved to Fort Kent about eight months later after falling in love with the town itself, the 
nature surrounding it, and making friends there. When I shared with one of my friends 
my passion about conservation of the North Maine Woods and the nature around it, 
they advised me that the overwhelming majority of the adult population are loggers and 
that I would be alienating them. I have always wondered if there was a way for 
environmentalist and loggers to find common ground, because it is something that 
clearly needs to be done to combat climate change.
Mud seasons have been getting longer, meaning loggers would be without work for 
longer since logging is impossible during mud season. When I was working as a 
Customer Service Agent for the Maine Department of Labor, I took a call from many 
             
loggers who told me that they were without work for longer than usual and that mud 
season is lasting longer. Family of loggers tend to have loggers of many generations. 
Children of loggers will likely become loggers themselves when they grow up. For this 
reason and for the future of Fort Kent and Maine’s economy, I believe it is important to 
extract wood in a sustainable way.
I would like everyone to understand that I am not here to propose taking away the 
livelihood of loggers. I am here to pass to the committee knowledge I have acquired 
from a course taken while in graduate school. Whether we like to think it or not, humans 
have always been and will always be part of a human-environment system. The goal 
stakeholders should have been making our human-environment system resilient. Being 
resilient means extracting goods without allowing the system to lose its equilibrium, 
which in this case would be to preserve some of the old growth while allowing extraction 
of woods in a sustainable way to feed the economy in Fort Kent. Combining knowledge 
and experience from an academic expert in forest ecology, wildlife biologist 
knowledgeable in forest habitat, an Indian nation representative, loggers, farmers, 
landowners, and other stakeholders will make it more likely that Maine will have a more 
just and sustainable economy while making our human-environment interaction resilient 
for many generations to come.
For this reason, I urge you to Support of LD 993: An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input 
Regarding Forest Policy in Maine. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely,
Marina Melo de Miranda
Fort Kent, Maine 04743
