Q Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street - Augusta Maine - 04330 - www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 993, 
An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest Policy in Maine 
March 20, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, I am Melanie Sturm, the Forests and Wildlife Director at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM), and I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in 
support of LD 993. 
Given the importance of Maine forests to Maine's economy and the people of Maine, and the growing 
importance of forestlands in the future, we believe the time has come to increase stakeholder input 
regarding forest policy in Maine, as called for by this legislation. 
As you know, Maine is the most heavily forested state in the nation and we have long relied on our 
forestlands for a broad range of uses and values, including timber, jobs, recreation, wildlife habitat, and 
inspiration. We are also learning just how important our forests are for storing and sequestering carbon 
and protecting biodiversity. Invasive species, pests and disease, climate change, and wildfires are 
significant and worsening threats to Maine's woods and the fish and wildlife that occupy our forests and 
the waterways within forested areas. As seen globally, we may gradually lose the biodiversity of 
Maine's woods if we don't take measures to protect what's there.’ 
The makeup of people, businesses, and landowners who interact with Maine's forests is changing along 
with the biological and environmental elements. While a relatively small handful of timberland owners 
once owned most of the 10.5-million-acre North Woods, that landscape it is now divided among 
hundreds of landowners with divergent goals, management plans, and objectives. Timber Investment 
Management Organizations and Real Estate Investment Trusts own significant tracts of Maine's North 
Woods, making decisions based on shorter term time horizons to satisfy shareholder interests. This can 
potentially be at odds with other values of the land that Maine people, visitors, and wildlife depend on. 
Changing ownership, shifting timber industry economics, accelerating climate change, and increased 
development pressures on land are creating a new context for forest policies in Maine. With these 
changes in mind, we believe LD 993 could serve as a valuable tool for building understanding regarding 
forest management that could lead to better outcomes for Maine's natural resources, businesses, and 
people while ensuring all sides have _a seat at the table. 
This is a modest bill. Similar Forest Advisory Boards exist in more than a dozen states with less 
forestland than Maine, including New Hampshire and Connecticut. In these other states, Forest Advisory 
Boards have served an important role in helping depoliticize complex issues regarding the stewardship. 
Ii 
if 
ii 
‘i
l 
i. 
r. 
i 
li 
ll 
i. 
1. 
ii‘ 
ii 
ix 
ai 
li 
kw 
?i ‘X
1
of public and private forestlands. Bringing diverse interests together to deliberate multi~faceted issues 
and work toward_common goals would be a benefit in Maine and an improvement over existing 
processes. 
Given the critical importance of Maine's forests to the future of our state, we support creation ofa 
Maine Forest Advisory Board as proposed by LD 993. This Board would create a forum for evaluating 
forest resource issues through collaboration. Much like the Advisory Boards for the Departments of 
Inland Fish and Wildlife and Marine Resources, a Forest Advisory Board would provide a forum fora 
wide range of forest resource interests to share perspectives, develop policy recommendations, 
facilitate interagency information sharing, and ensure public participation. 
I respectfully urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 993. Thank you for your time and 
consideration of this issue, and l would be glad to answer any questions you may have.
