n\*'"e 
,———/—'\ 
\ Maine Forest Products Council 
_/_ //./ : The voice of Maine's forest economy A -A /0 
m:*;:;;::_ —_9_-:. ‘3_-.L"~'7" ‘ -I t _-;,:;; ~-:;:::—<-~-7 rr:~ ._____; 5:’ ' M -r~r;:::Q;;g»2=;>5w:i —'*~“>‘~w'r11.. —- 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 993 
“An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest Policy in 
Maine” 
March 20, 2023 
Patrick Strauch, Executive Director 
Good afternoon, Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. I am Patrick Strauch from Exeter, Maine, and the 
Executive Director of the Maine Forest Products Council (MFPC). I represent Maine’s forest 
product industry, which contributes more than $8 billion to the state’s economy, and creates 
more than 33,500 direct and indirectjobs. 
Before l get started, the Council would like to make the same offer here as we made to the 
IF&W committee. In order to support your knowledge of our industry, we would like to offera 
tour after the legislative session to Maine’s working forests to see ﬁrsthand the many facets of 
land stewardship. In the past these tours have been insightful for legislators and an important 
way to experience the collaborative opportunities used between government and forest industry 
leaders. 
Now, to get to the business at hand, I am here today to testify in strong opposition to LD 993, 
“An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder Input Regarding Forest Policy in Maine” because, should it 
pass, this bill would shiﬁ the oversight of Maine’s forest resources away from the scientists and 
highly qualified professionals within the Bureau of Forestry to a politically appointed board. As 
drafted, critical forest policies that determine how private landowners manage their land could 
be decided by as few as six members, as an affirmative vote of the majority of members present 
can decide any measure brought before the board and a quorum is deﬁned as only ll members. 
This approach is fraught with inequities for the regulated landowner community. 
The Council appreciates the sponsor’s interest in Maine’s private forestlands, but the fact is that 
these are private resources, and the State has no authority to assume management as suggested 
in LD 993. We respect the authority of the legislative and the executive bodies of Maine 
government and will assist in any endeavor designed to promote collaborative solutions to 
identified policy issues. There are no other examples of natural resource boards or commissions 
that have been granted authority by the legislative body; all are authorized and administered by 
the executive branch. 
Even without this legislation, statewide commissions are commonly formed on an ad hoe basis 
to discuss and explore speciﬁc forestry-related concerns with good results. There is no need to 
establish one with a permanent charter and budget. There have been many ongoing collaborative 
efforts that have yielded signiﬁcant results. A few examples include: 
0 Maine Climate Council 
0 Forest Opportunity Roadmap project, FOR/Maine (MFPC is a founding member) 
Maine Spruce Budworm Taskforce 
Cooperative Forestry Research Unit 
Fisheries Improvement Network (FIN) 
535 Civic Center Drive, Augusta ME 04330 207-622-9288 www.maineforest.org
0 Sustainable Forestry Initiative — Maine Implementation Committee 
v State Forest Stewardship Coordination Committee 
0 Outcome Based Forestry Panel 
0 Keeping Maine’s Forest 
As a result of these collaborations, many of which are ongoing, Maine’s forests are managed in a healthy and sustainable 
way with a diverse assembly of partners. 
Pre-European settlement, Maine’s landscape was 92% forested. Today, with 17.5 million acres of forestland, Maine is 
89% forested. Of that acreage, only 352,400 acres of forestland are harvested annually, according to the USDA. Harvested 
acres are regenerated and, as a result, Maine is growing far more trees each year than are being removed, allowing for 
both carbon sequestration and long-term carbon storage in the form of long-lived timber products. 
According to research by the University of Maine, our managed forest currently captures 75% of the state’s annual fossil 
fuel emissions, with 60% captured by the forest and 15% captured in forest products. These forest products are becoming 
increasingly important alternatives to carbon-intensive materials such as concrete, steel and plastic, and they rely on local 
and sustainable forestry. 
It is also worth noting that Maine’s private landowners, who own 94% ofthe states forestland, are leading the nation in 
third-part _v certified sustainable forestr _v with 8.3 million acres of forestland certiﬁed by nationally recognized programs. 
To achieve certiﬁcation, landowners must adhere to forest practices that are environmentally sound, economically viable 
and socially responsible. It is also worth noting that even though some acreage has changed hands in recent years, the 
number of certiﬁed acres has not decreased, showing the ongoing commitment of private landowners to practice 
sustainable forestry. 
Upon reviewing the presentation by Sally Stockwell from Audubon and David Publicover from AMC, I see no 
compelling case for alarm. The changes in age class distribution of trees have been occurring for ages as the industry 
modernized and fewer old growth stands remain. But this is offset in the long run by the sale of forestland to 
environmental non-governmental organizations and federal ownerships where ecological reserves have rapidly increased. 
We have a healthy brook trout population and long-term studies of bird popuiations in Maine have been positive. 
The lack of good information in the l990’s drove Maine to build a stronger forest monitoring system. We currently 
monitor harvest activity using FIA data annually, and this data is already presented to the legislature annually in the 
Measures of Growth report. Commercial forestlands are not operating as the “wild west” and wildlife biologists, foresters, 
forest engineers in partnership with loggers and NGO’s are progressively discussing and managing the private forest 
resource responsibly with an eye to the next generation. 
The council views the proposed creation of the Forest Advisory Council as prescribed by LD 993 as a bureaucratic and 
politicizing mechanism not matched in structure by any natural resource agency. Certainly, Maine’s fanning community 
is not subjected to such a heavy handed oversite by the legislative body other than the legislative committee of 
jurisdiction. For these reasons, the Maine Forest Products Council urges an ‘ought not to pass’ vote on LD 993. 
Thank you for your consideration.
2
