Representa)ve O’Neil, Senator Ingwerson, Representa)ve Pluecker and members of the Joint Standing CommiBee on Agriculture, Conserva)on and Forestry, my name is Philomena Ostapchuk and I am a resident of Newcastle, Maine.  I am pleased to be here to tes)fy in support of LD 993,  I am here on behalf of MUUSAN, the Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network. MUUSAN is a statewide organiza)on that includes members from 26 congrega)ons found throughout the state, as far south as Sanford, to Houlton and Caribou in the north, and other towns like Norway, PiBsﬁeld, Ellsworth, Dexter, Waterville, Cas)ne, and Brunswick, in the major ci)es Portland, Bangor, Augusta, and other towns. Unitarian Universalists are guided by a set of principles including the principle centered on respect for the interdependent web of all existence of which we are a part. And it is this principle that brings me here today.        In addi)on, I also wear the important hat as a grandmother of two grandchildren growing up here in Maine. I have an abiding need to do my part to encourage our Maine government, of which we are all a part, to do its best to ensure a healthy future for my grandchildren and other children.  Toward that end, I have been learning about the role of the forests here in Maine, from their important economic value to the signiﬁcant roles forests play in the sequestra)on of carbon, as well as sustaining biodiversity within forest habitats, and our own impact on the health of forests.  We know that the direc)ons we take in the next decades with regard to global warming will have a huge impact on the quality of life for our future genera)ons like my grandchildren. Therefore, I think bringing together stakeholders in the forest is essen)al for sharing informa)on and oﬀering advise.      We need to be good stewards of our forests, and what beBer way than to set up a clearly deﬁned advisory group.The appointed members would be represen)ng the many aspects of forestry - from economic interest groups, to environmental and ecological interests, state agency representa)on and recrea)onal groups. The role of this group would be advisory and allow for open conversa)ons of how best we can meet all of our needs with regard to sustaining healthy forests and the diversity of the inhabitants of the forests.  As a ci)zen of Maine,  I or any other ci)zen, would be able to clearly see who speciﬁcally is in the advisory group to be able to send my comments, direct my ques)ons and have access to their reports. I urge your commiBee to support this bill. The forests of Maine are our treasure. Thank you for your aBen)on. 
Philomena Ostapchuk
MUSSAN, Newcastle
LD 993
Representative O’Neil, Senator Ingwerson, Representative Pluecker and members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Philomena 
Ostapchuk and I am a resident of Newcastle, Maine.  I am pleased to be here to testify in 
support of LD 993,  I am here on behalf of MUUSAN, the Maine Unitarian Universalist State 
Advocacy Network. MUUSAN is a statewide organization that includes members from 26 
congregations found throughout the state, as far south as Sanford, to Houlton and Caribou in 
the north, and other towns like Norway, Pittsfield, Ellsworth, Dexter, Waterville, Castine, and 
Brunswick, in the major cities Portland, Bangor, Augusta, and other towns. Unitarian 
Universalists are guided by a set of principles including the principle centered on respect for 
the interdependent web of all existence of which we are a part. And it is this principle that 
brings me here today.  
     In addition, I also wear the important hat as a grandmother of two grandchildren growing 
up here in Maine. I have an abiding need to do my part to encourage our Maine government, 
of which we are all a part, to do its best to ensure a healthy future for my grandchildren and 
other children.  Toward that end, I have been learning about the role of the forests here in 
Maine, from their important economic value to the significant roles forests play in the 
sequestration of carbon, as well as sustaining biodiversity within forest habitats, and our own 
impact on the health of forests.  We know that the directions we take in the next decades with
regard to global warming will have a huge impact on the quality of life for our future 
generations like my grandchildren. Therefore, I think bringing together stakeholders in the 
forest is essential for sharing information and offering advise.
     We need to be good stewards of our forests, and what better way than to set up a clearly 
defined advisory group.The appointed members would be representing the many aspects of 
forestry - from economic interest groups, to environmental and ecological interests, state 
agency representation and recreational groups. The role of this group would be advisory and 
allow for open conversations of how best we can meet all of our needs with regard to 
sustaining healthy forests and the diversity of the inhabitants of the forests.  As a citizen of 
Maine,  I or any other citizen, would be able to clearly see who specifically is in the advisory 
group to be able to send my comments, direct my questions and have access to their reports.
I urge your committee to support this bill. The forests of Maine are our treasure. Thank you for
your attention.

