'
" 
~ - ‘=2 "'( ‘:§"; V’ ”e;':~ 
. . . . 
Solutions for0. 
Tox|c~Free Tomorrow 
Testimony In Support of LD 993, “An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder lnput Regarding Forest Policy 
in Maine" Before the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee 
March 20, 2023 
Good morning, Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Forestry, and Conservation. My name is Sarah Woodbury, and I am 
the director of advocacy for Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health is a Maine-based non-profit 
that works to make sure that everyone has equal access to safe food, safe drinking water, 
healthy homes, and toxic-free, climate-friendly products. Please accept this testimony on behalf 
of Defend Our Health in support of LD 993, “An Act to Facilitate Stakeholder lnput Regarding 
Forest Policy in Maine”. 
LD 993 would create a forest advisory board. This board could help bring together a variety of 
individuals with different viewpoints such as landowners, tribal communities, ecologists, and 
sportsmen and women that have a stake in and care about the management of Maine's forests. 
It would provide a venue to share information, facilitate public input, look at the forest 
holistically, and advise the Maine Forest Sen/ice on policies to keep our forests healthy. 
If our forests are sustainabily managed, they can be utilized to help us ﬁght climate change by 
moving away from petrochemicals. Forest waste can be used to create biobased materials that 
can take the place of toxic plastics. We can convert woody biomass, such as the slash and 
sawdust leftover from logging and sawmill operations, into renewable chemicals. These forest 
bioproducts can replace petrochemicals as ingredients in everyday household products and 
building materials. A forest advisory board could help to make sure Maine‘s forests are 
managed correctly so we can utilize our forest’s resources to help fight both PFAS and climate 
change while at the same time making sure that they aren't overharvested, and we don't lose 
vital ecosystems. Additionally, the state needs to make sure it has systems in place, such as an 
advisory board, to help protect Maine’s forests from PFAS contamination. As more information 
comes out about PFAS leaching from containers ‘ into pesticidesz that are used for a variety of 
ioresi management practices, it's important to have a venue to discuss these issues and come 
up with best practices to both manage the forest and protect public health. 
I 
Environmental Protection Agency. (2021, March 5). EPA Releases T esling Dara Showing PFAS Coniamination ﬁvm Fluorinalea ’ Containers. 
EPA. Retrieved March l9, 2023, from https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-releases-testing-data-showing-pfas-contamina ﬁom 
ﬂuorinated-containers 
‘ Abel, D. (2020, December 2). Toxic forever chem icaIs' found in pesticide used on millions of Mass. Acres when spraying for mosquiiaes - Ilsa- 
Bosfon Globe. BostonGlobe.com. Retrieved March 19, 2023, ﬁom https://www.b0stonglobe.coml2020/ 12/01/met1'o/toxic-foreven 
chemicals-found-pcsticide-used-millions-mass~acres-wi1en-spraying-mosdunits 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 l (207) 6996795 I info@defendourhealth.org l defendourhealthorg
1 4* :13: % as é1 
Fifteen other states have forest advisory boards and Maine also has a variety of other advisory 
boards that help manage Maine’s other natural resources. Maine forests provide numerous 
benefits to our state, and we need to make sure we are doing everything to make sure that they 
will be around for future generations. Therefore we urge the committee to unanimously vote 
“ought to pass" on LD 993. 
Thank you. 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 l (207) 6996795 I inf0@defenciourhealth.0rg I (lefendourhealthnrg
