69 Maple Ridge Drive
Winthrop, ME  04364
February 13, 2023
Senator Michael Tipping
Representative Amy Roeder
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing
2 SHS
Augusta, ME  04333
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Committee members:
I write today to request your support of LD 70, An Act to Eliminate the Cap on Retirement 
Benefits for State Employees and Teachers to Which a Cost-of-living Adjustment Is Made.
For those of us who were aware of the cap in the Budget proposal in 2011, and not many were, 
the Administration at the time said it was necessary to balance the budget and would be 
reversed.  We were rightly concerned and skeptical.  Here we are, nearly twelve (12) years after 
the cap was put in place, once again requesting that it be corrected.
This cap has serious financial consequences for both future and current retirees.  Sadly, I 
believe that most current employees are unaware of this restriction until they near retirement or 
even until they retire.  Current or recent retirees, while they may appear to be silent, are 
resentful and enraged.  Please do not view silence as complacency.  Some count on the Maine 
Association of Retirees to be the voice; however, we all look to you, individually and as a 
legislative body, to right this wrong.
On a personal level, after a forty-two (42) year career in public service, most of my retirement 
benefit is in excess of the cap amount.  Given the number of retirees and future retirees who 
spent or will spend their career in service to the citizens of the state of Maine, the continuation 
of this cap is the antithesis of a reward for having done so.
I ask you to thoughtfully discuss this bill in your work session(s), to vote LD 70 “Ought to Pass,” 
to support it on the floor, and to work with the current Administration and MainePERS, as may 
be necessary, to rectify the existing situation.
Sincerely,
David W. Maxwell
cc:  Senator Craig Hickman
       Representative Tavis Rock Hasenfus
