Testimony ofjeff i\/|cCabe 
Maine Service Employees Association, SElU Local 1989 
in Support of LD 70, An Act to Eliminate the Cap on Retirement Benefits for State Employees and 
Teachers to Which a Cost-of-living Adjustment ls Made 
Before the Joint Standing Labor and Housing 
2/14/2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing, I'm Jeff McCabe, director of politics and legislation for the Maine Service Employees 
Association, Local 1989 of the Service Employees lnternational Union. We are a labor union representing 
over 13,000 Maine workers, including workers for all three branches of Maine State Government and 
retirees statewide. 
We're here in strong support of this bill as it provides cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) increases for 
retired state employees and teachers and their beneficiaries apply to a retiree‘s entire retirement 
benefit instead of only to the first $24,911.84, which is the current pension base, of retirement benefit. 
This would help retirees and improve future retirement benefits for current and future employees. This 
could help to with key recruitment and retention. 
l have found being on message in the Legislature can be so important, so I am sharing aspects of past 
testimony we gave around the supplemental budget below. Before getting into that, it's clear from this 
committee's action on the one-time COLA you are aware the 2011 pension cuts went too far. 
While the recent effort in the Supplemental Budget may feel good in that moment and may garnera 
headline in the press, it has little lasting impact for retirees. We hear a lot of talk in the capital about the 
importance of keeping retirees in their homes so they can live as independently as possible. We also 
hear a lot of talk about making the changes necessary for that to happen. - 
For retirees in the State/Teacher/Legislative/JudiciaI Retirement Plan who were eligible for a retiree 
cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) in September 2022, Governor Mills’ proposed Supplemental State 
Budget calls for a one-time payment equal to a 1 percent COLA for an average payment of $175. Several 
retiree members of our union participated in hearings to share their personal stories, and thoughts and 
recommendations relating to that proposal. 
For your reference, the proposed language also linked here in the Supplemental Budget is: "PARTJ Sec. 
J-1. Transfer from General Fund unappropriated surplus. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the 
contrary, on or before June 30, 2023, the State Controller shall transfer $6,600,000 from the 
unappropriated surplus of the General Fund to the Retirement Allowance Fund within the Maine Public 
Employees Retirement System for the purpose of providing the resources to fund an additional one-time 
cost-of-living increase of 1.0% of the established 2022 maximum benefit subject to an increase for 
retirees from the state-sponsored retirement plans. The additional 1.0% applies to retirement benefit 
payments, up to a maximum of $24,186.25, for the one-year period ending August 31, 2022. This 
additional increase applies to retirees who were eligible for a cost-of-living adjustment in September 
2022. The additional increase made pursuant to this section is a one-time payment and is not included 
in the calculation of future benefit adjustments." 
While we appreciate this recent effort, it's important to note Maine's retired state workers and teachers 
still haven't caught up from the 2011 pension cuts. In addition to the stories they have been sharing
1
with legislators, several ofour members in a recent video told their stories about the difficulty they've 
experienced being behind the cost of living for the past 12 years. Please watch that video; it’s linked 
here.. 
Our retiree members respectfully ask that you: 1) build upon the one-time payment in the proposed 
Supplemental Budget and fully fund a retiree COLA that matches inflation for participants in the Maine 
Public Employees Retirement System (MainePERS); and 2) address the 2011 pension cuts by passing and 
funding LD 70. By taking both of these actions, you can build upon the progress made in the 130*“ Maine 
Legislature in strengthening retirement security for participants in the State, Judicial, Legislative and 
Teacher retirement plan. 
Together, let's keep fighting to undo the damage caused by the 2011 pension cuts. As all of you may 
know, ever since 2011, when taxes for the wealthy were cut at the expense of MainePERS participants, 
many retired state employees and teachers have struggled to keep up with the cost of living. The 2011 
cuts included: 
0 A freeze on retirees ’ cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs) for 2011, 2012, and 2013; 
0 A 3% cap on all future cost-of-living adjustments; 
0 A permanent limit on cost-of-living adjustments so they only apply to the first $20,000 of 
pension income indexed to inflation. This particular cut is what LD 70 would address by ensuring 
COLAs apply to a retirees entire pension, not just to the current pension base of $24,911.84. 
You may recall that in 2022, we made some progress in undoing some of the harm caused by the 2011 
pension cuts. The Bipartisan Supplemental State Budget (LD 1995) passed by both the Maine House and 
the Maine Senate, and signed into law by Governor Mills makes key improvements but currently nothing 
is included in the proposed biennial budget. There is more work to be done and it needs to be done now 
by fully funding a retiree COLA that matches inflation for participants in the Maine Public'Employees 
Retirement System (MainePERS), and by passing and funding LD 70 to make retiree COLAs applicable to 
a retirees entire pension, not just to the pension base. 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions.
2
