Good Afternoon, Senator Michael Tipping and Representative Amy Roeber 
and Members of the Committee on Laborand Housing 
Thank you for holding this public hearing on our Governor ’s Supplimental Budget 
Proposal, as it pertains to the C.O.L.A. cap on a Retiree°s pension. 
My name is Iohn Whitten, and I am a retired public school teacher now living inV 
Oakland, Maine. ~‘ 
Years ago, I harkened to then Governor Reed’s ‘call’ for teachers needed in such 
specialized areas as: Industrial Arts, Art and Music. 
I answered that ‘call’ and taught music for more than 40 years. 
I taught most of my career in impoverished Washington County. 
My salary was lower than teachers in other parts of Maine, and thus my Retirement 
Pension is lower and it is difficult to make ends meet in our household. 
(Our three most recent Dead River heating fuel deliveries for these past three 
months have averaged $450.00 each and next month, We must cope with higher 
electricy costs.) 
Unlike some households in our state, during this pandemic, that have received various 
forms of monthly assistance, we have only received that one $850.00 check from 
Govenor Mills. It didn’t stretch nearly far enough and we need your help! 
Retired teachers NEED “inﬂation assistance ” . We need a ‘true’ C.O.L.A. H! 
The issue before us today, is how can you assist retired teachers to MAINTAIN 
what they have, via an “inﬂation equalizer ” . We need a C.O.L.A. that isI 
reﬂective of the Consumer Price Index (not reduced) AND we need it on our 
entire pension. 
VVhen I entered teaching this was so... but Governor Baldacci or Governor LePage 
and our, then legislators, I believe, needed funds else Where and supplimnted the 
State’s budget by reducing the amount of pension that a C.O.L.A. could be applied , 
as well as limiting the Consumer Price Index ‘s determined percentage necessary fora 
retiree to “stay even”.
Now, I hope that none of you, would condone rule changes during a Little League 
game. But that is exactly what our state did to teachers (already ‘in the retirement 
system’ ) .. . “They” changed the rules that we were planning on, for our retirement. 
I would have no disagreement should our state govermnent change the rules for 
teachers about to ENTER the profession, but “they” changed the rules for people 
“already in the game” , and reduced each retiree’s household ’s income. 
To emphasize my point of less household income, I do not think there is another 
person here today, that is driving a car older than my 23 year old, 2001 Toyota 
with 325 thousand miles on it. With this past years price escaltions, we can not 
afford a car payment, too. I need your help! 
Recently our local news, had a story about the state’s concern over teachers leaving the 
profession due to Covid-19, or burn-out or for better work. The number was north 
of I 3 O O educators. Also, the story listed over 900 teachers retireing (This is 
alarming as schools are already scrambling to ﬁll classrooms with instructors.) 
AND I ask you... 
“How can we recommend teaching as a profession, when Maine ‘double—kicks’ their 
retirees - - as they have done so since 2011 ??? ” How much more money does our 
state government want from retired teachers on fixed incomes??? 
As a school teacher, I would display on my wall a sign that read: 
“Do What You Have To Do... 
So You Can... 
Do VVhat You Have to Do” 
I would ask all of you to show your gratitude to the teachers you have had, 
and who are now retired - - especially with todays inﬂation running at over 8 percent, 
and realize that 3 parts of a recognized 8 percent COLA (or even 4 parts) 
Cost Of Living Adjustment, is just not sufficient for a retired teacher to ‘maintain ’ 
What they have... so, please, Do VVhat You Have To Do, So You Can... (show 
your grafritudie} .. 
Thank you for your considerations and for listening to me.
