February 14, 2023  
 
Testimony in S upport of LD 70, “An Act to Eliminate the Cap on Retirement Benefits for State Employees 
and Teachers to Which a Cost -of-living Adjustment Is Made .” 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roed er and distinguished members o f the Labo r and Housing 
Committee, pl ease accept th is testim ony in s upport of LD 70.   I am a resident of S carborough and live in 
a dual income  home to be a ble to af ford the cost of living in Southern Ma ine, a scenario that  has 
become a familiar situation in all parts o f the state.  My wife and I have spent our entire care ers in public 
service  working toward retirement and wi ll both be impacted by the cost of living cap that only impacts 
Maine PERS members who are teacher s or State employee s.  Unlike our municipal  and county 
counterparts , we are penalized by an already fi xed income having very small  and stri ct limits on cost-of-
living  adjustments.  Cons ider th is as you sit and listen to your co nstituents speak, in real numbe rs the 
maximum increase  that any impacted retiree can see in a cost of living adj ustment  under current la w is 
$725.58 per year .  Have your costs only  increased by $725 this year  and every other year ?    
In recent years, all working Mainers have been i mpacted  by rising costs and crushing inflation.  As it  
stands, retirees impacted by this limit are al so capped a t the  maximum upward adjustment of 3% , unlike 
participating local districts that en joy a 4% increase with no i ncome ca p.  Further more, as Maine PERS 
retire es are impacted by the Social Security Windfall Eliminat ion Provision (WEP) they also cannot 
collect the  full annual cost of living adjustments ma de by the Social Sec urity Administration .  Many have 
paid into and earned these  benefits  but those too are reduced by as mu ch as 60% o f what was earned.   
The 129th Maine Legisl ature sent to the US Congress  and Presi dent  of the Unite d State s the “JOINT 
RESOLUTION MEMORIALIZING THE PRESIDENT AND CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES TO SUPPORT 
THE REFORM OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY OFFSETS OF THE GOVERNMENT PENSION OFFSET AND THE 
WINDFALL ELIMINATION PROVISION .”  This resolution sought to urge Congress to rep eal the penalti es 
suffered by Ma ine retirees  on their Social Secu rity income  due to the ir participation in MainePERS.  LD 
70 gives the 13 1st Legislat ure the opportunity to create real and meaningfu l change that directly i mpacts 
these s ame impacted indiv iduals by removing the statutory barrier that l imits their earned and 
otherwise protected cost of living adjustments.  
I urge this committee to vote LD 70 as ought  to pass.  Th ank you for your time, service and attent ion to 
this matter.  
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Mark R oberts  
Scarborough, Maine  

