TESTIMONY OF 
JOHN SAGASER, TAX POLICY COUNSEL, MAINE REVENUE SERVICES 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 18, 2023 
LD 1853 — “An Act to Conform the Mining Excise Tax Laws to the Maine Metallic 
Mineral Mining Act and Set the Mining Excise Tax at 10 Percent” 
LD 1855 — “Resolve, Directing the Oﬂice of Tax Policy to Study Maine ’s Mining 
Excise Tax” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is John Sagaser, Tax Policy Counsel, 
Office of Tax Policy, Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to present combined testimony 
Neither For Nor Against LD 1853, “An Act to Conform the Mining Excise Tax 
Laws to the Maine Metallic Mineral Mining Act and Set the Mining Excise Tax at 
10 Percent, ” and in Support of LD 1855, “Resolve, Directing the Office of Tax 
Policy to Study Maine’s Mining Excise Tax.” 
LD 1853 should be considered by the Taxation Committee in tandem with 
LD 1855, the Governor ’s Resolve bill. LD 1853 conforms more tightly the 
existing terms and definitions contained in the mining excise tax law in Title 36, 
Chapter 371 to the same or similar terms used in the Maine Metallic Mineral 
Mining Act in Title 38, Chapter 3, subchapter 1, Article 9; makes other changes to 
align the mining excise tax with the related Title 38 provisions; and increases the 
minimum tax rate on the gross proceeds of a mining area. 
LD 1855 is the Governor ’s Bill Resolve; it directs the Office of Tax Policy 
to examine and evaluate the State’s taxation of metallic mineral mining business
1
activity, review mining taxes and fees from other states, and report its ﬁndings and 
recommendations, including suggested legislation. Revision of the current mining 
tax statute, including consideration of tax rates, as proposed by LD 1853, should be 
set aside until completion of the LD 1855 Study. 
The Administration notes that another mining regulation bill is also pending 
this Session, LD 1363, "An Act to Support Extraction of Common Minerals by 
Amending the Maine Metallic Mineral Mining Act." Any revisions made to the 
mining excise tax by LD 1853 and LD 1363 should be monitored for potential 
unintended dealignment of the similar terms in the two Titles. The full review of 
mining taxation approaches anticipated under LD 1855 would of course consider 
any such changes by other legislation this Session. 
Brieﬂy, the following information may be helpful to the Committee with 
respect to these two bills. First, a full review of the mining excise tax is 
particularly warranted because the current tax has never been active; state ﬁscal 
information reporting shows no revenue generated for the tax. Second, the basic 
provisions of the current mining excise tax are as follows. Under current law, 
mining companies are subject to an excise tax for the privilege of conducting 
mining in the State equal to the greater of the value of mining facilities and 
equipment multiplied by 0.005, or the tax on gross proceeds from a mine site. The 
tax on gross proceeds from a mine site is calculated by multiplying gross proceeds 
by the greater of the following: 
A. If net proceeds of the mining site are greater than zero, the higher of 
1. 0.009; or 
2. The rate determined by subtracting from 0.045 the quotient of 
gross proceeds divided by 100 times the net proceeds. 
B. If net proceeds of the mining site are not greater than Zero, 0.009.
2
Mining property, other than land and buildings, of a mining company that is 
subject to the mining excise tax is exempt from property tax. Mining excise tax 
revenues must be used to reimburse municipalities for lost revenue resulting from 
any property tax exemptions included in Maine’s mining excise tax law (Title 36, 
Chapter 371). Any revenue remaining after municipal reimbursement is placed 
into the Mining Oversight Fund and is distributed to the Mining Excise Tax Trust 
Fund, Mining Impact Assistance Fund, and the General Fund. The revenues are 
distributed to each fund proportionally based on a ratio established by law, which 
varies depending on how many years the mine site generating the revenue has been 
in operation. 
The estimated ﬁscal impact for LD l853 is not currently available. 
Estimated administrative costs for LD 1853 are nominal and can be absorbed 
within current budgetary allotments. Estimated administrative costs for LD 1855 
can be absorbed within current budgetary allotments. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
3
