 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 456
H.P. 323 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2017
An Act  To Increase Access to Vaccinations
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CHACE of Durham.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  GILLWAY of Searsport, GROHMAN of Biddeford, 
MALABY of Hancock,  WINSOR of  Norway, Senator: BELLOWS of Kennebec.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1734(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง13831, sub -ยง2, as amended by PL 2013, c. 6, ยง1, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
2.  Administration of other vaccines.   A pharmacist licensed in this State who meets 4 
the qualificati ons and requirements of section 13832 and rules adopted by the board, in 5 
addition to influenza vaccines under subsection 1, may administer vaccines that have 6 
United States Food and Drug Administration approval or are  licensed by the United 7 
States Food and Drug Administration and that are listed on the  recommended by 8 
immunization schedule of  the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 9 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, or successor organization, for 10 
administration to adults to a p erson 18 11 years of age or older according to a valid 11 
prescription when the person has an existing primary care physician or other existing 12 
relationship with a nurse practitioner or  from  an authorized practitioner in this State or a 13 
treatment protocol or a written standing order from a practitioner authorized under the 14 
laws of this State to issue a protocol or order .  A pharmacist may administer vaccines 15 
licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration that are outside the 16 
guidelines recommended by on the recommended immunization schedule of  the United 17 
States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Advisory Committee on Immunization 18 
Practices, or successor organization, to a person 18 years of age or older according to a 19 
valid prescription when  the person has an existing primary care physician or other 20 
existing relationship with a nurse practitioner or  from  an authorized practitioner in this 21 
State if the prescription specifically states that the vaccine is medically necessary.  When 22 
the person d oes not have an existing relationship with a primary care physician, nurse 23 
practitioner or other practitioner in this State, the pharmacist may proceed to administer 24 
according to a treatment protocol established by an authorized practitioner or a written 25 
standing order from a practitioner authorized under the laws of this State to issue an 26 
order, a prescription or a protocol to a person 18 years of age or older for vaccines 27 
licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration that are recommended by 28 
the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Advisory Committee on 29 
Immunization Practices, or successor organization, for administration to adults.  30 
SUMMARY  31 
This bill allows the administration of certain vaccines by a pharmacist to a person 1 1 32 
years of age and older, instead of 18 years of age and older as in current law.  A person is 33 
required to have a valid prescription, treatment protocol or written standing order from an 34 
authorized practitioner in this State in order to obtain a vaccinatio n. 35 
 
