 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1892
H.P. 1325 House of  Representatives, March 29, 2018
An Act  To Clarify the Prescribing and  Dispensing  of Naloxone 
Hydrochloride by Pharmacists
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Speaker GIDEON  of Freeport.
Cosponsored by Senator WOODSOME of York and
Representatives: CHACE of  Durham,  FECTEAU of Biddeford, HEAD of Bethel, 
HYMANSON of York, SYLVESTER of Portland, VACHON of Scarborough, Senators: DILL of Penobscot,  SAVIELLO  of Franklin.

Page 1 - 128LR2916(01)-11 Emergency preamble. Whereas,  acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as  emergencies; and
3 Whereas, the State  is facing a crisis  due to the number of deaths caused by opioid-
4 related drug overdoses; and
5 Whereas, unanticipated confusion has arisen regarding the application of recently 
6 enacted laws that  are intended  to decrease the risks  of opioid-related fatalities; and
7 Whereas, this legislation  clarifies  a perceived  ambiguity in order to facilitate the 
8 unimpeded and expedient implementation of these  critically important laws in order  to 
9 save lives;  and
10 Whereas, in the judgment  of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
11 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine  and require  the following legislation as 
12 immediately necessary  for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety;  now, 
13 therefore,
14 Be it enacted  by the People of  the State of Maine as  follows:
15 Sec. 1.  22 MRSA  §2353, sub-§2, ¶E  is enacted to read:
16 E.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary,  a pharmacist may prescribe 
17 and dispense  naloxone hydrochloride to an individual of any age who is at risk of 
18 experiencing an opioid-related drug overdose; is a member of the immediate  family  
19 of, or a friend of, an individual at risk of experiencing an opioid-related drug 
20 overdose; or is in a position to assist an individual  at risk of experiencing an opioid-
21 related drug overdose.
22 Emergency clause.  In view  of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
23 legislation takes effect when  approved.
24 SUMMARY
25 This bill clarifies that a pharmacist may prescribe and dispense naloxone 
26 hydrochloride to an individual of any age who is at risk of experiencing an opioid-related 
27 drug overdose; is a member of the immediate  family of, or a friend  of, an individual at 
28 risk of experiencing an opioid-related drug overdose; or is in a position  to assist  an 
29 individual at risk of experiencing an opioid-related drug overdose.
