 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 6
S.P. 10 In Senate,  January  5, 2017
An Act  To Prohibit Insurance Carriers from Retroactively  
Reducing Payment on Clean Claims Submitted by  Pharmacies
Reference to the Committee on Insurance  and Financial Services suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Representative FOLEY of Wells and
Senators: CARPENTER of Aroostook, CYRWAY of Kennebec, DESCHAMBAULT of York,  
DILL of Penobscot, KATZ of Kennebec, Representatives: SYLVESTER of Portland, TUCKER of  Brunswick.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0193(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA §4317, sub -§2, ¶¶J and K are enacted to read:  2 
J.  A contract entered into by a carrier with a pharmacy provider with respect to a 3 
prescription drug plan offered by the carrier  must provide that the carrier may not 4 
retroactively reduce payment directly, or indirectly reduce payment through an 5 
aggregated effective rate or otherwise, on a claim submitted by the pharmacy 6 
provider except for a claim determined by the carrier not to be a clean claim during 7 
the course of a routine audit conducted pursuant to the contract between the carrier 8 
and the pharmacy provider.  This paragraph does not prohibit any retroactive increase 9 
in payment to the pharmacy provider pursuant to a contract be tween a carrier and the 10 
pharmacy provider.  11 
K.  A contract entered into by a carrier with a pharmacy provider with respect to a 12 
prescription drug plan offered by the carrier must provide that the carrier may not 13 
directly or indirectly charge or hold the pha rmacy provider responsible for any fee 14 
related to a claim:  15 
(1)  That is not apparent at the time the carrier processes the claim;  16 
(2)  That is not reported on the remittance advice of a claim adjudicated by the 17 
carrier; or  18 
(3)  After the initial claim is a djudicated by the carrier.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This bill prohibits a health insurance carrier from retroactively reducing payment on a 21 
properly submitted claim by a pharmacy provider. The bill also prohibits a carrier from 22 
charging or holding a pharmacy provider respo nsible for any fee related to a claim that is 23 
not apparent at the time the carrier processes the claim, that is not reported on the 24 
remittance advice or after the initial claim is adjudicated by the carrier.  25 
 
