 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
\ ~ .,,i' \ 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 Date: ,!j' /c3 J / I 7 L.D. 174 
(FilingNo. H-37'A 
AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
128TH LEGISLATURE 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT"~' to H.P. 130, L.D. 174, Bill, "An Act To Limit 
the Use of Pesticides on School Grounds" 
Amend the bill by striking out the title and substituting the following: 
'An Act To Require Schools To Submit Pest Management Activity Logs and 
Inspection Results to the Board of Pesticides Control for the Purposes of Providing 
Information to the Public' 
Amend the bill by striking out everything after the enacting clause and before the 
summary and inserting the following: 
'Sec. 1. 22 MRSA ยง1471-M, sub-ยง8 is enacted to read: 
8. School pesticide data collection; public posting. The board by rule shall require 
each school to maintain and provide to the board by January 15th of each year a pest 
management activity log for the previous calendar year that includes a list of pesticide 
applications on school prope1ty. The log must include the date and location of each 
application, the name of the pest being managed, the trade name of the pesticide applied, 
the United States Environmental Protection Agency registration number if the pesticide is 
subject to registration, the name and license or certification number of the applicator and 
other pe1tinent information required by the board by rule to be included in the log. 
The board shall post on its publicly accessible website all information provided by each 
school under this subsection. The board shall also post and maintain on its publicly 
accessible website a current list of all board inspections of pesticide use by each school 
and the results of those inspections. 
For purposes of this subsection, "school" means any public or private school, as defined 
by the department by rule.' 
SUMMARY 
This amendment is the minority report of the committee and replaces the bill. The 
amendment establishes in law certain requirements of the Department of Agriculture, 
Page 1 -128LR0163(02)-l 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT.fl, to H.P. 130, L.D. 174 
1 Conservation and Forestry, Board of Pesticides Control related to pest management on 
2 school property, including the maintenance of records related to the application of 
3 pesticides. It requires this information to be provided annually to the board and requires 
4 the board to post that infonnation on its publicly accessible website. It also requires that 
5 the board post on its publicly accessible website a list of all board inspections of a 
6 school's use of pesticides and the results of those inspections. 
7 The fiscal note on the amendment identifies certain requirements in this amendment 
8 as a potential state mandate. In order to be a mandate pursuant to the Constitution of 
9 Maine, a provision must require a local unit of government to expand or modify its 
10 activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures from local revenue. The committee 
11 finds the provisions identified as a potential mandate do not require a local unit of 
12 government to expand or modify its activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures 
13 from local revenue. 
14 The requirement in the amendment that a school submit a copy of its pest 
15 management activity log, which is already required by rule to be maintained, does not 
16 require an expansion or modification of activities so as to necessitate additional 
17 expenditures from local revenue. The committee does not feel that the act of submitting 
18 once per year a pest management activity log that is already required to be maintained 
19 constitutes additional expenditures from local revenue. 
20 FISCAL NOTE REQUIRED 
21 (See attached) 
Page 2 -128LR0163(02)-l 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Revised: 05/09/17 feac. 
State Mandates 128th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 174 LR 163(02) 
An Act To Limit the Use of Pesticides on School Grounds 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment 'jf 
Committee: Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Potential State Mandate -Unfunded 
Required Activity Unit Affected 
Requires local school administrative units to submit a pest management activity log School 
to the Board of Pesticide Control by January 15th of each year for the previous 
calendar year. Local school administrative,units currently prepare a pest 
management activity log with the required data pursuant to rnles established by the 
Board of Pesticide Control. Local Cost 
Insignificant 
statewide 
The required local activities in this bill may represent a state mandate pursuant to the Constitution of Maine. If the bill 
does require a local unit of government to expand or modify its activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures 
from local revenue, the state mandate provisions of the Constitution of Maine require either: (1) General Fund 
appropriations be provided to fund at least 90% of any additional necessitated local costs of the mandate; or (2) a 
Mandate Preamble be added to the bill and two-thirds of the members of each House vote to exempt the mandate from 
the funding requirement. If the bill does represent a state mandate and neither one of these actions occurs, the local 
units of government will not be required to implement the mandated activities. 
LR0163(02)- Fiscal Note -Page 1 ofl 
