 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1193
H.P. 830 House of  Representatives, March 28, 2017
An Act  To Ensure the Cost-efficiency of Contracting out Services by  
the State
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WARREN of Hallowell.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: DUNPHY of Old Town,  HUBBELL of Bar Harbor, JORGENSEN of 
Portland, MARTIN of  Sinclair, McLEAN  of Gorham, SPEAR of South Thomaston, TIPPING  
of Orono,  Senator: DION of Cumberland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1723(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  3 MRSA ยง994, sub -ยง13 is enacted to read:  2 
13.  Review of privatization contracts.  Upon the request of the State Auditor in 3 
accordance with Title 5, section 1824 -B, subsection 3, paragra ph D, to review proposed 4 
privatization contracts and recommend to the State Auditor whether a proposed contract 5 
should be objected to under Title 5, section 1824 -B, subsection 3.  6 
Sec. 2.  5 MRSA c. 167 is enacted to read:  7 
CHAPTER 167  8 
PRIVATIZATION CONTRA CTS 9 
ยง2041.  Privatization contracts  10 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 11 
following terms have the following meanings.  12 
A.  "Agency" means an executive office, department, division, board, commission or 13 
other o ffice or officer in the executive branch of the government of the State.  14 
B.  "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Administrative and Financial 15 
Services.  16 
C.  "Department" means the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  17 
D.  "Dependent" mea ns the spouse or child of an employee if that person would 18 
qualify for dependent status under the United States Internal Revenue Code or for 19 
whom a support order has been or could be granted under Title 19 -A, Part 2 or 3.  20 
E.  "Privatization contract" or "c ontract" means an agreement or a combination or 21 
series of agreements with a term of no more than 5 years by which a 22 
nongovernmental person or entity agrees to provide services valued at $200,000 or 23 
more, which are substantially similar to and in lieu of se rvices previously provided in 24 
whole or in part by employees of an agency.  "Privatization contract" does not 25 
include:  26 
(1)  An agreement subsequent to an executed privatization contract, including an 27 
agreement resulting from a rebidding of the services prov ided under the contract;  28 
(2)  An agreement renewing or extending an executed privatization contract; or  29 
(3)  An agreement solely to provide legal, management consulting, planning, 30 
engineering or design services.  31 
2.  Requirements for privatization contract;  validity and enforceability; bid 32 
process.  An agency may not make a privatization contract unless the agency, in 33 
consultation with the department, has complied with the requirements of this subsection 34 
and the State Auditor does not object to the contract under subsection 3.  A privatization 35 
contract made by an agency that has not complied with the requirements of this 36 
subsection, or that contains terms or conditions intended to avoid the requirements of this 37 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1723(01) -1 
 subsection, or that is objected to by the State Auditor under subsection 3, is invalid and 1 
unenforceable.  In addition to the requirements provided under this subsection, the bid 2 
process described in this subsection is subject to the competitive bid process requirements 3 
of subchapter 1 -A. 4 
A.  The agency  must prepare a written statement describing the services proposed to 5 
be provided under a privatization contract, including the specific quantity and 6 
standard of quality of such services.  This statement is a public record and must be 7 
made available by the  agency for public inspection.  The agency must file the 8 
statement with the department and transmit the statement to the State Auditor for 9 
review under subsection 3.  10 
B.  The agency must solicit competitive sealed bids for the privatization contract 11 
based u pon the statement required under paragraph A.  The deadline for accepting the 12 
sealed bids must be the same for all parties.  13 
C.  For each position in which a bidder will employ a person under the privatization 14 
contract and for which the duties of the employ ee will be substantially similar to the 15 
duties performed by an agency employee, the statement required under paragraph A 16 
must include a statement of the minimum wage rate to be paid for the position, which 17 
is the lesser of step one of the grade or classifi cation under which the comparable 18 
agency employee is paid or, as determined by the department, the average private 19 
sector wage rate for that type of position.  Every bid for a privatization contract must 20 
specifically establish the wage rate for each positi on under the contract, which must 21 
be no less than the minimum wage rate determined under this paragraph.  22 
D.  A bid for a privatization contract and a privatization contract must provide that 23 
the contractor pay a percentage of the costs of health insurance plans for each 24 
employee under the bid or contract that will be or is employed for 20 hours or more 25 
weekly.  The percentage required under the bid or contract must be comparable to the 26 
percentage paid by the State for health insurance plans for comparable a gency 27 
employees.  A health insurance plan provided to an employee under a privatization 28 
contract must provide coverage to the employee and the employee's spouse and 29 
dependent children.  A contractor shall submit quarterly payroll records to the agency 30 
listing the name, address, social security number, hours worked and hourly wage paid 31 
for each employee in the previous quarter.  The Attorney General may bring a civil 32 
action in the Superior Court to enforce this paragraph or to prevent or remedy the 33 
dismissal , demotion or other action prejudicing any employee as a result of the 34 
employee's report of a violation of this paragraph by the contractor.  35 
E.  A privatization contract must require the contractor to offer available employee 36 
positions under the contract t o qualified employees of the agency who satisfy the 37 
hiring criteria of the contractor and whose state employment is terminated as a result 38 
of the contract.  The contract must require the contractor to comply with a policy of 39 
nondiscrimination and equal opp ortunity for all persons protected under Title 5, 40 
chapter 337 and to take affirmative steps to provide equal opportunity for those 41 
persons.  42 
F.  Prior to soliciting bids for a privatization contract under paragraph B, the agency 43 
shall prepare a comprehensiv e written estimate of the costs of agency employees 44 
providing, in the most cost -efficient manner, the services sought under the proposed 45 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR1723(01) -1 
 contract.  The estimate must include all direct and indirect costs of agency employees 1 
providing such services, includi ng, but not limited to, retirement benefits, insurance 2 
and other employee benefit costs.  For the purposes of this estimate, an employee 3 
organization may, at any time before the deadline for the agency to receive sealed 4 
bids under paragraph B, propose amen dments to a collective bargaining agreement to 5 
which it is a party that are intended to reduce the cost estimate under this paragraph.  6 
Any amendments to a collective bargaining agreement between the agency and an 7 
employee organization that are intended to  reduce the cost estimate under this 8 
paragraph must be accounted for by the agency prior to finalizing the estimate under 9 
this paragraph.  The estimate required under this paragraph shall remain confidential 10 
until the deadline for the agency to receive sea led bids pursuant to paragraph B has 11 
passed, at which time the estimate shall be a public record and must be made 12 
available by the agency for public inspection, filed with the department and 13 
transmitted to the State Auditor for review under subsection 3.  14 
G.  Where applicable, the agency shall consult with and provide adequate resources 15 
to an employee organization for the purpose of encouraging and assisting agency 16 
employees to organize and submit a bid, which may be made as part of a joint venture 17 
with othe r persons, to provide the services sought under the proposed privatization 18 
contract.  The agency shall consider any such employee bid on the same basis as all 19 
other bids.  An employee bid submitted under this paragraph is confidential and may 20 
not be disclo sed by the agency, except that the agency may disclose the bid to the 21 
department or the State Auditor as may be required under this section.  The 22 
provisions of sections 18, 18 -A and 19 do not apply to any actions of an agency 23 
employee conducted in accordan ce with this paragraph.  24 
H.  After soliciting and receiving bids, the agency shall publicly designate the bidder 25 
to which it proposes to award the privatization contract.  The agency shall prepare a 26 
comprehensive written analysis of the contract cost based on the designated bid, 27 
including an analysis of the costs of transition from public to private operation, 28 
additional unemployment and retirement benefits, if any, and monitoring and 29 
otherwise administering contract performance.  If the designated bidder pr oposes to 30 
perform any or all of the contract outside of the boundaries of the State, the contract 31 
cost, as determined for the purposes of this analysis, must be increased by the amount 32 
of income tax revenue, if any, that will be lost to the State by the co rresponding 33 
elimination of agency employees, as determined by the State Tax Assessor.  34 
I.  At the time that the agency publicly designates the bidder to which it proposes to 35 
award the privatization contract under paragraph H, the head of the agency and the 36 
commissioner shall each certify in writing to the State Auditor that:  37 
(1)  The agency has complied with all provisions of this section and any other 38 
applicable laws and rules;  39 
(2)  The quality of the services to be provided by the designated bidder is like ly 40 
to satisfy the quality requirements included in the statement prepared under 41 
paragraph A and to equal or exceed the quality of services that could be provided 42 
by agency employees as determined under paragraph F;  43 
 
 Page 4 - 128LR1723(01) -1 
 (3)  The contract cost as determined unde r paragraph H will be less than the 1 
estimated cost as determined under paragraph F, taking into account all 2 
comparable types of costs;  3 
(4)  The designated bidder and its supervisory employees have no adjudicated 4 
record of substantial or repeated willful no ncompliance with any relevant federal 5 
or state law or rule, including, but not limited to, labor relations laws and rules, 6 
occupational safety and health laws and rules, nondiscrimination and affirmative 7 
action laws and rules, environmental protection laws  and rules and conflicts of 8 
interest laws and rules; and  9 
(5)  The proposed privatization contract is otherwise in the public interest.  10 
The agency and the commissioner shall include a copy of the proposed privatization 11 
contract with the certificate transmit ted to the State Auditor in accordance with this 12 
paragraph.  13 
3.  Review by State Auditor; objection; request for review by Office of Program 14 
Evaluation and Government Accountability.  Except as provided in paragraph D, an 15 
agency may not make a privatization  contract and a privatization contract is invalid and 16 
unenforceable if, within 30 days of receiving the certificate and other documents required 17 
under subsection 2, the State Auditor objects to the proposed contract and notifies the 18 
agency in writing of th e objection in accordance with this subsection.  19 
A.  An objection made under this subsection must state specifically the State 20 
Auditor's basis for finding that the agency has failed to comply with the requirements 21 
of subsection 2, including whether the Stat e Auditor finds, based on an independent 22 
review of all relevant facts, that any of the findings required under subsection 2, 23 
paragraph I are incorrect.  24 
B.  In determining compliance by the agency with the requirements of subsection 2, 25 
the State Auditor may  require the attendance and testimony of agency employees and 26 
other witnesses and the production of books, papers and other records relating to the 27 
review under this subsection.  28 
C.  The State Auditor's objection to a proposed privatization contract in acco rdance 29 
with this subsection is final and binding on the agency, except when the State 30 
Auditor, by written notification to the agency, withdraws the objection based on a 31 
revised certificate submitted by the agency and the commissioner.  If the State 32 
Auditor  withdraws an objection under this paragraph, the specific reasons for the 33 
withdrawal of the objection, as based on the State Auditor's review of the revised 34 
certificate, must be stated in the written notification to the agency.  35 
D.  No later than 30 days a fter receiving from the agency the certificate and other 36 
documents required under subsection 2, the State Auditor may request that the Office 37 
of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability, established under Title 3, 38 
section 991, review the proposed c ontract and documents with the joint standing 39 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over program evaluation and 40 
government accountability matters and recommend to the State Auditor whether the 41 
proposed contract complies with the requirements of subsection 2.  If, prior to the 42 
expiration of the 30 -day review period, the Office of Program Evaluation and 43 
 
 Page 5 - 128LR1723(01) -1 
 Government Accountability agrees in writing to review the proposed contract, the 1 
State Auditor is granted an additional 30 days in which to notify the agency of its 2 
objection to the proposed contract in accordance with this subsection.  3 
E.  The State Auditor may adopt rules to implement the provisions of this subsection.  4 
Rules adopted pursuant to this paragraph are routine technical rules as describe d in 5 
Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 6 
4.  Applicability.  The provisions of this section do not apply to any privatization 7 
contracts executed prior to the effective date of this section.  8 
SUMMARY  9 
This bill implements a statutory process for the review of privatization contracts, 10 
which are agreements with a term of no more than 5 years by which a nongovernmental 11 
person or entity agrees to provide services valued at $200,000 or more, which are 12 
substantially similar to and in lieu of services previously pr ovided in whole or in part by 13 
state agency employees.  Under this process, the State Auditor is given 30 days from the 14 
date that the agency designates the bidder to which it proposes to award the privatization 15 
contract to object to, and thereby invalidate,  the proposed contract for failure to comply 16 
with statutory requirements.  The State Auditor is also authorized to seek a review by the 17 
Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability of any privatization 18 
contract.  19 
 
