 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 200
H.P. 156 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2017
An Act  To Allow Certain  Municipal Shellfish  Conservation 
Wardens To  Seize and Sell Marine  Organisms Taken in Violation of 
a Shellfish Conservation Ordinance
Reference to the Committee on Marine Resources  suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SIMMONS  of Waldoboro.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  O'CONNOR of  Berwick, PIERCE of  Dresden, SPEAR of 
South Thomaston.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0354(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  12 MRSA §6671, sub -§8, ¶D is enacted to read:  2 
D.  A certified municipal shellfish conservation warden who meets the requirements 3 
of Title 25, section 2804 -I and who is authorized by the  municipality to arrest 4 
violators of a shellfish conservation ordinance may seize and sell any marine 5 
organism taken by an alleged violator in connection with the alleged violation. The 6 
proceeds of the sale of the seized marine organism must be retained by  the 7 
municipality pending disposition of the civil or criminal proceedings against the 8 
alleged violator. The proceeds must be used by the municipality in connection with 9 
its shellfish conservation program if the alleged violator is convicted or adjudicated  10 
of having committed a violation of the shellfish conservation ordinance. The 11 
proceeds must be returned to the alleged violator if there is no conviction or 12 
adjudication of having committed a violation of the shellfish conservation ordinance.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This bill allows a municipal shellfish conservation warden who has completed the 15 
training required to make arrests to seize and sell any marine organism taken in 16 
connection with an alleged violation of a shellfish conservation ordinance. The proceeds 17 
of the sal e must be held pending disposition of the proceedings against the alleged 18 
violator, at which time the proceeds must either be returned to the person or retained by 19 
the municipality to use in connection with its shellfish conservation program.  20 
 
