 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1615
H.P. 1111 House of  Representatives, May 18, 2017
An Act  To Facilitate  Substance Abuse Treatment for Certain  
Applicants for and Recipients of Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Benefits
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SANDERSON  of Chelsea.  (GOVERNOR'S BILL)
Cosponsored by Representatives:  GERRISH of Lebanon,  GROHMAN  of Biddeford, 
MALABY of Hancock,  O'CONNOR of Berwick,  PIERCE of Dresden, STROM of Pittsfield.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2326(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3762, sub -ยง20, as reallocated by RR 2011, c. 1, ยง33, is 2 
amended to read:  3 
20.  Denial of assistance based on positive drug test.  A An applicant for or a  4 
recipient of TANF assis tance may be denied TANF assistance as described in this 5 
subsection.  6 
A.  The department may administer a drug test to a recipient of TANF assistance who 7 
has been convicted of a drug -related felony, as described in Section 115 of 8 
PRWORA, within 20 years of that person's date of conviction  shall require an 9 
applicant for TANF assistance to complete a written screening tool to determine the 10 
applicant's likelihood of current substance use . 11 
B.  If a person  the result of a written screening tool completed by an ap plicant  under 12 
paragraph A tests positive for an illegal drug, the department shall notify that person 13 
that or other factors create a reasonable suspicion by the department that the applicant 14 
is using an illegal drug or abusing a controlled substance, then : 15 
(1)  The person's  applicant's  TANF assistance is subject to termination  16 
application must be denied unless the applicant enrolls in a substance abuse 17 
treatment program appropriate to the type of illegal drug being used or the 18 
controlled substance being abu sed by that applicant. The department shall 19 
identify and approve an appropriate program and pay for the substance abuse 20 
treatment program with available TANF program funds ; 21 
(2)  The person  applicant  is entitled to a fair hearing regarding the termination  22 
denial  of TANF assistance; and  23 
(3)  If the person  applicant  requests a fair hearing, the person  applicant  shall 24 
submit to a 2nd drug test to verify the results of the first drug test . 25 
C.  The results of the 2nd drug test must be available prior to the fair hearing, if 26 
practicable.  The person  applicant  shall cooperate in a timely manner in submitting to 27 
the 2nd drug test.  If the 2nd drug test confirms that the person  applicant  is using an 28 
illegal drug or abusing a controlled substance , the person  applicant  may avoid 29 
termination  denial  of TANF assistance by enrolling in a substance abuse treatment 30 
program appropriate to the type of illegal drug being used or the controlled substance  31 
being used abused  by that person  applicant, as described in paragraph B, 32 
subp aragraph (1) . 33 
D.  If the department determines that, for good cause, a person  an applicant  is unable 34 
to enroll in a substance abuse program as required by paragraph C, the person  35 
applicant  remains eligible for TANF assistance until such time that the depar tment 36 
determines that the person  applicant  is able to enroll in a substance abuse treatment 37 
program.  38 
E.  The department shall terminate  deny  TANF assistance to a person  an applicant  39 
who fails to request a fair hearing and submit to a 2nd drug test as descr ibed in 40 
paragraph B or who fails to participate in a substance abuse treatment program as 41 
required pursuant to paragraph C or D.  42 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR2326(01) -1 
 F.  If the department has a reasonable suspicion that a recipient of TANF assistance is 1 
using an illegal drug or abusing a cont rolled substance, the department may require 2 
the recipient to complete a written screening tool to determine the recipient's 3 
likelihood of current substance use.  If the result of the written screening tool 4 
confirms that reasonable suspicion, the provision s of paragraphs B to E apply as if the 5 
recipient were an applicant.  6 
The department shall adopt routine technical rules, as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, 7 
subchapter 2 -A, to implement the provisions of this subsection, including determining 8 
what constitut es "good cause" under paragraph D.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This bill requires an applicant for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, or 11 
TANF, benefits to complete a written screening tool to determine the applicant's 12 
likelihood of current substance use.  This bill also  allows the Department of Health and 13 
Human Services, if it has a reasonable suspicion that a recipient of TANF benefits is 14 
using an illegal drug or abusing a controlled substance, to require the recipient to 15 
complete a written screening tool to determine t he TANF recipient's likelihood of 16 
substance use.  17 
If the results of the screening tool or other factors provide the department with a 18 
reasonable suspicion that the applicant or recipient is using an illegal drug or abusing a 19 
controlled substance, the depart ment must identify and pay for an appropriate substance 20 
abuse treatment program for the applicant or recipient as a condition of obtaining or 21 
receiving benefits.  22 
If the applicant or recipient refuses to enroll in a treatment program, the applicant or 23 
recip ient may appeal the denial of benefits but is subject to a drug test.  If the applicant or 24 
recipient fails the drug test and is unsuccessful with the appeal, the applicant or recipient 25 
may still enroll in substance abuse treatment as a condition of obtaini ng or receiving 26 
benefits.  27 
 
