 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 450
S.P. 152 In Senate, February 7, 2017
An Act  To Prevent  Oil Spills  in Casco Bay
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Senators:  BREEN of Cumberland,  DION of Cumberland, GRATWICK of 
Penobscot, MILLETT of  Cumberland, SAVIELLO  of Franklin, Representatives: CAMPBELL 
of Orrington, SYLVESTER  of Portland,  TUCKER of Brunswick.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0105(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA §546, sub -§4, ¶G, as amended by PL 1989, c. 546, §9, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
G.  Requirements for the safety and operation of vessels, barges, tugs, motor vehicles, 4 
motorize d equipment and other equipment relating to the use and operation of 5 
terminals, facilities and refineries and the approach and departure from terminals, 6 
facilities and refineries .  These requirements must provide that all vessels and barges 7 
engaged in tran sfers of oil or oil by -products, including transfers during ship -to-ship 8 
bunkering operations, be protected by an oil boom device during such transfers, 9 
except when an oil boom device cannot be deployed due to personnel safety 10 
conditions or weather, wind, sea or ice conditions or when, in the department's 11 
determination, use of an oil boom device is unnecessary based upon the 12 
characteristics of the oil or oil by -product involved in a transfer, and further provide 13 
that any vessel or barge engaged in those tra nsfers of oil or oil by -products notify the 14 
United States Coast Guard prior to engaging in those transfers ; 15 
Sec. 2.  Board of Environmental Protection; oil discharge prevention and 16 
pollution control rules.  The Board of Environmental Protection shall, by J une 1, 17 
2018, amend its rules relating to oil discharge prevention and pollution control for marine 18 
oil terminals, transportation pipelines and vessels to include the provisions required by 19 
the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, section 546, subsection 4, pa ragraph G.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This bill amends the regulatory powers of the Board of Environmental Protection to 22 
require that rules relating to oil discharge prevention and pollution control for terminals, 23 
facilities, refineries, vessels and related equipment adopted  under the board's authority 24 
must provide, subject to specified exceptions, that all vessels and barges engaged in 25 
transfers of oil or oil by -products, including transfers during ship -to-ship bunkering 26 
operations, be protected by an oil boom device during those transfers and notify the 27 
United States Coast Guard prior to those transfers.  The bill also directs the Board of 28 
Environmental Protection to amend its existing rules relating to oil discharge prevention 29 
and pollution control to reflect these statutor y changes.  30 
 
