 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 980
H.P. 693 House of  Representatives, March 9, 2017
An Act  To Improve  Absentee Balloting
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PIERCE of Falmouth.
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland  and
Representatives: DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, DENNO of Cumberland, FULLER of Lewiston,  
MOONEN of Portland,  O'NEIL of Saco, TIPPING of Orono.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1484(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA §753 -B, sub -§6, ¶A, as amended by PL 2013, c. 457, §3, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
A.  The list of absentee voters must include each voter's name, residence address, 4 
voting di strict and party affiliation; the date and manner by which the ballot was 5 
requested, issued and received; and a notation of whether the application and the 6 
ballot were accepted or rejected.  For an application that was rejected, the list must 7 
include the r easons for such rejection.   The clerk must also indicate on the list when 8 
the absentee voter is a uniformed service voter, overseas voter or township voter.  By 9 
the time that all absentee ballots have been processed on election day, the clerk must 10 
update t he central voter registration system or annotate the printed list of absentee 11 
voters to reflect all ballots that were received by the close of the polls on election day, 12 
including a notation of whether the ballots were accepted or rejected and the reasons 13 
for such rejections.  This list, reflecting all absentee ballots received by the close of 14 
the polls, must be made available for public inspection.  Any absentee voter certified 15 
as a participant in the Address Confidentiality Program pursuant to Title 5, se ction 16 
90-B must be listed by the voter code assigned to that individual under the program 17 
instead of by the voter's name and reflect the Address Confidentiality Program 18 
address assigned to the voter.  The list of absentee voters must be sorted so that the 19 
program participants appear at the end of the list and must be printed on a separate 20 
page of the list.  The portion of the list of absentee voters relating to Address 21 
Confidentiality Program participants must be kept under seal and excluded from 22 
public ins pection.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
This bill requires that the list of requests for absentee ballots that a clerk is required to 25 
create and maintain include, in the case of a request that is rejected, the reasons for the 26 
rejection.  27 
 
