 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 152
H.P. 110 House of  Representatives, January 19, 2017
An Act  To Strengthen Intragovernment Communication
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MARTIN of Sinclair.
Cosponsored by Senator JACKSON of Aroostook and
Representatives: BEEBE-CENTER of Rockland, BRYANT of Windham, DOORE of Augusta, GOLDEN of Lewiston,  KORNFIELD of Bangor, MASTRACCIO of Sanford,  SPEAR  of 
South Thomaston.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0400(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  2 MRSA c. 7 is enacted to read:  2 
CHAPTER 7  3 
AGENCIES  4 
ยง201.  Participation by agencies in legislative process  5 
Upon the request of a joint standing committee of the Legislature or a study 6 
commission or work group formed by legislative action, a commissioner or director of a 7 
state agency or the commissioner's or director's designee shall appear before and 8 
participate in a public hearing or work session of that committee, commission or work 9 
group.  The request to appear must be in writing and must specify the date and time of the 10 
hearing or work session.  11 
As used in this chapter, "state agency" means a state department, agency, office, 12 
board or commission or a quasi -independent agency, board, co mmission, authority or 13 
institution.  14 
SUMMARY  15 
This bill requires the commissioner or director of a state agency, which includes 16 
executive branch departments and quasi -independent agencies, to appear before a joint 17 
standing committee of the Legislature or a s tudy commission or work group formed by 18 
legislative action and to participate in a hearing or work session of that committee, 19 
commission or work group.  The committee, commission or work group must request the 20 
attendance of the commissioner or director in writing and provide the date and time of the 21 
hearing or work session.  22 
 
