 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 102
H.P. 70 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2017
An Act  To Make  a Person Convicted of a Crime Liable for  Payment 
of Investigative and Prosecutorial  Costs
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative STEWART of  Presque Isle.
Cosponsored by Senator ROSEN of Hancock  and
Representatives: FREDETTE of Newport, GERRISH of Lebanon, HERRICK of Paris, JOHANSEN of Monticello, SAMPSON of Alfred,  WARD of Dedham.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0570(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง1301, sub -ยง7 is enacted to read:  2 
7.  In addition to any other authorized sentencing alternative, the court shall impose 3 
on a person convicted of a crime under this code a fin e of an amount equal to the actual 4 
costs of investigation and prosecution of the crime for which the person is convicted that 5 
have been incurred by the office of the attorney for the State, a law enforcement agency 6 
or any other governmental entity that req uests payment of such costs.  7 
A.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the court shall impose a 8 
fine under this subsection notwithstanding the financial incapacity of the convicted 9 
person to pay the fine.  10 
B.  The court shall require the con victed person to pay the fine within a specified 11 
period of time or in specified installments, consistent with section 1303, except that 12 
the end of such period or the last such installment may not be later than:  13 
(1)  The end of a period of probation, if the  sentence imposed by the court on the 14 
convicted person includes a term of imprisonment with probation;  15 
(2)  If the sentence imposed by the court on the convicted person does not include 16 
a period of probation, 5 years after the end of the term of imprisonme nt imposed; 17 
or 18 
(3)  If the sentence imposed by the court does not include a term of 19 
imprisonment, and in all other circumstances, 5 years after the date on which the 20 
court imposes the sentence on the convicted person.  21 
C.  The expiration of the period for p ayment of the fine under paragraph B does not 22 
relieve the convicted person of the obligation to pay any unpaid portion of the fine 23 
imposed under this subsection.  24 
D.  If the sentence imposed by the court on the convicted person includes a period of 25 
probatio n, payment of the fine imposed under this subsection must be imposed as a 26 
condition of probation in accordance with section 1204.  27 
E.  The amount of the fine to be imposed under this subsection must be established by 28 
the court by a preponderance of the evid ence.  The burden of demonstrating the 29 
amount of the costs incurred by the office of the attorney for the State, a law 30 
enforcement agency or any other governmental entity requesting payment of costs is 31 
on the attorney for the State.  The burden of demonstr ating the financial resources 32 
and financial needs of the convicted person is on the convicted person.  33 
F.  Costs for the office of the attorney for the State must be set by the court in all 34 
cases at no less than $50 per case when a Class D or Class E crime is charged and no 35 
less than $100 per case when murder or a Class A, Class B or Class C crime is 36 
charged.  The court may set a higher amount upon a showing of sufficient proof of 37 
higher costs incurred by the office of the attorney for the State.  38 
G.  Costs r ecovered under this subsection on behalf of the office of the attorney for 39 
the State, a law enforcement agency or other governmental entity must be remitted to 40 
the Treasurer of State for disbursement.  Costs recovered under this subsection by the 41 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0570(01) -1 
 office of  the attorney for the State, a law enforcement agency or other governmental 1 
entity must be used for actual costs incurred in investigating and prosecuting criminal 2 
cases, including payment of the salaries of permanent employees.  3 
SUMMARY  4 
This bill amends th e Maine Criminal Code to require that a court impose on a person 5 
convicted of a crime under the code a fine of an amount equal to the actual costs of 6 
investigation and prosecution of the crime for which the person is convicted that have 7 
been incurred by th e office of the attorney for the State, a law enforcement agency or any 8 
other governmental entity that requests payment of such costs.  Costs recovered under 9 
this provision must be returned to the office of the attorney for the State, a law 10 
enforcement age ncy or governmental entity that incurred the costs and must be used for 11 
actual costs incurred by such entities in investigating and prosecuting criminal cases.  12 
 
