 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 879
H.P. 628 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2017
An Act  To Allow Any Person To Purchase Voter Registration Lists
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CASÁS of  Rockport.  (BY REQUEST)

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1084(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA §196 -A, sub -§1, ¶B, as amended by PL 2015, c. 447, §7, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
B.  A political party, or an individual or organization engaged in so -called "get out 4 
the vo te" efforts directly related to a campaign or other activities directly related to a 5 
campaign, or an individual who has been elected or appointed to and is currently 6 
serving in a municipal, county, state or federal office,  Any person  may purchase a list 7 
or report of certain voter information from the central voter registration system by 8 
making a request to the Secretary of State or to a registrar if the information 9 
requested concerns voters in that municipality. The Secretary of State or the registrar 10 
shall  make available the following voter record information, subject to the fees set 11 
forth in subsection 2:  the voter's name, residence address, mailing address, year of 12 
birth, enrollment status, electoral districts, voter status, date of registration, date of  13 
change of the voter record if applicable, voter participation history, voter record 14 
number and any special designations indicating uniformed service voters, overseas 15 
voters or township voters.  Any person obtaining, either directly or indirectly, 16 
informat ion from the central voter registration system under this paragraph may not 17 
sell, distribute or use the data for any unlawful  purpose that is not directly related to 18 
activities of a political party, "get out the vote" efforts directly related to a campaign  19 
or other activities directly related to a campaign.  This paragraph does not prohibit 20 
political parties, party committees, candidate committees, political action committees 21 
or any other organizations that have purchased information from the central voter 22 
registration system from providing access to such information to their members for 23 
purposes directly related to party activities, "get out the vote" efforts or a campaign.  24 
For purposes of this paragraph, "campaign" has the same meaning as in section 1052,  25 
subsection 1 . 26 
SUMMARY  27 
This bill allows any person to purchase voter registration information.  Current law 28 
allows only candidates, office holders, political action committees and other similarly 29 
situated persons to purchase such information.  30 
 
