 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 697
H.P. 488 House of  Representatives, February 28, 2017
Resolve, To  Establish a Commission To Study the Roles and Rights 
of Grandparents  in Raising Their Grandchildren
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WARD of Dedham.
Cosponsored by Senator ROSEN of Hancock  and
Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, HANLEY of  Pittston, KINNEY of Knox,  McELWEE of  
Caribou, STEARNS of Guilford, STEWART  of Presque Isle, THERIAULT  of China, TUELL 
of East Machias.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1657(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Roles and rights of grandparents study commission.  Resolved:  1 
That the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court shall convene a study commission 2 
consisting of representatives of appropriate state agencies and stakeholders.  The study 3 
commissio n shall examine the increasing role of grandparents in raising their 4 
grandchildren and appropriate legal rights of grandparents in the care, custody and 5 
control of those grandchildren.  The study commission shall develop recommendations 6 
regarding roles and  rights of grandparents and shall submit its report and 7 
recommendations, with any necessary implementing legislation, to the Joint Standing 8 
Committee on Judiciary no later than December 6, 2017.  After receipt and review of the 9 
report, the committee may su bmit legislation to the Second Regular Session of the 128th 10 
Legislature.  11 
SUMMARY  12 
This resolve requires the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court to convene a 13 
study commission to examine the increasing role of grandparents in raising their 14 
grandchildr en and appropriate legal rights of grandparents in the care, custody and 15 
control of those grandchildren.  16 
 
