 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1462
S.P. 508 In Senate, April 18, 2017
Resolve, To  Establish a Pilot Project To Facilitate the Acquisition of 
Basic Emergency Medical Training in Rural Communities in the State
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by President THIBODEAU of Waldo.
Cosponsored by Representative GILLWAY  of Searsport and
Senator: MAKER  of Washington, Representatives:  GERRISH of  Lebanon,  KINNEY of Knox, 
ZEIGLER of  Montville.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1534(01) -1 
 Whereas, a large percentage of emergency medical services personnel in rural areas 1 
of the State are volunteers; and  2 
Whereas, demographic changes are depleting the pool of available emergency 3 
medical services personnel, and rural emergency medical services entities struggle to 4 
recruit volunteers; and  5 
Whereas, it is critical to address issues of recruitment of emergency medical 6 
services personnel, especially in the rural areas of the State; now, therefore, be it  7 
Sec. 1.  Basic emergency medical training; pilo t project. Resolved: That the 8 
Department of Public Safety, Maine Emergency Medical Services shall establish an 9 
emergency medical services apprenticeship pilot project to expand the pool of available 10 
emergency medical services personnel.  Maine Emergency Me dical Services shall 11 
establish apprenticeship programs in 4 geographically diverse towns in the State with 12 
5,000 or fewer residents and, as part of the pilot project, shall ensure the provision of 13 
accessible and affordable basic emergency medical training classes in those towns.  14 
Maine Emergency Medical Services shall provide a report by January 15, 2019 to the 15 
joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over emergency medical 16 
services matters regarding the status of the pilot project and  its effect on the number of 17 
emergency medical services personnel in rural areas of the State and containing 18 
recommendations for the continuance, discontinuance or modification of the pilot project.  19 
The pilot project terminates March 15, 2020.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
The purpose of this resolve is to address issues of recruitment of emergency medical 22 
services personnel in the rural areas of the State.  This resolve directs the Department of 23 
Public Safety, Maine Emergency Medical Services to establish an emergency medical 24 
services apprenticeship pilot project to expand the pool of available emergency medical 25 
services personnel.  Maine Emergency Medical Services is directed to establish 26 
apprenticeship programs in 4 geographically diverse towns in the State having 5,000 or 27 
fewer residents and provide accessible and affordable basic emergency medical training 28 
classes in those towns.  29 
 
