 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1009
H.P. 710 House of  Representatives, March 14, 2017
Resolve, To  Require the Maine Turnpike Authority To Study the 
Feasibility of Constructing a Gorham Connector
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative McLEAN of Gorham.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2088(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Maine Turnpike Authority to study feasibility of constructing 1 
connector.  Resolved:  That the Maine Turnpike Authority shall study the feasibility of 2 
undertaking the planning, design and construction of a connector in the Town of Gorham 3 
in Cumberl and County from Route 114 in South Gorham to an interchange on the Maine 4 
Turnpike, referred to in this resolve as "the connector."  In conducting the study, the 5 
authority shall examine the need for the connector, determine whether the authority is the 6 
best entity, from both efficiency and fiscal viewpoints, to construct the connector and 7 
evaluate all reasonable alternatives, as required by the Sensible Transportation Policy 8 
Act.  If the authority determines that it is the best entity to construct the connec tor, the 9 
authority shall provide options for funding the planning, design and construction of the 10 
connector.  11 
The authority shall report its findings and recommendations, along with any 12 
necessary implementing legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 13 
no later than December 6, 2017.  The joint standing committee may report out a bill to the 14 
Second Regular Session of the 128th Legislature based on the findings and 15 
recommendations of the authority.  16 
SUMMARY  17 
This resolve requires the Maine Tu rnpike Authority to examine the feasibility of the 18 
authority's planning, designing and constructing a connector from the Town of Gorham to 19 
the Maine Turnpike.  The authority is required to examine all reasonable alternatives and 20 
report its findings and rec ommendations, including funding methods, to the Joint 21 
Standing Committee on Transportation, which may report out a bill to the Second 22 
Regular Session of the 128th Legislature based on the report of the authority.  23 
 
