 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 413
S.P. 140 In Senate, February 7, 2017
An Act  To Limit the  Influence of Lobbyists by Expanding the 
Prohibition on Accepting Political Contributions
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CHENETTE of  York.
Cosponsored by Representative DILLINGHAM of Oxford and
Senator: CHIPMAN of Cumberland,  Representatives: BERRY  of Bowdoinham,  HICKMAN  of 
Winthrop.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0487(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  1 MRSA §1015, sub -§3, ¶B, as amended by PL 2009, c. 286, §1, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
B.  The Governor, a member of the Legislature or any constitutional officer or the 4 
staff or agen t of the Governor, a member of the Legislature or any constitutional 5 
officer may not intentionally solicit or accept a contribution from a lobbyist, lobbyist 6 
associate or employer during any period of time in which the Legislature is convened 7 
before final adjournment , except for a qualifying contribution as defined under Title 8 
21-A, section 1122, subsection 7.  A lobbyist, lobbyist associate or employer may not 9 
intentionally give, offer or promise a contribution, other than a qualifying 10 
contribution, to the  Governor, a member of the Legislature or any constitutional 11 
officer or the staff or agent of the Governor, a member of the Legislature or any 12 
constitutional officer during any time in which the Legislature is convened before 13 
final adjournment .  These proh ibitions apply to contributions directly and indirectly 14 
solicited or accepted by, or given, offered and promised to a political action 15 
committee, ballot question committee or party committee of which the Governor, a 16 
member of the Legislature, a constitutio nal officer or the staff or agent of these 17 
officials is a treasurer, officer or primary fund -raiser or decision maker.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
Current law prohibits the Governor, members of the Legislature, constitutional 20 
officers and the staff or agents of the Governor, members of the Legislature and 21 
constitutional officers from soliciting or accepting contributions from a lobbyist, lobbyist 22 
associate or employer while the Legislature is convened in session.  This bill extends 23 
application of that prohibition year -round, r egardless of whether the Legislature is in 24 
session.  25 
 
