 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 710
H.P. 501 House of  Representatives, February 28, 2017
An Act  Regarding Emergency Lights  on Firefighters' Personal 
Vehicles Used When Responding to Emergency Calls
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative STEWART of  Presque Isle.
Cosponsored by Senator CARPENTER of Aroostook and
Representatives: HARRINGTON of Sanford, THERIAULT of China.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1113(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  29-A MRSA §2054, sub -§2, ¶F, as amended by PL 2015, c. 31, §2, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
F.  Only vehicles listed in this paragraph, rural mail vehicles as provided in paragraph 4 
C, su bparagraph (5) and school buses may be equipped with, display or use a red 5 
auxiliary or emergency light.  6 
(1)  Emergency lights used on an ambulance, an emergency medical service 7 
vehicle, a fire department vehicle, a fire vehicle, a rescue vehicle or a haza rdous 8 
material response vehicle must emit a red light or a combination of red and white 9 
light.  10 
(2)  The municipal officers or a municipal official designated by the municipal 11 
officers, with the approval of the fire chief, may authorize an active member of a 12 
municipal or volunteer fire department to use one red or combination red and 13 
white flashing auxiliary light mounted in the windshield or on the dashboard at 14 
the front of the vehicle or 2 flashing red or combination red and white auxiliary 15 
lights mounted on the front of the vehicle above the front bumper and below the 16 
hood and one red auxiliary light mounted in the rear window area or 2 flashing 17 
red or combination red and white auxiliary lights mounted on the rear of the 18 
vehicle above the rear bumper .  The  light or lights may be displayed but may be 19 
used only while the member is en route to or at the scene of a fire or other 20 
emergency.  A light mounted on the dashboard or in the windshield must be 21 
shielded so that the emitted light does not interfere with t he operator's vision.  22 
The use of lights may be revoked at any time by the fire chief.  23 
(3)  Members of an emergency medical service licensed by Maine Emergency 24 
Medical Services may display and use on a vehicle red or combination red and 25 
white flashing auxi liary lights and red auxiliary lights of the same proportion, in 26 
the same location and under the same conditions as those permitted municipal 27 
and volunteer firefighters, when authorized by the chief official of the emergency 28 
medical service. The use of lig hts may be revoked at any time by the chief 29 
official of the emergency medical service.  30 
SUMMARY  31 
This bill allows municipal and volunteer firefighters who are responding to 32 
emergency calls in personal vehicles to use red or red and white emergency lights on the 33 
rear of the vehicles similar to those permitted to be used on the front of the vehicles.  34 
 
