 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
Date: 5/17/Z.017 , 
Ma) or,· ±-1_ ___ 2 L.D. 1319 
(Filing No. S-J Olf ) 
3 EDUCATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
4 Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Secretary of the Senate. 
5 STATE OF MAINE 
6 SENATE 
7 128TH LEGISLATURE 
8 FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
9 COMMITTEE AMENDMENT" " to S.P. 448, L.D. 1319, Bill, "An Act To 
10 Ensure Federal Title I Funding Is Directed to Classroom Leaming" 
11 Amend the bill by incorporating the attached fiscal note. 
12 SUMMARY 
13 This amendment is the majority report of the committee. The amendment 
14 incorporates a fiscal note. 
Page 1 -128LR1001(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 05/10/17 fe.ac:.. 
128th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 1319 LR 1001(02) 
An Act To Ensure Federal Title I Funding Is Directed to Classroom Learning 
Fiscal Detail and Notes Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment ';it c S'-, o0 
Committee: Education and Cultural Affairs 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Current biennium cost increase -General Fund 
Current biennium cost increase -Local School Administrative Units 
This legislation eliminates the requirement that federal Title I funds received by a school administrative unit (SAU) be 
deducted from that SAU's operating allocation before the Essential Programs and Services (EPS) per-pupil rates are 
calculated. 
Ever since the implementation of the (EPS) model, the student-to-staff ratio's for teachers and education technicians 
used to calculate the EPS per-pupil rates have included teachers and education technicians that are paid with federal 
Title I funds. This was done, in part, because at the time the EPS model was developed, a break-out of teachers and 
education technicians that were paid with federal Title I was not available. The EPS per-pupil rates are used to 
calculate the basic and weighted cost allocations that contribute to each school administrative unit's total operating 
allocation. In order to negate the impact of the federally funded teachers and education technicians being included in 
EPS per-pupil rates, and avoid providing state and local funds for costs already being paid by federal funds, the 
amount of Title I funding that the SAU's receive is deducted from the operating allocation before the EPS per pupil 
rates are dete1mined. 
According to the Depatiment of Education, repealing the adjustment for federal Title 1 funds as pati of an SAU's 
operating allocation without making the necessary change to student-to-staff ratios will increase the total cost of K-12 
public education by approximately $42,851,231 in fiscal year 2017-18. The impact to the State and local SAU's will 
depend on any additional General Fund dollars provided to supp01i this legislation. If the full amount is appropriated, 
there will be no fiscal impact to local SAU's; if no General Fund dollars are appropriated, the full responsibility of this 
legislation will fall to local school units. If only a potiion of the total cost is appropriated, local SAU's will need to 
raise the remaining balance. 
LRl 001 (02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
