 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 607
H.P. 423 House of  Representatives, February 16, 2017
An Act  To Enhance Maine's  Coordinated Response to Mental 
Health Crises
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TALBOT ROSS  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator DION of Cumberland  and
Representatives: GATTINE of Westbrook, GERRISH of Lebanon, MALABY  of Hancock, 
RECKITT of South Portland, STEWART of  Presque Isle, WARREN of Hallowell, Senators:  
DESCHAMBAULT of York, ROSEN of Hancock.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2051(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  34-B MRSA c. 3, sub -c. 3, art. 3 is enacted to read:  2 
ARTICLE 3  3 
CRISIS INTERVENTION COORDINATION  4 
ยง3641.  Crisis intervention coordination  5 
The department shall provide assistance to crisi s intervention teams, agencies and law 6 
enforcement agencies to enable them to coordinate crisis intervention services and to 7 
fulfill the terms of the memorandum of understanding required under subsection 2.  8 
1.  Definitions.   As used in this section, unless  the context otherwise indicates, the 9 
following terms have the following meanings.  10 
A.  "Agency" means a person, firm, association or corporation that provides mental 11 
health services through one or more contracts with the department for the purposes of 12 
providing crisis services, but does not include the individual or corporate professional 13 
practice of one or more psychologists or psychiatrists.  14 
B.  "Crisis intervention team" means a crisis intervention team established under 15 
section 3622.  16 
C.  "Law enforcemen t agency" means the State Police, a sheriff's department or a 17 
municipal police department.  18 
D.  "Law enforcement officer" means a person who by virtue of public employment 19 
is vested by law with the power to make arrests for crime or serve criminal process.  20 
E.  "Person in need of mental health crisis services" means a person who appears to a 21 
law enforcement officer to be experiencing a mental health crisis or to have an 22 
untreated mental illness that compromises the ability of the person to function safely 23 
in the community.  24 
2.  Memorandum of understanding.   By July 1, 2018, a crisis intervention team or 25 
agency shall enter into and sign a memorandum of understanding with each law 26 
enforcement agency that provides law enforcement services in the area of the State served 27 
by the crisis intervention team or agency.  The memorandum of understanding must be 28 
effective for 3 years and must be renewed every 3 years. The memorandum of 29 
understanding must include the following:  30 
A.  A description of the process that the law en forcement agency uses to identify a 31 
person in need of mental health crisis services with whom the law enforcement 32 
officer has contact in the course of performing official duties, regardless of the 33 
custodial standing of the person;  34 
B.  A description of the protocol that the law enforcement agency uses, within 24 35 
hours of contact with a person in need of mental health crisis services, to share a 36 
contact report with a crisis intervention team or agency;  37 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR2051(01) -1 
 C.  A description of the process the crisis intervention team or agency uses to receive 1 
the contact report provided under paragraph B;  2 
D.  A description of the protocol the crisis intervention team or agency uses to 3 
communicate with the person in need of mental health crisis services or the guardian 4 
or family me mbers of that person; and  5 
E.  A description of the procedures that will be used to convene on a quarterly basis 6 
multidisciplinary team meetings between the crisis intervention team or agency and 7 
the law enforcement agency to review the experiences of the p arties to the 8 
memorandum of understanding and to discuss opportunities for improvement in the 9 
provision of services to persons in need of mental health crisis services.  10 
SUMMARY  11 
This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services to provide assis tance 12 
to crisis intervention teams and agencies that provide mental health crisis services and to 13 
law enforcement agencies to enable them to coordinate mental health crisis services.  The 14 
bill sets July 1, 2018 as the date by which a crisis intervention te am or agency must enter 15 
into and sign a memorandum of understanding with each law enforcement agency that 16 
provides law enforcement services in the area of the State served by the crisis 17 
intervention team or agency.  The bill requires the memorandum of unde rstanding to be 18 
effective for 3 years and to be renewed every 3 years.  The memorandum of 19 
understanding must include descriptions of the following: the internal processes the law 20 
enforcement agency uses to identify a person in need of mental health crisis services; the 21 
protocol the law enforcement agency uses to share a contact report with a crisis 22 
intervention team or agency; the process the crisis intervention team or agency uses to 23 
receive the report; the protocol the crisis intervention team or agency u ses to 24 
communicate with a person in need of mental health services or the guardian or family 25 
members of that person; and the procedures to be used to convene on a quarterly basis 26 
multidisciplinary team meetings to review experiences and discuss opportuniti es for 27 
improvement.  28 
 
