 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND SPECIAL  SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1926
S.P. 762 In Senate,  September 13, 2018
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Specify the  Qualifications of Electors
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin.   (GOVERNOR'S  BILL)

Page 1 - 128LR3094(01)-11 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch  of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following  amendment to the Constitution of Maine  be 
3 proposed:
4 Constitution, Art. II,  ยง1 is amended to read:
5 Section 1.  Qualifications  of electors; written ballot; military servicemen; 
6 students.  Only  a citizen of the United States may vote in a state, county or municipal  or 
7 other local election.  Every  citizen of the United States of the age of 18 years  and 
8 upwards, excepting persons under guardianship for reasons  of mental  illness, having his 
9 or her residence established in this State, shall be an elector  for Governor, Senators  and 
10 Representatives, and county, local or municipal  office in the city, town or plantation  
11 where his or her residence has been established, if he or she continues to reside in this 
12 State; and the elections shall be by written  ballot.  But persons in the military,  naval  or 
13 marine service of the United States, or this State, shall  not be considered as having 
14 obtained such established  residence  by being stationed in any garrison,  barrack or 
15 military place, in any city, town or plantation; nor shall the residence of a student  at any 
16 seminary of learning entitle  the student  to the right of suffrage in the city, town or 
17 plantation where such seminary is established.  No person, however, shall be deemed to 
18 have lost residence by reason of the person's absence  from  the state in the military  service 
19 of the United States, or  of this  State.
20 Indians.  Every  Indian, residing on tribal reservations and otherwise qualified, shall 
21 be an elector in  all county, state  and national elections.
22 ; and  be it further
23 Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
24 Resolved:  That the municipal  officers of this State shall  notify  the inhabitants of their 
25 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 
26 holding a statewide election, at a statewide election  held in the month of November 
27 following the passage of this resolution,  to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 
28 proposed in this resolution  by voting upon the following question:
29 "Do you favor  amending the Constitution of Maine to permit only 
30 citizens of the United  States to vote in state,  county or municipal  or other 
31 local elections?"
32 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
33 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark  placed within the corresponding 
34 square below  the word  "Yes"  or "No."  The ballots must  be received, sorted, counted and 
35 declared in open  ward,  town and plantation meetings and returns  made  to the Secretary  of 
36 State in the same manner as votes  for members of the Legislature.  The Governor  shall 
37 review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal  votes  are cast in favor  of the 
38 amendment, the Governor shall  proclaim  that fact without delay  and the amendment 
39 becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 
40 further
Page 2 - 128LR3094(01)-11 Secretary of State  shall  prepare ballots.  Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
2 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies  
3 of this resolution  necessary  to carry out the purposes of  this referendum.
4 SUMMARY
5 This resolution  proposes  to amend the Constitution  of Maine to specify that only a 
6 person who is a citizen  of the United  States  may vote in a state, county or municipal or 
7 other local election.
