 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 796
H.P. 576 House of  Representatives, March 2, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine Regarding Referendum  Questions  for Statewide Ballots
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative STEWART of  Presque Isle.
Cosponsored by Representative TURNER of Burlington,  Senator  LANGLEY  of Hancock and
Representatives: HANINGTON of Lincoln, MARTIN  of Eagle Lake, McCREA of Fort 
Fairfield, PARRY of Arundel,  PIERCE  of Dresden, SIROCKI of  Scarborough,  WARD of 
Dedham, Senator: CARPENTER of Aroostook.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0267(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub -ยง2 is amended to read:  4 
2.  Referral to electors u nless enacted by the Legislature without change; 5 
number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating signatures on 6 
petitions; competing measures.   For any measure thus proposed by electors, the number 7 
of signatures shall not be less than 10% of the total vote for Governor cast in each county  8 
in the last gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition.  Each signature of 9 
the number so required for a county must be that of a person registered to vote in the 10 
county.   The date eac h signature was made shall be written next to the signature on the 11 
petition.  A signature is not valid if it is dated more than one year prior to the date that the 12 
petition was filed in the office of the Secretary of State.  The measure thus proposed, 13 
unless enacted without change by the Legislature at the session at which it is presented, 14 
shall be submitted to the electors together with any amended form, substitute, or 15 
recommendation of the Legislature, and in such manner that the people can choose 16 
between  the competing measures or reject both. When there are competing bills and 17 
neither receives a majority of the votes given for or against both, the one receiving the 18 
most votes shall at the next statewide election to be held not less than 60 days after the 19 
first vote thereon be submitted by itself if it receives more than 1/3 of the votes given for 20 
and against both.  If the measure initiated is enacted by the Legislature without change, it 21 
shall not go to a referendum vote unless in pursuance of a demand mad e in accordance 22 
with the preceding section.  The Legislature may order a special election on any measure 23 
that is subject to a vote of the people.  24 
; and be it further  25 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 26 
Resolved:   That the  municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 27 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 28 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 29 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 30 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  31 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require on direct 32 
initiative petitions the same minimum percen tage of signatures to be 33 
collected from each county and to require of those signatures that each 34 
must be that of a person registered to vote in that county?"  35 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 36 
and desig nate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 37 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 38 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 39 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 40 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 41 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendmen t 42 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0267(01) -1 
 becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 1 
further  2 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 3 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 4 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  5 
SUMMARY  6 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require the total 7 
number of signatures required for a direct initiative of legislation to be not le ss than 10% 8 
of the total vote for Governor cast in each county in the last gubernatorial election.  It also 9 
requires each of the signatures from a county to be that of a person registered to vote in 10 
that county.  11 
 
