 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1105
H.P. 779 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2017
An Act  To Promote Independent Living for  People  with  Disabilities
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GATTINE of Westbrook.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1310(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to reallocate certain federal funds currently received by the 5 
Department of Labor and the Depart ment of Health and Human Services to ensure that 6 
those departments are in alignment with the goal of allowing people with disabilities to 7 
live as independently as possible.  8 
Under this bill, Maine programs would become more consistent with federal 9 
regulatio ns by redirecting existing resources to fund the newly mandated 5th requirement 10 
of the independent living core services in the federal Independent Living Program, as 11 
adopted by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for 12 
Community Living, Independent Living Administration. The 5th core requirement directs 13 
the provision of services to focus on 3 key areas for people with disabilities: transition 14 
from nursing homes to home and community settings; diversion from nursing homes; and 15 
transition of youths 18 to 24 years of age from school to adult living.  16 
Possible funding streams include federal funding under the federal Workforce 17 
Innovation and Opportunity Act and Maine's Money Follows the Person demonstration 18 
project administered by the D epartment of Health and Human Services, federal funding 19 
currently allocated for the Office of Child and Family Services, office of aging and 20 
disability services and office of substance abuse and mental health within the Department 21 
of Health and Human Servi ces and funding from the Department of Education from 22 
federal funds for the Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education Act of 2006 grant 23 
for special services and adult education, as well as funds allocated or appropriated by the 24 
State from General Fund  or Other Special Revenue sources.  25 
 
