 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 375
S.P. 116 In Senate, February 2, 2017
An Act  To Establish a Carpet  Stewardship Program
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin.
Cosponsored by Senator:  CARSON of Cumberland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0444(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA ยง2145 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง2145.  Stewardship program for carpet  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following terms have the following meanings.  5 
A.  "Brand" has the same meaning as in section 1771, subsection 1.  "Brand" includes 6 
both a registered and an unregistered trademark.  7 
B.  "Carpet" means a manufactured product used in commercial or residential 8 
buildings that is affixed or placed on the floor or building walking surface as a 9 
decorative or functional building feature and is primarily constructed of a top visible 10 
surface of synthetic face fibers or yarns or tufts attached to a backing system derived 11 
from synthetic or natura l materials.  "Carpet" includes, but is not limited to, a 12 
commercial or a residential broadloom carpet or modular carpet tiles.  "Carpet" does 13 
not include a rug, pad, cushion or underlayment used in conjunction with, or 14 
separately from, a carpet.  15 
C.  "Carp et stewardship assessment" or "assessment" means the amount added to the 16 
purchase price of carpet sold in the State necessary to cover the cost of collecting, 17 
transporting and processing discarded carpet statewide under a carpet stewardship 18 
program establi shed in accordance with this section.  19 
D.  "Carpet stewardship organization" or "organization" means a nonprofit 20 
organization created by one or more producers to design, submit a plan for, 21 
implement and operate a carpet stewardship program.  22 
E.  "Carpet stew ardship plan" or "plan" means a plan designed by a producer or 23 
carpet stewardship organization for the establishment of a carpet stewardship 24 
program.  25 
F.  "Carpet stewardship program" or "program" means a system implemented for the 26 
management of discarded c arpet in accordance with an approved carpet stewardship 27 
plan.  28 
G.  "Consumer" means a purchaser, owner or lessee of carpet.  29 
H.  "Discarded carpet" means carpet that a person discards, abandons or sends for 30 
recycling.  31 
I.  "Operator" means a producer or carpe t stewardship organization that implements 32 
and operates a carpet stewardship program.  33 
J.  "Participate" means, with respect to a producer, to, individually or through a carpet 34 
stewardship organization, establish and operate a carpet stewardship program in 35 
accordance with this section.  36 
K.  "Producer" means, with regard to carpet that is sold, offered for sale or distributed 37 
for sale in the State, the following:  38 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0444(01) -1 
 (1)  The person that manufactures the carpet and sells, offers for sale or 1 
distributes for sale th at carpet in the State under the person's own brand;  2 
(2)  If there is no person to which subparagraph (1) applies, the owner or licensee 3 
of the brand under which the carpet is sold or distributed in the State; or  4 
(3)  If there is no person to which subpara graph (1) or (2) applies, the person that 5 
imports the carpet into the United States for sale or distribution in the State.  6 
L.  "Recycling" means the transforming or remanufacturing of an unwanted product 7 
or the unwanted product's components and by -products  into usable or marketable 8 
materials.  "Recycling" includes incineration or energy recovery or energy generation 9 
by means of combusting unwanted products, components and by -products with or 10 
without other waste.  "Recycling" does not include landfill dispos al. 11 
M.  "Retailer" means a person that offers carpet for sale in the State in a retail sale, as 12 
defined in Title 36, section 1752, subsection 11, including remote sales conducted 13 
through sales outlets, catalogs or the Internet or any other similar electron ic means.  14 
N.  "Sell" or "sale" means any transfer of title for consideration, including remote 15 
sales conducted through sales outlets, catalogs or the Internet or any other similar 16 
electronic means.  17 
O.  "Wholesaler" means a person that offers carpet for sal e in the State in a sale that 18 
is not a retail sale, as defined in Title 36, section 1752, subsection 11, with the 19 
intention that the carpet be resold in a subsequent retail sale.  20 
2.  Submission of plan.  Except as provided in subsection 9, no later than on e year 21 
after the effective date of this section, each producer, individually or through a carpet 22 
stewardship organization, shall submit a plan for the establishment of a carpet 23 
stewardship program to the commissioner for approval.  The plan must include:  24 
A.  Identification and contact information for all persons that will be responsible for 25 
the operation of the program and a list of the brands of carpet to be covered under the 26 
program.  If the plan is submitted by an organization, it must include a descript ion of 27 
the organization, tasks to be performed by the organization and information on how 28 
the organization is organized, including administration and management of the 29 
organization;  30 
B.  A description of how the program will provide convenient, free, statew ide 31 
collection opportunities for discarded carpet and how the convenience and adequacy 32 
of the collection system will be monitored and maintained;  33 
C.  The criteria to be used by the program in determining whether an entity may serve 34 
as a collection location  for discarded carpet under the program. The plan must allow 35 
any retailer, wholesaler, municipality, solid waste management facility and other 36 
private or public entity that meets those criteria to voluntarily serve as a collection 37 
location;  38 
D.  The names a nd locations of recyclers, processors, disposal facilities and other 39 
entities that may be used by the program for the collection, processing, recycling or 40 
disposal of discarded carpet;  41 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR0444(01) -1 
 E.  Information on how discarded carpet collected through the program w ill be safely 1 
and securely transported, tracked and handled from collection through final 2 
disposition;  3 
F.   A description of the method to be used to ensure that, to the extent economically 4 
and technically feasible, collected discarded carpet is recycled o r otherwise 5 
responsibly managed.  The program must be designed to give preference to the 6 
recycling of discarded carpet over any other disposal method;  7 
G.  A description of how the amounts of discarded carpet collected, recycled, 8 
processed and disposed of w ill be measured;  9 
H.  A description of the education and outreach methods and activities that will be 10 
used to provide notice of and encourage use of or involvement in the program by 11 
consumers, businesses, local agencies, retailers, wholesalers and solid was te 12 
transportation services;  13 
I.  The establishment of performance goals to measure the success of the program and 14 
a description of how the program will be designed to meet or exceed those goals; and  15 
J.  An anticipated budget for operation of the program and  a description of how the 16 
program will be financed, including the method of calculating a carpet stewardship 17 
assessment that meets the requirements of subsection 6.  18 
3.  Approval of plan.  The commissioner shall review a plan submitted under 19 
subsection 2 an d approve or reject the plan within 90 days of receipt.  20 
A.  The commissioner shall make a plan submitted under subsection 2 available for 21 
public review at least 30 days prior to approving or rejecting the plan.  22 
B.  The commissioner shall approve a plan if the commissioner determines that the 23 
plan demonstrates the ability of the carpet stewardship program to meet the goals 24 
specified in subsection 2, paragraph I and meets the other requirements for 25 
submission of a plan under subsection 2.  The commissioner's approval of a plan must 26 
include approval of the method by which the program will be financed.  The 27 
commissioner shall require the producer or organization submitting the plan to 28 
provide an independent audit indicating the appropriateness of the proposed ca rpet 29 
stewardship assessment.  30 
C.  If a plan is rejected, the commissioner shall provide the reasons for rejecting the 31 
plan to the producer or organization submitting the plan.  The producer or 32 
organization submitting the plan may submit an amended plan with in 60 days of a 33 
rejection.  34 
D.  A producer or organization whose plan is rejected by the commissioner may 35 
appeal the commissioner's decision in accordance with sections 341 -D and 346.  36 
4.  Implementation of plan.  A producer or carpet stewardship organizatio n that 37 
submitted a plan approved by the commissioner under subsection 3 shall implement the 38 
plan no later than 120 days after the date the plan is approved.  39 
5.  Amendment of plan.  A change to an approved and implemented carpet 40 
stewardship plan must be sub mitted to the commissioner for review prior to 41 
 
 Page 4 - 128LR0444(01) -1 
 implementation of that change.  If the change is not substantive, such as the addition of or 1 
a change to collection locations, the addition of a new producer to the program or a 2 
change in the contact informati on or officers of the organization, approval is not needed, 3 
but the operator must inform the commissioner within 14 days of implementing the 4 
change.  The commissioner shall review substantive plan amendments in accordance with 5 
subsection 3.  6 
6.  Stewardship  assessment.  An operator shall administer a carpet stewardship 7 
assessment to be applied to all carpet covered by the program sold in the State.  The 8 
amount of the assessment must be approved by the commissioner in accordance with 9 
subsection 3 and must be sufficient to recover, but may not be designed to exceed, the 10 
cost of the program.  If the funds generated by the assessment exceed the amount 11 
necessary to operate the program, excess funds must be used to reduce future assessments 12 
or improve services unde r the program.  13 
A.  A carpet stewardship assessment must be added to the cost of all carpet covered 14 
by the program sold to retailers and wholesalers in the State.  A retailer or wholesaler 15 
shall add the assessment to the purchase price of carpet sold by tha t retailer or 16 
wholesaler.  The assessment must be clearly visible on invoices or functionally 17 
equivalent billing documents as a separate line item.  An assessment may not be 18 
imposed at the time a discarded carpet is collected.  The collection of the assess ment 19 
must commence no later than the implementation date established in subsection 4.  20 
B.  A producer participating in a carpet stewardship organization shall remit to the 21 
organization on a quarterly basis payment of the carpet stewardship assessment for al l 22 
carpet the producer sells in the State.  23 
7.  Sales prohibition.  Upon implementation of a carpet stewardship plan under 24 
subsection 4, a producer may not sell or offer for sale carpet in the State unless the 25 
producer, or a carpet stewardship organization t hat the producer has created or joined, 26 
participates in a carpet stewardship program established in accordance with this section.  27 
8.  Collection locations.  This subsection applies to collection locations for discarded 28 
carpet under a program.  29 
A.  A retaile r, a wholesaler, a municipality, a solid waste management facility and 30 
any other private or public entity may voluntarily serve as a collection location for 31 
discarded carpet under an approved and implemented plan, as long as the operator 32 
determines that th e collection location meets the criteria for collection locations 33 
established under the plan.  34 
B.  The operator must fully underwrite the costs of pickup and transportation of 35 
discarded carpet from each collection location established under the program and 36 
may not charge an entity serving as a collection location for the cost of such services.  37 
C.  An entity serving as a collection location may not refuse collection of a discarded 38 
carpet based on the brand of the carpet.  An operator may not refuse the pickup  or 39 
transportation of collected discarded carpet from a collection location based on the 40 
brand of the carpet.  41 
 
 Page 5 - 128LR0444(01) -1 
 D.  An entity serving as a collection location may not impose on consumers any fee 1 
relating to the collection of discarded carpet. An entity servi ng as a collection 2 
location may not impose any fee on an operator as a condition of agreeing to serve as 3 
a collection location under the program.  4 
9.  New producers.  A new producer must notify the commissioner and take other 5 
action in accordance with this subsection prior to selling or offering to sell carpet in the 6 
State.  For the purposes of this subsection, "new producer" means a producer that is not 7 
participating in an existing program established under this section that seeks to sell or 8 
offer for sale carpet in the State on or after the date that an approved carpet stewardship 9 
plan is first implemented under subsection 4.  10 
A.  Upon receiving notification under this subsection from a new producer, the 11 
commissioner shall list the producer as a new producer  on the department's publicly 12 
accessible website.  13 
B.  No later than 90 days following a new producer's notification under this 14 
subsection to the commissioner, the producer shall submit a plan to the commissioner 15 
in accordance with subsection 2 or join an e xisting organization operating a program 16 
in the State.  17 
C.  If a new producer fails to submit a plan or join an existing organization within the 18 
90-day period under paragraph B, the producer may not sell or offer to sell carpet in 19 
the State after the expira tion of the 90 -day period.  20 
A new producer that fails to submit a plan or join an existing organization within the time 21 
limits described in this subsection may not sell or offer for sale carpet in the State until 22 
the producer submits a plan that is approved  by the commissioner or joins an existing 23 
organization.  24 
10.  List of producers and brands.  The department shall post on its publicly 25 
accessible website a list of the producers participating and brands included in a carpet 26 
stewardship program.  27 
11.  Annual report.  By October 15th of the calendar year after the calendar year in 28 
which an approved carpet stewardship plan is implemented under subsection 4, and 29 
annually thereafter, the operator of a carpet stewardship program shall submit a report to 30 
the commiss ioner regarding the activities carried out by the program during the previous 31 
calendar year.  The report must include, but is not limited to:  32 
A.  The total tonnage of discarded carpet collected by the program, as well as the 33 
specific tonnages collected fro m municipalities, retailers and all other entities serving 34 
as collection locations; the total tonnage of discarded carpet diverted for recycling; 35 
the weight of carpet materials recycled, as indicated by the weight of each of the 36 
commodities sold to seconda ry markets; and the weight of carpet materials sent for 37 
disposal or processing at disposal facilities and other entities;  38 
B.  Based on the carpet stewardship assessment collected pursuant to the carpet 39 
stewardship program, the total amount of carpet sold i n the State by all producers 40 
participating in the program;  41 
 
 Page 6 - 128LR0444(01) -1 
 C.  The location of each collection location established under the program and an 1 
evaluation of the convenience and adequacy of the collection system implemented by 2 
the program;  3 
D.  A description o f the manner in which discarded carpet was collected, transported, 4 
sorted, consolidated and processed by the program;  5 
E.  A description of the methods and activities used by the program for education and 6 
outreach, including examples of any educational mate rials developed and used by the 7 
program, and an evaluation of the effectiveness of the education and outreach efforts 8 
implemented by the program;  9 
F.  The total cost of implementing the carpet stewardship plan and operating the 10 
carpet stewardship program du ring the reporting period, as determined by an 11 
independent financial audit funded from the carpet stewardship assessment.  The 12 
report of the total cost must include a breakdown of operation, collection, 13 
transportation, disposition and communication costs;  14 
G.  An evaluation of the effectiveness of the methods used to achieve the 15 
performance goals of the program included in the plan pursuant to subsection 2, 16 
paragraph I, as well as an update to the performance goals, if necessary, based on the 17 
experience of t he program during the previous calendar year; and  18 
H.  Any other recommendations for change to the program to improve the 19 
convenience of the collection system, education or outreach efforts or program 20 
evaluation methods or to otherwise better facilitate the  collection, recycling and 21 
management of discarded carpet in the State.  22 
12.  Administration and enforcement; fees.  The department shall enforce this 23 
section and may adopt rules as necessary for the purposes of implementing, administering 24 
and enforcing thi s section.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical 25 
rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 26 
The department shall charge a reasonable application fee, not to exceed $10,000, to be 27 
paid by an applicant under subsecti on 2 for review and approval of a carpet stewardship 28 
plan.  The department may establish a reasonable annual fee, not to exceed the greater of 29 
$25,000 and 1% of the total program costs as set forth in the independent financial 30 
auditing report required unde r subsection 11, paragraph F, to be paid by an operator, to 31 
cover the department's actual costs for annual report review, administration and 32 
enforcement.  33 
13.  Antitrust exclusions.  A producer or carpet stewardship organization, including 34 
a producer's or o rganization's officers, members, employees and agents that develop a 35 
plan for, implement and operate a carpet stewardship program in accordance with this 36 
section, is immune from liability for the producer's or organization's conduct under state 37 
laws relati ng to antitrust, restraint of trade, unfair trade practices and other regulation of 38 
trade or commerce only to the extent necessary to develop a plan for, implement and 39 
operate the program.  40 
 
 Page 7 - 128LR0444(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill provides for the establishment of a new stewardsh ip program in the State for 2 
discarded carpet.  Under the bill, a producer of carpet, or an organization comprising one 3 
or more producers of carpet, submits a plan for the establishment of a carpet stewardship 4 
program to the Commissioner of Environmental Pr otection for approval.  Once approved, 5 
a program operates to provide convenient, free statewide collection opportunities for 6 
discarded carpet, and discarded carpet collected through the program is recycled or 7 
otherwise responsibly managed.  A program is fu nded through the imposition of a carpet 8 
stewardship assessment, subject to review and approval by the commissioner, which is 9 
added to the purchase price of all carpet sold in the State.  10 
 
