 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1633
H.P. 1126 House of  Representatives, June 7, 2017
An Act  Concerning Private Personal Information of Public 
Employees and Licensed Individuals
Reported by Representative MOONEN of Portland for the Joint  Standing Committee on 
Judiciary pursuant to  the Maine Revised  Statutes, Title  1, section 411, subsection 6, paragraph  
G.
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed pursuant to Joint  
Rule 218.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2271(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  1 MRSA §434, sub -§4 is enacted to read:  2 
4.  Private personal information of public employees and licensed individuals.  3 
When the review committee reviews and evaluates a proposed public  records exception 4 
concerning the private personal information of a public employee or a professional and 5 
occupational licensee or license applicant, the review committee shall balance the privacy 6 
and safety interests of the individual involved concerning the individual's personal 7 
information with the public’s right to know regarding public employees and professional 8 
and occupational licensees and license applicants.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This bill is based on a recommendation of the Right To Know Advisory Committee 11 
conc erning the protection of private personal information that may be considered public 12 
records.  The bill directs the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 13 
jurisdiction over judiciary matters to balance the public’s right to know about public 14 
employees and professional and occupational licensees and license applicants with the 15 
privacy and safety interests of the individuals involved when a proposed public records 16 
exception concerns the private personal information of public employees and professio nal 17 
or occupational licensees or license applicants.  18 
 
