 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1249
H.P. 872 House of  Representatives, March 30, 2017
An Act  To Include the  Vehicles  of Emergency  Medical Services 
Persons in  the Firefighter Registration  Plate  Program
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HEAD of Bethel.
Cosponsored by Senator MAKER  of Washington  and
Representatives: CRAIG of  Brewer, HERRICK of Paris,  MADIGAN of Rumford,  PERKINS  
of Oakland,  PERRY  of Calais, PICKETT of Dixfield, SKOLFIELD of Weld,  TIMBERLAKE 
of Turner.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1145(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  29-A MRSA ยง519, sub -ยง8 is enacted to read:  2 
8.  Special firefighter registration plate for emergency medical services persons.  3 
The Secretary of State shall make available under this sec tion a special firefighter 4 
registration plate to an emergency medical services person.  The registration plate must 5 
have the same design as the special firefighter registration plate except that a standard 6 
emergency medical services emblem is used instead of the firefighter emblem.  A 7 
member of an emergency medical service licensed by the Department of Public Safety, 8 
Maine Emergency Medical Services may request a special firefighter registration plate 9 
for emergency medical services persons under this subsec tion. 10 
Sec. 2.  Contingent effective date.  This Act does not take effect unless the 11 
Secretary of State receives donations from public or private sources to cover the costs, as 12 
determined by the Secretary of State, of special firefighter registration plates  for 13 
emergency medical services persons for those eligible as a result of this Act.  Donations 14 
under this section must be deposited into the Specialty License Plate Fund established in 15 
the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 29 -A, section 469.  The Secretary of State shall notify 16 
the Secretary of the Senate, the Clerk of the House of Representatives and the Revisor of 17 
Statutes when the Secretary of State has received the donations required under this 18 
section.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This bill provides for issuance of special fir efighter registration plates for emergency 21 
medical services persons.  The bill also provides that the issuance of special firefighter 22 
registration plates for emergency medical services persons for those eligible is contingent 23 
upon the Secretary of State's receiving donations from public or private sources to cover 24 
the cost of the registration plates.  25 
 
