 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1411
S.P. 489 In Senate, April 11, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Limit Petitions for  Direct Initiatives That Would Violate 
the Constitution of  Maine
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Senators:  CUSHING of Penobscot, DESCHAMBAULT of York,  HILL of 
York, LIBBY of  Androscoggin, MASON  of Androscoggin, Representatives:  CASÁS  of 
Rockport, DENNO of Cumberland, GROHMAN of Biddeford.

 
 Page 1 - 128L R0949(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, §18, sub -§1 is amended by adding at the end a 4 
new paragrap h to read:  5 
No later than 10 days after the filing of a written petition in the office of the Secretary 6 
of State pursuant to this subsection, the Governor, Attorney General, Legislature by a 1/3 7 
vote of both Houses or at least 500 electors by petition filed  in the office of the Secretary 8 
of State may request an opinion of the Justices of the Supreme Judicial Court on whether 9 
the bill, resolve or resolution proposed by electors to the Legislature would, if passed and 10 
implemented, violate this Constitution in any manner, including, but not limited to, the 11 
restriction or abridgment of the rights of citizens expressly declared in this Constitution.  12 
The Justices of the Supreme Judicial Court shall issue their opinion no later than 30 days 13 
after a request is made.   The Secretary of State shall reject a written petition if a majority 14 
of the Justices of the Supreme Judicial Court determines that the bill, resolve or 15 
resolution proposed by electors would, if passed and implemented, violate this 16 
Constitution.  17 
; and be it further  18 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 19 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 20 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law f or 21 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 22 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 23 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  24 
"Do you favor  amending the Constitution of Maine to require the 25 
Secretary of State to reject a petition for a direct initiative of legislation 26 
if, upon request of the Governor, Attorney General, Legislature or at least 27 
500 electors of this State, a majority of the Just ices of the Supreme 28 
Judicial Court determines that the initiative would, if passed and 29 
implemented, violate the Constitution of Maine?"  30 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 31 
and designate their choice by a  cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 32 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 33 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 34 
State in the same manner a s votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 35 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 36 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 37 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 38 
further  39 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 40 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 41 
of this res olution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  42 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0949(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to allow the Governor, 2 
Attorney General, Legislature by a 1/3 vote of both Houses or at least 500 electors by 3 
petition filed  in the office of the Secretary of State to request an opinion of the Justices of 4 
the Supreme Judicial Court on whether a bill, resolve or resolution proposed by electors 5 
to the Legislature would, if passed and implemented, violate the Constitution of Main e in 6 
any manner, including, but not limited to, the restriction or abridgement of the rights of 7 
citizens expressly declared in the Constitution of Maine.  The Secretary of State must 8 
reject a petition if a majority of the Justices of the Supreme Judicial C ourt determines that 9 
the bill, resolve or resolution proposed by electors would, if passed and implemented, 10 
violate the Constitution of Maine.  11 
 
