 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1584
S.P. 557 In Senate,  May 4, 2017
An Act  To Expand the  Local Foods Economy by  Promoting Local 
Foods Procurement
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator VITELLI of Sagadahoc.
Cosponsored by Representative HICKMAN of Winthrop and
Senators: DILL of  Penobscot, SAVIELLO of Franklin, Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, 
DUNPHY of Old Town, KUMIEGA of  Deer  Isle, TEPLER of Topsham.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1678(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  7 MRSA ยง401 -B, sub -ยง7 is enacted to read:  2 
7.  Good local foods procurement program.  The commissioner shall establish and 3 
promote a good local foods procurement program, referred to in this subsection as "the 4 
program."  5 
A.  As used in this subsection, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following 6 
terms have the following meanings.  7 
(1)  "Community supported agriculture" means an arrangement in which 8 
individual consumers have agreem ents with a farmer to be provided with food or 9 
other agricultural products produced on the farmer's farm.  10 
(2)  "Farmers' market" has the same meaning as in section 415, subsection 1, 11 
paragraph A.  12 
(3)  "Good local foods" means foods that are:  13 
(a)  Produced or harvested in this State;  14 
(b)  Healthy, safe, wholesome and nutritious and meet the dietary guidelines 15 
for Americans published jointly by the United States Department of Health 16 
and Human Services and the United States Department of Agriculture;  17 
(c)  Affo rdable;  18 
(d)  Accessible to all residents of this State;  19 
(e)  Equitably distributed so that producers and harvesters receive and 20 
consumers pay a reasonable price and so that producers and harvesters have 21 
an equal opportunity to sell foods and consumers have  an equal opportunity 22 
to purchase foods; and  23 
(f)  Sustainably produced in terms of water, soil and pesticide management.  24 
B.  The program must help farmers and fishermen in this State by increasing demand 25 
for and direct purchasing of their products by indiv iduals and institutions with a goal 26 
of increasing the sale and purchase of good local foods by 20% no later than 2025 27 
and supporting local economies, farms, fisheries, jobs, nutrition, environmental 28 
sustainability and animal welfare.  The program also must  improve access to good 29 
local foods.  30 
C.  The program must increase the purchase of good local foods by public and private 31 
institutions in this State, including, but not limited to, primary and secondary schools, 32 
colleges and universities, hospitals, jails,  community centers serving senior citizens, 33 
child care centers, restaurants and grocery stores.  The commissioner shall establish 34 
guidelines to assist these institutions to assess their ability to procure good local foods 35 
while minimizing costs.  36 
D.   The p rogram must provide education and outreach for the purpose of supporting 37 
farms, farmers' markets, community supported agriculture and seafood providers to 38 
further the goal of increasing the sale and purchase of good local foods.  39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1678(01) -1 
 E.  The program must improv e access to good local foods for recipients of benefits 1 
under any food supplement program administered by the Department of Health and 2 
Human Services under Title 22.  The commissioner shall expand opportunities for 3 
farmers to sell good local foods to recip ients of food supplement program benefits by 4 
promoting the use of electronic benefits transfer cards at farmers' markets and, in 5 
partnership with a statewide federation of farmers' markets, encouraging participation 6 
in community supported agriculture by re cipients of food supplement program 7 
benefits.  The commissioner shall assist farmers' markets in accepting payments 8 
through the electronic benefits transfer system by helping them secure scanners and 9 
equipment, including equipment that does not require the  use of electricity, for 10 
processing payments through the electronic benefits transfer system.  The 11 
commissioner, in partnership with the Commissioner of Health and Human Services, 12 
shall educate recipients of food supplement program benefits of the opportun ity to 13 
use the benefits at farmers' markets and the advantages of such use.  14 
SUMMARY  15 
This bill requires the Commissioner of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to 16 
establish a good local foods procurement program to encourage the purchase and sale of 17 
foods that are produced and harvested in this State and that are healthy, safe, wholesome, 18 
nutritious, affordable, accessible and sustainably produced.  The program, administered 19 
by the commissioner, must help farmers and fishermen in this State by increasing demand 20 
for and direct purchasing of their products by individuals and institutions with a goal of 21 
increasing the sale and purchase of good local foods by 20% no later than 2025 and 22 
supporting local economies, farms, fisheries, jobs, nutrition, environmenta l sustainability 23 
and animal welfare.  The program also must improve access to good local foods.  24 
The program must increase the purchase of good local foods by public and private 25 
institutions in this State, including, but not limited to, primary and secondar y schools, 26 
colleges and universities, hospitals, jails, community centers serving senior citizens, child 27 
care centers, restaurants and grocery stores.  28 
The program must provide education and outreach for the purpose of supporting 29 
farms, farmers' markets and  community supported agriculture to further the goal of 30 
increasing the sale and purchase of good local foods.  31 
The program must improve access to good local foods for recipients of food 32 
supplement program benefits.  The commissioner must expand opportunitie s for farmers 33 
to sell good local foods to recipients of food supplement program benefits by promoting 34 
the use of electronic benefits transfer cards at farmers' markets and, in partnership with a 35 
statewide federation of farmers' markets, encouraging partici pation in community 36 
supported agriculture by recipients of food supplement program benefits.  The 37 
commissioner must assist farmers' markets in accepting payments through the electronic 38 
benefits transfer system by helping them secure scanners and equipment,  including 39 
equipment that does not require the use of electricity for locations that do not have access 40 
to electricity, for processing payments through the electronic benefits transfer system.  41 
The commissioner, in partnership with the Commissioner of Heal th and Human Services, 42 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR1678(01) -1 
 must educate recipients of food supplement program benefits of the opportunity to use the 1 
benefits at farmers' markets and the advantages of such use.  2 
 
