 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1203
H.P. 839 House of  Representatives, March 28, 2017
An Act  To Increase Transparency in  Cooperative Agreements 
within the  Department of Agriculture,  Conservation and Forestry
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HICKMAN of Winthrop.
Cosponsored by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin and
Representatives: ACKLEY of Monmouth, DUNPHY of Old Town, GRANT of Gardiner, GROHMAN of Biddeford, KINNEY  of Knox, MAREAN of Hollis, MARTIN of  Eagle Lake, 
Senator: DAVIS  of Piscataquis.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1049(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  7 MRSA ยง9, as amended by PL 1973, c. 44, is further amended to read:  2 
ยง9.  Cooperative agreements or arrangements  3 
The commissioner  department  may enter into cooperative  agreements or cooperative  4 
arrangements , in accordance with this section,  with a state or federal agency or with any 5 
person, firm or corporation for the purpose of controlling diseases of plants and domestic 6 
animals, advertising and increasing the sale and consumption of Ma ine food products or 7 
disseminating information concerning the grade, quality or condition of same  Maine food 8 
products , and supplying inspection and grading services with respect to such Maine  food 9 
products.  He The department  may receive, administer and di sburse any funds or 10 
contributions from such a state or federal agency, person, firm or corporation, either 11 
independently or in conjunction with state funds allocated to said that purpose.  Funds so 12 
contributed shall  in accordance with this section do  not lapse at the end of any fiscal year 13 
but shall be  are carried forward to be used for the purpose originally intended.  14 
1.  Public notice.   The department shall provide public notice of each proposed 15 
cooperative agreement or arrangement by posting on the depar tment's publicly accessible 16 
website a detailed description of each cooperative agreement or arrangement proposed or 17 
entered into during the previous fiscal year.  The description and notice must include the 18 
expected benefits to the State, the department, t he regulated community and the public 19 
and must include a solicitation of public comments.  20 
2.  Solicitation of comments; response.   The department shall solicit public 21 
comments on a proposed cooperative agreement or arrangement for which notice is 22 
provided in accordance with subsection 1, and shall provide responses to questions and 23 
comments from the public and interested parties to the best of the department's 24 
knowledge.  If a person submits in writing a request that the department decline to receive 25 
future  funding from a cooperative agreement or arrangement, the department shall 26 
consider the request, determine whether the benefits of the cooperative agreement or 27 
arrangement outweigh the person's concerns and inform the person in writing of the 28 
department's decision.  29 
3.  Annual report.   No later than March 1st annually, the department shall report to 30 
the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over agricultural 31 
matters regarding the cooperative agreements and arrangements entered into in 32 
accordance with this section during the previous fiscal year.  33 
4.  Public hearing.   Upon receipt of the annual report submitted in accordance with 34 
subsection 3, the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 35 
agricultural matters  may schedule a public hearing on any cooperative agreement or 36 
arrangement about which the committee has questions.  37 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR104 9(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill amends the law governing cooperative agreements and arrangements entered 2 
into by the Department of Agriculture, Conservati on and Forestry for the purpose of 3 
controlling diseases of plants and domestic animals and advertising or disseminating 4 
information concerning Maine food products.  This bill requires the department to:  5 
1.  Provide public notice of each proposed cooperativ e agreement or arrangement;  6 
2.  Solicit public comments and provide responses regarding proposed cooperative 7 
agreements or arrangements;  8 
3.  Consider requests submitted in writing to decline to receive future funding from a 9 
cooperative agreement or arrange ment; and  10 
4.  Report annually to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 11 
jurisdiction over agricultural matters regarding the cooperative agreements and 12 
arrangements entered into during the previous fiscal year.  13 
Under the bill, the joint sta nding committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction 14 
over agricultural matters may schedule a public hearing on any cooperative agreement or 15 
arrangement about which the committee has questions.  16 
 
