 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1136
H.P. 799 House of  Representatives, March 23, 2017
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services To Amend  Its Rules Regarding  Services  Provided to Students
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FARNSWORTH  of Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1155(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to amend rules.  1 
Resolved:   That, no later than December 15, 2017, the Department of Health and Human 2 
Services shall amend its rules regarding services provided to students to:  3 
1.  Allow speech pathologists to bill directly for services they provide to students who 4 
are eligible for the MaineCare program; and  5 
2.  Remove requirements that, for a student to be eligible for coverage for services 6 
under early periodic screening, diagnosis and treatment, the service s be included in the 7 
student’s individualized education plan or the family’s individualized family service plan 8 
and that the services be medical in nature as opposed to educational.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services t o amend its rules 11 
regarding services provided to students to:  12 
1.  Allow speech pathologists to bill directly for services they provide to students who 13 
are eligible for the MaineCare program; and  14 
2.  Remove requirements that, for a student to be eligible fo r coverage for services 15 
under early periodic screening, diagnosis and treatment, the services be included in the 16 
student’s individualized education plan or the family’s individualized family service plan 17 
and that the services be medical in nature as oppose d to educational.  18 
 
