 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1435
H.P. 990 House of  Representatives,  April 13, 2017
An Act  To Ensure Transparency in  the Distribution of Federal 
Block Grant Funds
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative JORGENSEN of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland  and
Representatives: GATTINE of Westbrook, HYMANSON of York,  MARTIN of Eagle  Lake, 
PIERCE of Falmouth, VACHON of Scarborough,  Senator: KATZ of Kennebec.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1498(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22-A MRSA ยง211 -A is enacted to read:  2 
ยง211 -A.  Federal block grant funds expenditure plan  3 
Annually, the department shall develop and submit to the joint standing committee of 4 
the Legisla ture having jurisdiction over appropriations and financial affairs a proposed 5 
plan for expenditures of federal block grant funds.  The plan must include a description of 6 
current expenditures of federal block grant funds and how the department proposes to 7 
change any expenditure, including, but not limited to, how the department proposes to 8 
reduce or remove funding for existing approved services.  The department may not make 9 
an expenditure from any federal block grant unless the expenditure is recommended by 10 
the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over appropriations 11 
and financial affairs and approved by the Legislature, except that, if the Legislature is not 12 
in session, upon a determination by the commissioner that an expenditure i s necessary to 13 
avert an emergency and with 60 days' notice to the joint standing committee of the 14 
Legislature having jurisdiction over appropriations and financial affairs, the department 15 
may make an expenditure that has not been approved by the Legislatur e. 16 
SUMMARY  17 
This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services annually to develop 18 
and submit to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 19 
appropriations and financial affairs proposed plans for expenditures of fed eral block grant 20 
funds including a description of current expenditures of federal block grant funds and 21 
how the department proposes to change any expenditure.  Under the bill, the department 22 
may not make an expenditure from any federal block grant unless t he expenditure is 23 
recommended by the joint standing committee and approved by the Legislature.  When 24 
the Legislature is not in session, the department may make an expenditure if the 25 
Commissioner of Health and Human Services determines that the expenditure is 26 
necessary to avert an emergency and provides 60 days' notice to the joint standing 27 
committee.  28 
 
