 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 294
H.P. 227 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2017
Resolve, To  Name the  Bridge over the  Penobscot River in  the Towns 
of Enfield  and Howland King's  Bridge
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HANINGTON of Lincoln.
Cosponsored by Senator DILL of Penobscot and
Representatives: STANLEY of Medway, TURNER of Burlington, Senator:  ROSEN of 
Hancock.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1580(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, this resolve designates the newly built bridge that spans the Penobscot 3 
River in the Town of Enfield and the Town of Howland King's Bridge after Leeman King 4 
of Howland and Philip and Carroll King of Enfield; and  5 
Whereas, the Town of Howland and the Town of Enfield have issued proclamations 6 
regarding the new bridge, and formal designation by the  State must be made before the 7 
end of the 90 -day period; and  8 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 9 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 10 
immediately necessary for the  preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 11 
therefore, be it  12 
Sec. 1.  Bridge in Enfield and Howland named. Resolved:  That the 13 
Department of Transportation shall designate the bridge that spans the Penobscot River in 14 
the Town of Enfield and the Town of Howland King's Bridge.  15 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 16 
legislation takes effect when approved.  17 
SUMMARY  18 
This resolve names the bridge that spans the Penobscot River in the Town of Enfield 19 
and the Town of H owland King's Bridge.  20 
 
