 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1113
S.P. 367 In Senate,  March  21, 2017
An Act  To Improve  Antihunger Programs in  Maine Schools
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative KORNFIELD of Bangor and
Senators: BREEN of  Cumberland, DOW of Lincoln,  KATZ of Kennebec, LANGLEY of 
Hancock, MILLETT of Cumberland,  Representatives:  PIERCE  of Falmouth,  POULIOT  of 
Augusta, TUELL  of East Machias.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1650(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง6601 -A is enacted to read:  2 
ยง6601 -A.  National School Lunch Program; Internet -based school meal applications  3 
The department shall develop and make available to public schools an Internet -based 4 
application for eligible students for free or reduced -price meals under the National School 5 
Lunch Program under 7 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 210.  A public school may 6 
make the Internet -based application developed by the department available for school 7 
meal applications.  If a public school implements an Internet -based application process 8 
under this section, the public school shall maintain paper applications for school meals.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This bill requires the Department of Education to  develop and make available to 11 
public schools an Internet -based application for eligible students for free or reduced -price 12 
meals under the National School Lunch Program.  The bill provides that a public school 13 
may make available the Internet -based applica tion developed by the department for 14 
school meal applications.  The bill also provides that if a public school implements an 15 
Internet -based application process, the public school is required to maintain paper 16 
applications for school meals.  17 
 
