 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 957
S.P. 313 In Senate,  March  9, 2017
Resolve, To  Update Maine's Liquor  Laws
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LANGLEY of  Hancock.
Cosponsored by Representative LUCHINI of Ellsworth and
Senators: COLLINS  of York, MASON  of Androscoggin, Representatives: SUTTON of 
Warren, TURNER of Burlington.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1599(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Economic and Community Development and 1 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of Alcoholic 2 
Beverages and Lottery Operations to convene study group.  Resolved:   That 3 
the Department of Economic and Community Develo pment and the Department of 4 
Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery 5 
Operations shall convene a study group consisting of representatives of appropriate state 6 
agencies and stakeholders, including alcoholic beverage p roducers, distributors and 7 
retailers and representatives of entities that enforce the laws governing alcoholic 8 
beverages.  The study group shall review and propose revisions to the laws governing 9 
alcoholic beverages to eliminate outdated laws, respond to i ndustry concerns and support 10 
the State's emerging craft beer, wine and liquor industry.  The study group shall develop 11 
recommendations regarding changes to the laws governing alcoholic beverages, and the 12 
departments shall submit a report and recommendation s, together with any necessary 13 
implementing legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 14 
no later than December 6, 2017.  After receipt and review of the report, the committee 15 
may submit a bill to the Second Regular Session of  the 128th Legislature.  16 
SUMMARY  17 
This resolve requires the Department of Economic and Community Development and 18 
the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages 19 
and Lottery Operations to convene a study group consisting  of representatives of 20 
appropriate state agencies and stakeholders, including alcoholic beverage producers, 21 
distributors and retailers and representatives of entities that enforce the laws governing 22 
alcoholic beverages, to review and propose revisions to t he laws governing alcoholic 23 
beverages to eliminate outdated laws, respond to industry concerns and support the State's 24 
emerging craft beer, wine and liquor industry.  25 
 
