 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1119
H.P. 783 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2017
An Act  To Ensure Safe Drinking  Water in Public Buildings
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BROOKS  of Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  CARDONE of  Bangor, DEVIN of Newcastle, GOLDEN  of 
Lewiston, HICKMAN of  Winthrop, KORNFIELD of Bangor, NADEAU of Winslow, 
TALBOT ROSS of  Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0041(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง2604, as enacted by PL 1975, c. 751, ยง4, is amended to read:  2 
ยง2604.  Public buildings, sampling and examination of water  3 
Any school, which  public building that  takes water from  a source other than a public 4 
water system and uses such water for drinking or culinary purposes , shall submit samples 5 
of such water to the department for analysis at least once during each school  year. Such  6 
The samples shall  must  be analyzed by the depart ment. If the water is found to violate the 7 
state primary drinking water regulations, the department shall issue an order prohibiting 8 
the use of the water for drinking or culinary purposes by the school , which order shall 9 
must  remain in force until the wate r conforms to the state primary drinking water 10 
regulations.  The department shall provide results of any analysis performed under this 11 
section to the Department of Environmental Protection.  The Department of 12 
Environmental Protection shall make the results  available on a publicly accessible 13 
website maintained and updated by the Department of Environmental Protection.  For the 14 
purposes of this section, "public building" means any building or structure operated or 15 
maintained for use by the general public, inc luding, but not limited to, buildings used for 16 
state, municipal or county purposes; education; health care, a residential care nursing 17 
home or any facility licensed by the department under section 1811; public assembly; a 18 
hotel, motel, inn or rooming or lo dging house; or a restaurant.  19 
In addition to any other requirement in this chapter that applies to a public building 20 
that is regulated as a public water system, the requirements of this section apply to a 21 
public building that takes water from a public wate r system and uses that water for 22 
drinking or culinary purposes if the public building is more than 10 years old.  23 
Violation of this section shall  is, on conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more 24 
than $500.  25 
SUMMARY  26 
Current law requires schools that tak e drinking water from sources other than public 27 
water systems to have that water tested.  This bill expands this requirement to include all 28 
public buildings that take water from a source other than a public water system.  This bill 29 
requires public building s that take drinking water from public water systems to have the 30 
same tests performed on that water, except that public buildings less than 10 years old are 31 
exempt from this requirement.  Under the bill, the Department of Health and Human 32 
Services must pro vide test results to the Department of Environmental Protection.  After 33 
receiving the results, the Department of Environmental Protection must make the results 34 
available on the department's publicly accessible website.  35 
 
