 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 537
H.P. 381 House of  Representatives, February 9, 2017
An Act  To Provide  an Exemption from Road  Association Payments 
for Landowners Whose Primary Access Is Not over the Road
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WADSWORTH  of Hiram.
Cosponsored by Senator HAMPER of Oxford  and
Representatives: GRIGNON of Athens, HARRINGTON  of Sanford, KINNEY  of Limington, 
ORDWAY of Standish, PIERCE of Dresden.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1203(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  23 MRSA ยง3107 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง3107.  Exemption when nonprimary road access  3 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, an owner of a parcel of land 4 
benefited by a road that does not serve as the primary access route to the owner's parcel 5 
of land is exempt from all payments or assessments under this subchapter for repairs or 6 
maintenance relating to that road if that owner notifies the owners of all other parcels 7 
benefited  by that road, prior to the determination by the road association to undertake the 8 
repair or maintenance, that the road does not serve as the primary access route to the 9 
owner's parcel of land.  For purposes of this section, "road" means a private road, pr ivate 10 
way or bridge subject to the provisions of this subchapter.  11 
SUMMARY  12 
This bill provides an exemption from road association payments for an owner of a 13 
parcel of land benefited by a private road, private way or bridge that does not serve as the 14 
primary access route to the land.  The owner is exempt from all payments or assessments 15 
for repairs or maintenance determined to be undertaken by the road association as long as 16 
the owner notifies the owners of all other parcels benefited by the road, way or bridg e 17 
prior to the determination by the road association to undertake the repair or maintenance.  18 
 
