 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1485
S.P. 515 In Senate, April 18, 2017
An Act  Regarding MaineCare Coverage  for Telehealth Services
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Representative MASTRACCIO  of Sanford and
Senators: KATZ of Kennebec, LIBBY of Androscoggin, SAVIELLO  of Franklin, 
Representatives: PIERCE  of Dresden, RYKERSON of Kittery.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2196(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3173 -H is enacted to read:  2 
ยง3173 -H.  Services delivered through telehealth  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following term s have the following meanings.  5 
A.  "Patient originating site" means a site where a patient is physically located at the 6 
time that health care services are provided through telehealth.  7 
B.  "Provider distant site" means a site where a provider is physically located while 8 
providing health care services through telehealth.  9 
C.  "Store and forward transfers" means transmission of a patient's recorded health 10 
history through a secure electronic system to a provider.  11 
D.  "Telehealth," as it pertains to the delivery of health care services, means the use 12 
of interactive real -time visual and audio or other electronic media for the purpose of 13 
consultation and education concerning and diagnosis, treatment, care management 14 
and self -management of a patient's physical and me ntal health and includes real -time 15 
interaction between the patient at a patient originating site and the telehealth provider 16 
at a provider distant site, synchronous encounters, asynchronous encounters, store 17 
and forward transfers and remote patient monitor ing. "Telehealth" does not include 18 
the use of audio -only telephone, facsimile machine, e -mail or texting.  19 
E.  "Telemonitoring," as it pertains to the delivery of health care services, means the 20 
use of information technology to remotely monitor a patient's health status via 21 
electronic means through the use of clinical data while the patient remains in a 22 
residential setting, allowing the provider to track the patient's health data over time. 23 
Telemonitoring may or may not take place in real time.  24 
2.  Reimburse ment.  Services under MaineCare that are delivered through telehealth 25 
must be reimbursed at the same rates as those services that are not delivered through 26 
telehealth.  27 
3.  Standards.  The department shall develop standards to facilitate and integrate the 28 
use of telehealth under MaineCare. In developing standards, the department must consult 29 
with health care providers, health care policy analysts, persons with expertise in health 30 
care finance and the Legislature. The department may solicit, apply for and rec eive grants 31 
that support the development of the technology infrastructure necessary to support the 32 
delivery of health care services through telehealth and that support access to equipment, 33 
technical support and education related to telehealth for health ca re providers.  34 
4.  Annual report.  Beginning April 1, 2018 and annually thereafter, the department 35 
shall report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 36 
health and human services matters on the use of telehealth in MaineCa re, including its 37 
effect on health care costs, quality and access.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR2196(01) -1 
 5.  Rules.  The department shall adopt rules as necessary to implement this section. 1 
Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are major substantive rules as defined in Title 2 
5, chapter 375 , subchapter 2 -A.  At a minimum, any rules adopted by the department 3 
must:  4 
A.  Define health care provider to include any licensed, registered or certified 5 
provider in this State;  6 
B.  Clarify that the practice of medicine occurs at a patient originating si te; 7 
C.  Require that an originating facility fee may be billed for services provided 8 
through telehealth only if a patient originating site is a health care provider's facility, 9 
part of a hospital system, health care clinic or federally qualified health cen ter; 10 
D.  Clarify that a health care provider at a patient originating site and a health care 11 
provider at a provider distant site may be part of the same organization and that the 12 
provider at the patient originating site may receive reimbursement for servic es 13 
delivered through telehealth if the services are provided by a qualified health care 14 
professional under contract with the provider at the patient originating site;  15 
E.  When establishing criteria for a patient's eligibility for telehealth services, provi de 16 
that the patient is eligible for telehealth services if a health care provider has 17 
determined the delivery of health care services through telehealth is medically 18 
appropriate and if the services are covered services under MaineCare;  19 
F.  When establishin g criteria for a patient's eligibility for telemonitoring services, 20 
eliminate any requirement that the patient have had at least 2 emergency room visits 21 
or hospitalizations related to the patient's diagnosis in the past calendar year;  22 
G.  Prohibit the use of geographic restrictions or requirements as a condition of 23 
coverage;  24 
H.  Prohibit restrictions on requirements for the patient originating site;  25 
I.  Require health care providers to use in good faith equipment and products that are 26 
compliant with standar ds required by the federal Health Insurance Portability and 27 
Accountability Act of 1996, Public Law 104 -191; and  28 
J.  Require the informed consent of a patient before the first telehealth encounter with 29 
a health care provider.  30 
Sec. 2.  Rulemaking.  Before De cember 31, 2017, the Department of Health and 31 
Human Services shall amend its rule Chapter 101: MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapter 32 
I, Section 4, Telehealth Services to make the changes necessary to be consistent with the 33 
provisions of this Act.  34 
SUMMARY  35 
This bill requires that services under MaineCare that are provided through telehealth 36 
be reimbursed at the same rates as those services that are not provided through telehealth. 37 
The bill also requires the Department of Health and Human Services to amend its ru le 38 
relating to MaineCare coverage for services delivered through telehealth.  39 
