 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 498
H.P. 361 House of  Representatives, February 9, 2017
An Act  Regarding Marijuana Licensing
Reference to the Joint Select  Committee  on Marijuana Legalization Implementation 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HARVELL of  Farmington.
Cosponsored by Senator DION of Cumberland  and
Representatives: BICKFORD of Auburn, BLACK of Wilton, COREY  of Windham, 
MONAGHAN of Cape Elizabeth, O'CONNOR of Berwick, PARRY of Arundel, SANDERSON of Chelsea.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1621(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  7 MRSA §2447, sub -§1, ¶¶I to K are enacted to read:  2 
I.  An applicant who is a natural person must have been a resident of the State for at 3 
least one year continuously prior to applicati on for a license.  4 
J.  An applicant that is a business entity organized under Title 13 -B or 13 -C must 5 
have been organized for at least one year continuously prior to application for a 6 
license.  The individual who submits the application for the business mus t have been 7 
a resident of the State for at least one year continuously prior to application for a 8 
license.  9 
K.  An applicant must disclose the applicant's financial interest in the license, 10 
including, but not limited to, any investment interest and salary o r other 11 
reimbursement that may become due to the applicant from any other person or 12 
business if the license is granted.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This bill requires an applicant for a marijuana license under the Maine Revised 15 
Statutes, Title 7 who is a natural person to hav e been a resident of the State for at least 16 
one year continuously prior to application for a license.  It requires an applicant that is a 17 
business entity organized under Title 13 -B or 13 -C that applies for a marijuana license 18 
under Title 7 to have been org anized for at least one year continuously prior to 19 
application for a license and requires an individual who submits the application for the 20 
business to have been a resident of the State for at least one year continuously prior to 21 
application for a license.  22 
This bill requires an applicant for a marijuana license under Title 7 to disclose the 23 
applicant's financial interest in the license, including, but not limited to, investment 24 
interest and salary or other reimbursement that may become due to the applicant from any 25 
other person or business if the license is granted.  26 
 
