 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 194
H.P. 150 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2017
An Act  To Ensure Equity  in the Awarding of Compensation for 
Tort Claims
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GINZLER  of Bridgton.
Cosponsored by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot  and
Representatives: GUERIN  of Glenburn, LOCKMAN of Amherst, STEARNS of Guilford,  
WALLACE of Dexter,  WARD of Dedham.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0510(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  14 MRSA §156, 5th ¶, as amended by PL 1999, c. 633, §1 and affected 2 
by §3, is further amended to read:  3 
In a case involving multiparty defendants, each defendant is jointly and severally  4 
liable to the plaintiff for the full amount of the plaintiff's pecuniary  damages.  However, 5 
any For nonpecuniary damages, including emotional distress, pain and suffering and the 6 
loss of comfort, society and companionship, a defendant's liability is sever al and each 7 
defendant is liable for only the amount of the nonpecuniary damages proportional to the 8 
percentage of fault attributable to that defendant, unless the defendants acted in concert, 9 
in which case the defendants are jointly and severally liable fo r the nonpecuniary 10 
damages.  This limitation on liability also applies in any claim for contribution or action 11 
brought by another defendant.  A  defendant has the right through the use of special 12 
interrogatories to request of the jury the percentage of faul t contributed by each 13 
defendant.  If a defendant is released by the plaintiff under an agreement that precludes 14 
the plaintiff from collecting against remaining parties that portion of any damages 15 
attributable to the released defendant's share of responsibi lity, then the following rules 16 
apply.  17 
SUMMARY  18 
This bill provides that, if 2 or more defendants are found to be liable for a plaintiff's 19 
injury, then the defendants are jointly and severally liable for the plaintiff's pecuniary 20 
damages, but each defendant i s only severally liable for nonpecuniary damages 21 
proportional to the percentage of fault attributable to that defendant.  If the defendants 22 
acted in concert, they are jointly and severally liable for the nonpecuniary damages as 23 
well.  24 
 
