 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1264
S.P. 427 In Senate,  March  30, 2017
Resolve, Regarding Court Facilities  in York County
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator WOODSOME of York.
Cosponsored by Senators:  DESCHAMBAULT of York, HILL of York, Representatives: 
GERRISH of Lebanon,  HARRINGTON  of Sanford, KINNEY of Limington,  LAWRENCE of 
South Berwick, MAREAN of Hollis, SAMPSON of Alfred.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1427(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Termination of construction.  Resolved:  That, except as provided in 1 
section 2, the Judicial Department shall terminate all construction, contracts, contract 2 
negotiations and any other negotiations and any other actions relating to the acquisition , 3 
ownership, construction, permitting and operation of the York County Judicial Center and 4 
shall maintain and continue providing court services in the York County Superior Court 5 
in Alfred and the District Courts in Biddeford, Springvale and York; and be it  further  6 
Sec. 2.  Requirements if construction is not terminated.  Resolved:  That, if 7 
the Judicial Department determines that terminating all construction, contracts, contract 8 
negotiations and any other negotiations and any other actions relating to the a cquisition, 9 
ownership, construction, permitting and operation of the York County Judicial Center 10 
will result in excessive monetary loss to the State, the provisions of section 1 do not apply 11 
and the Judicial Department shall:  12 
1.  Ensure that office space o f not less than 20,000 square feet in the York County 13 
Judicial Center is provided for an indefinite term of years to the York County District 14 
Attorney's Office at a cost of free rent;  15 
2.  Compensate York County for the cost of additional personnel necessar y for the 16 
proper staffing associated with inmate security within and when traveling to and from the 17 
York County Judicial Center; and  18 
3.  Ensure that recommendations provided by the York County Board of 19 
Commissioners concerning the design of the York County  Judicial Center relating to 20 
inmate holding areas are considered.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This resolve directs the Judicial Department to terminate all construction, contracts, 23 
contract negotiations and any other negotiations and any other actions relating to the 24 
acquisit ion, ownership, construction, permitting and operation of the York County 25 
Judicial Center and to maintain and continue providing court services in the Superior 26 
Court and District Courts in York County.  Under the resolve, if the Judicial Department 27 
determi nes that terminating all construction, contracts, contract negotiations and any 28 
other negotiations and any other actions relating to the acquisition, ownership, 29 
construction, permitting and operation of the York County Judicial Center will result in 30 
excess ive monetary loss to the State, the construction of the York County Judicial Center 31 
may continue, but the Judicial Department must provide office space in the York County 32 
Judicial Center to the York County District Attorney's Office, compensate York County  33 
for the cost of additional staffing associated with inmate security and ensure that the York 34 
County Board of Commissioners' recommendations concerning inmate holding areas are 35 
considered in the design of the York County Judicial Center.  36 
 
