 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1782
S.P. 665 In Senate,  January  11, 2018
An Act  To Provide  for In-person  Visitation of Incarcerated Persons
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LIBBY of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 128LR2791(01)-11 Be it enacted  by the People of  the State of Maine as  follows:
2 Sec. 1.  30-A MRSA ยง1663 is  enacted to read:
3 ยง1663.  Visitation
4 1.  Requirement.  The sheriff shall provide for in-person visitation at a county jail 
5 between a prisoner and a visitor  of the prisoner, subject  to conditions and limitations 
6 imposed on a case-by-case basis as required for the safety and security of the jail as 
7 determined by the sheriff and subject to the exception for video-only visitation provided  
8 in subsection 2.
9 2.  Exception.  The sheriff may provide video-only visitation at a county jail between 
10 a prisoner  and a visitor of the prisoner only after a determination  is made  on a case-by-
11 case basis  and documented  in the record of the prisoner  that in-person  visitation may 
12 jeopardize the safety and security of the jail or that, on a short-term basis, the jail facility 
13 is unable  to provide a safe and secure location for in-person  visitation.
14 SUMMARY
15 This bill requires a county sheriff to provide for in-person visitation at a county jail 
16 between a prisoner and a visitor  of the prisoner, subject  to conditions and limitations 
17 imposed on a case-by-case basis as required for the safety and security of the jail as 
18 determined by the sheriff and subject to an exception for video-only visitation.  The bill 
19 allows a sheriff to provide video-only  visitation only after a determination is made  on a 
20 case-by-case basis,  documented in the record of the prisoner,  that in-person visitation 
21 may jeopardize the safety and security of the jail or that, on a short-term basis, the jail 
22 facility is  unable to provide a safe  and secure location for  in-person visitation.
