 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 487
H.P. 350 House of  Representatives, February 9, 2017
An Act  To Promote Keeping Workers in Maine
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SCHNECK of Bangor.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: HANINGTON of Lincoln, KORNFIELD of Bangor, LONGSTAFF of Waterville, LUCHINI of Ellsworth, MARTIN of Sinclair, MASTRACCIO of Sanford, STANLEY of Medway,  Senator: COLLINS of York.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0378(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to regulate the use of so -called noncompete agreements, which are 5 
contracts entered into by an e mployee prohibiting the employee from working in the 6 
same or a similar profession within a time certain after leaving employment with the 7 
employer and within a specified geographical area.  This bill would restrict the use of 8 
noncompete agreements by publi c and private employers by:  9 
1.  Prohibiting their use for low -wage employees;  10 
2.  Requiring employers to include in any advertisement for a job a statement that the 11 
person hired will be required to sign a noncompete agreement;  12 
3.  Requiring employers to no tify prospective employees of the noncompete 13 
requirement and provide a copy of the noncompete agreement before extending a job 14 
offer;  15 
4.  Requiring employers to provide additional compensation to those employees who 16 
agree to sign a noncompete agreement;  17 
5.  Restricting the use of noncompete agreements to those situations when they are 18 
necessary to protect trade secrets or confidential information held by that employer;  19 
6.  Limiting the duration of noncompete agreements so that they would have to be 20 
renegoti ated and agreed to after a certain period of time; and  21 
7.  Allowing an employee harmed by the unlawful use of a noncompete agreement to 22 
bring suit against the employer and, if the employee prevails, be awarded damages, 23 
attorney's fees and court costs.  24 
 
