 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1626
H.P. 1121 House of  Representatives, June 1, 2017
Resolve, Authorizing  the Bureau of General Services within the 
Department of Administrative and Financial  Services To Assume  
Ownership of the  Forest  City Project
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TURNER of Burlington.  (GOVERNOR'S BILL)
Cosponsored by Senator JACKSON of Aroostook and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, FREDETTE of  Newport, PERRY of Calais, SHERMAN of 
Hodgdon, Senators:  CARPENTER of Aroostook, MAKER of Washington.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2356(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, Woodland Pulp LLC currently owns the dam and water storage project, 3 
known as the Forest Ci ty Project, located on the East Branch of the St. Croix River in 4 
Washington County and Aroostook County; and  5 
Whereas, Woodland Pulp LLC seeks to transfer to the State the Forest City Project, 6 
together with associated flowage rights, easements and related f acilities; and  7 
Whereas, ownership of this property will allow the State to regulate the level of 8 
water in East Grand Lake to ensure recreational and habitat -related purposes; and  9 
Whereas, this legislation authorizes the State to accept the donation, and it  is 10 
necessary to expedite this authorization to stay the proceedings related to the application 11 
to surrender the dam that is pending at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; and  12 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergen cy within 13 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 14 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 15 
therefore, be it  16 
Sec. 1.  Forest City Project.  Resolved:  That the Departme nt of Administrative 17 
and Financial Services, Bureau of General Services is authorized to assume ownership of 18 
that portion of a dam and water storage project known as the Forest City Project, together 19 
with associated flowage rights, easements and related fa cilities, located on the East 20 
Branch of the St. Croix River in Washington County and Aroostook County, from 21 
Woodland Pulp LLC.  The authorization under this section is limited to that portion of the 22 
Forest City Project that is located within the territoria l limits of the United States; and be 23 
it further  24 
Sec. 2.  Project management.  Resolved:  That the Department of Inland 25 
Fisheries and Wildlife shall oversee the management of the Forest City Project acquired 26 
under section 1.  27 
Emergency clause.  In view of t he emergency cited in the preamble, this 28 
legislation takes effect when approved.  29 
SUMMARY  30 
This resolve authorizes the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, 31 
Bureau of General Services to assume ownership of the dam and water storage project 32 
known as the Forest City Project and requires the Department of Inland Fisheries and 33 
Wildlife to oversee the management of the Forest City Project.  34 
 
