 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
-----<J j 
2 Date: &/ B/Qor, \\J\ d\t\V ~, L.D. 891 
(Filing No. S-J. 31) 
3 EDUCATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
4 Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Secretaiy of the Senate. 
5 STATE OF MAINE 
6 SENATE 
7 128TH LEGISLATURE 
8 FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
9 COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "A" to S.P. 291, L.D. 891, Bill, "An Act To 
10 Suppmt the Professional Development of Principals in Maine Schools" 
11 Amend the bill by incorporating the attached fiscal note. 
12 SUMMARY 
13 This amendment, which is the majority repmt of the committee, incorporates a fiscal 
14 note. 
Page 1 -128LR1598(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 05/24/17 feac:.. 
128th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD891 LR 1598(02) 
An Act To Support the Professional Development of Principals in Maine Schools 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment'~' ( S-d-=s1) 
Committee: Education and Cultural Affairs -
State Mandates 
Required Activity Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Potential State Mandate -Unfunded 
Requires school administrative units to provide a mentoring program for principals 
and assistant principals that have held a cettificate for less than 5 years as patt of its 
comprehensive performance evaluation and professional growth system. Unit Affected 
School Local Cost 
Moderate 
statewide 
The required local activities in this bill may represent a state mandate pursuant to the Constitution of Maine. If the bill 
does require a local unit of govermnent to expand or modify its activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures 
from local revenue, the state mandate provisions of the Constitution of Maine require either: (1) General Fund 
appropriations be provided to fund at least 90% of any additional necessitated local costs of the mandate; or (2) a 
Mandate Preamble be added to the bill and two-thirds of the members of each House vote to exempt the mandate from 
the funding requirement. If the bill does represent a state mandate and neither one of these actions occurs, the local 
units of government will not be required to implement the mandated activities. 
Fiscal Detail and Notes 
Expanding the requirements of the performance evaluation and professional growth system enacted pursuant to Public 
Law 2011, c. 635 to include a new mentoring program for principals and assistant principals will increase costs to 
school administrative units. It is not possible to estimate the additional costs at this time. However, given that LD 
390, the Governor's proposed budget for the 2018-2019 biennium, eliminates all funding to suppott the 
implementation of the current performance evaluation and professional growth system, it is unclear how school 
administrative units will implement the requirements of this bill. 
LR1598(02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
