 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1321
S.P. 450 In Senate, April 4, 2017
An Act  To Promote Social and Emotional Learning and 
Development in  Early Childhood
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BREEN of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative PIERCE  of Falmouth and
Senators: LANGLEY  of Hancock, MAKER of Washington, MILLETT  of Cumberland, 
Representatives: FARNSWORTH of Portland, GATTINE of  Westbrook, KORNFIELD of 
Bangor, MALABY of  Hancock, PARKER  of South Berwick.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0401(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง254, sub -ยง20 is enacted to read:  2 
20.  Statewide voluntary early childhood consultation program.  Beginning 3 
September 1, 2019, the commissioner shall implement a statewide vol untary early 4 
childhood consultation program to provide support and guidance to early care and 5 
education teachers and to providers working in public preschools, child care centers as 6 
defined in Title 22, section 8301 -A, subsection 1 -A, family child care set tings and Head 7 
Start programs serving infants and young children who are experiencing challenging 8 
behaviors that put them at risk of learning difficulties and removal from early learning 9 
settings.  10 
Sec. 2.  Pilot project; early childhood consultation progra m.  The 11 
Department of Education shall develop and implement a pilot project to establish an early 12 
childhood consultation program to enable consultants with expertise in the areas of early 13 
childhood development and mental health to work on -site with early c are and education 14 
teachers and providers of child care to aid them in the use of evidence -based strategies 15 
that reduce challenging behaviors in children and promote social -emotional growth, as 16 
well as provide guidance to parents about their children's beha vioral difficulties.  The 17 
department shall designate an entity to design the pilot project in consultation with the 18 
National Center for Excellence for Infant and Early Childhood Mental Health 19 
Consultation and key stakeholders in the State.  The entity desi gnated by the department 20 
may be a public entity, a private entity or a public -private partnership.  In developing the 21 
pilot project, the designated entity shall:  22 
1.  Study national and in -state models of early childhood mental health consultations, 23 
includ ing but not limited to the Early Childhood Consultation and Outreach Program in 24 
Washington County; Maine Roads to Quality at the University of Southern Maine Muskie 25 
School of Public Service; and the Early Childhood Consultation Partnership in 26 
Connecticut;  27 
2.  Explore enhancing cross -sector professional development capacity in the State 28 
through partnerships with entities such as the Technical Assistance Center on Social 29 
Emotional Intervention for Young Children, a project funded by the United States 30 
Departme nt of Education;  31 
3.  Establishing connections between individualized on -site coaching for teachers and 32 
caregivers and other forms of professional development, including group training and 33 
communities of practice;  34 
4.  Develop a system for collecting and ana lyzing data on implementation and 35 
selected outcomes to promote accountability and continuous quality improvement; and  36 
5.  Develop a plan for establishing a roster of qualified consultants with the 37 
specialized knowledge, skills and experience to effectively  coach teachers, caregivers and 38 
program directors to promote a child's social and emotional health and decrease 39 
challenging behaviors.  40 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0401(01) -1 
 The department shall provide a report by January 15, 2019 to the joint standing 1 
committee of the Legislature having juris diction over education matters regarding the 2 
status of the pilot project and its ability to provide support and guidance to early care and 3 
education teachers and to providers working in public preschools, child care centers, 4 
family child care settings and Head Start programs serving infants and young children 5 
who are experiencing challenging behaviors that put them at risk of learning difficulties 6 
and removal from early learning settings.  As part of its report, the department shall 7 
include its recommendati ons regarding the amendment of the statewide voluntary early 8 
childhood consultation program established under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 9 
20-A, section 254, subsection 20.  After receipt and review of the report and 10 
recommendations, the joint standin g committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction 11 
over education matters may report out a bill to the First Regular Session of the 129th 12 
Legislature.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This bill requires the Commissioner of Education to implement, beginning September 15 
1, 2019, a sta tewide voluntary early childhood consultation program to provide support 16 
and guidance to early care and education teachers and to providers working in public 17 
preschools, child care centers, family child care settings and Head Start programs serving 18 
infants  and young children who are experiencing challenging behaviors that put them at 19 
risk of learning difficulties and removal from early learning settings.  The bill authorizes 20 
the Department of Education to designate an entity to design and implement an early  21 
childhood consultation program as a pilot project, and to report back to the joint standing 22 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over education matters with its 23 
recommendations concerning the amendment of the statewide voluntary early childhoo d 24 
consultation program.  25 
 
