 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 841
H.P. 590 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2017
An Act  To Provide  Stability in MaineCare Payments for 
Educational Programming
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MELARAGNO of Auburn.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BICKFORD  of Auburn, FULLER  of Lewiston, HANDY  of 
Lewiston, LAWRENCE  of South  Berwick,  POULIOT of Augusta, SHEATS of Auburn,  
STEARNS of  Guilford, Senator: LIBBY of  Androscoggin.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0831(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง15689 -A, sub -ยง22, as amended by PL 2015, c. 63, ยง1, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
22.  MaineCare seed for school administrative units.   The commissioner may 4 
deduct from a schoo l administrative unit's state subsidy and  pay on behalf of the a school 5 
administrative unit allowable school -based costs that represent the school administrative 6 
unit's portion of MaineCare payments.  A transfer of payment by the department to the 7 
Departme nt of Health and Human Services must be made pursuant to a schedule agreed 8 
upon by the Department of Health and Human Services and the department and in a 9 
manner that remains in compliance with federal intergovernmental transfer requirements.  10 
No later tha n 90 days after the incurrence of allowable school -based payments to schools, 11 
the Department of Health and Human Services shall provide the detailed payment 12 
information to the department.  The department shall make this information available and 13 
apply the adjustment to the appropriate school administrative units within 30 days of 14 
receipt of the detailed payment information from the Department of Health and Human 15 
Services.  The commissioner may not deduct from a school administrative unit's state 16 
subsidy any  payments made under this subsection.  17 
SUMMARY  18 
Under current law, the Department of Education is authorized to pay on behalf of a 19 
school administrative unit allowable school -based costs that represent the school 20 
administrative unit's portion of MaineCare pa yments.  Current law also provides that the 21 
department may then deduct that amount from the school administrative unit's state 22 
subsidy.  This bill changes the law to provide that the department may not deduct from a 23 
school administrative unit's state subsi dy such payments.  24 
 
