 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 92
S.P. 40 In Senate,  January  17, 2017
An Act  To Require  a Person Who  Provides  Illegal Drugs To Give 
Medical Aid to  Another  Person in Medical Distress Due to That  
Illegal Drug Transaction
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CYRWAY of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative ALLEY  of Beals and
Senators: CHENETTE  of York, DAVIS of Piscataquis, DESCHAMBAULT of York, DOW  of 
Lincoln, KEIM of Oxford, MAKER of Washington, President THIBODEAU of Waldo, Representative: HANINGTON of Lincoln.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0002(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง1125  is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1125.  Duty to provide aid to impaired person in medical distress  3 
1.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following  terms 4 
have the following meanings.  5 
A.  "Illegal substance" means a scheduled drug or any substance the provision of 6 
which to another person subjects the person providing the scheduled drug or other 7 
substance to a criminal penalty under the laws of this St ate or federal law.  8 
B.  "In medical distress" means injured, ill or emotionally distraught and in need of 9 
emergency aid in order to avoid serious harm or death.  10 
C.  "Provide" means to sell, barter, trade, exchange or furnish.  11 
2.  A person who provides to a nother person an illegal substance that subsequently 12 
causes that other person to be in medical distress shall:  13 
A.  Render first aid and assistance as that person is capable of rendering under the 14 
circumstances; and  15 
B.  Seek and obtain assistance from a med ical professional, first responder or law 16 
enforcement officer.  17 
3.  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, a person who provides first aid and 18 
assistance to an individual in medical distress pursuant to subsection 2 is not civilly liable 19 
for damages susta ined by the individual or the death of that individual resulting from an 20 
act performed by that person in rendering aid or assistance as long as the act was not 21 
gross negligence.  This subsection may not be construed to exempt or excuse the person's 22 
crimina l conduct.  23 
4.  A person who violates subsection 2 commits a Class C crime.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill requires a person who provides an illegal substance to an individual that 26 
causes that individual serious or life -threatening medical distress to provide first aid and 27 
assistance to that individual and seek assistance from a medical professional, first 28 
responder or law enforcement officer.  A person who renders first aid is not civilly liable 29 
for damages or death caused as a result of rendering that aid unless it is done in a grossly 30 
negligent manner.  Criminal liability is not waived.  31 
Failure to provide first aid and assistance is a Class C crime.  32 
 
