 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1621
S.P. 571 In Senate,  May 24, 2017
An Act  To Retain Jobs  in Maine
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator JACKSON of  Aroostook.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1777(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  26 MRSA ยง625 -B, sub -ยง6-B is enacted to read:  2 
6-B.  Offer of sale.   The closing of a covered establishment is governed by this 3 
subsection.  4 
A.  A person proposing to close a covered estab lishment shall make a good faith offer 5 
of sale, at fair market value, of the facility and equipment and all inventory, 6 
proprietary equipment and software necessary to continue the efficient and successful 7 
operation of the covered establishment to an intere sted employee organization or to a 8 
privately owned business entity, government -owned business entity or jointly owned 9 
business entity.  10 
B.  A covered establishment must be listed for sale in accordance with paragraph A 11 
for up to one year or until it is purc hased, whichever occurs first.  12 
C.  An employer may not discriminate against an employee regarding the employee's 13 
terms and conditions of employment because the employee, acting in good faith,  14 
reports to the director information concerning possible violati ons of this subsection.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This bill requires that a person proposing to permanently shut down an industrial or 17 
commercial facility make an offer of sale, at fair market value, of the facility and 18 
equipment to an interested employee organization or to  a privately owned business entity, 19 
government -owned business entity or jointly owned business entity.  20 
 
