 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 756
H.P. 536 House of  Representatives, March 2, 2017
An Act  To Clarify the Authority of an  Affiliate of a Utility To Own  
Power Generation outside of the Utility's Territory
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HARVELL of  Farmington.
Cosponsored by Senator KEIM of Oxford and
Representatives: COOPER of Yarmouth,  DeCHANT of  Bath, FARRIN of Norridgewock, 
HANLEY of Pittston, O'CONNOR of Berwick,  WADSWORTH of Hiram, Senators: DION  of 
Cumberland, WOODSOME  of York.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1259(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  35-A MRSA ยง3204, sub -ยง11 is enacted to read:  2 
11.  Affiliated generation outside service territory permitted.  Notwithstanding 3 
any other provision of this chapter, an affiliate of an inv estor -owned transmission and 4 
distribution utility may own generation or generation -related assets unless:  5 
A.  The generation or generation -related assets are interconnected to the transmission 6 
or distribution facilities that are owned or operated by the in vestor -owned 7 
transmission and distribution utility; or  8 
B.  The affiliate is a wholly owned or partially owned subsidiary of the investor - 9 
owned transmission and distribution utility.  10 
For purposes of this subsection, "affiliate" means a person who has any ow nership 11 
interest in, or is a subsidiary of a person who has any ownership interest in, the investor - 12 
owned transmission and distribution utility.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This bill authorizes an affiliate of an investor -owned transmission and distribution 15 
utility to own gen eration or generation -related assets unless the assets are interconnected 16 
to the transmission or distribution facilities that are owned or operated by the utility or the 17 
affiliate is a wholly owned or partially owned subsidiary of the utility.  18 
 
