 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 609
H.P. 425 House of  Representatives, February 16, 2017
An Act  To Prohibit Insurance Carriers That Are Not Health 
Insurance Carriers from Operating as Managed Care Organizations
Reference to the Committee on Insurance  and Financial Services suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CAMPBELL  of Orrington.
Cosponsored by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin and
Representatives: LAWRENCE of South Berwick,  MARTIN of Eagle Lake, STANLEY  of 
Medway, TUELL of East  Machias, Senator: DIAMOND of Cumberland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0950(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง2185 -A is enacted to read:  2 
ยง2185 -A.  Acting as managed care organization prohibited  3 
It is an unfair trade practice under this chapter for an insurer authorized to transact 4 
insurance in this State to act as a managed care organization or impose principles of 5 
managed care under a contract with a health care provider except as provided in this 6 
section.  7 
1.  Fee schedule.   An insurer may not impose a fee schedule used by an affili ated 8 
health insurer, health maintenance organization or other managed care organization under 9 
a separate contract with a health care provider for any claim under any automobile 10 
insurance liability policy or workers' compensation policy without the express prior 11 
written consent of the health care provider.  12 
2.  Reduction of reimbursement or imposition of limits.   An insurer may not 13 
reduce reimbursement or impose limits on the type or frequency of covered services of a 14 
health care provider under any automobile  insurance liability policy or workers' 15 
compensation policy based on the terms and conditions of the health care provider's 16 
separate contract with the insurer's affiliated health insurer, health maintenance 17 
organization or other managed care organization w ithout the express prior written consent 18 
of the health care provider.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This bill prohibits an insurer from imposing a fee schedule, reducing reimbursement 21 
or imposing limits on the type or frequency of health care services covered under any 22 
automobi le insurance liability policy or workers' compensation policy based on the terms 23 
and conditions of a health care provider's separate contract with the insurer's affiliated 24 
health insurer, health maintenance organization or other managed care organization 25 
without the express prior written consent of the health care provider.  26 
 
