 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 878
H.P. 627 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2017
An Act  To Allow Municipalities To Permit  the Operation of Golf 
Carts on Municipally  Owned Streets
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DENNO of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Senator BRAKEY  of Androscoggin and
Representative: CHACE of Durham, Senator: BREEN of Cumberland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1437(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  29-A MRSA ยง2093 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง2093.  Operation of golf carts  3 
A golf cart may be operated on the extreme right of a public way or as directed by the 4 
appropriate governmental unit within the public way of a municipality or an unorganized 5 
or unincorporated township if the appropriate governmental unit has designated the 6 
public way as a golf cart access route.  A golf cart must travel in the same direction as 7 
motor vehicle traffic on a public way designated as a golf cart access route.  A public way 8 
designated by an appropriate governmental unit as a golf cart access route must be posted 9 
conspicuously at regular intervals by that governmental unit with highly visible signs 10 
designating the golf cart access route.  Before designating a public way as a golf cart 11 
access route, the appropriate governmental unit shall make appropriate determinations 12 
that golf cart travel on the extreme right of the public way or as directed by the 13 
appropriate  governmental unit within the public way may be conducted safely and will 14 
not interfere with vehicular traffic on the public way.  The appropriate governmental unit 15 
may enact ordinances to require a golf cart to be registered with the governmental unit to 16 
be used on a golf cart access route in that governmental unit's jurisdiction and regarding 17 
the safe operation and required safety features of a golf cart used on a golf cart access 18 
route in that governmental unit's jurisdiction.  For purposes of this parag raph, 19 
"appropriate governmental unit" means the department, county commissioners or 20 
municipal officers within their respective jurisdictions.  The jurisdiction of each 21 
appropriate governmental unit over public ways pursuant to this paragraph is the same as  22 
its jurisdiction over the passage of vehicles on public ways pursuant to section 2395.  23 
Municipal or county law enforcement officials having jurisdiction have primary 24 
enforcement authority over any route established under this paragraph.  25 
SUMMARY  26 
This bill  allows municipalities to designate certain public ways as golf cart access 27 
routes, similar to existing provisions of law allowing municipalities to designate certain 28 
public ways as all -terrain vehicle access routes, and to pass ordinances requiring the 29 
registration of golf carts used on the access routes and for the safe operation and required 30 
safety features of those golf carts.  31 
 
