 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 299
H.P. 232 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2017
An Act  To Increase Voter Knowledge by Placing the Amount  of the 
Total Current Bond  Debt on Each  Ballot That Contains a Bond 
Issue
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SUTTON of Warren.
Cosponsored by Senator KATZ of Kennebec and
Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, CASÁS  of Rockport, MALABY  of Hancock, O'CONNOR 
of Berwick,  PRESCOTT of Waterboro, SAMPSON of Alfred, SANDERSON  of Chelsea,  
STETKIS of  Canaan.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0929(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA §152, as amended by PL 2013, c. 131, §1, is further amended to 2 
read:  3 
§152.  Ratification of bond issue; signed statement  4 
In accordance with the Constitution of Maine, Article IX,  section 14, the Treasurer of 5 
State shall prepare a signed statement, called the Treasurer's Statement, to accompany any 6 
question submitted to the electors for ratification of a bond issue setting forth the total 7 
amount of bonds of the State outstanding an d unpaid, the total amount of bonds of the 8 
State authorized and unissued and the total amount of bonds of the State contemplated to 9 
be issued if the enactment submitted to the electors should be ratified. The Treasurer of 10 
State shall also set forth in that  statement an estimate of costs involved, including 11 
explanation of, based on such factors as interest rates that may vary, the interest cost 12 
contemplated to be paid on the amount to be issued, the total cost of principal and interest 13 
that will be paid at m aturity and any other substantive explanatory information relating to 14 
the debt of the State as the Treasurer of State considers appropriate.  To meet the 15 
requirement that the signed statement of the Treasurer of State accompany any ballot 16 
question for rati fication of a bond issue, the statement may must  be printed on the ballot 17 
or it may  and must  be printed as a separate document that is made available to voters as 18 
provided in Title 21 -A, sections 605 -A and 651.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
Current law provides that the stateme nt of the Treasurer of State setting forth the total 21 
amount of bonds of the State outstanding and unpaid, the total amount of bonds of the 22 
State authorized and unissued and the total amount of bonds of the State contemplated to 23 
be issued if the enactment s ubmitted to the electors is ratified be printed on the ballot 24 
containing the proposed bond issue or printed as a separate document and posted outside 25 
the guardrail enclosure at each voting place.  This bill amends that law to require that that 26 
information be printed on the ballot and printed as a separate document and posted 27 
outside the guardrail enclosure at each voting place.  28 
 
