 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 904
H.P. 632 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2017
An Act  To Require  the County Commissioners To  Adjust  the 
Assessed Value of a Municipality When  They Grant an  Abatement  
Request
Reference to the Committee on Taxation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative JOHANSEN of Monticello.
Cosponsored by Senator CARPENTER of Aroostook and
Representatives: BICKFORD of Auburn, HANINGTON of Lincoln, HANLEY of Pittston, STETKIS of  Canaan, TUELL  of East  Machias.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0441(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  36 MRSA ยง844, sub -ยง1, as amended by PL 2001, c. 396, ยง18, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
1.  Municipalities without board of assessment review.   Except when the 4 
municipality or primary ass essing area has adopted a board of assessment review, if the 5 
assessors or the municipal officers refuse to make the abatement asked for, the applicant 6 
may apply to the county commissioners within 60 days after notice of the decisions from 7 
which the appeal is being taken or within 60 days after the application is deemed to have 8 
been denied.  If the commissioners think that the applicant is over -assessed, the applicant 9 
is granted such reasonable abatement as the commissioners think proper and the 10 
commissioner s shall adjust downward by an equal amount the assessed value of the 11 
applicant's municipality or primary assessing area .  If the applicant has paid the tax, the 12 
applicant is reimbursed out of the municipal treasury, with costs in either case.  If the 13 
appli cant fails, the commissioners shall allow costs to the municipality, taxed as in a civil 14 
action in the Superior Court, and issue their warrant of distress against the applicant for 15 
collection of the amount due the municipality.  The commissioners may requi re the 16 
assessors or municipal clerk to produce the valuation by which the assessment was made 17 
or a copy of it.  Either party may appeal from the decision of the county commissioners to 18 
the Superior Court, in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedu re, Rule 80B.  If 19 
the county commissioners fail to give written notice of their decision within 60 days of 20 
the date the application is filed, unless the applicant agrees in writing to further delay, the 21 
application is deemed denied and the applicant may ap peal to the Superior Court as if 22 
there had been a written denial.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
This bill requires the county commissioners for a municipality or primary assessing 25 
area to whom an appeal of an assessment has been made to adjust downward the 26 
valuation of that mun icipality or primary assessing area when the county commissioners 27 
grant the abatement.  The adjustment must be equal to the amount of the abatement.  28 
 
