 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1062
H.P. 745 House of  Representatives, March 16, 2017
An Act  To Expand the  Availability of Electric Vehicle Charging 
Stations in Maine
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative RYKERSON  of Kittery.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: BERRY of Bowdoinham, CAMPBELL of Orrington, COOPER of Yarmouth, DeCHANT of Bath, SCHNECK of Bangor,  SYLVESTER of Portland, Senators: GRATWICK 
of Penobscot,  SAVIELLO  of Franklin.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0538(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to establish a program to support the installation throughout the 5 
State of publicly accessible u niversally compatible electric vehicle charging stations.  6 
Under the program:  7 
1.  An entity doing business in the State would be able to apply for a grant to be used 8 
to install a charging station by submitting an application;  9 
2.  Applicants would be select ed based on preferential criteria, including:  10 
A.  The ability of the applicant to make the charging station available to the public for 11 
use 24 hours per day and 7 days per week;  12 
B.  The absence of other available charging stations in or near the area in wh ich the 13 
proposed charging station will be located;  14 
C.  The relative safety of the proposed location of the charging station, including the 15 
presence of lighting or shelter;  16 
D. The willingness of the applicant to contribute the applicant's own funds to help 17 
maintain and operate the charging station;  18 
E.  The location of the proposed charging station in relation to important regional 19 
attractions, events, facilities, transportation corridors, major thoroughfares and high - 20 
traffic areas; and  21 
F.  The proximity of d ining, lodging, retail and entertainment opportunities within 22 
walking distance of the proposed charging station;  23 
3.  A recipient of a grant would be required to commit to:  24 
A.  Making the charging station accessible and available for use by the public; and  25 
B.  Maintaining and operating the charging station; and  26 
4. Funds would be provided by several sources.  It is intended that the program be 27 
included in the State's beneficiary mitigation plan to receive trust funds pursuant to the 28 
Volkswagen Partial Consent  Decree, which settles portions of the multidistrict litigation 29 
concerning certain Volkswagen diesel engines.  In addition, private funding that is 30 
designed to leverage other funds would make up a part of the program funding.  31 
 
