 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 564
H.P. 406 House of  Representatives, February 14, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Increase the  Number of Signatures Required for a Direct 
Initiative of  Legislation
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SEAVEY of Kennebunkport.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1293(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub -ยง2 is amended to read:  4 
2.  Referral to electors u nless enacted by the Legislature without change; 5 
number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating signatures on 6 
petitions; competing measures.   For any measure thus proposed by electors, the number 7 
of signatures shall not be less than 10% 15% of the total vote for Governor  President  cast 8 
in the State  in the last gubernatorial  presidential  election preceding the filing of such 9 
petition.  The date each signature was made shall be written next to the signature on the 10 
petition.  A signature  is not valid if it is dated more than one year prior to the date that the 11 
petition was filed in the office of the Secretary of State.  The measure thus proposed, 12 
unless enacted without change by the Legislature at the session at which it is presented, 13 
shall be submitted to the electors together with any amended form, substitute, or 14 
recommendation of the Legislature, and in such manner that the people can choose 15 
between the competing measures or reject both. When there are competing bills and 16 
neither receiv es a majority of the votes given for or against both, the one receiving the 17 
most votes shall at the next statewide election to be held not less than 60 days after the 18 
first vote thereon be submitted by itself if it receives more than 1/3 of the votes given  for 19 
and against both.  If the measure initiated is enacted by the Legislature without change, it 20 
shall not go to a referendum vote unless in pursuance of a demand made in accordance 21 
with the preceding section.  The Legislature may order a special election  on any measure 22 
that is subject to a vote of the people.  23 
; and be it further  24 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 25 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 26 
respective cities , towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 27 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 28 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 29 
proposed in th is resolution by voting upon the following question:  30 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require that the 31 
number of signatures on a direct initiative petition be at least 15% of the 32 
total vote for President cast in the State in the last pre sidential election?"  33 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 34 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 35 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be rece ived, sorted, counted and 36 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 37 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 38 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of t he legal votes are cast in favor of the 39 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 40 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 41 
further  42 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1293(01) -1 
 Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 1 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 2 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  3 
SUMMARY  4 
This resolution proposes to amend the Const itution of Maine to require that the 5 
number of signatures on a direct initiative petition be at least 15% of the total vote for 6 
President cast in the State in the last presidential election.  The Constitution of Maine 7 
currently requires this number to be a t least 10% of the total vote for Governor cast in the 8 
last gubernatorial election.  9 
 
