 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 902
H.P. 630 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2017
Resolve, To  Increase Access  to Evidence-based  Psychosocial 
Treatment for Children  in the MaineCare  Program
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MALABY of Hancock.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  GATTINE of Westbrook, HANINGTON  of Lincoln, 
HAWKE of Boothbay Harbor, MADIGAN of  Waterville, PARKER of South Berwick, 
PERRY of  Calais.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1199(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to increase 1 
MaineCare reimbursement for outpatient psychosocial treatments for 2 
children.  Resolved:   That the Department of Health and Human Services shall 3 
increase reimbursement rates under rule Chapter 101 : MaineCare Benefits Manual, 4 
Chapters II and III, Sections 28, 65 and 97 for evidence -based therapies for treating 5 
emotional and behavioral problems in children.  These therapies include multisystemic 6 
therapy, multisystemic therapy for problem sexualized b ehavior, functional family 7 
therapy, therapy under the so -called Treatment Foster Care Oregon model and applied 8 
behavior analysis.  These rates must be sufficient to cover all costs to the provider of 9 
delivering the services, including additional training, to attract enough providers to clear 10 
waiting lists for services and to attract providers to all areas of the State, including 11 
underserved rural areas; and be it further  12 
Sec. 2.  Additional evidence -based practices services for children.  13 
Resolved:   That th e Department of Health and Human Services shall issue a request for 14 
proposals to contract with therapeutic mental health service providers to offer new 15 
evidence -based outpatient psychosocial treatment services for children known as trauma - 16 
focused cognitive  behavioral therapy and parent management training programs.  The 17 
request for proposals must be funded with General Fund funds and be used for start -up 18 
training costs to allow service providers to hire and train staff to provide the treatment.  19 
The Departm ent of Health and Human Services shall work with the contracted providers 20 
to develop an ongoing MaineCare reimbursement rate for providing treatment that allows 21 
for federal Medicaid matching funds and the continued financial health of the service 22 
providers  providing these therapies.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to increase the 25 
MaineCare reimbursement rates for evidence -based outpatient psychosocial treatments 26 
for children to a rate that covers all costs involved with providing the service, including 27 
additional training, clears waiting lists and attracts providers to all areas of the State, 28 
including underserved rural areas.  The resolve also requires the department to cover 2 29 
additional evidence -based services kno wn as trauma -focused cognitive behavioral 30 
therapy and parent management training programs through a request for proposals, using 31 
General Fund funds for training and hiring staff. The department and the contracted 32 
providers are required to develop a reimbur sement rate for providing the service that is 33 
sufficient to allow the continued financial health of the service providers providing these 34 
therapies.  35 
 
