 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1162
S.P. 383 In Senate,  March  23, 2017
An Act  To Reduce  the Incidence of Obesity and Chronic Disease in 
Maine
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LIBBY of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Representative HAMANN of South  Portland  and
Senators: CHIPMAN of Cumberland, GRATWICK  of Penobscot, KATZ of Kennebec,  
Representative: HARLOW of Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0322(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3174 -ZZ is enacted to read:  2 
ยง3174 -ZZ.  Medical nutritional therapy; obesity treatment medication; rules  3 
The department shall provide for the reimbursement under the MaineCare p rogram 4 
for medical nutritional therapy, including treatment for being overweight, obesity, 5 
hypertension, diabetes, pre -diabetes, disorders of lipid metabolism, HIV infection, 6 
unintended weight loss in older adults, chronic kidney disease, malnutrition and 7 
inappropriate eating habits.  Medical nutritional therapy also includes dietary surveillance 8 
and counseling.  Medical nutritional therapy services may be provided by physicians, 9 
licensed dietitians and dietitian nutritionists who practice in hospitals, out patient settings 10 
or private offices.  11 
The department shall provide for the reimbursement under the MaineCare program 12 
for obesity treatment medication.  13 
The department shall adopt rules to implement this section.  Rules adopted pursuant 14 
to this paragraph are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 15 
2-A. 16 
As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, "dietitian nutritionist" 17 
means a provider of medical nutritional therapy and "medical nutritional therapy" means 18 
a therapeutic approach to treating medical conditions and their associated symptoms by 19 
use of a specifically tailored diet devised and monitored by a physician, a licensed 20 
dietitian or a dietitian nutritionist.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This bill provides for reimbursement un der the MaineCare program for medical 23 
nutritional therapy provided by physicians, licensed dietitians and dietitian nutritionists 24 
and reimbursement for obesity treatment medication.  25 
 
