 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1383
H.P. 962 House of  Representatives,  April 11, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine Regarding Early  Voting
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DENNO of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Senator CARPENTER of Aroostook and
Representatives: CARDONE  of Bangor, CASÁS of Rockport, FARNSWORTH of Portland, 
MALABY of Hancock,  McELWEE of Caribou, PIERCE of Falmouth, Senators:  BRAKEY of 
Androscoggin, MIRAMANT of Knox.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0529(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. II, §4 is amended to read:  4 
Section 4.  Time of state election; absentee v oting.   The election of Senators 5 
and Representatives shall be on the Tuesday following the first Monday of November 6 
biennially forever and the election of Governor shall be on the Tuesday following the first 7 
Monday of November every 4 years.  The Legislatu re by proper enactment may authorize 8 
a process to allow qualified voters to vote at polling places in or outside their election 9 
districts during the 15 -day period immediately preceding an election and may, by proper 10 
enactment, authorize other methods to fa cilitate voting during that period.  The 11 
Legislature under  by proper enactment shall authorize and provide for voting by absentee 12 
ballot  by citizens of the State absent therefrom in the Armed Forces of the United States 13 
or of this State and for voting by ab sentee ballot  by other citizens absent or physically 14 
incapacitated  for any reasons deemed sufficient.  15 
; and be it further  16 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 17 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall noti fy the inhabitants of their 18 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 19 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 20 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the  ratification of the amendment 21 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  22 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to allow the 23 
Legislature to authorize a process to allow qualified voters to vote at 24 
polling places in or out side their election districts during the 15 -day 25 
period immediately preceding an election or to vote by another method 26 
and to authorize voting by absentee ballot for any sufficient reason?"  27 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ba llot on this question 28 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 29 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 30 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and return s made to the Secretary of 31 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 32 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 33 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact  without delay and the amendment 34 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 35 
further  36 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 37 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and p lantation all ballots, returns and copies 38 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0529(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to allow the Legislature 2 
to authorize a process to allow qualified vote rs to vote at polling places in or outside their 3 
election districts during the 15 -day period immediately preceding an election or to vote 4 
by another method and to allow absentee voting for any sufficient reason.  5 
 
