 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 777
H.P. 557 House of  Representatives, March 2, 2017
An Act  To Establish a Conditional Presumption of Compensability 
for Corrections Employees in Cases of Impairment from 
Hypertension or Heart  Disease
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TUCKER of Brunswick.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1575(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  39-A MRSA ยง328 -C is enacted to read:  2 
ยง328 -C.  Heart disease or hypertension suffered by a corrections officer  3 
There is a rebuttable presumption that an employee of the State or of a cou nty whose 4 
regular or incidental duties require the care, supervision or custody of a person confined 5 
in a jail, prison or state correctional facility pursuant to an order of a court or as a result of 6 
an arrest and who contracts heart disease or hypertensio n has contracted the heart disease 7 
or hypertension in the course of employment and as a result of that employment, that 8 
sufficient notice of the heart disease or hypertension has been given and that the heart 9 
disease or hypertension was not occasioned by a ny willful act of that employee to cause 10 
the heart disease or hypertension, as long as the employee successfully passed a physical 11 
examination upon entry into that employment, or during the time of that employment, 12 
that failed to reveal any evidence of tha t condition.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This bill amends the workers' compensation laws by adding a presumption that heart 15 
disease or hypertension suffered by a state or county corrections employee was caused in 16 
the course of that employment, as long as the employee had succ essfully passed a 17 
physical examination upon entry into or during the course of that employment that failed 18 
to reveal any evidence of that condition.  19 
 
