 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 956
S.P. 311 In Senate,  March  9, 2017
An Act  To Establish the Maine Buy America and Build  Maine  Act
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator JACKSON of  Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Speaker  GIDEON of Freeport and
Senators: BREEN of  Cumberland, DAVIS of Piscataquis, LIBBY of Androscoggin, 
SAVIELLO of Franklin, Representatives: BLACK of Wilton, FECTEAU of Biddeford, MARTIN of  Eagle Lake, MARTIN  of Sinclair.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0457(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA c. 153, sub -c. 3 is enacted to read:  2 
SUBCHAPTER 3  3 
MAINE BUY AMERICA AN D BUILD MAINE ACT  4 
§1777.  Short title  5 
This Act may be known and cited as "the Maine Buy America and Build Ma ine Act."  6 
§1778.  Definitions  7 
As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following 8 
terms have the following meanings.  9 
1.  Department.  "Department" means the Department of Administrative and 10 
Financial Services.  11 
2.  Emergency li fe safety and property safety goods.  "Emergency life safety and 12 
property safety goods" means any goods that are part of or for addition to a system 13 
designed to prevent, respond to, alert regarding, suppress, control or extinguish an 14 
emergency or the cause  of an emergency, or goods used to assist evacuation in the event 15 
of an emergency, that threatens life or property.  "Emergency life safety and property 16 
safety goods" includes, but is not limited to, goods relating to systems or items for fire 17 
alarm, fire sprinkling, fire suppression, fire extinguishing, security, gas detection, 18 
intrusion detection, access control, video surveillance and recording, mass notification, 19 
public address, emergency lighting, patient wandering, infant tagging and nurse call.  20 
3.  In-state contractor.  "In-state contractor" means an individual residing in this 21 
State or a business based in this State.  "In -state contractor" includes:  22 
A.  If an individual, an individual who has a physical address in this State at which 23 
the individual h as established residency and has filed a Maine tax return for at least 24 
the 2 years immediately prior to bidding on a state contract; or  25 
B.  If a business, a business that has a physical address in this State at which it 26 
conducts business, including intervi ewing applicants for employment by the business 27 
and hiring and employing staff, and:  28 
(1)  Has filed a Maine tax return or paid Maine employment taxes for at least the 29 
2 years immediately prior to bidding on a state contract; or  30 
(2)  If the business does no t meet the requirements of subparagraph (1), an 31 
officer, if the business is a corporation, a partner in the business or the sole 32 
proprietor must meet the requirements of paragraph A.  33 
4.  Manufactured good.  "Manufactured good" means:  34 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0457(01) -1 
 A.  An article, materi al or supply, including any preassembled items, brought to a 1 
construction site for incorporation into a public building or public work; and  2 
B.  Articles, materials or supplies acquired for public use.  3 
5.  Manufactured in the United States.  "Manufactured in the United States" means:  4 
A.  In the case of an iron or steel product, all manufacturing takes place in the United 5 
States, except metallurgical processes involving the refinement of steel additives; and  6 
B.  In the case of a manufactured good other than  an iron or steel product:  7 
(1)  All of the manufacturing processes for the manufactured good take place in 8 
the United States; and  9 
(2)  The origin of the manufactured good's components or subcomponents meets 10 
a minimum level of domestic content, as defined i n rules established by the 11 
department pursuant to section 1780.  12 
6.  Public agency.  "Public agency" means the State and its departments, agencies, 13 
boards, commissions and institutions but does not mean a county, municipality or school 14 
administrative unit.  15 
7.  Public building or public work.  "Public building or public work" means any 16 
structure, building, highway, waterway, street, bridge, transit system, airport or other 17 
betterment, work or improvement whether of a permanent or temporary nature and 18 
whether for governmental or proprietary use.  "Public building or public work" includes, 19 
but is not limited to, any railway; street railway; subway; elevated and monorail 20 
passenger rolling stock; passenger and rail rolling stock; self -propelled car; gallery car; 21 
locomotive; passenger bus; wires, poles and equipment for electrification of a transit 22 
system; rails; tracks; roadbed; guideway; elevated structure; school; hospital; station; 23 
terminal; dock; and shelter; and repairs to any such public building or public wo rk. 24 
8.  United States.  "United States" means the United States of America and any 25 
territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.  26 
§1779.  Use of American -made materials  27 
1.  Mandatory contract provision.  Notwithstanding a ny other provision of law to 28 
the contrary, a contract for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, 29 
improvement or maintenance of a public building or public work made by a public 30 
agency must contain a provision that the manufactured goods, inc luding iron and steel, 31 
used or supplied in the performance of the contract or any subcontract to the contract 32 
must be manufactured in the United States.  33 
2.  Exceptions.  A public agency may apply to the Governor or the Governor's 34 
designee for a waiver of t he requirements of subsection 1 in any case or category of cases 35 
in which the executive head of a public agency finds:  36 
A.  That the application of the requirements of subsection 1 would be inconsistent 37 
with the public interest;  38 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR0457(0 1)-1 
 B.  That the necessary manuf actured goods are not produced in the United States in 1 
sufficient and reasonably available quantities and of a satisfactory quality;  2 
C.  That inclusion of manufactured goods manufactured in the United States will 3 
increase the cost of the overall project co ntract by an unreasonable amount, as 4 
defined in rules established by the department pursuant to section 1780; or  5 
D.  The cost of the total contract for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, 6 
repair, improvement or maintenance of a public building or  public work is below a 7 
minimum project cost as established by rules of the department pursuant to section 8 
1780.  9 
3.  Public review and comment.  The department shall implement procedures to 10 
allow a reasonable amount of time for public review and comment on  a requested waiver 11 
under subsection 2 before making a finding based on the request and shall publish on the 12 
department's publicly accessible website, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the 13 
area of the proposed work, a detailed justification for a ny waiver granted.  14 
4.  Intentional violations.  The department shall, after a hearing, debar a person, 15 
business or other entity from participation in contracts or subcontracts with the State for 2 16 
years if the department has reason to believe that person, business or other entity has 17 
intentionally:  18 
A.  Affixed a label bearing a "Made in America" inscription, or any inscription with 19 
the same meaning, to any manufactured good, including iron and steel, used in a 20 
project to which this section applies when that  manufactured good was not 21 
manufactured in the United States;  22 
B.  Represented that any manufactured good, including iron and steel, used in a 23 
project to which this section applies was manufactured in the United States when that 24 
manufactured good was not ma nufactured in the United States; or  25 
C.  Violated any provision of this subchapter.  26 
5.  International trade obligations.  This section must be applied in a manner 27 
consistent with the State's obligations under any applicable international agreements 28 
pertaini ng to government procurement.  29 
6.  Exception for emergency life safety and property safety goods.  The provisions 30 
of this subchapter do not apply to emergency life safety and property safety goods.  31 
§1780.  Preference for in -state contractors  32 
1.  Award of su bstantially similar bids; opportunity to match.  In addition to the 33 
requirements of Title 26, chapter 15 and notwithstanding any other provision of law to 34 
the contrary, except as provided in subsection 2, the department, in awarding a bid for the 35 
construct ion, reconstruction, alteration, repair, improvement or maintenance of a public 36 
building or public work or for services provided to or on behalf of the State, shall award 37 
the bid to an in -state contractor if that in -state contractor's bid is substantially similar to 38 
other submitted bids.  If an in -state contractor submits a bid that is substantially higher 39 
than other submitted bids, the department shall give that in -state contractor the 40 
opportunity to match the lowest bid submitted.  If more than one in -state contractor 41 
 
 Page 4 - 128LR0457(01) -1 
 submits a bid that is substantially similar to other submitted bids, each must be given the 1 
opportunity to revise and resubmit that contractor's bid.  2 
2.  Exception.  If the department determines, by a preponderance of evidence, that a 3 
bid sub mitted by an in -state contractor is frivolous or that the in -state contractor is 4 
incapable of satisfactorily completing the contract, the department may refuse to award 5 
the bid to that in -state contractor.  6 
3.  Grievance; investigation; mediation.  An in -state contractor that is not awarded 7 
a bid pursuant to subsection 1 may request, within 30 days of the award of the bid, the 8 
Attorney General to investigate the bidding process and award to determine whether the 9 
procedure in subsection 1 was adhered to by th e department or, if the contract was not 10 
awarded pursuant to subsection 2, whether the department's determination was valid.  If 11 
the Attorney General determines that the department has not followed the procedure 12 
specified in subsection 1, the Attorney Gene ral may act as a mediator in a dispute 13 
between the in -state contractor and the department.  14 
§1781.  Rules  15 
The department shall adopt routine technical rules as described in chapter 375, 16 
subchapter 2 -A to implement this subchapter.  17 
Sec. 2.  Effective date.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2018.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
This bill establishes the Maine Buy America and Build Maine Act and requires that 20 
all contracts for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, improvement or 21 
maintenance of a public building or pu blic work made by a state agency, board, 22 
commission or institution contain a provision that the manufactured goods, including iron 23 
and steel, used or supplied in the performance of the contract or any subcontract to the 24 
contract must be manufactured in the  United States.  This requirement does not apply to 25 
counties, municipalities or school administrative units.  26 
The bill requires that, in the case of a manufactured good other than an iron or steel 27 
product, all of the manufacturing processes take place in th e United States and the origin 28 
of the manufactured good's components or subcomponents meet a minimum level of 29 
domestic content as established by rule.  30 
Under the Act, a public agency may apply to the Governor or the Governor's designee 31 
for a waiver of the r equirement if the executive head of the public agency finds that the 32 
application of the requirement would be inconsistent with the public interest, that the 33 
necessary manufactured goods are not produced in the United States in sufficient and 34 
reasonably ava ilable quantities and of a satisfactory quality or that inclusion of 35 
manufactured goods made in the United States will increase the cost of the overall project 36 
contract by an unreasonable amount.  The Department of Administrative and Financial 37 
Services is directed to develop rules regarding the Act, including rules to guide the 38 
waiver process and the process for public review and comment regarding requests for a 39 
waiver.  40 
 
 Page 5 - 128LR0457(0 1)-1 
 The bill requires that if the Department of Administrative and Financial Services has 1 
reason to believe that any person, business or other entity has intentionally made 2 
fraudulent representations about the domestic content of a manufactured good or has 3 
intentionally violated any provision of the Act, the department must, after a hearing, 4 
deba r that person, business or other entity from contracts or subcontracts with the State 5 
for 2 years.  6 
The bill provides that the provisions of this legislation must be applied in a manner 7 
consistent with the State's obligations under any applicable internatio nal agreements 8 
pertaining to government procurement.  9 
The bill also requires that, in the award of a bid for the construction, reconstruction, 10 
alteration, repair, improvement or maintenance of a public building or public work or for 11 
services to be provided to or on behalf of the State, if 2 or more bids are submitted that 12 
are substantially similar, preference must be given to the bid submitted by an in -state 13 
contractor.  If the bid submitted by an in -state contractor is higher than the lowest bid 14 
submitted b y a contractor that is not an in -state contractor, the in -state contractor must be 15 
given the opportunity to match the lowest bid submitted.  16 
 
