 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 963
S.P. 319 In Senate,  March  9, 2017
An Act  To Require  Certain Personnel on a Bridge Painting Project 
To Be Certified
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator JACKSON of  Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Representative McLEAN of Gorham and
Senators: BELLOWS of Kennebec, BREEN of Cumberland, CHIPMAN  of Cumberland, 
MIRAMANT of Knox, Representatives: BRYANT  of Windham, SCHNECK of Bangor.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1131(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  23 MRSA ยง403 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง403.  Surface preparation and coating of bridges  3 
For any work involving the surface preparation for or coating application of paint on 4 
a bridge, a cert ified coating application specialist or other person certified for field 5 
application of coatings to industrial structures by a nationally recognized association for 6 
industrial protective coatings must be present at all times when the work is being 7 
performe d.  For any work involving cleaning, rehabilitation, surface preparation for or 8 
coating application or removal of paint on a bridge on which lead may be present, a 9 
certified coating application specialist for hazardous coatings or other person certified fo r 10 
field removal of hazardous coatings by a nationally recognized association for industrial 11 
protective coatings must be present at all times when the work is being performed.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This bill requires a certified coating application specialist or other pe rson who is 14 
certified for field application of coatings to industrial structures by a nationally 15 
recognized association for industrial protective coatings to be present at all times when 16 
surface preparation for or coating application of paint on a bridge i s being performed.  17 
For any work involving cleaning, rehabilitation, surface preparation for or coating 18 
application of paint on a bridge on which lead may be present, the bill requires that a 19 
certified coating application specialist for hazardous coatings or other person certified for 20 
field removal of hazardous coatings by a nationally recognized association for industrial 21 
protective coatings must be present at all times when the work is being performed.  22 
 
