 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1436
H.P. 991 House of  Representatives,  April 13, 2017
Resolve, To  Reduce MaineCare Spending  through Targeted  
Nutrition Interventions
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HAMANN of South Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and
Representatives: DENNO  of Cumberland, FECTEAU of Biddeford, HICKMAN  of Winthrop, 
MADIGAN of Waterville, PARKER  of South  Berwick.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2099(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to seek demonstration 1 
waiver.  Resolved:   That the Department of Health and Human Services shall file an 2 
application with the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 3 
Medicare and M edicaid Services to request a demonstration waiver under the federal 4 
Social Security Act, Section 1115 to allow medically tailored food and nutrition 5 
interventions to be a reimbursable covered service.  Medically tailored food and nutrition 6 
interventions m ay be used when a health care provider determines that certain elements 7 
of nutrition or foods based upon a nutrition plan developed by a licensed dietitian are 8 
necessary for a patient's health.  The determination by the health care provider may be for 9 
reasons of preventive health care or to support treatment for a patient, may be for a 10 
patient who is homebound and unable to prepare nutritious foods and is at a high risk for 11 
admission or readmission to a health care facility or may be to assist in a patient' s health 12 
outcome; and be it further  13 
Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services 14 
shall report annually for 5 years by January 1st to the joint standing committee of the 15 
Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters on the use of 16 
services provided under a demonstration waiver under section 1, including how many 17 
individuals have qualified for a nutrition intervention under section 1 and the duration of 18 
and conditions treated under the nutrition interve ntion.  The report must also include data 19 
on hospital readmission rates for 2 categories of individuals with similar health 20 
conditions: individuals who have received nutrition interventions and individuals who 21 
have not received nutrition interventions; and  be it further  22 
Sec. 3.  Department of Health and Human Services to file application for 23 
home -delivered meal coverage. Resolved:   That the Department of Health and 24 
Human Services shall file the application by October 1, 2017 with the United States 25 
Departmen t of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 26 
to request that home -delivered meals be reimbursable under MaineCare as directed by 27 
Resolve 2015, chapter 54.  28 
SUMMARY  29 
This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Service s to file an 30 
application with the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 31 
Medicare and Medicaid Services for a demonstration waiver to allow for reimbursement 32 
of medically tailored food and nutrition interventions when a health c are provider 33 
determines that certain elements of nutrition or foods based upon a nutrition plan 34 
developed by a licensed dietitian are necessary for a patient's health.  This resolve also 35 
directs the Department of Health and Human Services to file the appli cation by October 36 
1, 2017 with the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 37 
Medicare and Medicaid Services to request that home -delivered meals be reimbursable 38 
under MaineCare as directed by Resolve 2015, chapter 54.  39 
 
