 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 523
H.P. 367 House of  Representatives, February 9, 2017
Resolve, To  Establish the Commission To Review  the Laws 
Governing Domestic  Violence
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative RECKITT of  South  Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec and
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, FAY of Raymond,  TALBOT  ROSS of  Portland, 
WARREN of Hallowell, Senator: DESCHAMBAULT of York.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0554(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, this legislation establishes the Commission To Review the Laws 3 
Governing Domestic Violenc e; and  4 
Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90 -day period expires in order that 5 
the study may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 6 
legislative session; and  7 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these fact s create an emergency within 8 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 9 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 10 
therefore, be it  11 
Sec. 1.  Commission established.  Resolv ed:  That the Commission To Review 12 
the Laws Governing Domestic Violence, referred to in this resolve as "the commission," 13 
is established; and be it further  14 
Sec. 2.  Commission membership.  Resolved:  That the commission consists of 15 
11 members appointed as follows:  16 
1.  Three members of the Senate, appointed by the President of the Senate, including 17 
members from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the Legislature. 18 
When making the appointments, the President shall give preference to me mbers of the 19 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety and the Joint Standing 20 
Committee on Judiciary;  21 
2.  Four members of the House of Representatives, appointed by the Speaker of the 22 
House, including members from each of the 2 parties  holding the largest number of seats 23 
in the Legislature. When making the appointments, the Speaker shall give preference to 24 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety and the 25 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary;  26 
3.  The  Attorney General or the Attorney General's designee;  27 
4.  The Chief of the State Police or the chief's designee;  28 
5.  A representative of a statewide organization to end domestic violence and assault, 29 
appointed by the Speaker of the House; and  30 
6.  A judge o r retired judge from the District Court, appointed by the Chief Justice of 31 
the Supreme Judicial Court; and be it further  32 
Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the first -named Senate member is the Senate 33 
chair and the first -named House of Representatives member  is the House chair of the 34 
commission; and be it further  35 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0554 (01)-1 
 Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of commission.  Resolved:  That all 1 
appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 2 
resolve.  The appointing authorities shall no tify the Executive Director of the Legislative 3 
Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 4 
the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more 5 
after the effective date of this  resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 6 
made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 7 
for the commission to meet and conduct its business; and be it further  8 
Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the co mmission shall conduct a comprehensive 9 
examination of the laws governing domestic violence in the State to determine whether 10 
the principles of ensuring victim safety and batterer accountability are upheld under the 11 
existing statutory scheme.  The commissio n shall review the domestic violence laws of 12 
other states, invite the participation of experts and interested parties, gather information 13 
and request necessary data from public and private entities.  As part of its review, the 14 
commission shall examine the handling of all aspects of domestic violence cases from 15 
investigation to prosecution to movement through the court system and shall evaluate the 16 
ways in which the needs of victims of domestic violence are or are not being addressed in 17 
the current legal sys tem and the contribution that can be made by laws to deterring 18 
batterers' behavior; and be it further  19 
Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Legislative Council shall provide 20 
necessary staffing services to the commission; and be it further  21 
Sec. 7.   Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 6, 2017, the commission 22 
shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 23 
legislation, for presentation to the Second Regular Session of the 128th Legislature.  24 
Emerg ency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 25 
legislation takes effect when approved.  26 
SUMMARY  27 
This resolve establishes the Commission To Review the Laws Governing Domestic 28 
Violence, which is directed to conduct a comprehensive examinat ion of the laws 29 
governing domestic violence in the State to determine whether the principles of ensuring 30 
victim safety and batterer accountability are upheld under the existing statutory scheme.  31 
 
