 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 48
H.P. 34 House of  Representatives, January 10, 2017
An Act  To Provide  for Fairness in the Transfer  of Students
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HIGGINS of Dover-Foxcroft.
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS  of Piscataquis and
Representatives: HANINGTON of Lincoln, KINNEY of Knox,  MAREAN  of Hollis,  STROM 
of Pittsfield, THERIAULT of China, TURNER of Burlington.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0101(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, this legislation must take effect in time for the 2017 -2018 school year; 3 
and 4 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 5 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 6 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 7 
therefore,  8 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  9 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง5205, sub -ยง6, as amended by PL 2015, c. 448, ยง10, is 10 
further amended to read:  11 
6.  Transfer students.   The following provisions apply to transfers of students from 12 
one school admi nistrative unit to another.  13 
A.  Two superintendents may approve the transfer of a student from one school 14 
administrative unit to another if:  15 
(1)  They find that a transfer is in the student's best interest; and  16 
(2)  The student's parent approves.  17 
The super intendents shall notify the commissioner of any transfer approved under 18 
this paragraph.  If either of the superintendents decides not to approve the transfer, 19 
that superintendent shall provide to the parent of the student requesting transfer under 20 
this par agraph a written description of the basis of that superintendent's 21 
determination.  22 
B.  On the request of the parent of a student requesting transfer under paragraph A, 23 
the commissioner shall review the transfer.  The commissioner shall review the 24 
superinten dents' determinations and communicate with the superintendents and with 25 
the parent of the student prior to making a decision. The commissioner may approve 26 
or disapprove the transfer and shall provide to the parent of the student and to the 27 
superintendents a written decision describing the basis of the commissioner's 28 
determination.  29 
C.  The superintendents shall annually review any transfer under this subsection.  30 
D.  For purposes of the state school subsidy, a student transferred under this 31 
subsection is cons idered a resident of the school administrative unit to which 32 
transferred.  Upon request of the superintendent of schools in the unit in which a 33 
student is placed in accordance with this subsection, the state share percentage for 34 
subsidized educational cost s for that student is equivalent to the state share 35 
percentage of the unit in which the student's parent or legal guardian resides or the 36 
average state share percentage, whichever is greater.  If the parent or legal guardian 37 
does not reside in the State or  can not be located, the subsidy is the state average 38 
subsidy.  39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0101(01) -1 
 E.  A school administrative unit may not charge tuition for a transfer approved under 1 
this subsection.  2 
F.  If dissatisfied with the commissioner's decision, a parent of a student requesting 3 
transfer or either superintendent may, within 10 calendar days of the commissioner's 4 
decision, request that the state board review the transfer.  The state board shall review 5 
the superintendents' determinations and communicate with the commissioner, the 6 
super intendents and the parent of the student.  The state board may approve or 7 
disapprove the transfer.  The state board shall make a decision within 45 calendar 8 
days of receiving the request and shall provide to the parent of the student, the 9 
superintendents a nd the commissioner a written decision describing the basis of the 10 
state board's determination.  The state board's decision is final and binding.  11 
G.  Notwithstanding paragraph D, if the commissioner or state board approves a 12 
transfer under this subsection and the student subject to the transfer is receiving 13 
special education services, the state subsidy of special education costs for the 14 
transferred student may not be reduced as a result of the transfer.  15 
A transfer under this subsection may not be made to a receiving school administrative 16 
unit that does not operate a public school that includes the grade level of the student 17 
whose parent requests the transfer, unless the superintendents of both the sending and 18 
receiving school administrative units approve the  transfer.   This subsection applies to a 19 
transfer involving a private school approved for tuition purposes.  20 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 21 
legislation takes effect when approved.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
Current law provides no appe al for a student denied a request to transfer to a school 24 
administrative unit that does not operate a public school that includes the grade level of 25 
the student.  This bill provides that the appeals process that applies to other transfer 26 
students applies t o such a student and explicitly makes the law regarding transfers apply 27 
to a transfer involving a private school approved for tuition purposes pursuant to the 28 
Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20 -A, chapter 117, subchapter 2.  29 
 
