 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 763
H.P. 543 House of  Representatives, March 2, 2017
An Act  To Support  Individuals with  Disabilities by Exempting 
Certain Wages  from Consideration for MaineCare
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative NADEAU of  Winslow.
Cosponsored by Senator BREEN of  Cumberland  and
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, DOORE of  Augusta,  FARNSWORTH of Portland, 
HARVELL of Farmington, MADIGAN of Waterville, MALABY of Hancock, RECKITT of South Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2007(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3174 -ZZ is enacted to read:  2 
ยง3174 -ZZ.  Income from certain employment activities in determination of eligibility  3 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the depart ment may not include 4 
income received from the following sources in determining a person's eligibility for 5 
MaineCare:  6 
1.  Work support services.  Income received by a person with a disability from 7 
employment if the employment when undertaken by a person wit h a disability is eligible 8 
for support services under the MaineCare program.  For purposes of this subsection, 9 
"disability" means an intellectual or developmental disability, autism spectrum disorder, 10 
brain injury, cerebral palsy, seizure disorder or other  related condition that qualifies the 11 
person for services under a MaineCare waiver program; and  12 
2.  Vocational rehabilitation.  Income received by a person from the person's 13 
participation in a vocational rehabilitation program provided pursuant to Title 26 , chapter 14 
19, subchapter 2.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This bill exempts income received by a person with a disability from certain work 17 
programs available to individuals with disabilities from being considered in determining 18 
the person's eligibility for MaineCare.  19 
 
