 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 573
S.P. 188 In Senate, February 16, 2017
Resolve, To  Audit Standardized  Testing in Maine's Schools
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LIBBY of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Representative SAMPSON  of Alfred  and
Representatives: FARNSWORTH of Portland, FULLER of Lewiston.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1000(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Maine Education Policy Research Institute to audit standardized 1 
testing.  Resolved:  That the Maine Education Policy Research Institute shall conduct 2 
an audit of standardized testing in a random sample of school administrative units 3 
statewide for the purpose of understanding the amount, cost and usefulness of 4 
standardized testing.  The audit must include:  5 
1.  Determining the opportunity costs of testing, including the loss of instructional 6 
time and other disruptions to learning for students caused by the testing; and  7 
2.  Considering best practices regarding the amount of testing, the amount of 8 
preparation students are required to participate in prior to the testing and the degree to 9 
which the testing results inform teachers regarding instruction in the classroom generally 10 
and individual students specifically; and be it further  11 
Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than January 1, 2018, the Maine 12 
Education Policy Research Institute shall issue a report that includes its findings and 13 
recommendati ons under section 1, including suggested legislation, to the Joint Standing 14 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs.  The Joint Standing Committee on 15 
Education and Cultural Affairs may report out a bill based upon the report to the Second 16 
Regular Sessi on of the 128th Legislature.  17 
SUMMARY  18 
This bill directs the Maine Education Policy Research Institute to conduct an audit of 19 
standardized testing in a random sample of school administrative units statewide for the 20 
purpose of understanding the amount, cost a nd usefulness of standardized testing.  This 21 
bill requires the Maine Education Policy Research Institute no later than January 1, 2018 22 
to issue a report with its findings and recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee 23 
on Education and Cultural Affairs , which may report out a bill based upon the report to 24 
the Second Regular Session of the 128th Legislature.  25 
 
