 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1047
S.P. 350 In Senate,  March  16, 2017
An Act  To Protect  Homeowners from  Improper Foreclosure Fees
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative LAWRENCE of South Berwick and
Senators: CARSON of Cumberland, CYRWAY of  Kennebec, KATZ of Kennebec, 
Representatives: CARDONE  of Bangor, CRAIG of Brewer, FREDETTE of Newport, FREY  
of Bangor, MOONEN of Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1886(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  14 MRSA ยง6101, as amended by PL 2011, c. 269, ยง1, is further amended 2 
to read:  3 
ยง6101.  Attorney's fees  4 
For the foreclosure of a mortgage by any method authorized by this chapter, if the 5 
mortgagee prevails, the mortgagee or the person claiming under the mortgagee may 6 
charge a reasonable attorney's fee which is a lien on the mortgaged estate, and must be 7 
included with the expense of publication, service and recording in making up the sum to  8 
be tendered by the mortgagor or the person claiming under the mortgagor in order to be 9 
entitled to redeem, provided the sum has actually been paid in full or partial discharge of 10 
an attorney's fee.  If the plaintiff that claimed to be  the mortgagee in the  foreclosure 11 
action  does not prevail, or upon evidence that the action was not brought in good faith, 12 
the court may order the plaintiff that claimed to be the  mortgagee to pay the mortgagor's 13 
reasonable court costs and attorney's fees incurred in defending  against the foreclosure or 14 
any proceeding within the foreclosure action and deny in full or in part the award of 15 
attorney's fees and costs to the mortgagee.  For purposes of this section, "does not 16 
prevail" does not mean a stipulation of dismissal entered  into by the parties, an 17 
agreed -upon motion to dismiss without prejudice to facilitate settlement or successful 18 
mediation of the foreclosure action pursuant to section 6321 -A. 19 
SUMMARY  20 
Current law provides that attorney's fees must be paid to mortgagors whe n the 21 
mortgagee does not prevail in a foreclosure action, which creates a loophole that allows 22 
the mortgagee to escape the attorney's fees provisions when the plaintiff does not prevail 23 
because it is determined that the plaintiff is not the true mortgagee.   This bill rectifies that 24 
loophole by clarifying that a plaintiff who claims to be a mortgagee who does not prevail 25 
in a foreclosure action must still pay attorney's fees to the prevailing mortgagor.  26 
 
