 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1424
S.P. 494 In Senate, April 13, 2017
An Act  To Amend the Laws Governing MaineCare Eligibility 
Determination For Applicants  To Nursing Homes
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Representative FAY  of Raymond and
Senators: DESCHAMBAULT of York, SAVIELLO  of Franklin, Representatives:  
CAMPBELL of  Orrington, DUCHESNE of Hudson, HARLOW of Portland, PIERCE of 
Dresden, ZEIGLER of Montville.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1169(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3174 -I, sub -ยง1-C is enacted to read:  2 
1-C.  Processing of initial applications for eligibility.   Initial applications for 3 
eligibility under this section must be processed in acc ordance with this subsection.  4 
A.  The department shall provide timely and adequate notice to the applicant, the 5 
applicant's guardian or conservator and the facility in which the applicant resides or 6 
seeks to reside in any circumstance if the department is  not able to make a decision 7 
on eligibility due to inconclusive or conflicting information or other deficiencies in 8 
the application.  The notice must provide a period of not less than 20 business days 9 
for the recipient or recipients of the notice to respon d.  The facility in which the 10 
applicant resides or seeks to reside shall provide the department with written 11 
authorization from the applicant or the applicant's guardian or conservator to receive 12 
such information. The department shall notify the applicant,  the applicant's guardian 13 
or conservator and the facility in which the applicant resides or seeks to reside of the 14 
application questions that remain unanswered, the additional information that is 15 
required and any issues that need to be resolved in order to  determine eligibility. The 16 
department shall, in a timely fashion, provide to the applicant, the applicant's 17 
guardian or conservator and the facility in which the applicant resides or seeks to 18 
reside copies of all communications required under this paragra ph. 19 
B.  The department shall provide to the applicant and the applicant's guardian or 20 
conservator a period of not less than 20 business days in which to respond to 21 
questions and to provide any necessary information, and the facility in which the 22 
applicant resides or seeks to reside may assist the applicant and the applicant's 23 
guardian or conservator in providing responses and information. The department, 24 
when appropriate, shall extend the time frame for receipt of responses and 25 
information.  26 
C.  After contac ting the applicant or the applicant's guardian or conservator and the 27 
facility in which the applicant resides or seeks to reside and after a period of not less 28 
than 30 days has elapsed following the department's request for information under 29 
paragraph B, i f the department cannot determine that eligibility exists, the department 30 
may deny assistance.  If the necessary information and verifications are provided at a 31 
later date, the department shall use that information to update and supplement the 32 
previous app lication, and the applicant may not be required to submit a new 33 
application.  34 
1-D.  Notice of annual and other MaineCare reviews.  The department shall 35 
provide advance notice of not less than 20 days of reviews for annual determinations and 36 
other periodic r edeterminations of MaineCare eligibility to a recipient of MaineCare, the 37 
recipient's guardian or conservator and the facility in which the recipient resides or seeks 38 
to reside. The department shall work cooperatively with the recipient, the recipient's 39 
guardian or conservator and the facility in which the recipient resides or seeks to reside to 40 
timely secure any information and documentation needed to properly carry out a fair, 41 
timely and proper review, which must be completed within 30 business days of re ceiving 42 
any requested information.  The department shall, in a timely fashion, provide to the 43 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1169(01) -1 
 recipient, the recipient's guardian or conservator and the facility in which the recipient 1 
resides or seeks to reside copies of all communications required under this subsection.  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill amends the laws governing MaineCare eligibility determinations for 4 
applicants to nursing homes.  It directs the Department of Health and Human Services to 5 
provide timely and adequate notice to both the applicant and the f acility in which the 6 
individual resides or seeks to reside if the department is unable to make a decision of 7 
eligibility due to inconclusive or conflicting information or other deficiencies in the 8 
application and requires the department to notify the appli cant and the affected facility of 9 
the additional information required. It requires that the provision of copies of all 10 
communications be timely provided to the facility as well as the applicant, and that the 11 
applicant be provided a reasonable amount of tim e to respond and provide information. It 12 
directs the department to extend the time frame for responses in appropriate 13 
circumstances. If an application is denied and if necessary information is later provided, 14 
the additional information must be used to upda te and supplement the prior application, 15 
and the applicant need not submit a new application.  16 
The bill also requires the department to provide timely advance notice of reviews for 17 
annual determinations and other periodic redeterminations of MaineCare eligi bility to a 18 
MaineCare recipient and the facility in which the recipient resides or seeks to reside. The 19 
bill requires the department to provide to the recipient and the facility in which the 20 
recipient resides or seeks to reside copies of communications.  21 
 
