 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 596
H.P. 412 House of  Representatives, February 16, 2017
An Act  To Promote Highway Safety by Restricting the Use of 
Marijuana and Possession of an Open Marijuana Container in a Motor Vehicle
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative COREY of Windham.
Cosponsored by Senator COLLINS of  York, Senator ROSEN of Hancock and
Representatives: DENNO  of Cumberland, GERRISH of Lebanon, HARRINGTON of  Sanford, 
HERRICK of Paris, McCREA of Fort Fairfield, TUCKER of Brunswick, TUELL of East Machias, Senator: CYRWAY of Kennebec.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1270(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  29-A MRSA ยง2112 -B is enacted to read:  2 
ยง2112 -B.  Open container; using marijuana in a vehicle prohibited  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicate s, the 4 
following terms have the following meanings.  5 
A.  "Open container" means a receptacle that contains any amount of marijuana or 6 
consumable products made from marijuana and has a broken seal or a receptacle from 7 
which the contents have been partially removed.  8 
B.  "Passenger area" means the area designed to seat the operator and passengers 9 
while a motor vehicle is in operation and any area readily accessible to the operator 10 
or a passenger, including the glove compartment, while in their seated positions . 11 
C.  "Public way" means a way, including a right -of-way, owned and maintained by 12 
the State, a county or a municipality over which the general public has a right to pass.  13 
2.  Violation.  The operator of a vehicle on a public way commits a traffic infractio n 14 
if the operator or a passenger in the passenger area of the vehicle:  15 
A.  Consumes marijuana or a marijuana product; or  16 
B.  Possesses an open container.  17 
3.  Exceptions.  An operator of a vehicle is not in violation of this section if:  18 
A.  The operator or a passenger possesses an open container in a vehicle not equipped 19 
with a trunk if the open container is located behind the last upright seat of the vehicle 20 
or in an area not normally occupied by the operator or passenger;  21 
B.  A passenger transported for a fee consumes marijuana or a marijuana product or 22 
possesses an open container in a vehicle designed for the for -hire transportation of 23 
passengers other than a taxicab;  24 
C.  A passenger possesses an open container or a passenger consumes marijuana or a 25 
mariju ana product in the living quarters of a motor home, trailer, semitrailer or truck 26 
camper; or  27 
D.  A passenger possesses an open container and is a cardholder for medical 28 
marijuana as defined in Title 22, section 2422, subsection 1.  29 
SUMMARY  30 
This bill makes i t a traffic infraction to consume marijuana or a marijuana product or 31 
to possess an open container of marijuana or a marijuana product in the passenger area of 32 
a motor vehicle.  This bill is similar to the provisions of law making consuming alcohol 33 
or havi ng an open container of alcohol in the passenger area of a motor vehicle a traffic 34 
infraction.  35 
 
