 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1405
S.P. 483 In Senate, April 11, 2017
An Act  To Require  Remote Sellers To Collect  and Remit Sales and  
Use Tax on Sales into Maine and  To Provide Retailers a Collection 
Allowance
Reference to the Committee on Taxation  suggested and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator COLLINS of York.
Cosponsored by Representative PARRY of Arundel and
Senators: BREEN of  Cumberland, CYRWAY of Kennebec, DESCHAMBAULT of York, 
DIAMOND of Cumberland, HAMPER  of Oxford, JACKSON of Aroostook,  Representatives: 
BRYANT of Windham, SCHNECK of Bangor.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1292(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  36 MRSA ยง1754 -B, sub -ยง4 is enacted to read:  2 
4.  Collection allowance.  A seller that is required to register pursuant to this section 3 
and that collects and remits sales and use tax in a ccordance with the provisions of this 4 
Part may deduct and retain 2% of that tax as a collection allowance.  The collection 5 
allowance does not apply to taxes collected by a state, county or municipal agency.  6 
Sec. 2.  36 MRSA ยง1951 -B is enacted to read:  7 
ยง195 1-B.  Collection of tax by remote sellers  8 
1.  Legislative findings.  The Legislature finds that:  9 
A.  The inability to effectively collect the sales or use tax from remote sellers that 10 
deliver tangible personal property, a product transferred electronically  or a service 11 
directly to the citizens of this State is seriously eroding the sales tax base of this State, 12 
causing revenue losses and imminent harm to this State through the loss of critical 13 
funding for state and local services;  14 
B.  Despite the fact that a use tax is owed on tangible personal property, a product 15 
transferred electronically or a service delivered for use in this State, many remote 16 
sellers actively market sales as "tax free" or "no sales tax" transactions;  17 
C.  The structural advantages of rem ote sellers, including the absence of point -of-sale 18 
tax collection, along with the general growth of online retail, could further erode this 19 
State's sales tax base in the near future;  20 
D.  Remote sellers that make a substantial number of deliveries into or have large 21 
gross revenues from Maine benefit extensively from this State's market, including the 22 
economy generally and state infrastructure;  23 
E.  In contrast with increasing harm caused to the State from the exemption from 24 
sales and use tax collection dutie s for remote sellers, the costs of that collection have 25 
fallen. Given modern computing and software options, it is neither unusually difficult 26 
nor burdensome for remote sellers to collect and remit sales and use taxes associated 27 
with sales into Maine; and  28 
F.  The Legislature recognizes that the imposition of this requirement places remote 29 
sellers in a complicated position, precisely because existing constitutional doctrine 30 
calls the imposition of this requirement into question. Accordingly, the Legislature 31 
intends to clarify that the obligations created by the imposition of this requirement 32 
would be appropriately stayed by the courts until the constitutionality of this law has 33 
been clearly established by a binding judgment, including, for example, a decision  34 
from the Supreme Court of the United States abrogating its existing doctrine or a 35 
final judgment applicable to a particular taxpayer.  36 
2.  Legislative intent.  It is the intent of the Legislature to apply the sales and use tax 37 
obligations imposed under the  laws of this State to the limit of federal and state 38 
constitutional doctrines and to thereby clarify that the laws of this State permit the State 39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR129 2(01) -1 
 to immediately argue in any litigation that such constitutional doctrine should be changed 1 
to permit the tax collection obligations of this section.  2 
3.  Collection of tax by remote seller.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the 3 
contrary, a person selling tangible personal property, products transferred electronically 4 
or services for delivery into this State  is subject to the provisions of this Part and shall 5 
collect and remit the sales tax imposed pursuant to section 1811 in the same manner as a 6 
retailer that has a physical presence in this State if:  7 
A.  The person's gross revenue from delivery of tangible p ersonal property, products 8 
transferred electronically or services that are taxable by this State into this State in the 9 
previous calendar year or current calendar year exceeds $100,000; or  10 
B.  The person sold tangible personal property, products transferre d electronically or 11 
services that are taxable by this State for delivery into this State in at least 200 12 
separate transactions in the previous calendar year or the current calendar year.  13 
4.  Declaratory judgment action.  Notwithstanding any other provision  of law, and 14 
regardless of whether the State initiates an audit or other tax collection procedure, the 15 
State may bring a declaratory judgment action pursuant to Title 14, chapter 707 against 16 
any person the State believes meets the criteria of subsection 3 to establish that the tax 17 
collection obligation is applicable and valid under state and federal law. The court shall 18 
act on this declaratory judgment action as expeditiously as possible, and the court shall 19 
proceed with priority over any other action prese nting the same question in any other 20 
venue.  21 
5.  Effect of court action on collection of tax; injunction.  During a pending action 22 
pursuant to subsection 4, and upon determining that a question is presented regarding the 23 
constitutionality of this law, the c ourt, on the State's motion or the court's own initiative, 24 
shall enjoin the State from enforcing the obligation in subsection 3 against any person 25 
subject to subsection 3 that does not affirmatively consent or otherwise collect the sales 26 
or use tax on a vo luntary basis. The injunction does not apply if there is a previous 27 
judgment from a court establishing the validity of the obligation in subsection 3 with 28 
respect to the particular taxpayer.  29 
6.  Appeal.  Any appeal from a decision with respect to the cause  of action 30 
established by this section may only be made to the Supreme Judicial Court sitting as the 31 
Law Court. The Law Court shall hear and decide the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  32 
7.  No retroactive application of tax.  The obligation to collect a nd remit the sales 33 
and use tax required by this section may not be applied retroactively.  34 
8.  Prospective application of tax following injunction.  If an injunction imposed 35 
pursuant to subsection 5 is lifted, the State shall assess and apply the sales or u se tax 36 
collection obligation only from that date forward with respect to any person covered by 37 
the injunction.  38 
Sec. 3.  Effective date.  This Act takes effect October 1, 2017.  39 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR1292(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill permits persons that are required to register under Maine's sa les and use tax 2 
laws to deduct and retain an amount equal to up to 2% of the sales and use taxes they 3 
collect.  4 
This bill also requires persons that sell for delivery into this State tangible personal 5 
property, a product delivered electronically or a servic e that is taxable by this State to 6 
collect and remit to the State the sales or use tax imposed by the State on that property, 7 
product or service.  This requirement applies to a person whose gross revenue from 8 
delivery of taxable tangible personal property,  a product transferred electronically or a 9 
service into Maine in the previous calendar year or current calendar year exceeds 10 
$100,000 or to a person that sold taxable tangible personal property, a product transferred 11 
electronically or a service into this S tate in at least 200 separate transactions in the 12 
previous calendar year or the current calendar year.  13 
If a lawsuit is brought challenging, on constitutional grounds, the requirement of a 14 
person to collect and remit sales or use tax for items delivered int o Maine, the court is 15 
required to enjoin the State from enforcing the requirement to collect and remit the tax 16 
against any person unless that person voluntarily agrees to collect and remit the tax or 17 
against any person that has previously been adjudicated to be required to collect and remit 18 
the tax.  After the injunction against the State is lifted, the requirement to collect and 19 
remit the sales or use tax may be applied only to prospective sales.  20 
 
