 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
'1 1 ,i\(J~ ,· !~~"\· \ 7.. . \ .. ) I_) (' \L l 2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 minori+_j L.D. 777 
(Filing No. H-~ / ) 
LABOR, COMMERCE, RESEARCH AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
128TH LEGISLATURE 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
COJ\ilMITTEE AMENDMENT "A" to H.P. 557, L.D. 777, Bill, "An Act To 
Establish a Conditional Presumption of Compensability for Corrections Employees in 
Cases of Impairment from Hypertension or Heart Disease" 
Amend the bill by incorporating the attached fiscal note. 
SUMMARY 
This amendment incorporates a fiscal note. 
Page 1 -128LR1575(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 04/17/17 feae. 
128th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD777 LR 1575(02) 
An Act To Establish a Conditional Presumption of Compensability for Corrections Employees in 
Cases of Impairment from Hypertension or Heart Disease ;'\ 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment 'ft' l /-J-3 0 
Committee: Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development 
State Mandates 
Required Activity Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Potential State Mandate -Unfunded 
Current biennium cost increase -General Fund 
Shifting the burden of proof from a county corrections employee that performs 
certain duties to the county that hea1t disease or hypertension suffered by the 
employee did not arise out of and in the course of employment if that employee 
passed a physical examination upon entry or during the course of that employment 
and that physical examination failed to reveal any evidence of heart disease or 
hypertension may represent a modification or expansion of a county activity. Unit Affected 
County Local Cost 
Significant 
statewide 
The required local activities in this bill may represent a state mandate pursuant to the Constitution of Maine. If the bill 
does require a local unit of government to expand or modify its activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures 
from local revenue, the state mandate provisions of the Constitution of Maine require either: (1) General Fund 
appropriations be provided to fund at least 90% of any additional necessitated local costs of the mandate; or (2) a 
Mandate Preamble be added to the bill and two-thirds of the members of each House vote to exempt the mandate from 
the funding requirement. If the bill does represent a state mandate and neither one of these actions occurs, the local 
units of government will not be required to implement the mandated activities. 
Fiscal Detail and Notes 
Shifting the burden of proof from a State corrections employee that performs certain duties to the State that heatt 
disease or hypertension suffered by the employee did not arise out of and in the course of employment if that 
employee passed a physical examination upon entty or during the course of that employment and that physical 
examination failed to reveal any evidence of heart disease or hypertension will result in additional costs to the State as 
a direct reimbursement employer and to the Depattment of Corrections associated with increased payments of 
workers' compensation benefits and legal and administrative expenses. The impact will depend on actual experience 
This legislation will also increase costs to county governments in the form of both higher premiums for workers' 
compensation insurance and increased legal and administrative expenses. The impact to individual counties will 
depend on actual experience. 
LR1575(02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
