 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1741
S.P. 640 In Senate, December  22, 2017
Resolve, Establishing the Commission To Study the Economic, Environmental and Energy  Benefits  of Energy Storage to the Maine 
Electricity Industry
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on December 19, 2017.  Referred to  the Committee  
on Energy, Utilities and Technology  pursuant  to Joint  Rule 308.2 and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by President THIBODEAU of Waldo.
Cosponsored by Speaker  GIDEON of Freeport and
Senators: DION of Cumberland, HILL of  York, MAKER of Washington, WOODSOME of 
York, Representatives: BERRY of Bowdoinham,  GILLWAY of Searsport, PIERCE of 
Dresden, SANBORN of  Portland.

Page 1 - 128LR2608(01)-11 Emergency preamble. Whereas,  acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as  emergencies; and
3 Whereas, this resolve establishes the Commission To Study the Economic, 
4 Environmental and Energy Benefits of Energy Storage to the Maine Electricity  Industry 
5 to examine the electricity industry  in the State and the potential and benefits of energy  
6 storage; and
7 Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90-day period expires in order  that 
8 the study  may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 
9 legislative session; and
10 Whereas, in the judgment  of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
11 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine  and require  the following legislation as 
12 immediately necessary  for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety;  now, 
13 therefore, be it
14 Sec. 1.  Commission  established.   Resolved:   That the Commission To Study  
15 the Economic, Environmental and Energy Benefits of Energy Storage  to the Maine 
16 Electricity Industry, referred to in this resolve as "the commission," is established; and be 
17 it further
18 Sec. 2.  Membership.   Resolved:  That,  notwithstanding Joint Rule  353, the 
19 commission consists  of 13 members appointed as  follows:
20 1.  Two members  of the Senate  appointed by the President of the Senate,  including a 
21 member from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number  of seats in the Legislature;
22 2.  Three members  of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the 
23 House of Representatives, including a member from each of the 2 parties holding the 
24 largest number  of seats in the Legislature;
25 3.  Four members appointed by the President  of the Senate  as follows:
26 A.  A representative of the  energy storage industry;
27 B.  A representative of  the hydroelectric energy storage industry;
28 C.  A representative of  an electric utility in the State; and
29 D.  A representative of academia with suitable expertise in the electricity industry; 
30 and
31 4.  Four members appointed  by the Speaker of the House of Representatives as 
32 follows:
33 A.  A representative of a  conservation organization;
34 B.  A representative of a business  that uses a significant amount of electricity in the 
35 State;
36 C.  A representative of  a large-scale battery  energy storage system owner;  and
Page 2 - 128LR2608(01)-11 D.  A representative  of a small-scale battery  energy  storage system owner; and be it 
2 further
3 Sec. 3.  Commission  chairs.  Resolved:  That the first-named Senate  member  is 
4 the Senate  chair and the first-named House of Representatives member  is the House chair 
5 of the commission; and  be it  further
6 Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening  of commission.  Resolved:  That all 
7 appointments must be made  no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 
8 resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 
9 Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 
10 the chairs  shall call and convene the first meeting  of the commission.   If 30 days or more 
11 after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been  
12 made, the chairs  may request  authority and the Legislative Council may grant  authority 
13 for the commission to meet and conduct its business; and  be it further
14 Sec. 5.  Duties.   Resolved:  That the commission shall:
15 1.  Review and evaluate the economic, environmental  and energy benefits of energy 
16 storage to the State's  electricity  industry, as well as public  policy and economic proposals 
17 to create and maintain  a sustainable future for energy storage in the  State;
18 2.  Consider the challenges  of the broad electricity market in the State, including 
19 challenges with transmission and stranded  renewable energy  generation in northern  
20 portions of the State,  and analyze whether energy  storage  is part of a transmission 
21 solution;
22 3.  Consider whether the environmental,  economic, resiliency and energy benefits  of 
23 energy storage support updating the State's energy  policy  to strengthen  and increase  the 
24 role that energy storage plays throughout the State;
25 4.  Consider the costs and benefits of energy storage system  procurement  targets, 
26 including benefits of cost savings to ratepayers from the provision  of services, including 
27 energy price arbitrage, capacity,  ancillary services  and transmission and distribution  asset  
28 deferral or substitution; direct  cost savings to customers  that deploy energy storage 
29 systems; an improved ability to integrate renewable resources; improved reliability and 
30 power quality; the effect on retail  electric  rates over the life of a given energy storage  
31 system compared  to the effect  on retail  electric  rates using alternatives to energy storage 
32 systems over the life of the alternatives; reduced greenhouse gas emissions; and any other  
33 costs and benefits reasonably  related to the application of energy storage  system 
34 technology, compared to  the effect  of leaving current policies  in place; and
35 5.  Examine any other  issues to  further the purposes of the study.
36 In carrying out the duties under this section, the commission shall seek public input 
37 and shall  consult and collaborate with stakeholders and experts in the fields  of economic 
38 development, natural  resources and energy policy;  and be it further
Page 3 - 128LR2608(01)-11 Sec. 6.  Meetings. Resolved:  That the commission shall hold at least 4 meetings; 
2 and be it further
3 Sec. 7.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:   That the Legislative  Council shall provide  
4 necessary staffing services to the commission.  The commission may invite  the 
5 Department of Economic and Community Development, the Public Utilities Commission,  
6 the Office of the Public Advocate, the Governor's Energy Office and the Efficiency 
7 Maine Trust  and other appropriate agencies of State Government to provide additional  
8 staff support or assistance to the commission;  and be it further
9 Sec. 8.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than November  7, 2018, the 
10 commission shall submit a report that includes its findings  and recommendations, 
11 including suggested legislation, including, but not limited to, legislation adopting 
12 procurement targets for the State for energy storage systems behind  customer  meters  and 
13 energy storage systems connected to transmission or distribution facilities if proven  
14 beneficial for ratepayers in the cost-benefit  analysis under  section 5, for presentation to 
15 the joint standing committee  of the Legislature having  jurisdiction over energy, utilities 
16 and technology  matters.
17 Emergency clause.  In view  of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
18 legislation takes effect when  approved.
19 SUMMARY
20 This resolve  establishes the Commission To Study  the Economic, Environmental and 
21 Energy Benefits  of Energy Storage to the Maine  Electricity  Industry.
