 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1049
H.P. 732 House of  Representatives, March 16, 2017
Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry To  Convey  Certain Lands  to Roosevelt Conference Center 
Doing Business as Eagle Lake Sporting Camps
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DUCHESNE of Hudson.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BLACK of Wilton,  DUNPHY of Old Town, MARTIN of  
Sinclair, Senators: DILL of Penobscot, JACKSON  of Aroostook.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1732(01) -1 
 Preamble.  The Constitution of Maine, Article IX, Section 23 requires that real 1 
estate held by the State for conservation or recreation purposes may not be reduced or its 2 
uses substantially altered except on the vote of 2/3 of all members elected to each H ouse.  3 
Whereas, certain real estate authorized for conveyance under this resolve is under 4 
the designations described in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 12, section 598 -A; and  5 
Whereas, the Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands within the Department of 6 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry may sell or exchange lands with the approval of 7 
the Legislature in accordance with Title 12, sections 1837 and 1851; and  8 
Whereas, Aroostook County has experienced significant economic reductions over 9 
the last 20 years , with a 5.5% unemployment rate, aging workforce and declining 10 
population; and  11 
Whereas, an existing business, Eagle Lake Sporting Camps, established in 1889 and 12 
located on Eagle Lake Public Reserve Lands east of Route 11, desires to invest 13 
significantly in  its business to grow into a year -round operation and to upgrade facilities 14 
and improve amenities, thus stimulating the economy, creating jobs and increasing local 15 
and state tax revenues; and  16 
Whereas, such investment would not be feasible or commitment mad e without the 17 
acquisition of fee simple ownership of sufficient land to develop and expand the business 18 
and without the lease of additional adjoining land to support a modern wilderness 19 
destination resort; and  20 
Whereas, the subject land is now used as a dev eloped commercial sporting camp 21 
property, and no vital conservation land or wildlife habitat nor outdoor recreation 22 
opportunities, such as hunting and fishing, are affected by the change in land ownership, 23 
and the investment permitted by this conveyance wo uld increase access and opportunities 24 
for public use of the Eagle Lake Public Reserve Lands; now, therefore, be it  25 
Sec. 1.  Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands to convey certain land 26 
in T16 R6.  Resolved:  That the Director of the Bureau of Parks and  Lands within the 27 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, referred to in this resolve as "the 28 
director," shall convey, by quitclaim deed without covenant and at appraised fair market 29 
value agreed to jointly by the director and the purchaser, to Roosevelt Conference Center, 30 
doing business as Eagle Lake Sporting Camps, and its successors and assigns, the land 31 
described in the lease of land in Township 16, Range 6 current as of the effective date of 32 
this resolve from the State to Eagle Lake Sport ing Camps and such additional contiguous 33 
land as agreed to by the director and the purchaser to the east of the leased land for a total 34 
of 12.86 acres, subject to the State's retaining or withholding any rights to subdivide the 35 
land conveyed.  In addition,  the director shall convey to Eagle Lake Sporting Camps, for 36 
the appraised fair market value agreed jointly by the director and the purchaser, an access 37 
right -of-way that is no greater than 66 feet wide along the service road to the Square Lake 38 
Road.  The conveyance of the right -of-way must include conditions that allow Eagle Lake 39 
Sporting Camps to maintain the road and make road improvements after acquiring prior 40 
written approval from the State.  The conveyances required by this section must contain 41 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1732(01) -1 
 condit ions granting the State the right of first refusal, within 90 days following notice by 1 
Eagle Lake Sporting Camps of intent to transfer the land or the right -of-way, to reacquire 2 
the parcel and the right -of-way at the appraised fair market value agreed to j ointly by the 3 
director and the purchaser, if the use of the land for a year -round sporting camp or Class 4 
A restaurant, as defined in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 28 -A, section 2, subsection 5 
15, and lodge open to the public is discontinued or if Eagle Lake Sporting Camps fails to 6 
maintain appropriate licenses to conduct those activities from the Department of Health 7 
and Human Services.  8 
If the director intends to lease any land to Eagle Lake Sporting Camps other than that 9 
required by this resolve, the di rector shall provide an opportunity for and consider 10 
comments regarding public access to the Eagle Lake Public Reserve Lands from 11 
representatives authorized by the Town of Eagle Lake.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This resolve requires the Director of the Bureau of Parks and La nds within the 14 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to convey to Roosevelt 15 
Conference Center, doing business as Eagle Lake Sporting Camps, a 12.86 -acre parcel of 16 
land in Township 16, Range 6.  The resolve requires the director to sell the l and at fair 17 
market value and to retain or withhold any rights to subdivide.  The director is also 18 
required by the resolve to convey to Eagle Lake Sporting Camps a right -of-way along the 19 
service road to the Square Lake Road for appraised fair market value.  The resolve also 20 
stipulates that the State must retain a right of first refusal to reacquire the parcel and 21 
right -of-way from the owner if the use of the parcel for a year -round sporting camp or 22 
Class A restaurant and lodge is discontinued or appropriate licenses are not maintained.  23 
 
