 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1428
H.P. 982 House of  Representatives,  April 13, 2017
An Act  To Relieve Overcrowding in County Jails
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GUERIN of Glenburn.
Cosponsored by Senator ROSEN of Hancock  and
Representatives: COREY of  Windham, GERRISH of Lebanon, HERRICK of Paris, 
LONGSTAFF of Waterville, MAREAN of Hollis, NADEAU of Winslow,  WARREN of 
Hallowell, Senator: DIAMOND of Cumberland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2294(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the housing of persons incarcerated in the State's custodial facilities is an 3 
important st ate responsibility; and  4 
Whereas, a significant portion of the budgets of the counties is dedicated to the 5 
operation of the county and regional jails; and  6 
Whereas, there is currently a crisis among the counties in the State in the ability to 7 
adequately fund  the county and regional jails, creating overcrowding and other unsafe 8 
conditions; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 11 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore,  13 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  14 
Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง1205 -C, sub -ยง7 is enacted to read:  15 
7.  If the court orders the probationer hel d without bail pending hearing under 16 
subsection 4, the probationer must be transferred to the custody of the Department of 17 
Corrections and within 7 days transported to a department facility under Title 34 -A, 18 
chapter 3.  19 
Emergency clause.  In view of the eme rgency cited in the preamble, this 20 
legislation takes effect when approved.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This bill requires that a probationer held without bail pending hearing after an initial 23 
appearance for a probation violation must be transferred to the custody of the Depar tment 24 
of Corrections and within 7 days transported to a department facility.  25 
 
