 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 588
S.P. 203 In Senate, February 16, 2017
An Act  To Allow Law Enforcement Agencies and  Associations To 
Engage Directly in  Fund-raising  under Certain  Circumstances
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS  of Piscataquis, Representative CAMPBELL of Orrington  and
Senators: CYRWAY  of Kennebec, DILL of  Penobscot, DION  of Cumberland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0124(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  25 MRSA §3701, sub -§9, as enacted by PL 2007, c. 633, §2, is repealed.  2 
Sec. 2.  25 MRSA §3702 -C, as amended by PL 2011, c. 596, §1, is further 3 
amended to read:  4 
§3702 -C.  Solicitation un lawful; exceptions  5 
Except as provided in this section, a law enforcement agency, law enforcement 6 
association, law enforcement officer or solicitation agent may not solicit property from 7 
the general public when the property or any part of that property in a ny way tangibly 8 
benefits, is intended to tangibly benefit or is represented to be for the tangible benefit of 9 
any law enforcement officer, law enforcement agency or law enforcement association.  10 
Any violation of this chapter constitutes a violation of the Maine Unfair Trade Practices 11 
Act. 12 
1.  Limited solicitation.   A law enforcement agency or association may solicit 13 
property from the general public, a law enforcement officer, a law enforcement agency or 14 
a law enforcement association for the tangible benefit  of a law enforcement officer, or an 15 
immediate family member of a law enforcement officer, suffering from a catastrophic 16 
illness by hosting fundraising  fund-raising  events or by written solicitation.  17 
A.  A law enforcement agency or association may host tic keted fundraising  18 
fund-raising  events that are open to the public as long as the events are advertised 19 
only through public announcements and tickets are available for purchase only from a 20 
designated public benefit corporation . 21 
B.  A law enforcement agency or association may make general public solicitations 22 
for donations through public announcements or paid advertisements as long as all 23 
donations are directed to be sent to a designated public benefit corporation .  24 
Solicitations may not be sent directly to p otential donors by mail or any other direct 25 
means.  26 
Nothing in this subsection may be construed to allow a law enforcement agency or 27 
association to engage in door -to-door solicitation.  28 
2.  Required notice.   Any public solicitation or advertisement for a fundraising  29 
fund-raising  event must contain a notice that clearly identifies the name and address of 30 
the designated public benefit corporation  law enforcement agency or association making 31 
the solicitation  and the law enforcement officer or immediate family me mber for whom 32 
the solicitation is made.  The notice must also specify that any questions about the 33 
solicitation may be directed to the Office of the Attorney General.  34 
A.  A notice for a fundraising  fund-raising  event must read:  "This event is sponsored 35 
by (insert name of law enforcement agency or association) for the sole benefit of 36 
(insert name and agency).  All donations made pursuant to this solicitation must be 37 
sent to the designated public benefit corporation  (insert name of law enforcement 38 
agency or association) , which may not disclose the names of donors."  39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0124(01) -1 
 B.  A notice for a public solicitation must read:  "This solicitation is made by (insert 1 
name of law enforcement agency or association) for the sole benefit of (insert name 2 
and agency).  All donati ons made pursuant to this solicitation must be sent to the 3 
designated public benefit corporation  (insert name of law enforcement agency or 4 
association) , which may not disclose the names of donors."  5 
3.  Standardized written agreement.   Prior to engaging in any solicitation activity 6 
under this section, a law enforcement agency or a law enforcement association and a 7 
designated public benefit corporation must enter into a signed written agreement that 8 
specifies the obligations of each party.  The Office of the Attorney General shall provide 9 
a standardized written agreement that must be used by the parties.  10 
4.  No disclosure of donors.   A designated public benefit corporation that engages in 11 
solicitation pursuant to this section may not disclose the names of any donors to any 12 
person, except to the Attorney General.  13 
5.  Limited reimbursement.   The law enforcement agency or law enforcement 14 
association may reimburse the designated public benefit corporation only for its 15 
advertising costs and may not otherwise pay the  designated public benefit corporation for 16 
its services provided under this section.  17 
6.  Registration and reporting.   Each party to the written agreement shall comply 18 
with all requirements for reporting to and registration with the Department of 19 
Profession al and Financial Regulation as a charitable organization, or as a charitable 20 
organization that is exempt from registration, pursuant to the Charitable Solicitations Act 21 
and shall comply with any other reporting and registration requirements related to the 22 
event or solicitation.  23 
7.  Escrow account.   All funds collected by the designated public benefit corporation  24 
under this section must be held in an escrow account pursuant to this subsection.  25 
A.  The escrow account must be established by the designated publ ic benefit 26 
corporation  law enforcement agency or association making a solicitation pursuant to 27 
this section  in a bank or trust company authorized to do business in this State within 28 
the meaning of Title 9 -B, section 131, subsection 2.  The funds deposited in the 29 
escrow account must be kept and maintained in an account separate from any other 30 
accounts.  31 
B.  Checks, drafts and money orders from donors may be made payable only to the 32 
bank or trust company described in paragraph A.  33 
C.  Funds deposited in the esc row account are not subject to any liens or charges by 34 
the escrow agent or judgments, garnishments or creditor's claims against the 35 
designated public benefit corporation or  beneficiary.  36 
D.  The funds may be paid only to the beneficiary, or to the heirs of the beneficiary if 37 
the beneficiary dies, and must be paid within 30 days of the conclusion of the event 38 
or written solicitation.  39 
8.  Accounting.   Upon request, the designated public benefit corporation  law 40 
enforcement agency or association making the solic itation  shall provide an accounting of 41 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR0124(01) -1 
 the funds received from the event or written solicitation and any documents related to the 1 
fundraising  fund-raising  event or solicitation, including the names of the donors, to the 2 
Attorney General.  The Attorney Gene ral may enforce application of funds given or 3 
appropriated to public charities and prevent breaches of trust in their administration, 4 
pursuant to Title 5, section 194, subsection 2.  5 
SUMMARY  6 
This bill amends the law regarding solicitation by law enforcement  officers to remove 7 
designated public benefit corporations from that process and instead allows law 8 
enforcement agencies and associations to engage directly in fund -raising.  The bill also 9 
explicitly prohibits door -to-door solicitation.  10 
 
