 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1353
S.P. 461 In Senate, April 6, 2017
An Act  To Establish the Maine Domestic Trade Center
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CARPENTER  of Aroostook.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1792(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง13070 -C, sub -ยง2, as enacted by PL 1995, c. 648, ยง3, is 2 
amended to read:  3 
2.  Duties.   The International Trade Director shall implement the State's policies with 4 
respect to develo pment of international trade opportunities for the State's businesses and 5 
citizens.  The director shall serve as the State's diplomat and shall advocate within the 6 
State and abroad on behalf of the State and the State's international community.  7 
The directo r shall serve as the president of the Maine International Trade Center upon 8 
confirmation by the center's Board of Directors of the Maine International Trade Center.  9 
The director shall oversee activities of the center and has the duties and responsibilitie s as 10 
provided in Title 10, chapter 107 -B.  The director shall also serve as the president of the 11 
Maine Domestic Trade Center, established in Title 10, chapter 107 -E, upon confirmation 12 
by the center's Board of Directors of the Maine Domestic Trade Center.  The director 13 
shall oversee activities of the Maine Domestic Trade Center and has the duties and 14 
responsibilities as provided in Title 10, chapter 107 -E. 15 
Sec. 2.  10 MRSA c. 107 -E is enacted to read:  16 
CHAPTER 107 -E 17 
MAINE DOMESTIC TRADE  CENTER  18 
ยง949 -A.  Maine Domestic Trade Center  19 
1.   Establishment.  The Maine Domestic Trade Center, referred to in this chapter as 20 
"the center," is established to enhance the competitive advantage of the State's businesses 21 
desiring to compete in the domestic market.  The center p rovides a source of leadership, 22 
coordination and a shared vision for interstate trade development in the State.  The 23 
purpose of the center, through its cooperative public and private board of directors, 24 
established in subsection 4, is to help the State's b usinesses, particularly the State's small 25 
businesses, to innovate, grow and create new jobs by providing and enhancing services, 26 
in coordination with the economic development activities of the private sector, 27 
community and regional agencies and State Gover nment, to facilitate the export of goods 28 
and services to other states.  29 
The center is a private nonprofit corporation with a public purpose and the exercise by the 30 
center of the powers conferred by this chapter is held to be an essential governmental 31 
functi on. 32 
2.  Duties.  The center shall provide to private entities, individuals, the State and 33 
quasi -public and public entities a base level of services without regard to membership in 34 
the center and enhanced services as the center's board of directors may dire ct. The center 35 
shall encourage and assist the growth of the State's domestic economic activities in the 36 
following ways.  37 
A.  The center shall provide a continuing forum for the exchange of expertise, ideas 38 
and innovations between the public and private sect ors. 39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1792(01) -1 
 B.  The center shall offer high -quality education and technical services to businesses 1 
in the State that compete or seek to compete in the interstate market.  2 
C.  The center shall act as a catalyst in the development and coordination of programs 3 
to imp rove exports of goods and services to the interstate market.  4 
D.  The center shall underscore the importance of interstate trade as a priority of 5 
public policy and shall enhance public appreciation of the relevance of the interstate 6 
economy.  7 
E.  The center shall provide information necessary to transact business in other states 8 
and to make effective decisions concerning interstate trade and policy.  9 
F.  The center shall support the development and availability of an overall 10 
infrastructure conducive to interst ate business.  11 
G.  The center shall identify market opportunities and potential contracts in other 12 
states that match the technologies and expertise available in the State and coordinate 13 
and submit appropriate proposal responses.  14 
H.  The center shall maintai n an interstate commerce database to assist in making 15 
program decisions.  16 
3.  Members.  Members are the private individuals, partnerships, firms, corporations, 17 
governmental entities and other organizations that pay dues to the center. For the 18 
purposes of th is chapter, members may include, but are not limited to, municipal and 19 
county governments, councils of government, local and area development corporations, 20 
regional planning commissions, development districts, state agencies, higher educational 21 
facilities,  including the University of Maine System, the Maine Maritime Academy, 22 
private colleges and the Maine Community College System, and other public or quasi - 23 
public entities. The following 7 public organizations are granted membership by virtue of 24 
the State's contributions to the organizations and are exempt from dues requirements and 25 
each is entitled to designate one individual to exercise its voting right: the Department of 26 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry; the Governor's Office of Policy and 27 
Management ; the Finance Authority of Maine; the Department of Labor; the Department 28 
of Marine Resources; the Department of Economic and Community Development; and 29 
the Department of Transportation.  30 
Memberships may be set at different levels. Members shall elect 7 mem bers to the board 31 
of directors of the center pursuant to subsection 4.  All members have a vote in the affairs 32 
of the center as set forth in the bylaws of the center, except that when the member is an 33 
organization and not an individual the governing body o f that organization shall designate 34 
the individual who is to exercise the voting right.  35 
4.  Board of directors and officers.  The Board of Directors of the Maine Domestic 36 
Trade Center, referred to in this chapter as "the board of directors," consists of 12  voting 37 
directors elected or appointed as provided in this subsection.  Each director is entitled to 38 
one vote. Directors' terms must be staggered as determined in the bylaws of the center.  39 
The state representative of the United States Department of Commerc e and the state 40 
representative of the United States Small Business Administration may serve as 41 
nonvoting ex officio directors.  42 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR1792(01) -1 
 The members shall elect 7 directors from among the center's dues -paying membership.  1 
The Governor shall appoint 5 directors, one of whom must be the International Trade 2 
Director at the Department of Economic and Community Development.  The other 4 3 
directors must have business or professional experience.  The board of directors shall 4 
elect the chair and the vice -chair of the board of  directors and the treasurer of the center 5 
from among the directors.  6 
5.  President.  The International Trade Director at the Department of Economic and 7 
Community Development shall serve as the president of the center upon confirmation by 8 
a majority of the board of directors.  Once every 2 years, the Governor shall submit the 9 
International Trade Director's name to the board of directors for reappointment. 10 
Reappointment is subject to confirmation by a majority of the board of directors.  The 11 
president shall:  12 
A.  Serve as the liaison between the board of directors and the center;  13 
B.  Manage the center's programs and services;  14 
C.  Ensure that the center's programs reflect the policy and management decisions of 15 
the board of directors;  16 
D.  Coordinate all services  to continually meet the needs of the center as described in 17 
the strategic plan for the State;  18 
E.  Play a leadership role in coordinating, facilitating and helping to prioritize both 19 
the short -term and long -term recommendations of the strategic plan;  20 
F.  Serve as the State's representative, providing leadership in the area of domestic 21 
trade and advocating within the State and in other states on behalf of the State's 22 
business community; and  23 
G.  Perform such other duties as the board of directors considers ap propriate.  24 
6.  Powers.  The center may:  25 
A.  Sue or be sued in its own name;  26 
B.  Apply for and receive funds from any private source or governmental entity, 27 
whether by grant, donation, loan or any other manner;  28 
C.  Provide services to public or private enti ties to assist those entities' efforts in the 29 
development of domestic trade in the State and to charge such fees for these services 30 
as the center determines appropriate;  31 
D.  Subject to subsection 7, hire employees to assist in the administration of the 32 
center's work;  33 
E.  Purchase, receive, hold, lease, acquire by foreclosure, operate, manage, license, 34 
sell, convey, transfer or grant real and personal property, together with those rights 35 
and privileges that may be incidental and appurtenant to the real and p ersonal 36 
property and the use of the real and personal property, including, but not limited to, 37 
any real or personal property acquired by the center from time to time in the 38 
satisfaction of debts or enforcement of obligations;  39 
 
 Page 4 - 128LR1792(01) -1 
 F.  Make all expenditures and incur any obligations reasonably required in the 1 
exercise of sound business principles to secure possession of, preserve, maintain, 2 
insure and improve real and personal property or interests in real and personal 3 
property acquired by the center;  4 
G.  Acquire , subscribe for, own, hold, sell, assign, transfer, mortgage or pledge the 5 
stock, shares, bonds, debentures, notes or other securities and evidences of interest in 6 
or indebtedness of any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, partnership, 7 
associat ion or trust and, while the owner or holder thereof, exercise all the rights, 8 
powers and privileges of ownership, including the right to vote thereon;  9 
H.  Mortgage, pledge or otherwise encumber any property right or thing of value 10 
acquired pursuant to the powers contained in paragraph E, F or G as security for the 11 
payment of any part of the purchase price of the property right or thing of value;  12 
I.  Make contracts, including contracts for services, and incur liabilities for any of the 13 
purposes authorized in  those contracts;  14 
J.  Borrow money for any of the purposes authorized in this chapter; incur debt, 15 
including the power to issue the center's bonds, debentures, notes or other evidences 16 
of indebtedness, whether secured or unsecured; and secure the same by m ortgage, 17 
pledge, deed of trust or other lien on the center's property, rights and privileges of 18 
every kind and nature, or any part thereof or interest therein; and  19 
K.  Cooperate with governmental agencies and the University of Maine System and 20 
cooperate, a ssist and encourage organizations, local or regional, private or public, in 21 
the communities of the State in the promotion, assistance and development of 22 
domestic trade in those communities and the State.  23 
7.  Sharing of staff and facilities.  The Maine Inte rnational Trade Center shall share 24 
facilities and provide staffing services for the center, within existing resources.  The 25 
board of directors may vote to move the center to its own facilities and to hire additional 26 
employees for the center if the board of  directors determines that the center has sufficient 27 
financial resources to do so without compromising the center's effectiveness.  28 
8.  Adoption of bylaws.  The center shall adopt bylaws consistent with this chapter 29 
for the governance of its affairs and has  the general powers accorded corporations under 30 
Title 13 -C, section 302.  The center shall take all actions necessary or convenient to carry 31 
out the lawful purposes of the center under this chapter.  32 
9.  Limitation of powers.  The center may not enter into contracts, obligations or 33 
commitments of any kind on behalf of the State or any of its agencies, nor may it have the 34 
power of eminent domain or any other power not provided to business corporations 35 
generally. Bonds, notes and other evidences of indebtednes s of the center may not in any 36 
way be a debt or liability of the State or constitute a pledge of the faith and credit of the 37 
State.  38 
10.  Liability of officers, directors and employees.  All officers, directors, 39 
employees and other agents of the center, inc luding employees of the Maine International 40 
Trade Center providing staffing assistance for the center, entrusted with the custody of 41 
the securities of the center or authorized to disburse the funds of the center must be 42 
 
 Page 5 - 128LR1792(01) -1 
 bonded, either by a blanket bond or by individual bonds, with a surety bond or bonds with 1 
a minimum limitation of $100,000 coverage for each person covered by the surety bond, 2 
conditioned upon the faithful performance of duties, the premiums for which are paid out 3 
of the assets of the center . 4 
11.  Prohibited interests of officers, directors and employees.  Officers, directors 5 
and employees of the center, including employees of the Maine International Trade 6 
Center providing staffing assistance for the center and their spouses or dependent 7 
children, may not receive any direct personal benefit from the activities of the center in 8 
assisting any private entity. This subsection does not prohibit corporations or other 9 
entities with which officers or directors are associated by reason of ownership or 10 
employment from participating in activities of the center or receiving services offered by 11 
the center as long as the ownership or employment is made known to the board of 12 
directors and, if applicable, the officers or directors abstain from voting on matter s 13 
relating to that participation. This subsection does not apply to members who are not 14 
officers or directors of the center.  15 
12.  Donations to State.  The State, through the Governor, may accept donations, 16 
bequests, devises, grants or other interests of an y nature on behalf of the center and 17 
transfer those funds, property or other interests to the center.  18 
13.  Confidential records.  The records and proceedings of the center are public for 19 
the purposes of Title 1, chapter 13, except for the following.  20 
A.  Information provided to or developed by the center and included in a business or 21 
marketing plan is public unless the person to whom the information belongs or 22 
pertains requests that it be designated as confidential and the center has determined it 23 
contains p roprietary information. For the purposes of this subsection, "proprietary 24 
information" means information that is a trade secret or production, commercial or 25 
financial information the disclosure of which would impair the competitive position 26 
of the center o r the person submitting the information and would make available 27 
information not otherwise publicly available.  28 
B.  Any financial statement, supporting data or tax return of any person is 29 
confidential.  30 
C.  Any record obtained by the center that contains an assessment of the 31 
creditworthiness, credit rating or financial condition of any person is confidential.  32 
This subsection does not prohibit the disclosure of information that is otherwise available 33 
in the public domain.  34 
14.  Annual report; audit.  The center  shall provide an annual report and an 35 
independent audit of its activities by November 15th to the Governor, the joint standing 36 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over economic development matters and 37 
the members of the center.  38 
15.  General c onditions; dissolution.  The center shall operate as a nonprofit 39 
organization consistent with its composition and broad public purposes. The following 40 
conditions apply to the operation or dissolution of the center.  41 
 
 Page 6 - 128LR1792(01) -1 
 A.  No part of the net earnings of the ce nter may inure to the benefit of any member, 1 
officer, director or employee, except that the center may pay reasonable 2 
compensation for services rendered and otherwise hold, manage and dispose of its 3 
property for the purposes of the center.  4 
B.  Upon dissolu tion of the center, the members shall transfer all unexpended General 5 
Fund appropriations to the State before paying or making provision for the payment 6 
of all other liabilities of the center.  7 
16.  Liberal construction.  This chapter may be construed liber ally to effect the 8 
intent and purposes of the center for an improved and enhanced domestic trade 9 
development effort in the State and may not be construed as a limitation of powers.  10 
SUMMARY  11 
This bill establishes the Maine Domestic Trade Center, a private no nprofit 12 
corporation with a public purpose.  The center is charged with helping Maine businesses, 13 
particularly small businesses, to innovate, grow and create new jobs by providing and 14 
enhancing services to facilitate the export of goods and services from Ma ine to other 15 
states.  The center will have a board of directors and the International Trade Director at 16 
the Department of Economic and Community Development shall serve as the president of 17 
the center.  The center will share staffing support and facilities with the International 18 
Trade Center, but may hire its own staff and secure its own facilities upon approval of the 19 
board of directors.  20 
 
