 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 31
H.P. 32 House of  Representatives, January 10, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Require  That Signatures on a Direct Initiative of 
Legislation Come from  Each Congressional District
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ESPLING of New Gloucester.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  KINNEY  of Limington, SUTTON of Warren, Senator  
SAVIELLO of Franklin, Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland and
Representatives: GUERIN  of Glenburn, HARVELL of Farmington,  LUCHINI of Ellsworth, 
STEWART of Presque  Isle.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0107(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub -ยง2 is amended to read:  4 
2. Referral to electors un less enacted by the Legislature without change; 5 
number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating 6 
signatures on petitions; competing measures.   For any measure thus proposed by 7 
electors, the number of signatures of voters from each cong ressional district  shall not be 8 
less than 10% of the total vote for Governor cast in that congressional district  in the last 9 
gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition.  The date each signature was 10 
made shall be written next to the signat ure on the petition.  A signature is not valid if it is 11 
dated more than one year prior to the date that the petition was filed in the office of the 12 
Secretary of State.  The measure thus proposed, unless enacted without change by the 13 
Legislature at the sess ion at which it is presented, shall be submitted to the electors 14 
together with any amended form, substitute, or recommendation of the Legislature, and in 15 
such manner that the people can choose between the competing measures or reject both.  16 
When there are competing bills and neither receives a majority of the votes given for or 17 
against both, the one receiving the most votes shall at the next statewide election to be 18 
held not less than 60 days after the first vote thereon be submitted by itself if it receive s 19 
more than 1/3 of the votes given for and against both.  If the measure initiated is enacted 20 
by the Legislature without change, it shall not go to a referendum vote unless in 21 
pursuance of a demand made in accordance with the preceding section.  The Legisl ature 22 
may order a special election on any measure that is subject to a vote of the people.  23 
; and be it further  24 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 25 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inha bitants of their 26 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 27 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 28 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratificati on of the amendment 29 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  30 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require signatures 31 
on direct initiative petitions from voters from each congressional district 32 
of this State?"  33 
The le gal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 34 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 35 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 36 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 37 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 38 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 39 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 40 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on March 1, 2018; and be it further  41 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0107(01) -1 
 Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 1 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 2 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  3 
SUMMARY  4 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require that the 5 
signa tures on a petition to directly initiate legislation be of voters from each of the State's 6 
2 congressional districts and that the number of signatures from each congressional 7 
district be not less than 10% of the total vote for Governor cast in that congres sional 8 
district in the previous gubernatorial election. This resolution provides that, if the 9 
required votes are cast in favor of the proposed amendment to the Constitution, the 10 
proposed amendment becomes part of the Constitution on March 1, 2018 instead o f on 11 
the date of the Governor's proclamation.  12 
 
