 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1624
S.P. 577 In Senate,  May 31, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Implement  Ranked-choice  Voting
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BREEN of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative PIERCE  of Falmouth and
Senators: CHENETTE  of York, CHIPMAN of Cumberland, DION of Cumberland, 
GRATWICK of Penobscot,  MILLETT  of Cumberland, MIRAMANT of Knox,  VITELLI  of 
Sagadahoc.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2373(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. First, §5 is amended to read:  4 
Section 5.  Election of Representat ives; lists of votes delivered forthwith; 5 
lists of votes examined by Governor; summons of persons who appear to be 6 
elected; lists shall be laid before the House.   The meetings within this State for the 7 
choice of Representatives shall be warned in due cours e of law by qualified officials of 8 
the several towns and cities 7 days at least before the election, and the election officials of 9 
the various towns and cities shall preside impartially at such meetings, receive the votes 10 
of all the qualified electors, sor t, count and declare them in open meeting; and a list of the 11 
persons voted for shall be formed, with the number of votes for each person against that 12 
person's name.  Cities and towns belonging to any Representative District shall hold their 13 
meetings at the  same time in the respective cities and towns; and such meetings shall be 14 
notified, held and regulated, the votes received, sorted, counted and declared in the same 15 
manner.  Fair copies of the lists of votes shall be attested by the municipal officers and 16 
the clerks of the cities and towns and the city and town clerks respectively shall cause the 17 
same to be delivered into the office of the Secretary of State forthwith.  The Governor 18 
shall examine the returned copies of such lists and 7 days before the first  Wednesday of 19 
December biennially, shall issue a summons to such persons as shall appear to have been 20 
elected by a plurality  majority  of all votes returned, to attend and take their seats.  All 21 
such lists shall be laid before the House of Representatives o n the first Wednesday of 22 
December biennially, and they shall finally determine who are elected.  23 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Second, §§4 and 5 are amended to read:  24 
Section 4.  Lists of votes examined by Governor; summons to persons who 25 
appear to be elected.   The Governor shall, as soon as may be, examine the copies of 26 
such lists, and at least 7 days before the said first Wednesday of December, issue a 27 
summons to such persons, as shall appear to be elected by a plurality  majority  of the 28 
votes in each senatoria l district, to attend that day and take their seats.  29 
Section 5.  Determination of Senators elected; procedure for filling 30 
vacancies.   The Senate shall, on said first Wednesday of December, biennially 31 
determine who is elected by a plurality  majority  of vote s to be Senator in each district.  32 
All vacancies in the Senate arising from death, resignation, removal from the State or like 33 
causes, and also vacancies, if any, which may occur because of the failure of any district 34 
to elect by a plurality  majority  of vo tes the Senator to which said district shall be entitled 35 
shall be filled by an immediate election in the unrepresented district.  The Governor shall 36 
issue a proclamation therefor and therein fix the time of such election.  37 
Constitution, Art. V, Pt. First, § 3 is amended to read:  38 
Section 3.  Election; votes to be returned to Secretary of State; Secretary 39 
of State to lay lists before the Senate and House of Representatives; provision 40 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR2373(01) -1 
 in case of tie.   The meetings for election of Governor shall be notified, held  and 1 
regulated and votes shall be received, sorted, counted and declared and recorded, in the 2 
same manner as those for Senators and Representatives.  Copies of lists of votes shall be 3 
sealed and returned to the secretary's office in the same manner and at the same time as 4 
those for Senators.  The Secretary of State for the time being shall, on the first 5 
Wednesday after the first Tuesday of January then next, lay the lists returned to the 6 
secretary's office before the Senate and House of Representatives to b e by them 7 
examined, together with the ballots cast if they so elect, and they shall determine the 8 
number of votes duly cast for the office of Governor, and in case of a choice by plurality  9 
majority  of all of the votes returned they shall declare and publis h the same.  If there shall 10 
be a tie between the 2 persons having the largest number of votes for Governor, the 11 
House of Representatives and the Senate meeting in joint session, and each member of 12 
said bodies having a single vote, shall elect one of said 2  persons having so received an 13 
equal number of votes and the person so elected by the Senate and House of 14 
Representatives shall be declared the Governor.  15 
; and be it further  16 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 17 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 18 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 19 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 20 
follow ing the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 21 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  22 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require candidates 23 
for the political offices of Govern or, State Senator and State 24 
Representative to be elected by a majority of the votes cast for that 25 
office?"  26 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 27 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed w ithin the corresponding 28 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 29 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 30 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Le gislature.  The Governor shall 31 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 32 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 33 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 34 
further  35 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 36 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 37 
of this resolution necessary to carry ou t the purposes of this referendum.  38 
SUMMARY  39 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require candidates for 40 
the political offices of Governor, State Senator and State Representative to be elected by 41 
a majority of the votes cast for tha t office.  42 
