 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1133
H.P. 796 House of  Representatives, March 23, 2017
An Act  Regarding Access  to Appropriate Residential Services for 
Individuals Being Discharged from Psychiatric Hospitalization
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative McCREIGHT  of Harpswell.
Cosponsored by Senator HILL of York and
Representatives: DENNO  of Cumberland, HILLIARD of Belgrade, MADIGAN of Waterville, 
MALABY of Hancock,  PERRY of Calais, Senators:  CARSON of Cumberland, CHENETTE 
of York, DOW of  Lincoln.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0871(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  34-B MRSA ยง1226 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1226.  Request by patient for residential services  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, "residential service provider" means:  4 
A.  An agency or  person that operates assisted housing, a residential care facility or a 5 
private nonmedical institution licensed pursuant to rules adopted by the department; 6 
or 7 
B.  An agency or person that provides residential services that are licensed by, funded 8 
by or p rovided under contract with the department.  9 
2.  Reasons for denial must be provided.  If a patient in a psychiatric hospital, as 10 
defined in section 3801, subsection 7 -B, or a patient who is treated for a psychiatric 11 
condition in a hospital licensed under T itle 22, section 1811 or 1813 is determined by the 12 
hospital to be clinically ready for discharge and requests admission or readmission from 13 
the hospital to a facility operated by a residential service provider and that request is 14 
denied, the residential se rvice provider shall provide the patient the reasons for the denial 15 
in writing no later than 3 business days after the request is denied.  16 
3.  Standardized form.  The department shall develop a standardized form for use by 17 
a residential service provider to state the specific reasons for a denial under subsection 2.  18 
The form must include both checklists and space for additional comments to ensure 19 
consideration of the individual needs of the patient.  A residential service provider shall 20 
provide the completed  standardized form to a patient who has requested admission or 21 
readmission to a facility operated by a residential service provider or to the patient's 22 
parent or guardian or designated representative.  A residential service provider shall 23 
annually send to the department's division of licensing and regulatory services a report of 24 
all patients who are denied admission or readmission pursuant to subsection 2 and the 25 
reasons given to the patients that were contained in the standardized forms.  26 
4.  Penalty.  A residential service provider that violates this section is subject to a 27 
civil penalty of $500, payable to the patient or the patient's parent or guardian or 28 
designated representative.  This penalty is recoverable in a civil action.  If a residential 29 
service provider violates this section 3 times or more in a calendar year, the residential 30 
service provider may lose the provider's license to provide residential services.  31 
SUMMARY  32 
This bill provides that, if a patient in a hospital who received treatment for a 33 
psychiatric condition and who the hospital has determined is clinically ready for 34 
discharge requests admission or readmission from the hospital to a facility operated by a 35 
residential service provider and that request is denied, the residential service provi der 36 
must provide the patient the reasons for the denial in writing no later than 3 business days 37 
after the request is denied.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0871(01) -1 
 The bill directs the Department of Health and Human Services to develop a 1 
standardized form for use by residential service provide rs to state the specific reasons for 2 
denial.  A residential service provider must provide the standardized form to the patient 3 
or the patient's parent or guardian or designated representative.  A residential service 4 
provider must annually send to the depar tment's division of licensing and regulatory 5 
services a report of all patients who are denied admission or readmission and the reasons 6 
given the patients that were contained in the standardized forms.  7 
The bill allows a patient or a patient's parent or guar dian or designated representative 8 
to recover $500 from a residential service provider that violates these provisions.  It also 9 
provides for the revocation of the license of a residential service provider that violates 10 
these provisions 3 times or more in a calendar year.  11 
 
