 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 931
H.P. 659 House of  Representatives, March 9, 2017
An Act  To Create Extended Producer Responsibility for Post-
consumer Waste Generated from the Use of Tobacco Products
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BLUME of York.
Cosponsored by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland  and
Representatives: COOPER of Yarmouth,  DEVIN of Newcastle, FAY of Raymond, 
MASTRACCIO of Sanford, SCHNECK of Bangor.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2136(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to establish a system under which producers of tobacco products 5 
develop, finance and implement s tewardship programs to collect, transport, process and 6 
safely dispose of post -consumer tobacco waste to reduce, prevent and mitigate the 7 
environmental effects of the disposal of that waste in the State.  8 
The bill proposes to:  9 
1.  Prohibit tobacco producers or retailers from selling or offering for sale tobacco 10 
products in the State unless they are participating in an approved tobacco waste 11 
stewardship program;  12 
2.  Require a tobacco producer to provide retailers that sell tobacco products 13 
information about th e producer's tobacco waste stewardship program and information 14 
regarding available collection opportunities for post -consumer tobacco product waste.  15 
Under the bill, a retailer that sells tobacco products would be required to provide that 16 
information to it s consumers at the time of sale;  17 
3.  Require each tobacco producer to submit a plan for its tobacco waste stewardship 18 
program to the State for approval.  The plan must:  19 
A.  Specify educational and outreach activities and materials that promote and 20 
increase  awareness of the tobacco waste stewardship program, including but not 21 
limited to a website and written materials.  The outreach materials must identify 22 
options for establishing an effective collection system, promote a reduction in the 23 
generation of post -consumer tobacco product waste, identify each tobacco producer 24 
participating in the program, identify participating brands of tobacco products sold 25 
and identify the processors that manage the post -consumer tobacco product waste that 26 
is collected;  27 
B.  Estab lish and provide for the implementation of goals to reduce the generation of 28 
post-consumer tobacco product waste;  29 
C.  Outline the responsibility for negotiating and executing contracts to collect, 30 
transport and process post -consumer tobacco product waste f or end -of-product 31 
management;  32 
D.  Describe how the end -of-product management of post -consumer tobacco product 33 
waste that is collected under the tobacco waste stewardship program will use 34 
environmentally sound management practices that are consistent with s tate laws and 35 
other relevant environmental rules and practices for ultimate disposal;  36 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR2136(01) -1 
 E.  Establish a timeline for carrying out an annual assessment of the effectiveness of 1 
actions taken under the tobacco waste stewardship program;  2 
F.  Include an anticipat ed annual operating budget for the tobacco waste stewardship 3 
program; and  4 
G.  Identify an effective, convenient system for the collection of post -consumer 5 
tobacco product waste that ensures sufficient permanent collection sites and provides 6 
for collection events in geographically underserved areas;  7 
4.  Establish a process for tobacco producers to amend their tobacco waste 8 
stewardship programs;  9 
5.  Require tobacco producers to submit annual reports, which must include the 10 
volume of post -consumer tobacco prod uct waste collected, an independent financial 11 
audit, an evaluation of the tobacco waste stewardship program's funding mechanism, an 12 
updated budget, samples of educational and outreach materials, documentation of 13 
compliance with collection requirements, a d escription of activities undertaken to achieve 14 
the program's goals as provided for in the program plan and identification of proposed 15 
changes to the program;  16 
6.  Allow the state agency charged with overseeing tobacco waste stewardship 17 
programs to develop a  pilot project for a tobacco waste stewardship program;  18 
7.  Require the state agency charged with overseeing tobacco waste stewardship 19 
programs to establish a schedule of fees;  20 
8.  Make financial cost, production or sales data and records confidential and 21 
establish a process for disclosure of aggregate information;  22 
9.  Require the state agency charged with overseeing tobacco waste stewardship 23 
programs to publish by municipality, city or county the total weight of post -consumer 24 
tobacco product waste collecte d; and  25 
10.  Establish civil penalties for violations.  26 
 
