 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 377
S.P. 118 In Senate, February 2, 2017
An Act  To Create a County Jail Drug Rehabilitation and Treatment  
Grant Program
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CHENETTE of  York.
Cosponsored by Representative GROHMAN  of Biddeford and
Senators: DESCHAMBAULT of York, WOODSOME of York,  Representatives:  GERRISH  of 
Lebanon, NADEAU of Winslow, O'NEIL  of Saco.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0883(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  34-A MRSA ยง1219 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1219.  County Jail Drug Rehabilitation and Treatment Grant Program  3 
There is established the County Jail Drug Rehabilitation and Treatment Grant 4 
Prog ram, referred to in this section as "the grant program," to provide state funding in the 5 
form of grants for the creation of drug rehabilitation and treatment programs or facilities 6 
attached to or affiliated with county jails or regional jails.  Drug rehabi litation and 7 
treatment programs and facilities, to qualify for funding, must provide evidence -based 8 
rehabilitation and treatment, which may include, but is not limited to, detoxification 9 
services, medication -assisted treatment, clinical treatment, medical services, faith -based 10 
treatment, peer support, family support, self -care, recovery coaching and support services 11 
and educational services.  A facility or program may be residential or provide outpatient 12 
or community -based services.  13 
1.  Advice.   The departm ent shall seek the advice of a statewide association of county 14 
commissioners and a statewide association of sheriffs in designing the grant program, 15 
adopting standards for awarding grants and periodically reviewing the effectiveness of 16 
the grant program.  17 
2.  Availability.   The grant program is available to provide partial funding to eligible 18 
counties that are planning to affiliate with or build or convert a portion of county or 19 
regional jails or jail facilities for use as short -term or long -term residential  drug 20 
rehabilitation and treatment facilities or programs or other county -based solutions to drug 21 
addiction within the scope of the grant.  22 
3.  Awards; grading standards; priority list.   The department shall adopt grading 23 
standards for awarding grants that require county funding contributions to the drug 24 
rehabilitation and treatment facility or program of at least 50% of the cost, that take into 25 
consideration the level of support within the county for the facility or program and the 26 
level of county funding c ommitted to the facility or program and that take into 27 
consideration the level of need in the county for a drug rehabilitation and treatment 28 
facility or program.  The grading standards must give priority to a county that 29 
demonstrates a commitment to increa sing the financial contributions of that county over 30 
time.  The department shall compile a list of eligible counties that reflects priorities 31 
derived from the grading standards.  The department shall update the standards and list of 32 
eligible counties as ne eded for the administration of the grant program.  33 
4.  Funding.   The department shall accept funding from state, federal and community 34 
sources, including, but not limited to, private funding, to fund the grant program through 35 
the County Jail Drug Rehabilita tion and Treatment Grant Program Dedicated Fund, 36 
which is established as a dedicated fund within the department.  Funds of the County Jail 37 
Drug Rehabilitation and Treatment Grant Program Dedicated Fund do not lapse at the 38 
end of the fiscal year but carry f orward to the next fiscal year.  Notwithstanding any 39 
provision of law to the contrary, funds remaining and unencumbered at the end of a state 40 
fiscal year in any account of the department lapse on the first day of the new fiscal year to 41 
the County Jail Drug  Rehabilitation and Treatment Grant Program Dedicated Fund.  42 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0883(01) -1 
 5.  Rulemaking.   The department shall adopt rules to establish the grading standards 1 
for the grant program and the grading methodology for judging applications and to 2 
administer the grant program.   Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine 3 
technical rules as defined by Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 4 
SUMMARY  5 
This bill establishes the County Jail Drug Rehabilitation and Treatment Grant 6 
Program to provide state funding in the form o f grants to partially fund the creation of 7 
drug rehabilitation and treatment facilities and programs attached to or affiliated with 8 
county jails or regional jails.  The bill requires the Department of Corrections to seek the 9 
advice of a statewide associati on of county commissioners and a statewide association of 10 
sheriffs in designing, adopting standards for and periodically reviewing effectiveness of 11 
the grant program.  The bill specifies that the grant program provides partial funding to 12 
counties that are planning to affiliate with or build or convert a portion of county or 13 
regional jails or jail facilities for use as short -term or long -term residential drug 14 
rehabilitation and treatment facilities or programs.  The bill requires the department to 15 
adopt grad ing standards for awarding grants that require county funding contributions to 16 
the drug rehabilitation and treatment facility or program of at least 50% of the cost, that 17 
take into consideration the level of county support and county funding and that take into 18 
consideration county need.  The department is directed to compile a priority list that 19 
reflects priorities derived from the grading standards.  The bill allows the department to 20 
accept funding from private and public sources and provides for funding f rom the County 21 
Jail Drug Rehabilitation and Treatment Grant Program Dedicated Fund, which is 22 
established in the bill as a nonlapsing, dedicated fund.  The bill provides that department 23 
funds remaining and unencumbered at the end of a state fiscal year laps e to the County 24 
Jail Drug Rehabilitation and Treatment Grant Program Dedicated Fund.  25 
 
