 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1390
H.P. 964 House of  Representatives,  April 11, 2017
An Act  To Enhance the  Rights of Families of Missing Persons  and 
Homicide Victims
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative RILEY of  Jay.
Cosponsored by Senator CYRWAY  of Kennebec and
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, SKOLFIELD of Weld, STANLEY of Medway, TALBOT ROSS of  Portland, Senator: CHENETTE  of York.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1693(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง1178 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1178.  Information regarding unsolved missing persons and murder  3 
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, Title 5, chapter 316 -A and Title 1 5, 4 
sections 812 and 6101, in order to improve communication with the families of murder 5 
and criminal homicide victims or missing persons regarding the status of unsolved or 6 
open murder, criminal homicide and missing person cases, the following provisions 7 
apply.  8 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 9 
following terms have the following meanings.  10 
A.  "Case" means an open investigation of a murder or missing person.  11 
B.  "Investigating agency" means the law enforce ment agency that has primary 12 
responsibility for the investigation of a case.  13 
C.  "Murder" includes criminal homicide.  14 
D.  "Open" means:  15 
(1)  For a murder case, that a person committing the murder has not been tried or 16 
adjudicated for or pled guilty to murd er or a lesser included crime or has been 17 
found not criminally responsible by reason of mental disease or defect of murder 18 
or a lesser included crime; and  19 
(2)  For a missing person case, that the person has not been located.  20 
2.  Open case website.  The Dep artment of Public Safety shall maintain a publicly 21 
accessible website that lists all open missing person and murder cases in the State.  The 22 
cases listed on the website must be categorized first by missing person or murder and 23 
next by the type of each murd er or missing person case, such as unsolved murder, 24 
suspicious death, active missing person or presumed missing, and must contain a 25 
summary of the details of the case and the name of and contact information for the 26 
investigating agency.  27 
3.  Annual intervie ws.  An investigating agency for an open case shall conduct a 28 
press conference or issue a press release annually on the anniversary date that the murder 29 
occurred or the person was reported missing unless the family of the victim or missing 30 
person requests otherwise.  31 
4.  Request for assistance from outside resources.  If a case remains open after 10 32 
years, the family of a murder victim or missing person may require the investigating 33 
agency to seek assistance from a federal law enforcement agency to resolve t he open 34 
case.  35 
5.  Outside media.  The family of a murder victim or missing person may invite an 36 
investigation by an organization that performs investigative journalism for broadcast, in 37 
whatever form, to the public.  The investigating agency shall provide access to 38 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1693(01) -1 
 information regarding the open case except for that information the investigating agency 1 
considers to be detrimental to solving the case if made public.  2 
6.  Regular communication and updates by investigating agency and victim 3 
advocate.  The inves tigating agency and a victim advocate shall communicate on at least 4 
an annual basis with the family of the murder victim or missing person regarding the 5 
status of the investigation into the murder or missing person case unless the family of the 6 
murder vict im or missing person requests otherwise.  If the investigating agency becomes 7 
aware of new information regarding the case or changes the status of the case, the 8 
investigating agency must inform the family of that new information within 14 days 9 
unless the i nvestigating agency determines that the release of that information would be 10 
detrimental to solving the case.  11 
7.  Return of personal property; destruction or loss of evidence.  Upon request of 12 
the family of a murder victim or missing person, an investigati ng agency or other state 13 
agency in possession of personal property that belongs to the victim or missing person 14 
shall return to the family that personal property if the investigating agency and, if 15 
applicable, the Attorney General or other prosecuting agen cy determine that the retention 16 
of the personal property by the State is not necessary to the investigation or prosecution 17 
of the case.  If other evidence collected, compiled or produced during the investigation of 18 
a case is lost or destroyed, the investig ating agency or, if applicable, the Attorney General 19 
or other prosecuting agency shall notify the family of the victim or missing person within 20 
48 hours of discovery of the loss or destruction of the evidence.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This bill amends the current law regar ding victims' rights to enhance and improve the 23 
communication between law enforcement agencies and prosecutors and the families of 24 
murder victims and missing persons and to increase public awareness of unsolved murder 25 
and missing person cases.  Specificall y, this bill:  26 
1.  Requires the Department of Public Safety to establish a publicly accessible 27 
website that contains relevant information about open, or unsolved, murder and missing 28 
person cases;  29 
2.  Requires the law enforcement agency responsible for the i nvestigation of an open 30 
murder or missing person case to hold a press conference or issue a press release annually 31 
on the anniversary date of the murder or the day the person was reported missing 32 
regarding the status of the case, unless the family of the v ictim requests otherwise;  33 
3.  Allows the family of a murder victim or missing person to seek the assistance of 34 
an investigative journalism organization and requires the investigating law enforcement 35 
agency to cooperate with the organization to the extent t hat cooperating does not 36 
jeopardize the resolution of the case;  37 
4.  After a case has been open for at least 10 years, allows the family to require the 38 
investigating law enforcement agency to seek help in solving the case from a federal law 39 
enforcement agen cy; 40 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR1693(01) -1 
 5.  Requires at least annual communication by the investigating law enforcement 1 
agency and a victim advocate with the family of a murder victim or a missing person 2 
regarding the status of the case, unless the family requests otherwise.  Any change in 3 
status or new information regarding the case must be reported to the family within 14 4 
days; and  5 
6.  Requires that personal property that belonged to the murder victim or missing 6 
person in the possession of the State be returned to the family of the victim o r person if it 7 
is determined that the property is not necessary to the investigation or prosecution of the 8 
case and requires the family to be notified if any other evidence collected, compiled or 9 
produced during the investigation is destroyed or lost.  10 
The actions required by this legislation are intended to be in addition to the rights of 11 
and responsibilities to victims and victims' families already in statute.  12 
 
