 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
;<;VlV) -
R. off') 
,_ 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 Date: 5/J~J }7 L.D. 1062 
(Filing No. H-]~D) 
ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY 
Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
128TH LEGISLATURE 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "A" to H.P. 745, L.D. 1062, Bill, "An Act To 
Expand the Availability of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in Maine" 
Amend the bill by striking out the title and substituting the following: 
'Resolve, To Expand the Availability of Light-duty Zero Emission Vehicle Supply 
Equipment' 
Amend the bill by striking out everything after the title and inserting the following: 
'Sec. 1. Light-duty zero emission vehicle supply equipment availability 
expansion. Resolved: That the Department of Transportation, in consultation with the 
Department of Environmental Protection and the Governor's Energy Office, shall include 
in the State's beneficiary mitigation plan under the Volkswagen Mitigation Trust 
Agreement to receive trust funds pursuant to the Volkswagen Partial Consent Decree, 
which settles portions of the multidistrict litigation concerning certain Volkswagen diesel 
engines, a proposal to allocate 15% of funds received for light-duty zero emission vehicle 
supply equipment as permitted by the Volkswagen Partial Consent Decree. 
As used in this resolve, "light-duty zero emission vehicle supply equipment" means 
level 1, level 2 or direct current fast chargers located in a place available to the public, a 
workplace or a multi-unit dwelling or hydrogen fuel cell supply equipment, including 
hydrogen dispensing equipment, that is located in a place available to the public; and be it 
further 
Sec. 2. Grants. Resolved: That, if the State's beneficiary mitigation plan 
described in section 1 is approved, the portion of the funds allocated for light-duty zero 
emission vehicle supply equipment must be disbursed in whole or in part through grants 
for the installation of light-duty zero emission vehicle supply equipment. Preference 
must be given to proposals for grants that make light-duty zero emission vehicle supply 
equipment available to the public 24 hours per day and 7 days per week; locate light-duty 
zero emission vehicle supply equipment in or near an area where no other charging 
station is available, that is safe due to the presence of lighting or shelter and that is close 
to important regional attractions, events, facilities, transportation corridors, major 
Page 1 -128LR0538(02)- l 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
fl cf s. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 COMMITIEEAMENDMENT'A "to H.P. 745, L.D.1062 
thoroughfares and high-traffic areas; and commit a grant applicant to contribute the 
applicant's own funds to help maintain and operate the light-duty zero emission vehicle 
supply equipment; and be it further 
Sec. 3. Program. Resolved: That the grants described in section 2 may be 
disbursed through a new or existing grant program. The grant program must support the 
installation throughout the State of publicly accessible, universally compatible light-duty 
zero emission vehicle supply equipment. If a new program is developed, the Department 
of Transportation shall consult with the Efficiency Maine Trust established in the Maine 
Revised Statutes, Title 5, section 12004-G, subsection 10-C on the development of that 
program; and be it further 
Sec. 4. Report. Resolved: That the Department of Transportation shall, by 
January 15, 2018, submit a report to the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology describing the status of the State's beneficiary mitigation plan, the plan to 
use funds for a new or existing grant program and the need, if any, for legislation for a 
grant program. The committee may report out a bill based on this report to the Second 
Regular Session of the 128th Legislature.' 
SUMMARY 
This amendment requires the Department of Transportation, in consultation with the 
Department of Environmental Protection and the Governor's Energy Office, to include in 
the State's beneficiary mitigation plan the proposal to allocate 15% of the trust funds 
received for light-duty zero emission vehicle supply equipment as permitted by the 
Volkswagen Partial Consent Decree. If the mitigation plan is approved, it requires that 
the funds be used in whole or in part to provide grants for the installation of light-duty 
zero emission vehicle supply equipment. It requires that grants funded with the trust 
funds be disbursed to projects that meet certain preferential selection criteria. It allows 
the Department of Transportation to disburse funds for the installation of light-duty zero 
emission vehicle supply equipment within an existing program or a new program 
developed in consultation with the Efficiency Maine Trust. Lastly, it requires that the 
Department of Transportation submit by January 15, 2018 a report to the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology describing the status of the State's 
beneficiary mitigation plan, the plan to use funds for a new or existing grant program and 
the need, if any, for legislation for a grant program. 
FISCAL NOTE REQUIRED 
(See attached) 
Page 2 -128LR0538(02)- l 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 05/21/17 feac 
128th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 1062 LR 538(02) 
An Act To Expand the Availability of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in Maine 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment ,A,(H--3-l.O) 
Committee: Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Fiscal Detail and Notes Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Current biennium revenue increase -Other Special Revenue Funds 
Current biennium cost increase -Other Special Revenue Funds 
The Department of Transportation will receive funding from the litigation settlement concerning Volkswagen Diesel 
Engines (VDE) once a beneficiary mitigation plan is developed, submitted and approved. The amount of funding to 
be received is not known at this time and may be received in this biennium or in a future biennium. The department 
will need to set aside 15% of the funding received for grants for the purpose outliµed in the bill. 
Any additional costs to the Department of Environmental Protection, the Governor's Energy Office or the Efficiency 
Maine Trust related to advising on the uses of the funds received as a result of the litigation settlement concerning 
VDE are anticipated to be minor and can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. 
LR0538(02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of I 
