 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1099
H.P. 773 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2017
Resolve, To  Require the State To Bring Suit  against the  Federal 
Government for Failure  To Comply with the Federal Refugee Act of 
1980
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative LOCKMAN of Amherst.
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS  of Piscataquis and
Representatives: BRADSTREET  of Vassalboro, HANLEY of Pittston, HARRINGTON  of 
Sanford, HERRICK of  Paris,  JOHANSEN of Monticello, SHERMAN of Hodgdon, Senators: 
CYRWAY of Kennebec, MASON of  Androscoggin.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1439(01) -1 
 Whereas, the Federal Government is actively placing refugees in the State; and  1 
Whereas, the State is required to provide certain benefits and services to eligible 2 
refugees, including Medicaid services pursuant to 8 United States Code, Section 1612 or 3 
risk losing Medicaid funding; and  4 
Whereas, under the United States Constitution, Amendment X as construed by the 5 
United States Supreme Court in National Federation of Independent Business et al. v. 6 
Sebelius, 132 S. Ct. 2566 (2012), the Federal Government cannot  lawfully coerce the 7 
State to provide funding with no real option but to acquiesce; and  8 
Whereas, by conditioning all Medicaid funding on the requirement that the State 9 
provide Medicaid services to refugees absent other input or control by the State, the St ate 10 
is being coerced in violation of both the United States Constitution and the Constitution 11 
of Maine; and  12 
Whereas, each member of the Legislature has taken an oath to uphold the 13 
Constitution of Maine and the United States Constitution; and  14 
Whereas, if it is constitutionally permissible for the Federal Government to compel 15 
a state legislative body to perform its most important function, the appropriation of state 16 
tax dollars, as well as expend its limited resources, personnel and services, the United 17 
State s Constitution, Amendment X has no meaning and the powers of the Federal 18 
Government are unfettered and boundless; and  19 
Whereas, the right of Mainers to appropriate tax dollars in a manner determined by 20 
representatives elected by Maine citizens is fundamenta l and cannot be usurped; and  21 
Whereas, if the Federal Government intends to overreach its authority to the point 22 
that it assumes the traditional role of a state legislative body, it is only fitting and proper 23 
that the very existence as well as the depth and  breadth of this federal power be clarified 24 
and declared in a court of law; and  25 
Whereas, the federal Refugee Act of 1980 establishes a framework for collaboration 26 
and cooperation between the Federal Government and the states in resettling refugees.  27 
The fe deral Refugee Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Government "shall consult 28 
regularly (not less often than quarterly) with State and local governments and private 29 
nonprofit voluntary agencies concerning the sponsorship process and the intended 30 
distributi on of refugees among the States and localities before their placement in those 31 
States and localities." 8 United States Code, Section 1522(a)(2)(A); and  32 
Whereas, the Refugee Act of 1980 requires the Federal Government to consult with 33 
the State regarding the  placement of refugees before those refugees are placed within its 34 
borders, and that consultation has not occurred; now, therefore, be it  35 
Sec. 1.  The Attorney General to initiate or intervene in one or more civil 36 
actions on behalf of the State or seek app ropriate relief in a federal court of 37 
competent jurisdiction.  Resolved:  That the Attorney General shall initiate or 38 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1439(01) -1 
 intervene in one or more civil actions on behalf of the State or seek appropriate relief in a 1 
federal court of competent jurisdiction rega rding the failure of the Federal Government to 2 
comply with the federal Refugee Act of 1980, as amended, and any actions taken by the 3 
Federal Government, including the President of the United States, the head of any 4 
department or agency or any other employe e of the executive branch of the Federal 5 
Government, in violation of federal law or as prohibited by the United States 6 
Constitution, Amendment X, or any statutory or constitutional provisions of the United 7 
States or the State, with respect to the operation  or implementation in this State of any 8 
provision of the Federal Government's refugee resettlement program, including any 9 
revision or amendment by regulation or otherwise pertaining to the program. The civil 10 
action under this section must seek to prohibit the appropriation of state funds without the 11 
specific authorization of the Legislature in connection with the federal Refugee Act of 12 
1980. The Attorney General, in conjunction with the President of the Senate and the 13 
Speaker of the House of Representatives , may employ the services of outside counsel to 14 
assist in and consult on the civil action under this section; and be it further  15 
Sec. 2.  Notice from Attorney General. Resolved:  That the Attorney General 16 
shall file written notice with the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of 17 
Representatives if the Attorney General chooses not to initiate or intervene in a civil 18 
action under section 1.  Upon receipt of notice from the Attorney General declining the 19 
initiation of or intervention in a civil ac tion in section 1, the President of the Senate and 20 
the Speaker of the House of Representatives are authorized to employ outside counsel to 21 
commence a civil action in section 1.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
This resolve directs the Attorney General to initiate or intervene in a  civil action 24 
against the Federal Government in opposition to the federal Refugee Act of 1980 and the 25 
imposition of financial mandates on the State.  If the Attorney General sends notice to the 26 
Senate and the House of Representatives declining to initiate or intervene in a civil action 27 
required by this resolve, this resolve authorizes the President of the Senate and the 28 
Speaker of the House of Representatives to employ outside counsel to commence the 29 
civil action.  30 
 
