 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 248
H.P. 181 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2017
An Act  Regarding Law Enforcement Training  for Former Military 
Police Officers
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GUERIN of Glenburn.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  ALLEY  of Beals, CASÁS of Rockport,  FARRIN of 
Norridgewock, GOLDEN  of Lewiston, JOHANSEN of Monticello,  PICCHIOTTI  of Fairfield, 
PICKETT of  Dixfield,  Senator: CARPENTER of Aroostook.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0022(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  25 MRSA §2804 -C, sub -§6 is enacted to read:  2 
6.  Application to veterans of the United States Armed Forces who served as 3 
military police officers.   This section does not apply to a perso n who is an honorably 4 
discharged veteran of the United States Armed Forces who served as a military police 5 
officer and has been hired for or received a conditional offer of full -time employment as a 6 
law enforcement officer if the person:  7 
A.  Has been certi fied by the board as satisfying all preservice training requirements 8 
under section 2804 -B; 9 
B.  Has passed a basic law enforcement training program waiver examination adopted 10 
and administered by the board; and  11 
C.  Is a graduate of a formal United States Arm ed Forces police academy or training 12 
program and was authorized by law to engage in or supervise the prevention or 13 
detection of or investigation, prosecution or incarceration of any person for any 14 
violation of law and had statutory powers of arrest or appr ehension under the United 15 
States Uniform Code of Military Justice or successor military judicial code and meets 16 
the following military service and education criteria:  17 
(1)  Has 5 years' supervisory experience in military law enforcement in a military 18 
pay gr ade of at least E -5 or its equivalent; or  19 
(2)  Has 3 years' active service experience in military law enforcement and has 20 
completed an associate degree or higher in criminal justice from an accredited 21 
postsecondary educational institution.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
This bil l exempts honorably discharged veterans of the United States Armed Forces 24 
who served as military police officers and have been hired for or have received 25 
conditional offers of full -time employment as law enforcement officers from basic law 26 
enforcement trai ning by the Maine Criminal Justice Academy if the veterans' military 27 
experience and education meet certain criteria.  28 
 
