 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 453
S.P. 155 In Senate, February 7, 2017
Resolve, Regarding Insurance Coverage for  Alternative Therapies  
for Addiction and Recovery
Reference to the Committee on Insurance  and Financial Services suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Representative BROOKS  of Lewiston and
Senators: CARSON of Cumberland, CHIPMAN of Cumberland, LIBBY of Androscoggin, Representatives: HAMANN of  South  Portland, JORGENSEN of Portland, RYKERSON of 
Kittery.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1170(01) -1 
 Preamble. Whereas, Maine citizens are experiencing an addiction crisis related to 1 
opioid and heroin use; and  2 
Whereas, addiction treatment services are essential components to successful 3 
recovery; now, therefore, be it  4 
Sec. 1.  Superintendent of Insurance t o evaluate insurance coverage for 5 
alternative therapies for addiction treatment and recovery. Resolved:  That the 6 
Superintendent of Insurance shall convene representatives of organizations that provide 7 
addiction treatment, medical professionals and health i nsurers to identify best practices 8 
for evidence -based alternative therapy for the treatment of opioid and heroin addiction 9 
and successful recovery. The superintendent shall evaluate health insurance plans offered 10 
in the State to identify gaps in coverage f or recommended evidence -based alternative 11 
therapies and, before January 15, 2018, report to the Joint Standing Committee on 12 
Insurance and Financial Services.  The report must also include information on the impact 13 
of benefit design requirements of the fede ral Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 14 
as amended, on alternative therapies and any federal changes or potential federal changes 15 
that may affect benefit design requirements. The joint standing committee may submit a 16 
bill based on the superintenden t's findings and recommendations to the Second Regular 17 
Session of the 128th Legislature.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
This resolve requires the Superintendent of Insurance to convene interested parties to 20 
evaluate commercial insurance coverage for addiction treatment and recov ery alternative 21 
therapies and report findings and recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee on 22 
Insurance and Financial Services before January 15, 2018. The resolve authorizes the 23 
Joint Standing Committee on Insurance and Financial Services to submit  a bill to the 24 
Second Regular Session of the 128th Legislature based upon the report.  25 
 
