 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 635
H.P. 451 House of  Representatives, February 16, 2017
An Act  To Incentivize Legislative Carpooling
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FULLER of Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  FAY of Raymond, GOLDEN of Lewiston,  HANDY  of 
Lewiston, SHEATS of Auburn, TEPLER of  Topsham.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1443(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  3 MRSA ยง5 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง5.  Travel allowance for carpooling  3 
Notwithstanding the mileage allowance rate imposed under section 2, the daily 4 
mileage allowance rate per mile paid to a Legislator who transports one or more other 5 
Legislators as passengers must be increased by 25% per Legislator traveling as a 6 
passenger. The increased reimbursement rate applies only to the portion of the trip during 7 
which a Legislator traveling as a pass enger is present in the vehicle. Notwithstanding 8 
section 2, a Legislator who is a passenger of another Legislator receiving a daily mileage 9 
allowance increased pursuant to this section is not entitled to any actual daily mileage 10 
allowance relating to trave l as a passenger.  11 
SUMMARY  12 
This bill provides for an increased mileage reimbursement rate for Legislators who 13 
transport other Legislators in a car pool to or from legislative meetings and sessions. The 14 
bill provides for a 25% increase in the rate paid per mile for each additional passenger 15 
and specifies that the passenger is not eligible for mileage reimbursement.  16 
 
