 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 715
H.P. 506 House of  Representatives, February 28, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Amend the Citizen  Initiative Process
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CRAIG of Brewer.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BRADSTREET of Vassalboro, FOLEY of Wells, HERRICK 
of Paris,  JOHANSEN of Monticello, KINNEY  of Knox, PICCHIOTTI  of Fairfield, TUELL of 
East Machias, Senator: WHITTEMORE  of Somerset.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2093(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub -ยง2 is amended to read:  4 
2.  Referral to electors u nless enacted by the Legislature without change; 5 
number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating signatures on 6 
petitions; competing measures.   For any measure thus proposed by electors, the number 7 
of petition must contain  signatures shall not be less than 10%  of at least 15%  of the total 8 
vote for Governor cast in the last gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such 9 
petition  registered voters in each county .  The date each signature was made shall be 10 
written next to the signatur e on the petition.  A signature is not valid if it is dated more 11 
than one year prior to the date that the petition was filed in the office of the Secretary of 12 
State.  The measure thus proposed, unless enacted without change by the Legislature at 13 
the sessio n at which it is presented, shall be submitted to the electors together with any 14 
amended form, substitute, or recommendation of the Legislature, and in such manner that 15 
the people can choose between the competing measures or reject both. No earlier than 90  16 
days before the referendum vote and no later than 30 days before the referendum vote, the 17 
Secretary of State shall hold at least one public debate on the measure in each senatorial 18 
district at which the full text of the measure and any amended form, subst itute, or 19 
recommendation of the Legislature must be read aloud in its entirety.   When there are 20 
competing bills and neither receives a majority of the votes given for or against both, the 21 
one receiving the most votes shall at the next statewide election to  be held not less than 22 
60 days after the first vote thereon be submitted by itself if it receives more than 1/3 of 23 
the votes given for and against both.  If the measure initiated is enacted by the Legislature 24 
without change, it shall not go to a referendum  vote unless in pursuance of a demand 25 
made in accordance with the preceding section.  The Legislature may order a special 26 
election on any measure that is subject to a vote of the people.  27 
; and be it further  28 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of ques tion; effective date. 29 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 30 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 31 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election hel d in the month of November 32 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 33 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  34 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require that a 35 
direct  initiative petition contain signatures of at least 15% of the 36 
registered voters in each county and that the Secretary of State hold a 37 
public debate in each senatorial district on the measure proposed in the 38 
initiative?"  39 
The legal voters of each city, town  and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 40 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 41 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 42 
declared in open ward, town an d plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 43 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR2093(01) -1 
 State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 1 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 2 
amendment, the G overnor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 3 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 4 
further  5 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 6 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 7 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  8 
SUMMARY  9 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require that a direct 10 
initiative pet ition contain signatures of at least 15% of the registered voters in each 11 
county.  The Constitution of Maine currently requires a petition to contain a number of 12 
signatures equal to at least 10% of the total vote for Governor cast in the last 13 
gubernatorial  election.  14 
This resolution requires the Secretary of State to hold at least one public debate on 15 
the measure proposed in the petition in each senatorial district at which the full text of the 16 
measure and any amended form, substitute or recommendation of th e Legislature must be 17 
read aloud in its entirety.  18 
 
