 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 464
S.P. 158 In Senate, February 7, 2017
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services To Facilitate the  Scheduling of Transportation for Persons with 
Disabilities
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator VOLK of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative MALABY of Hancock and
Senators: BRAKEY of  Androscoggin, CHIPMAN  of Cumberland, Representatives: DENNO 
of Cumberland, HAMANN  of South  Portland,  HYMANSON  of York, PERRY of Calais, 
VACHON of Scarborough.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1242(01) -1 
 Whereas, individuals with disabilities may experience difficulty navigating the 1 
process of scheduling transportation to necessary appointments; and  2 
Whereas, the consequences for an individual with a disability that may result from a 3 
failure of scheduled tr ansportation can be serious and dangerous; and  4 
Whereas, it is important that the State have the means to monitor the provision of 5 
transportation services for individuals with disabilities, including transportation providers' 6 
on-time percentages; now, there fore, be it  7 
Sec. 1.  Implementation of statewide mobile application. Resolved: That the 8 
office of aging and disability services within the Department of Health and Human 9 
Services shall develop and maintain an accessible central database of transportation 10 
provider information and shall implement a statewide mobile application to facilitate the 11 
scheduling of transportation services for individuals with disabilities. The central 12 
database of transportation provider information must be accessible by transportati on 13 
providers and must store necessary identifying information that enables individuals who 14 
schedule transportation to enter only a unique identification number.  The statewide 15 
mobile application must allow transportation providers to confirm their arrival time and 16 
the completion of their transport and must allow individuals to provide evaluations of 17 
providers' transportation programs and drivers and to access the scheduling function at 18 
any time using a cellular telephone or other device that has an integrat ed computer and 19 
the ability to run the software application.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This resolve directs the office of aging and disability services within the Department 22 
of Health and Human Services to develop and maintain an accessible central database of 23 
transportatio n provider information and implement a statewide mobile application to 24 
facilitate the scheduling of transportation services for individuals with disabilities.  25 
 
