 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 169
H.P. 125 House of  Representatives, January 19, 2017
An Act  To Support  Sexual Assault Survivors
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MADIGAN of Waterville.
Cosponsored by Senator VOLK of Cumberland and
Representatives: BERRY of Bowdoinham, HYMANSON of York, O'NEIL of Saco,  PARKER 
of South  Berwick,  WARREN of Hallowell,  Senators: BREEN  of Cumberland, CHIPMAN  of 
Cumberland, VITELLI  of Sagadahoc.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0355(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA §3360 -M, sub -§2-A is enacted to read:  2 
2-A.  Survivor information.  The prosecutor or law enforcement agency that has 3 
jurisdiction over an alleged or suspected gross sexual assaul t shall provide written 4 
information to the alleged victim as provided in this subsection.  5 
A.  The prosecutor or law enforcement agency shall inform the alleged victim of the 6 
right to undergo a forensic examination.  7 
B.  The prosecutor or law enforcement age ncy shall inform the alleged victim of the 8 
right to receive the results and any report resulting from a forensic examination, 9 
including a DNA profile match, a toxicology report and other results from the 10 
examination, unless the prosecutor or law enforcemen t agency has determined that 11 
disclosure to the alleged victim may impede or compromise an ongoing investigation 12 
or an ongoing prosecution.  13 
Sec. 2.  5 MRSA §3360 -M, sub -§6 is enacted to read:  14 
6.  Retention of forensic examination results.  The following pro visions govern 15 
retention of the results of a forensic examination and subsequent any report resulting 16 
from the examination and govern the destruction or disposal of the results and report.  17 
A.  The prosecutor or law enforcement agency that has custody of th e results of a 18 
forensic exam and any report arising from that forensic exam shall retain the results 19 
and report until the expiration of the period of the statute of limitations applicable 20 
under Title 17 -A, subsection 8.  The prosecutor or law enforcement a gency may not 21 
impose any charge in addition to the charge for the examination under subsection 2 22 
for retention of the results and report.  23 
B.  At least 60 days prior to destroying or disposing of the results and any report, the 24 
prosecutor or law enforcement  agency shall provide notice to the alleged victim of 25 
the intended destruction or disposal.  If the alleged victim objects to destruction or 26 
disposal, the prosecutor or law enforcement agency shall retain the results and report 27 
as provided in rules adopted  pursuant to this subsection.  28 
The board shall adopt rules regarding retention, destruction and disposal of the results and 29 
any report from a forensic examination under this subsection.  Rules adopted pursuant to 30 
this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 31 
2-A. 32 
Sec. 3.  25 MRSA §2915, sub -§§5 and 6 are enacted to read:  33 
5.  Right to forensic examination; results and report.  A prosecutor or law 34 
enforcement agency shall provide written information to an alleged vi ctim of gross sexual 35 
assault regarding the alleged victim's right to undergo a forensic examination.  The 36 
prosecutor or law enforcement agency must inform the alleged victim of the right to 37 
receive the results of the forensic examination and any report res ulting from the forensic 38 
examination, including a DNA profile match, a toxicology report and other results from 39 
the examination, unless the prosecutor or law enforcement agency has determined that 40 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0355(01) -1 
 disclosure to the alleged victim may impede or compromise a n ongoing investigation or 1 
an ongoing prosecution.  2 
6.  Forensic examination records retention and disposal.  The following 3 
provisions govern the retention and destruction or disposal of the records of the results of 4 
a forensic examination under subsection 5 and any report resulting from the examination.  5 
A.  The prosecutor or law enforcement agency that has custody of the results and any 6 
report shall retain the results and report until the expiration of the period of the statute 7 
of limitations applicable und er Title 17 -A, subsection 8.  Notwithstanding Title 5, 8 
section 3360 -M, subsection 2, the prosecutor or law enforcement agency may not 9 
impose any charge for retention of the results and report.  10 
B.  At least 60 days prior to the end of the statute of limitat ions period under 11 
paragraph A, the prosecutor or law enforcement agency shall provide notice to the 12 
alleged victim of the prosecutor's or law enforcement agency's intention to destroy or 13 
dispose of the examination results and any reports.  If the alleged v ictim objects to 14 
the destruction or disposal, the prosecutor or law enforcement agency shall retain the 15 
results and report as provided in rules adopted pursuant to this subsection.  16 
The Chief of the State Police shall adopt rules regarding retention and des truction or 17 
disposal of the results and any report from a forensic examination under this section.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
This bill enacts protections for alleged victims of gross sexual assault that mirror 20 
protections provided in federal law.  The bill contains the foll owing provisions.  21 
1.  The bill requires a prosecutor or law enforcement agency to provide written 22 
information to an alleged victim concerning the right to undergo a forensic examination 23 
and the right to receive the results and any report resulting from a f orensic examination 24 
unless disclosure to the alleged victim could impede or compromise an ongoing 25 
investigation or an ongoing prosecution.  26 
2.  The bill requires the prosecutor or law enforcement agency that has custody of the 27 
results and any report to reta in the results and any report without charge until the 28 
expiration of the period of the statute of limitations.  The bill requires the prosecutor or 29 
law enforcement agency, at least 60 days prior to destroying or disposing of the results 30 
and report, to prov ide notice of the intended destruction or disposal to the victim and 31 
allows for further retention upon the objection of the victim.  The bill provides for routine 32 
technical rulemaking by the Chief of the State Police regarding retention and destruction 33 
or disposal of the results and any report.  34 
 
