 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
 Thursday, March 22, 2018 Page 14  
 
SENATE PAPERS 
 
 
(3-1)  Bill "An Act To Amend the Maine Life and Hea lth Insurance Guaranty Association Act" 
S.P. 718  L.D. 1875 
 
Presented by Senator WHITTEMORE of Somerset.  (GOVE RNOR'S BILL) 
 
 
Committee on INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES  suggested and ordered printed. 
 
 
_________________________________ 
 
 
ORDERS 
 
Joint Orders 
 
 
(4-1)  On motion by Senator LANGLEY  of Hancock, the following Joint Order: 
S.P. 717 
 
STATE OF MAINE  
128 TH  LEGISLATURE 
 
WHEREAS, the members of the Task Force on Maine's 21st Centu ry Economy and 
Workforce worked together in a nonpartisan manner, with input from the State's businesses, 
education community and workforce and policy expert s, to develop unanimous 
recommendations for targeted investments in places where workforce barriers were identified in 
order to provide some immediate alleviation of work force shortages in priority sectors; and 
WHEREAS, the Task Force on Maine’s 21st Century Economy and Workforce focused 
most of its recommendations on the health care sect or, while there are other priority sectors in 
the State, such as retail trade, professional and b usiness services and the hospitality industry; and 
WHEREAS, the Task Force on Maine’s 21st Century Economy and Workforce 
recommended that the task force be authorized to co ntinue its important work in order to develop 
additional recommendations to address workforce iss ues in these additional priority sectors; now, 
therefore, be it 
  
 Thursday, March 22, 2018 Page 15  
 
ORDERED, the House concurring, that the Task Force on Maine' s 21st Century Economy 
and Workforce, established by Joint Order 2017, S.P . 294, referred to in this order as "the task 
force," is reestablished and authorized to continue  its work as follows. 
1. Appointments; composition.  Notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the task force con sists of 
members appointed as follows: 
A.  Two members of the Senate, appointed by the Pre sident of the Senate, including one 
member of the party holding the largest and one mem ber of the party holding the 2nd 
largest number of seats in the Senate; 
B.  Two members of the House of Representatives, ap pointed by the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives, including one member of t he party holding the largest and one 
member of the party holding the 2nd largest number of seats in the House of 
Representatives; 
C.  One member representing the interests of the Ma ine Community College System, 
appointed by the President of the Senate; 
D.  One member representing the interests of the Un iversity of Maine System, appointed 
by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; 
E.  One member representing the interests of appren ticeship programs in the State, 
appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representa tives; 
F.  One member representing the interests of provid ers and teachers of adult education in 
the State, appointed by the President of the Senate ; 
G.  One member representing the interests of retail  trade, professional and business 
services or the hospitality industry, appointed by the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives; 
H.  One member representing the statewide interests  of the business community, 
appointed by the President of the Senate; 
I.  One member representing the interests of a Main e business that employs more than 
1,000 workers, appointed by the President of the Se nate; and 
J.  One member representing the interests of a Main e business that employs fewer than 
1,000 workers, appointed by the Speaker of the Hous e of Representatives. 
The President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall invite to 
participate as members of the task force the Commis sioner of Education, or the commissioner's 
designee, and the Commissioner of Labor, or the com missioner's designee. 
2.  Chairs.  The first-named Senator is the Senate chair of the  task force and the first-named 
member of the House of Representatives is the House  chair of the task force.  The chairs may 
invite the participation of interested parties and stakeholders who represent the interests of those 
sectors of industry that have experienced significa nt workforce shortages and who are not task 
force members. 
3.  Appointments; convening.  All appointments must be made no later than 15 day s 
following passage of this order. The appointing aut horities shall notify the Executive Director of 
the Legislative Council once all appointments have been made. When the appointment of all 
members has been completed, the chairs of the task force may call and convene the first meeting 
of the task force. If 15 days or more after the pas sage of this order a majority of but not all 
appointments have been made, the chairs may request  authority and the Legislative Council may 
grant authority for the task force to meet and cond uct its business. 
  
 Thursday, March 22, 2018 Page 16  
 
4. Duties.  The task force shall develop strategies to make ta rgeted and strategic investments 
in the State's workforce and businesses; to expand partnerships among the State's workers, 
educators and businesses to specifically address wo rkforce needs and worker training; to develop 
strategies for attracting, retaining and training M aine workers in sectors of industry most acutely 
affected by workforce shortages, as identified in p riority order by the Maine Department of 
Labor, including retail trade, professional and bus iness services and the hospitality industry; and 
to help improve the ability of small businesses to innovate and expand. 
5. Compensation.  The legislative members of the task force are enti tled to receive the 
legislative per diem, as defined in the Maine Revis ed Statutes, Title 3, section 2, and 
reimbursement for travel and other necessary expens es related to their attendance at authorized 
meetings of the task force. Public members not othe rwise compensated by their employers or 
other entities that they represent are entitled to receive reimbursement of necessary expenses and, 
upon a demonstration of financial hardship, a per d iem equal to the legislative per diem for their 
attendance at authorized meetings of the task force . 
6. Quorum.  A quorum is a majority of the members of the task force, including those 
members invited to participate who have accepted th e invitation to participate. 
7. Staffing.  The Legislative Council shall contract for necessa ry staff support for the task 
force during the legislative session and may contra ct for such staff support for a longer period to 
the extent needed and if sufficient funding is avai lable. At the request of the task force, the 
Legislative Council may provide drafting assistance  to the task force during the legislative 
session and other staffing support to the task forc e when the Legislature is not in session. 
8. Reports.  No later than November 7, 2018, the task force sha ll submit a final report that 
includes its findings and recommendations, includin g suggested legislation, to the Second 
Regular Session of the 128th Legislature. 
 
 
_________________________________ 
 
 
An Expression of Legislative Sentiment recognizing:  
 
  
