 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1553
S.P. 544 In Senate, April 27, 2017
An Act  To Protect  the Rights of Public Employees To Determine  
Their Collective Bargaining Agent
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Representative WARD of Dedham  and
Senators: MASON of Androscoggin,  President  THIBODEAU  of Waldo,  VOLK of 
Cumberland, WHITTEMORE of Somerset,  Representatives: ESPLING of New Gloucester, 
FREDETTE of Newport, SIROCKI of Scarborough, WINSOR of Norway.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0463(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  26 MRSA §967, as amended by PL 1991, c. 622, Pt. O, §7, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
§967.  Determination of bargaining agent  4 
1.  Voluntary recognition.  Any public employee organization  may file a request 5 
with a public employer alleging that a majority of the public employees in an appropriate 6 
bargaining unit wish to be represented for the purpose of collective bargaining between 7 
the public employer and the employees' organization. Such a request shall  must  describe 8 
the grouping of jobs or positions which  that constitute the unit claimed to be appropriate 9 
and shall  must  include a demonstration of majority support. Such a request for 10 
recognition shall  must  be granted by the public employer , unless the public employer 11 
desires that an election determine whether the organization represents a majority of the 12 
members in the bargaining unit.  13 
2.  Elections.  The executive director of the board, or a designee, upon the signed 14 
request of a public em ployer alleging that one or more public employees or public 15 
employee organizations have presented to it a claim to be recognized as the representative 16 
of a bargaining unit of public employees, or upon the signed petition of at least 30% of a 17 
bargaining uni t of public employees that they desire to be represented by an organization 18 
or pursuant to a bargaining agent recertification required by subsection 3 , shall conduct a 19 
secret ballot election to determine whether the organization represents a majority of th e 20 
members in the bargaining unit.  Such an election may be conducted at suitable work 21 
locations or through the United States mail, and the procedures adopted and employed 22 
must ensure that neither the employee organizations or nor the management 23 
representat ives involved in the election have access to information that would identify a 24 
voter.  Employees must be permitted to cast a ballot for a period of 7 days from the 25 
commencement of the election.  26 
The ballot shall  must  contain the name of such the organizatio n and that of any other 27 
organization showing written proof of at least 10% representation of the public 28 
employees within the unit, together with a choice for any public employee to designate 29 
that he the employee  does not desire to be represented by any bar gaining agent.  Where  If 30 
more than one organization is on the ballot and no one of the 3 or more choices receives a 31 
majority vote of the public employees voting, a run -off election shall  must  be held.  The 32 
run-off ballot shall  must  contain the 2 choices which that received the largest and second - 33 
largest number of votes. When an organization receives the majority of votes of those 34 
voting, the executive director of the board shall certify it as the bargaining agent.  The 35 
bargaining agent certified as represen ting a bargaining unit shall  must  be recognized by 36 
the public employer as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for all of the employees in 37 
the bargaining unit unless and until a decertification election by secret ballot shall be  is 38 
held and the bargaini ng agent declared by the executive director of the board as not 39 
representing a majority of the unit.  40 
Whenever 30% of the employees in a certified bargaining unit petition for a bargaining 41 
agent to be decertified, the procedures for conducting an election o n the question shall be  42 
are the same as for representation as bargaining agent hereinbefore set forth.  43 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0463(01) -1 
 3.  Recertification.  The executive director of the board or the director's designee 1 
shall periodically direct a secret ballot election to certify that a  majority of the employees 2 
in a certified bargaining unit desire to be represented by the unit's currently certified 3 
bargaining agent.  The recertification election must be conducted in accordance with 4 
subsection 2, except that a majority vote for purposes  of a recertification election is a 5 
majority of all employees in the bargaining unit.  6 
If the bargaining agent is not recertified by a majority vote of all employees in the 7 
bargaining unit, the executive director or the director's designee shall decertify t he 8 
bargaining agent and the bargaining unit will not be represented by that bargaining agent.  9 
If the bargaining agent is decertified in accordance with this subsection, the terms of any 10 
collective bargaining agreement that are in effect between the bargai ning unit represented 11 
by that bargaining agent and the employer remain in effect except as to dues, service fees, 12 
grievances, arbitration and any other provisions regarding the bargaining agent.  The 13 
employees in a bargaining unit that has failed to recert ify its bargaining agent pursuant to 14 
this subsection may certify a new bargaining agent pursuant to this section, except that, 15 
for a period of at least one year, the employees may not certify a new bargaining agent 16 
that is substantially similar to or affil iated with the previous bargaining agent.  17 
The executive director or the director's designee shall commence recertification elections 18 
not less than 2 years and not more than 3 years after the effective date of this subsection 19 
and shall then subsequently com mence recertification elections every even -numbered 20 
year.  Recertification elections must be conducted no earlier than August 1st and no later 21 
than December 1st in any year in which they occur.  22 
No question concerning representation may be raised within one  year of a 23 
certification or attempted certification.  Where  When  there is a valid collective bargaining 24 
agreement in effect, no question concerning unit or representation  may be raised except 25 
during the period not more than 90 nor less than 60 days prior t o the expiration date of the 26 
agreement.  No question concerning representation may be raised during this period 27 
except by the executive director or the director's designee in accordance with subsection 3 28 
or by a bargaining agent, employer, employee or grou p of employees when the 29 
bargaining unit has failed to recertify its bargaining agent pursuant to subsection 3.  The 30 
not more than 90 -day nor less than 60 -day period prior to the expiration date of an 31 
agreement regarding unit determination and representation  shall  does not apply to matters 32 
of unit clarification.  33 
The bargaining agent certified by the executive director of the board as the exclusive 34 
bargaining agent shall be  is required to represent all the public employees within the unit 35 
without regard to mem bership in the organization certified as bargaining agent, provided  36 
except  that any public employee at any time may present his the employee's  grievance to 37 
the public employer and have such the grievance adjusted without the intervention of the 38 
bargaining agent, if the adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of a collective 39 
bargaining agreement then in effect and if the bargaining agent's representative has been 40 
given reasonable opportunity to be present at any meeting of the parties called for the 41 
resolution of such the grievance.  42 
Sec. 2.  26 MRSA §968, sub -§3, as amended by PL 1975, c. 564, §24, is further 43 
amended to read:  44 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR0463(01) -1 
 3.  Rule -making power.  The board may, after a public hearing, from time to time, 1 
adopt such rules of procedure as it deems  consi ders necessary for the orderly conduct of 2 
its business and for carrying out the purposes of this chapter.  These rules must include 3 
measures designed to preserve the integrity of recertification elections and the secrecy of 4 
the ballot, and must also includ e a determination of whether recertification elections may 5 
be conducted in person, by mail, by telephone, by Internet -based systems or by any other 6 
means determined to be fair, confidential and reliable.  These rules may also establish a 7 
fee schedule appli cable to an organization under consideration for bargaining agent in a 8 
recertification election for the purpose of funding such elections.   Such rules shall  must  9 
be published and made available to all interested parties.  The board shall also, upon its 10 
own initiative or upon request, issue interpretative rules interpreting the provisions of this 11 
chapter.  Such interpretative rules shall be  are advisory only and shall  are not be binding 12 
upon any court.  Such interpretative rules must be in writing and availa ble to any person 13 
interested therein.  14 
Sec. 3.  26 MRSA §979 -F, sub -§2, as amended by PL 1981, c. 277, is further 15 
amended to read:  16 
2.  Elections.  17 
A.  The executive director of the board or his the director's  designee , upon signed 18 
request of a public employ er alleging that one or more state employees or state 19 
employee organizations have presented to it a claim to be recognized as the 20 
representative of a bargaining unit of state employees, or upon signed petition of at 21 
least 30% of a bargaining unit of state employees that they desire to be represented by 22 
an organization or pursuant to a bargaining agent recertification required by 23 
paragraph F , shall conduct a secret ballot election to determine whether the 24 
organization represents a majority of the members of the bargaining unit. Such an 25 
election may be conducted at suitable work locations or through the United States 26 
mail provided, nevertheless, that the .  The  procedures adopted and employed by the 27 
Maine Labor Relations Board shall  must  maintain the anonymity of the voter from 28 
both the employee organizations and the management representatives involved.  29 
Employees must be permitted to cast a ballot for a period of 7 days from the 30 
commencement of the election.  31 
B.  The ballot shall  must  contain the name of such or ganization and that of any other 32 
organization showing written proof of at least 10% representation of the state 33 
employees within the unit, together with a choice for any state employee to designate 34 
that he the employee  does not desire to be represented by any bargaining agent. 35 
Where  When  more than one organization is on the ballot and no one of the 3 or more 36 
choices receives a majority vote of the state employees voting, a run -off election shall 37 
must  be held. The run -off ballot shall  must  contain the 2 choi ces which  that received 38 
the largest and 2nd largest number of votes. When an organization receives the 39 
majority of votes of those voting, the executive director of the board shall certify it as 40 
the bargaining agent. The bargaining agent certified as repres enting a bargaining unit 41 
shall  must  be recognized by the public employer as the sole and exclusive bargaining 42 
agent for all of the employees in the bargaining unit unless and until a decertification 43 
election by secret ballot shall be  is held and the bargai ning agent declared by the 44 
executive director of the board as not representing a majority of the unit.  45 
 
 Page 4 - 128LR0463(01) -1 
 C.  Whenever 30% of the employees in a certified bargaining unit petition for a 1 
bargaining agent to be decertified, the procedures for conducting an elec tion on the 2 
question shall be  are the same as for representation as bargaining agent hereinbefore 3 
set forth.  4 
D.  No question concerning representation may be raised within one year of a 5 
certification or attempted certification. Where  When  there is a valid collective 6 
bargaining agreement in effect, no question concerning unit or representation  may be 7 
raised except during the period not more than 90 nor less than 60 days prior to the 8 
expiration date of the agreement. Unit clarification proceedings are not sub ject to this 9 
time limitation and may be brought at any time consistent with section 979 -E, 10 
subsection 3.  No question concerning representation may be raised during this period 11 
except by the executive director or the director's designee in accordance with 12 
paragraph F or by a bargaining agent, employer, employee or group of employees 13 
when the bargaining unit has failed to recertify its bargaining agent pursuant to 14 
paragraph F.  15 
E.  The bargaining agent certified by the executive director of the board or his the 16 
director's  designee as the exclusive bargaining agent shall be  is required to represent 17 
all the public employees within the unit without regard to membership in the 18 
organization certified as bargaining agent, provided  except  that any public employee 19 
at any time may present his the employee's  grievance to the public employer and have 20 
such grievance adjusted without the intervention of the bargaining agent, if the 21 
adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of a collective bargaining agreement 22 
then in ef fect and if the bargaining agent's representative has been given reasonable 23 
opportunity to be present at any meeting of the parties called for the resolution of 24 
such grievance.  25 
F.  The executive director of the board or the director's designee shall period ically 26 
direct a secret ballot election to certify that a majority of the employees in a certified 27 
bargaining unit desire to be represented by the unit's currently certified bargaining 28 
agent.  The recertification election must be conducted in accordance wit h this 29 
subsection, except that a majority vote for purposes of a recertification election is a 30 
majority of all employees in the bargaining unit.  31 
If the bargaining agent is not recertified by a majority vote of all employees in the 32 
bargaining unit, the exec utive director or the director's designee shall decertify the 33 
bargaining agent, and the bargaining unit will not be represented by that bargaining 34 
agent.  If the bargaining agent is decertified in accordance with this paragraph, the 35 
terms of any collective  bargaining agreement that are in effect between the 36 
bargaining unit represented by that bargaining agent and the employer remain in 37 
effect except as to dues, service fees, grievances, arbitration and any other provisions 38 
regarding the bargaining agent.  T he employees in a bargaining unit that has failed to 39 
recertify its bargaining agent pursuant to this paragraph may certify a new bargaining 40 
agent pursuant to this section, except that, for a period of at least one year, the 41 
employees may not certify a new bargaining agent that is substantially similar to or 42 
affiliated with the previous bargaining agent.  43 
The executive director or the director's designee shall commence recertification 44 
elections not less than 2 years and not more than 3 years after the effecti ve date of 45 
 
 Page 5 - 128LR0463(01) -1 
 this paragraph and shall then subsequently commence recertification elections every 1 
even -numbered year.  Recertification elections must be conducted no earlier than 2 
August 1st and no later than December 1st in any year in which they occur.  3 
Sec. 4.  26 MRSA §1287, as enacted by PL 1983, c. 702, is amended to read:  4 
§1287.  Determination of bargaining agent  5 
1.  Voluntary recognition.   Any judicial employee organization may file a request 6 
with the public employer alleging that a majority of the judic ial employees in an 7 
appropriate bargaining unit wish to be represented for the purpose of collective 8 
bargaining between the public employer and the employees' organization.  The request 9 
shall  must  describe the grouping of jobs or positions which  that const itute the unit 10 
claimed to be appropriate and shall  must  include a demonstration of majority support.  11 
The request for recognition shall  must  be granted by the public employer, unless the 12 
public employer desires that an election determine whether the organi zation represents a 13 
majority of the members in the bargaining unit.  14 
2.  Elections.   The executive director of the board or his the director's  designee, upon 15 
signed request of a public employer alleging that one or more judicial employees or 16 
judicial employ ee organizations have presented to it a claim to be recognized as the 17 
representative of a bargaining unit of judicial employees, or upon signed petition of at 18 
least 30% of a bargaining unit of judicial employees that they desire to be represented by 19 
an org anization or pursuant to a bargaining agent recertification required by subsection 3, 20 
paragraph E , shall conduct a secret ballot election to determine whether the organization 21 
represents a majority of the members of the bargaining unit.  Such an election m ay be 22 
conducted at suitable work locations or through the United States mail , provided that the . 23 
The procedures adopted and employed by the board shall  must  maintain the anonymity of 24 
the voter from both the employee organizations and the management represe ntatives 25 
involved.  Employees must be permitted to cast a ballot for a period of 7 days from the 26 
commencement of the election.  27 
3.  Voting.  28 
A.  The ballot shall  must  contain the name of the organization and that of any other 29 
organization showing written pr oof of at least 10% representation of the judicial 30 
employees within the unit, together with a choice for any judicial employee to 31 
designate that he the employee  does not desire to be represented by any bargaining 32 
agent.  When more than one organization is on the ballot and no one of the 3 or more 33 
choices receives a majority vote of the judicial employees voting, a runoff election 34 
shall  must  be held.  The runoff ballot shall  must  contain the 2 choices which  that 35 
received the largest and 2nd largest number of  votes.  When an organization receives 36 
the majority of votes of those voting, the executive director of the board shall certify 37 
it as the bargaining agent.  The bargaining agent certified as representing a bargaining 38 
unit shall  must  be recognized by the pu blic employer as the sole and exclusive 39 
bargaining agent for all of the employees in the bargaining unit, unless and until a 40 
decertification election by secret ballot shall be  is held and the bargaining agent 41 
declared by the executive director of the board  as not representing a majority of the 42 
unit. 43 
 
 Page 6 - 128LR0463(01) -1 
 B.  Whenever 30% of the employees in a certified bargaining unit petition for a 1 
bargaining agent to be decertified, the procedures for conducting an election on the 2 
question shall be  are the same as for represen tation as bargaining agent as set forth in 3 
this chapter.  4 
C.  No question concerning representation may be raised within one year of a 5 
certification or attempted certification.  Where  When  there is a valid collective 6 
bargaining agreement in effect, no quest ion concerning unit or representation  may be 7 
raised, except during the period not more than 90 days nor less than 60 days prior to 8 
the expiration date of the agreement.  Unit clarification proceedings are not subject to 9 
this time limitation and may be brou ght at any time consistent with section 1286, 10 
subsection 4.  No question concerning representation may be raised during this period 11 
except by the executive director or the director's designee in accordance with 12 
paragraph E or by a bargaining agent, employe r, employee or group of employees 13 
when the bargaining unit has failed to recertify its bargaining agent pursuant to 14 
paragraph E.  15 
D.  The bargaining agent certified by the executive director of the board or his the 16 
director's  designee as the exclusive barga ining agent shall be  is required to represent 17 
all the judicial employees within the unit without regard to membership in the 18 
organization certified as bargaining agent, provided  except  that any judicial employee 19 
at any time may present his the employee's  grievance to the public employer and have 20 
that grievance adjusted without the intervention of the bargaining agent, if the 21 
adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of a collective bargaining agreement 22 
then in effect and if the bargaining agent's repres entative has been given reasonable 23 
opportunity to be present at any meeting of the parties called for the resolution of that 24 
grievance.  25 
E.  The executive director of the board or the director's designee shall periodically 26 
direct a secret ballot election to  certify that a majority of the employees in a certified 27 
bargaining unit desire to be represented by the unit's currently certified bargaining 28 
agent.  The recertification election must be conducted in accordance with subsection 29 
2, except that a majority vo te for purposes of a recertification election is a majority of 30 
all employees in the bargaining unit.  31 
If the bargaining agent is not recertified by a majority vote of all employees in the 32 
bargaining unit, the executive director or the director's designee sh all decertify the 33 
bargaining agent, and the bargaining unit will not be represented by that bargaining 34 
agent.  If the bargaining agent is decertified in accordance with this paragraph, the 35 
terms of any collective bargaining agreement that are in effect bet ween the 36 
bargaining unit represented by that bargaining agent and the employer remain in 37 
effect except as to dues, service fees, grievances, arbitration and any other provisions 38 
regarding the bargaining agent.  The employees in a bargaining unit that has f ailed to 39 
recertify its bargaining agent pursuant to this paragraph may certify a new bargaining 40 
agent pursuant to this section, except that, for a period of at least one year, the 41 
employees may not certify a new bargaining agent that is substantially simil ar to or 42 
affiliated with the previous bargaining agent.  43 
The executive director or the director's designee shall commence recertification 44 
elections not less than 2 years and not more than 3 years after the effective date of 45 
 
 Page 7 - 128LR0463(01) -1 
 this paragraph and shall then sub sequently commence recertification elections every 1 
even -numbered year.  Recertification elections must be conducted no earlier than 2 
August 1st and no later than December 1st in any year in which they occur.  3 
SUMMARY  4 
This bill makes the following changes to the municipal public employees labor 5 
relations laws, the state employees labor relations laws and the judicial employees labor 6 
relations laws.  7 
1.  It adds a new requirement for recertification elections, which must start within 3 8 
years of the effective dat e of the provision and must be held every even -numbered year 9 
after that, to ensure that a majority of the employees in the collective bargaining unit 10 
support their current collective bargaining agent.  If the bargaining agent does not receive 11 
votes from a majority of the employees in the bargaining unit, the bargaining agent is 12 
decertified and will no longer represent the bargaining unit.  13 
2.  It permits employees who have decertified a bargaining agent pursuant to the new 14 
recertification election process to  certify a new bargaining agent at any time, regardless of 15 
whether a collective bargaining agreement is still in effect.  16 
3.  It permits an employee to cast a ballot for a period of 7 days from the 17 
commencement of a collective bargaining election.  18 
4.  It ad ds a requirement that the Maine Labor Relations Board adopt rules to 19 
preserve the integrity of collective bargaining recertification elections and the secrecy of 20 
the ballot, including a determination of acceptable methods for submitting a ballot.  These 21 
rules may also establish a fee schedule applicable to an organization under consideration 22 
for bargaining agent in a recertification election for the purpose of funding such elections.  23 
 
