 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 87
S.P. 36 In Senate,  January  11, 2017
An Act  To Require  Screening for Cytomegalovirus in Newborn 
Infants
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BREEN of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative DENNO of Cumberland and
Senators: GRATWICK  of Penobscot, MILLETT  of Cumberland, Representatives: COOPER of 
Yarmouth, LONGSTAFF of Waterville,  MADIGAN of Waterville.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0210(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง1534 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1534.  Cytomegalovirus public education and testing  3 
1.  Required testing.   A hospital, birthing center or other birthing service shall test 4 
newborn in fants, or cause them to be tested, for the presence of cytomegalovirus by 5 
means of a saliva or urine sample no later than 21 days after birth.  6 
2.  Religious objection exemption.   The requirement under this section that a 7 
newborn infant must be tested for t he presence of cytomegalovirus does not apply to a 8 
child if the parents of that child object on the grounds that a test conflicts with their 9 
religious tenets and practices.  10 
3.  Report.   A hospital, birthing center or other birthing service that tests a new born 11 
infant pursuant to this section shall report to the department aggregate data on the testing, 12 
including, but not limited to, the number of infants born, the number tested for 13 
cytomegalovirus, the results of the screening and testing and the type of sc reening sample 14 
used.  15 
4.  Public education.   The department shall provide public educational resources to 16 
inform pregnant women and women who may become pregnant that include, but are not 17 
limited to, information regarding the incidence of cytomegalovirus, t he transmission of 18 
cytomegalovirus during and before pregnancy, birth defects caused by congenital 19 
cytomegalovirus, methods of diagnosing congenital cytomegalovirus, available 20 
preventive measures and resources for the family of an infant born with congenit al 21 
cytomegalovirus.  The department may solicit and accept the assistance of relevant 22 
medical associations or community resources to develop, promote and distribute the 23 
public educational resources.  24 
5.  Rulemaking.   The department may adopt rules to implem ent this section.  Rules 25 
adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, 26 
chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 27 
SUMMARY  28 
This bill requires the testing of all newborn infants for cytomegalovirus by a saliva or 29 
urine sample no la ter than 21 days after birth.  The Department of Health and Human 30 
Services is required to develop public educational materials regarding cytomegalovirus 31 
for pregnant women and women who may become pregnant.  32 
 
