 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 224
S.P. 70 In Senate,  January  24, 2017
An Act  Regarding Actions for  Failure To Follow Condominium 
Association Requirements
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator COLLINS of York.
Cosponsored by Representative SHERMAN  of Hodgdon and
Senators: HILL of  York, KEIM of Oxford,  WHITTEMORE of Somerset, Representatives:  
BAILEY of Saco,  BRADSTREET  of Vassalboro,  MOONEN of Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0499(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  33 MRSA §1603 -111, 2nd ¶, as enacted by PL 1981, c. 699, is amended 2 
to read:  3 
If the wrong accrued during any period of declarant control, and if the association 4 
gives the declarant reas onable notice of and an opportunity to defend against the action, 5 
the declarant who then controlled the association is liable to the  association or to any unit 6 
owner:  (1)  For all tort losses not covered by insurance suffered by the association or that 7 
unit owner; and (2)  for all costs which  that the association would not have incurred but 8 
for the breach of contract or other wrongful act or omission.  In any case where the 9 
declarant is liable to the association under this section, the declarant is also l iable for all 10 
litigation expenses, including reasonable attorneys'  attorney's  fees, incurred by the 11 
association.  During any period in which the control of the declarant is limited to the 12 
power to approve actions of the association or executive board, as p rovided in section 13 
1603 -103, subsection (d), the declarant shall be  is liable under this section only for losses 14 
caused by the exercise of declarant's right of disapproval.  Any statute of limitation 15 
affecting the association's right of action under this s ection is tolled until the period of 16 
declarant control terminates.  After the association provides reasonable notice and an 17 
opportunity to be heard, the association may bring an action against a unit owner or a 18 
group of unit owners for failure to follow re quirements imposed by the declaration, 19 
bylaws or adopted rules and regulations of the association.  If the unit owner or the group 20 
of unit owners is found liable, the unit owner or the group of unit owners is also liable for 21 
all litigation expenses includi ng reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the association in 22 
bringing the action.  After a unit owner or a group of unit owners provides reasonable 23 
notice and an opportunity to be heard, the unit owner or the group of unit owners may 24 
bring an action agains t the association for failure to follow requirements imposed by the 25 
declaration, bylaws or adopted rules and regulations of the association.  If the association 26 
is found liable, it is also liable for all litigation expenses, including reasonable attorney's  27 
fees incurred by the unit owner or the group of unit owners in bringing the action.   A unit 28 
owner is not precluded from bringing an action contemplated by this section because he 29 
the unit owner  is a unit owner or a  member or officer of the association.  L iens resulting 30 
from judgments against the association are governed by section 1603 -117, other liens 31 
affecting the condominium.  32 
SUMMARY  33 
This bill provides that, following reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard, a 34 
condominium association may bring an action against a unit owner or a group of unit 35 
owners for violating requirements imposed by association documents and that, following 36 
reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard, a unit owner or a group of unit owners 37 
may bring an action against an  association for violating requirements imposed by those 38 
same documents.   39 
 
