 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 39
S.P. 18 In Senate,  January  10, 2017
An Act  To Clarify Landowners' Liability Regarding Public Access
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin.
Cosponsored by Representative BLACK  of Wilton and
Senator: DAVIS  of Piscataquis, Representatives:  SKOLFIELD of Weld,  TIMBERLAKE of 
Turner.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0046(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  14 MRSA §159 -A, sub -§4, ¶B, as amended by PL 1995, c. 566, §1, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
B.    For an injury suffered in any case where permission to pursue any recreational or 4 
harves ting activities was granted for a consideration other than the consideration, if 5 
any, paid to the following:  6 
 (1)  The landowner or the landowner's agent by the State; or  7 
 (2)  The landowner or, the landowner's agent , lessee or sublessee or the holder of 8 
an easement from the landowner  for use of the premises on which the injury was 9 
suffered, as long as the premises are not used primarily for commercial 10 
recreational purposes and as long as the user has not been granted the exclusive 11 
right to make use of the premises for recreational activities; or  12 
SUMMARY  13 
Under current law, liability for recreational or harvesting activities is not limited for 14 
an injury suffered in any case where permission to pursue any recreational or harvesting 15 
activities was granted for a  consideration other than consideration paid to the landowner 16 
or the landowner's agent for use of the premises on which the injury was suffered, as long 17 
as certain conditions exist.  This bill provides that liability is not limited where 18 
permission was gra nted for a consideration other than consideration paid to the 19 
landowner, the landowner's agent, lessee or sublessee or the holder of an easement from 20 
the landowner, as long as certain conditions exist.  21 
 
