 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 195
H.P. 151 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2017
An Act  Amending the So-called "Good Samaritan" Laws
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GINZLER  of Bridgton.
Cosponsored by Senator KEIM of Oxford and
Representatives: GUERIN  of Glenburn, LOCKMAN of Amherst, MOONEN of Portland, 
PICKETT of  Dixfield,  STEARNS of Guilford,  TUELL of East Machias, WADSWORTH of 
Hiram, WARD  of Dedham.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0509(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  14 MRSA ยง164, as amended by PL 1977, c. 69, is further amended to read:  2 
ยง164.  Immunity from civil liability  3 
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of any public or private and spe cial law, 4 
any person who voluntarily, without the expectation of monetary or other compensation 5 
from the person aided or treated, renders first aid, emergency treatment or rescue 6 
assistance to a person who is unconscious, ill, injured or in need of rescue assistance, 7 
shall  or provides shelter or housing to a homeless person is  not be liable for damages for 8 
injuries alleged to have been sustained by such person nor for damages for the death of 9 
such person alleged to have occurred by reason of an act or omiss ion in the rendering of 10 
such first aid, emergency treatment or rescue assistance, or the providing of shelter or 11 
housing,  unless it is established that such the injuries or such death were caused willfully, 12 
wantonly or recklessly or by gross negligence on the part of such person. This section 13 
shall apply  applies  to members or employees of nonprofit volunteer or governmental 14 
ambulance, rescue or emergency units, whether or not a user or service fee may be 15 
charged by the nonprofit unit or the governmental ent ity and whether or not the members 16 
or employees receive salaries or other compensation from the nonprofit unit or the 17 
governmental entity. This section applies to a person, nonprofit organization or faith - 18 
based organization that, voluntarily and without th e expectation of monetary or other 19 
compensation from the person aided, provides housing or shelter to a homeless person.   20 
This section shall  does not be construed to  require a person who is ill or injured to be 21 
administered first aid or emergency treatment  if such that person objects thereto  to first 22 
aid or emergency treatment  on religious grounds. This section shall  does not apply if such 23 
first aid or emergency treatment or assistance is rendered on the premises of a hospital or 24 
clinic.  25 
SUMMARY  26 
This bill a mends to the so -called "Good Samaritan" statute, which provides immunity 27 
to a person who renders certain assistance to another person for no expectation of 28 
monetary or other compensation from the person aided. It adds immunity for any person, 29 
nonprofit org anization or faith -based organization that provides shelter or housing to a 30 
homeless person.  31 
 
