 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1363
H.P. 940 House of  Representatives,  April 6, 2017
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review  of Portions of Chapter 11:  
Rules Governing the Controlled Substances  Prescription Monitoring 
Program and  Prescription of Opioid  Medications, a Late-filed  
Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Health and Human Services
(EMERGENCY)
Reported by Representative HYMANSON of York for the Department of Health and  
Human Services  pursuant to the Maine  Revised Statutes, Title 5, section  8072 and approved for 
introduction by  a majority of the Legislative Council.
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed 
pursuant to Joint Rule 218.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2305(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A requires 3 
legislative aut horization before major substantive agency rules may be finally adopted by 4 
the agency; and  5 
Whereas, the above -named major substantive rule has been submitted to the 6 
Legislature outside the legislative rule acceptance period; and  7 
Whereas, immediate enactmen t of this resolve is necessary to record the 8 
Legislature's position on final adoption of the rule; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following le gislation as 11 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore, be it  13 
Sec. 1.  Adoption.  Resolved:  That final adoption of portions of Chapter 11:  14 
Rules Governing the Controlled Substances Prescription Moni toring Program and 15 
Prescription of Opioid Medications, a provisionally adopted major substantive rule of the 16 
Department of Health and Human Services that has been submitted to the Legislature for 17 
review pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chap ter 375, subchapter 2 -A 18 
outside the legislative rule acceptance period, is authorized.  19 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 20 
legislation takes effect when approved.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This resolve provides for legislative review of p ortions of Chapter 11:  Rules 23 
Governing the Controlled Substances Prescription Monitoring Program and Prescription 24 
of Opioid Medications, a major substantive rule of the Department of Health and Human 25 
Services that was filed outside the legislative rule ac ceptance period.  26 
 
