 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1469
H.P. 1008 House of  Representatives,  April 18, 2017
An Act  Relating  to Firearms Exclusions in Certain Locations
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative KINNEY of  Knox.
Cosponsored by Representative WARD of Dedham,  Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin and
Representatives: CEBRA of Naples, O'CONNOR of Berwick, SKOLFIELD of Weld, STETKIS of  Canaan, SUTTON of Warren,  WOOD of Greene,  Senator: DAVIS of Piscataquis.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0814(0 1)-1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  25 MRSA ยง2014 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง2014.  Assumption of responsibility if firearms prohibited  3 
1.  Assumption of responsibility.  A person that prohibits the possession of firearms 4 
on pr operty by an individual otherwise authorized to carry a firearm thereby assumes 5 
absolute custodial responsibility for the safety and defense of the individual prohibited 6 
from possessing a firearm while that individual is on that property and while that 7 
individual is on any property that individual is required to traverse in order to travel to 8 
and from the location where that individual's firearm is stored.  9 
2.  Scope of responsibility.  The responsibility under subsection 1 of the person that 10 
prohibits the p ossession of firearms on property for the safety and defense of the 11 
individual prohibited from possessing a firearm extends to artificial and natural hazards 12 
that are able to be defended against, to the conduct of other invitees, trespassers and 13 
employees of the person and to vicious animals and wild animals.  14 
3.  Liability.  The following provisions govern liability of persons responsible under 15 
subsection 1.  16 
A.  An individual prohibited from possessing a firearm who is otherwise authorized 17 
to carry a firear m and who is injured, suffers bodily injury or death or incurs 18 
economic loss or expense, property damage or any other compensable loss as the 19 
result of conduct occurring on property on which the possessing of a firearm is 20 
prohibited has a cause of action a gainst the person that prohibits the possession of 21 
firearms on that property.  In addition to damages, the individual is entitled to 22 
reasonable attorney's fees, expert witness costs and other costs necessary to bring the 23 
cause of action.  24 
B.  The statute of  limitations for a cause of action under paragraph A is 2 years from 25 
the date of the occurrence giving rise to the damages, loss or injury.  26 
4.  Requirements to prevail in action.  To prevail in an action brought under this 27 
section, the plaintiff must show by a preponderance of the evidence that:  28 
A.  The plaintiff was authorized to carry a firearm at the time of the incident giving 29 
rise to the action;  30 
B.  The plaintiff was prohibited from carrying a firearm on the property where the 31 
incident occurred because  the defendant prohibited the possession of firearms on the 32 
property or the plaintiff was on property that the plaintiff was required to traverse in 33 
order to travel to and from the location where the plaintiff's firearm was stored and to 34 
and from property on which the defendant prohibited the possession of firearms when 35 
the incident occurred; and  36 
C.  The defendant was not required to prohibit the possession of firearms on the 37 
property by state or federal law but possession was prohibited by choice of the 38 
defendant.  39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0814(01) -1 
 5.  Signs.  A notice or sign posted by the choice of a person stating that firearms are 1 
prohibited on the property must also contain language citing this section and stating that 2 
any individual prohibited from possessing a firearm on the property who otherwise would 3 
carry a firearm on the property is under the custodial responsibility of the person 4 
prohibiting the possession of firearms.  5 
6.  Construction.  This section must be liberally construed to effectuate its purpose.  6 
SUMMARY  7 
This bill provide s that a person that prohibits the possession of firearms on property 8 
by an individual otherwise authorized to carry a firearm thereby assumes absolute 9 
custodial responsibility for the safety and defense of the individual prohibited from 10 
possessing a firea rm while that individual is on that property and while that individual is 11 
on any property that individual is required to traverse in order to travel to and from the 12 
location where that individual's firearm is stored.  An individual prohibited from 13 
possessi ng a firearm who is otherwise authorized to carry a firearm and who is injured, 14 
suffers bodily injury or death or incurs economic loss or expense, property damage or any 15 
other compensable loss as the result of conduct occurring on property on which the 16 
possession of a firearm is prohibited has a cause of action against the person that 17 
prohibits the possession of firearms on that property.  18 
 
