 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 185
H.P. 141 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2017
An Act  To Establish a Pilot Project for Medicaid Reimbursement 
for Acupuncture Treatment of Substance  Abuse Disorders
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MALABY of Hancock.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  CHACE of Durham, HARVELL of Farmington,  HEAD of 
Bethel, NADEAU of Winslow, PERRY of  Calais.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0421(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22-A MRSA ยง203, sub -ยง5 is enacted to read:  2 
5.  Pilot projects.  The department shall develop pilot projects and demonstration 3 
projects required by law, and shall apply for any authoriza tion necessary to undertake 4 
such projects.  5 
Sec. 2.  Acupuncture pilot project.  By January 1, 2018, the Department of 6 
Health and Human Services and the department's office of substance abuse and mental 7 
health services shall apply for authorization from the  United States Department of Health 8 
and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to develop a pilot 9 
project in accordance with this section to treat alcohol abuse disorders, substance abuse 10 
disorders and co -occurring disorders using the N ational Acupuncture Detoxification 11 
Association auricular acupuncture protocol.  12 
1.  Pilot project standards.  The treatment under the pilot project must be performed 13 
by project staff who have been trained to perform the National Acupuncture 14 
Detoxification A ssociation auricular acupuncture protocol, who practice acupuncture 15 
within the scope of their license in this State and whose licenses to practice are in good 16 
standing.  The Department of Health and Human Services and the department's office of 17 
substance a buse and mental health services shall consult with a statewide association of 18 
licensed acupuncturists to establish treatment standards that are consistent with the 19 
National Acupuncture Detoxification Association auricular acupuncture protocol.  20 
2.  Patient limits and financing.  The pilot project must be limited to a finite number 21 
of patients determined by the Department of Health and Human Services and the 22 
department's office of substance abuse and mental health services and may last no longer 23 
than 2 years.  Acupuncture treatment under the project must be reimbursable as allowed 24 
under the United States Social Security Act, Title XIX and it must be developed and 25 
implemented in a manner that ensures that it will be cost -neutral or will result in savings 26 
to the MaineCare program.  27 
3.  Report.  The Department of Health and Human Services and the department's 28 
office of substance abuse and mental health services shall submit a report on the results of 29 
the pilot project, including recommendations for continuing the pr oject, to the joint 30 
standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services 31 
matters at the conclusion of the pilot project.  32 
SUMMARY  33 
This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services and the department's 34 
office of substance abuse and mental health services to apply by January 1, 2018 for 35 
authorization from the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers 36 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services to develop a pilot project to treat alcohol abuse 37 
disorde rs, substance abuse disorders and co -occurring disorders using the National 38 
Acupuncture Detoxification Association auricular acupuncture protocol.  The bill requires 39 
the department to consult with a statewide association representing licensed 40 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0421(01) -1 
 acupuncturist s in the establishment of treatment standards.  The bill requires that the 1 
treatment be provided by staff who are licensed to practice acupuncture in the State and 2 
whose licenses are in good standing.  The project may last no longer than 2 years and 3 
must b e reimbursable as allowed under the United States Social Security Act and be cost - 4 
neutral or result in savings to the MaineCare program.  The department and the office 5 
must report their findings to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 6 
jurisdiction over health and human services matters at the end of the project.  7 
 
