 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 198
H.P. 154 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2017
An Act  To Protect  Landlords from Lawsuits for  Damage or Harm 
Caused by Assistance Animals
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ORDWAY of Standish.
Cosponsored by Senator WOODSOME of York and
Representatives: HANINGTON of Lincoln, HARRINGTON of Sanford, KINNEY of Limington, PICKETT of  Dixfield, STETKIS of Canaan, STEWART of Presque Isle, TURNER 
of Burlington, Senator:  COLLINS  of York.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0786(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง4582 -A, sub -ยง3, as amended by PL 2015, c. 457, ยง3, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
3.  Assistance animals.   For any owner, lessor, sublessor, managing agent or other 4 
person having t he right to sell, rent, lease or manage a housing accommodation or any of 5 
their agents to refuse to permit the use of an assistance animal or otherwise discriminate 6 
against an individual with a physical or mental disability who uses an assistance animal at  7 
the housing accommodation unless it is shown by defense that the assistance animal 8 
poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others or the use of the assistance animal 9 
would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others or would 10 
substantially interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of the housing accommodation by 11 
others.  The use of an assistance animal may not be conditioned on the payment of a fee 12 
or security deposit, although the individual with a physical or mental disability i s liable 13 
for any damage done to the premises or facilities by such an assistance animal.  Except in 14 
cases of gross negligence, recklessness or intentional misconduct on the part of the 15 
owner, lessor, sublessor, managing agent or other person having the rig ht to sell, rent, 16 
lease or manage a housing accommodation or any of their agents, such owner, lessor, 17 
sublessor, managing agent or other person is not liable in a civil action for personal 18 
injury, death, property damage or other damages resulting from or a rising out of an 19 
occurrence involving an assistance animal at the housing accommodation.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This bill provides that a landlord is not liable in a civil action for personal injury, 22 
death, property damage or other damages caused by an assistance animal on the landlord's 23 
rental property.  24 
 
