 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 742
H.P. 522 House of  Representatives, March 2, 2017
An Act  To Allow Hemp Growers To Grow Hemp from Clones and 
To Grow Hemp Indoors
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HARVELL of  Farmington.
Cosponsored by Senator DILL of Penobscot and
Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, BRADSTREET of Vassalboro, FARRIN of Norridgewock, HILLIARD of Belgrade,  O'CONNOR of  Berwick,  POULIOT of Augusta, SIMMONS  of 
Waldoboro, VACHON  of Scarborough.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1620(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, current law does not allow for the cultivation of industrial hemp from 3 
tissue samples take n from live crops grown from certified seeds or from a cutting from a 4 
mature industrial hemp plant and these propagation techniques allow for greater control 5 
in terms of biological selection, ensuring production of hemp crops and certifiable seeds 6 
that do not exceed permitted tetrahydrocannabinol levels for industrial hemp; and  7 
Whereas, current rules do not allow for the licensing of industrial hemp grown 8 
indoors and indoor production provides a greater ability to regulate the growing 9 
environment for the co ntrolled studies necessary for a new industry in Maine; and  10 
Whereas, allowing indoor production and new propagation techniques will help 11 
Maine to move forward in the industrial hemp industry and produce scientific research 12 
that provides value in many comme rcial applications to benefit Maine’s economy; and  13 
Whereas, academic research partnerships and projects that could benefit from new 14 
propagation techniques and indoor production are slated to begin in early 2017 and 15 
provide significant benefits to Maine’s r esearch institutions and economy; and  16 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 17 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 18 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the pu blic peace, health and safety; now, 19 
therefore,  20 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  21 
Sec. 1.  7 MRSA §2231, sub -§§1, 2 and 6,  as amended by PL 2015, c. 202, §1, 22 
are further amended to read:  23 
1.  Definitions.   As used in this chapter,  unless the context otherwise indicates, 24 
"industrial hemp" means any variety of Cannabis sativa L. with a 25 
delta -9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that does not exceed 0.3% on a dry weight 26 
basis and that is grown or possessed by a licensed grower in comp liance with this chapter.  27 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, "certified seed source" 28 
means a source of hemp seeds that are certified by a 3rd party as producing hemp having 29 
a delta -9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that do es not exceed 0.3% on a dry weight 30 
basis.  As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, "clone" means an 31 
industrial hemp plant produced using a cutting from any part of a mature industrial hemp 32 
plant.  33 
2.  Growing permitted.   Notwithstan ding any other provision of law, a person may 34 
plant, grow, harvest, possess, process, sell and buy industrial hemp if that person holds a 35 
license issued pursuant to subsection 4.  A person licensed pursuant to subsection 4 may 36 
plant, grow and harvest only hemp that is grown from seeds acquired from a certified 37 
seed source , grown from a clone or propagated from tissue cultures removed from live 38 
crops grown from seeds acquired from a certified seed source .  A person licensed 39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1620(01) -1 
 pursuant to subsection 4 may acqui re hemp seeds directly from a certified seed source or 1 
from a hemp seed distributor licensed in this State distributing hemp seeds pursuant to 2 
subsection 2 -A. 3 
6.  Rules.   The commissioner shall adopt rules to establish an application fee, a 4 
license fee, pe r acre fees for monitoring, sampling and testing and guidelines for 5 
monitoring the growth and harvest of industrial hemp.  The commissioner shall adopt 6 
rules to provide for the application and licensing of industrial hemp grown indoors.   7 
Rules adopted purs uant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, 8 
chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A.  9 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 10 
legislation takes effect when approved.  11 
SUMMARY  12 
This bill provides that a perso n licensed to grow industrial hemp may, in addition to 13 
existing permitted activities, grow industrial hemp from a clone or tissue cultures 14 
removed from live crops grown from certified seeds.  It also requires the Commissioner 15 
of Agriculture, Conservation a nd Forestry to adopt rules to allow for licensing of indoor 16 
industrial hemp production.  17 
 
