 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1716
H.P. 1196 House of  Representatives, December  22, 2017
An Act  To Protect  Persons Who Provide Assistance to Law  
Enforcement Dogs,  Search and Rescue Dogs and Service Dogs
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Received by the Clerk of the House on December 19, 2017.  Referred to  the Committee on 
Judiciary pursuant to  Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed pursuant to  Joint  Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FAY of Raymond.
Cosponsored by Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland and
Representatives: BAILEY  of Saco, BATTLE  of South Portland, COREY  of Windham, 
ESPLING of New  Gloucester, HARRINGTON of Sanford, MASTRACCIO  of Sanford,  
PERRY of  Calais, TUELL  of East Machias.

Page 1 - 128LR2526(01)-11 Be it enacted  by the People of  the State of Maine as  follows:
2 Sec. 1.  14 MRSA  ยง164-B is enacted  to read:
3 ยง164-B.  Immunity  from civil liability for assistance given  to law enforcement  dogs, 
4 search and rescue dogs and service dogs
5 1.  Definitions.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
6 following terms  have the following  meanings.
7 A.  "Emergency medical services person"  means  a person who is licensed  to provide 
8 emergency medical treatment.  "Emergency medical  services  person"  includes 
9 emergency medical  technicians and paramedics.
10 B.  "Law enforcement dog" means a dog trained for law enforcement use that is 
11 actively certified pursuant to federal, national, regional  or state standards  and that is 
12 owned or maintained by a law enforcement agency  or other governmentally funded  
13 agency for law  enforcement or security  services.
14 C.  "Law enforcement dog handler" means a law enforcement officer  or security 
15 professional who is trained to partner with a law enforcement dog in the performance 
16 of the law enforcement officer's or security professional's duties, who is actively 
17 certified pursuant  to federal, national, regional or state standards and who is qualified 
18 to train, care  for and  work  with  a law enforcement dog.
19 D.  "Search and rescue  dog" means a dog that is certified as a search and rescue dog 
20 by the Department of Inland Fisheries  and Wildlife, Bureau of Warden Service or 
21 that is in training  to become a search  and rescue dog with an organization recognized  
22 by the Bureau of  Warden  Service to provide  such  training.
23 E.  "Service dog" has the same meaning as "service animal" in Title 5, section 4553, 
24 subsection 9-E.
25 2.  Immunity.  Notwithstanding any provision of any public or private and special 
26 law to the contrary,  an emergency medical  services person or a law enforcement  dog 
27 handler who voluntarily, without  the expectation of monetary or other  compensation, 
28 renders first aid, emergency  treatment or rescue  assistance to a law enforcement  dog, 
29 search and rescue  dog or service dog that is unconscious,  ill, injured or in need of rescue 
30 assistance is not liable for damages for an injury  alleged  to have  been  sustained  by the 
31 dog nor for damages for the death of the dog alleged to have  occurred by reason  of an act 
32 or omission in the rendering of the first aid, emergency treatment or rescue assistance 
33 unless it is established that the injury  or the death was caused willfully, wantonly  or 
34 recklessly or by gross  negligence  on the part of the emergency medical services person or 
35 law enforcement dog handler.
36 3.  Application.   This section  applies to a member  or employee of a nonprofit 
37 volunteer or governmental ambulance, rescue or emergency unit, whether or not a user or 
38 service fee may be charged  by the nonprofit  unit or the governmental  entity and whether 
39 or not the member or employee receives a salary or other compensation from the 
40 nonprofit unit or the governmental entity.
Page 2 - 128LR2526(01)-11 This section applies to a law enforcement dog handler  who voluntarily renders  first aid, 
2 emergency treatment or rescue assistance  to a law enforcement dog, search and rescue 
3 dog or service dog, to the extent the handler  has received training  in the medical  
4 stabilization of dogs and is authorized by the  handler's employer to provide such care.
5 This section  does not apply  if the first aid, emergency  treatment or rescue assistance  is 
6 rendered on the  premises of a veterinary hospital or clinic.
7 SUMMARY
8 This bill extends Good Samaritan  liability protection to cover emergency  medical 
9 services persons  and law enforcement dog handlers who treat law enforcement  dogs, 
10 search and rescue  dogs and  service dogs in emergency  situations.
