 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 84
S.P. 33 In Senate,  January  11, 2017
An Act  To Clarify the Contracts Used for Automobile  Sales
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MIRAMANT of Knox.
Cosponsored by Representative MASTRACCIO  of Sanford and
Senators: CYRWAY  of Kennebec, LIBBY of Androscoggin, Representatives: PARRY of 
Arundel, SPEAR of South  Thomaston.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0054(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  10 MRSA ยง1194, sub -ยง2 is enacted to read:  2 
2.  Summary of costs; buyer acknowledgment.   A dealer shall present to the buyer 3 
a concise and plain language summary in writing explaining eac h cost item to be incurred 4 
by the buyer, as well as the total of all cost items, before selling the buyer a new or used 5 
motor vehicle.  Cost items that must be summarized include, but are not limited to, the 6 
vehicle purchase price, each charge, tax and fee  pertinent to the sales agreement and, if 7 
the sale involves a financing agreement with or facilitated by the dealer, all interest and 8 
other financing costs to be paid.  The summary of the total of all cost items must include, 9 
but is not limited to, the tot al cost over the term of a financing agreement with or 10 
facilitated by the dealer.  Each of these summaries must be acknowledged by the buyer 11 
with the buyer's signature, or with the buyer's initials, immediately below the summary.  12 
Any sales agreement, or fi nancing agreement with or facilitated by the dealer, for which 13 
the dealer fails to provide these cost summaries and to receive proper acknowledgment 14 
from the buyer pursuant to this subsection is void, and the buyer is entitled to a 15 
reimbursement from the d ealer of all costs paid pursuant to that sales agreement or 16 
financing agreement.  This subsection does not preclude any remedies available to a 17 
buyer under Title 5, chapter 10 or Title 9 -A, Article 8 -A or any other remedies otherwise 18 
available to the buyer  at law or equity.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This bill requires a motor vehicle dealer to provide a buyer with a plain language 21 
written summary explaining each cost item in an agreement for the sale of a motor 22 
vehicle, including, but not limited to, the vehicle purchase pri ce, each charge, tax and fee 23 
pertinent to the agreement and all interest and other financing costs to be paid pursuant to 24 
a financing agreement with or facilitated by the dealer.  The dealer must also provide a 25 
summary of the total of all costs, including the total cost over the life of a financing 26 
agreement with or facilitated by the dealer.  If the dealer fails to provide these summaries 27 
and to obtain the buyer's written acknowledgment, the agreement is void and the buyer 28 
may recover from the dealer all c osts paid pursuant to the agreement.  29 
 
