 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 445
S.P. 147 In Senate, February 7, 2017
An Act  To Encourage Maine Consumers To Comparison-shop for 
Certain Health Care Procedures and  To Lower Health Care Costs
Reference to the Committee on Insurance  and Financial Services suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator WHITTEMORE of Somerset.
Cosponsored by Representative PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield and
Senators: BRAKEY of  Androscoggin, COLLINS of York,  CUSHING  of Penobscot, KATZ of 
Kennebec, President THIBODEAU of Waldo, Representatives: FARRIN of  Norridgewock, 
FOLEY of  Wells, WALLACE of Dexter.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0484(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA §1718 -B, sub -§2, ¶D is enacted to read:  2 
D.  A health care entity shall notify patients of their right, if covered by a health plan, 3 
to shop for services and receive payment for shared savings under a carrier's shared 4 
savings incentive program provided in accordance with Title 24 -A, section 4318 -A.  5 
A health care entity may comply with this paragraph by prominently displaying the 6 
information in a location that is readily accessibl e to patients or by providing written 7 
notice when the health care entity recommends a health care service or procedure that 8 
may qualify for a shared savings incentive payment.  9 
Sec. 2.  24-A MRSA §4318 -A is enacted to read:  10 
§4318 -A.  Shared savings incenti ve program  11 
Beginning January 1, 2018, a carrier offering a health plan in this State shall provide 12 
a shared savings incentive program that, at a minimum, meets the requirements of this 13 
section.  14 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 15 
following terms have the following meanings.  16 
A.  "Comparable health care service" means a health care service for which a carrier 17 
offers a shared savings incentive payment under a program established by the carrier 18 
pursuant to this  section.  "Comparable health care service" includes, at a minimum, a 19 
health care service in the following categories:  20 
(1)  Physical and occupational therapy services;  21 
(2)  Obstetrical and gynecological services;  22 
(3)  Radiology and imaging services;  23 
(4)  L aboratory services;  24 
(5)  Infusion therapy services;  25 
(6)  Inpatient and outpatient surgical procedures; and  26 
(7)  Outpatient, nonsurgical diagnostic tests and procedures.  27 
B.  "Program" means the shared savings incentive program established by a carrier 28 
pursu ant to this section.  29 
2.  Filing with superintendent.  Prior to offering the program to an enrollee, a 30 
carrier shall file a description of the program established by the carrier pursuant to this 31 
section with the superintendent in the manner determined by th e superintendent. The 32 
superintendent may review the filing made by the carrier to determine if the carrier's 33 
program complies with the requirements of this section.  34 
3.  Availability of program; notice to enrollees.  Except for a health plan offered 35 
through  the federally facilitated marketplace established pursuant to the federal 36 
Affordable Care Act, a carrier shall make the program available as a component of all 37 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0484(01) -1 
 health plans offered by the carrier in this State.  A carrier may make the program 1 
available as  a component of a health plan offered by the carrier through the federally 2 
facilitated marketplace. Annually at enrollment or renewal, a carrier shall provide notice 3 
about the availability of the program to an enrollee who is enrolled in a health plan 4 
eligible for the program.  5 
4.  Incentive program required.  A carrier shall develop and implement, or contract 6 
with a 3rd party to develop and implement, a program that provides incentives for an 7 
enrollee in a health plan who elects to receive a comparable heal th care service that is 8 
covered by the health plan from a provider that charges less than the average price paid 9 
by that carrier for that comparable health care service.  10 
A.  An incentive may be calculated as a percentage of the difference in price, as a fl at 11 
dollar amount or by some other reasonable methodology approved by the 12 
superintendent.  The carrier may provide the incentive as a cash payment to the 13 
enrollee or as a reduction in the enrollee's cost sharing or premium payment.  For 14 
services that are pa id for by the enrollee under the health plan's deductible provision, 15 
the carrier may provide the incentive by crediting a higher amount than the provider's 16 
actual charge toward the enrollee's deductible.  17 
B.  The program must provide an enrollee with at lea st 50% of the carrier's saved cost 18 
for each comparable health care service.  Compliance with this requirement may be 19 
demonstrated in the aggregate of health plans offered in this State based on a 20 
reasonably anticipated mix of claims.  A carrier is not requ ired to provide a payment 21 
or credit to an enrollee when the carrier's saved cost is $50 or less.  22 
C.  A carrier may determine the methodology for calculating the average price paid 23 
by the carrier for a comparable health care service and the process an enrol lee must 24 
use to document that the provider chosen by an enrollee charges less for the 25 
comparable health care service than the average price paid by that carrier.  26 
5.  Out-of-network provider.  If an enrollee elects to receive a comparable health 27 
care servic e from an out -of-network provider that results in a shared savings incentive 28 
payment, the carrier shall apply the amount paid for the comparable health care service 29 
toward the enrollee's cost sharing as specified in the enrollee's health plan as if the hea lth 30 
care service were provided by a network provider.  31 
6.  No administrative expense.  A shared savings incentive payment made by a 32 
carrier in accordance with this section is not an administrative expense of the carrier for 33 
rate development or rate filing p urposes.  34 
7.  Report.  Beginning March 1, 2019 and annually on March 1st of each year 35 
thereafter, a carrier shall file with the superintendent for the most recent calendar year the 36 
total number of shared savings incentive payments made pursuant to this sect ion, the use 37 
of comparable health care services by category of service for which shared savings 38 
incentive payments are made, the total of shared savings incentive payments made to 39 
enrollees, the average amount of shared savings incentive payments made by c ategory of 40 
service, the total savings achieved below the average prices by category of service and 41 
the total number and percentage of a carrier's enrollees that participated in the program.  42 
Beginning April 1, 2019 and annually by April 1st of each year th ereafter, the 43 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR0484(01) -1 
 superintendent shall submit an aggregate report for all carriers containing the information 1 
required by this subsection to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 2 
jurisdiction over health insurance matters.  3 
8.  Rules.  The supe rintendent may adopt rules as necessary to implement this 4 
section.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defined 5 
in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 6 
SUMMARY  7 
This bill requires all carriers offering health plans in t he State, beginning January 1, 8 
2018, to provide a shared savings incentive program as a component of all health plans, 9 
except health plans offered through the federally facilitated marketplace established 10 
pursuant to the federal Affordable Care Act.  The b ill establishes the shared savings 11 
incentive program for enrollees who elect to receive a comparable health care service that 12 
costs less than the average price paid for that service by a carrier.  The bill defines 13 
"comparable health care service" as a serv ice for which a carrier offers a shared savings 14 
incentive payment and includes, at a minimum, a health care service in the following 7 15 
categories: physical and occupational therapy services; obstetrical and gynecological 16 
services; radiology and imaging ser vices; laboratory services; infusion therapy services; 17 
inpatient and outpatient surgical procedures; and outpatient, nonsurgical diagnostic tests 18 
and procedures.  If an enrollee shops for services, the bill requires a carrier to pay that 19 
enrollee a shared savings incentive payment of at least 50% of the difference between the 20 
average amount for that comparable health care service and the amount paid, except that 21 
a payment is not required if the saved cost is $50 or less.  22 
The bill authorizes a carrier to est ablish its own methodology for calculating the 23 
average price paid by that carrier under its shared savings incentive program.  If an 24 
enrollee elects to receive health care services from an out -of-network provider that results 25 
in a shared savings incentive payment, a carrier shall apply the amount paid for the 26 
comparable health care service toward the enrollee's cost sharing as specified in the 27 
enrollee's health plan as if the health care services were provided by a network provider.  28 
The bill also requires c arriers to provide certain information to the Department of 29 
Professional and Financial Regulation, Bureau of Insurance on an annual basis relating to 30 
the payments made to enrollees, the use of health care services for which payments are 31 
provided and the sa ved costs if an enrollee elects to receive health care services from a 32 
provider that cost less than the average cost for a particular admission, procedure or 33 
service.  The Superintendent of Insurance is required to report aggregate information 34 
from all car riers to the Legislature on an annual basis.  35 
This bill also requires providers to notify patients of their right to shop for certain 36 
health care services pursuant to a carrier's shared savings incentive program.  37 
 
