 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 86
S.P. 35 In Senate,  January  11, 2017
An Act  To Protect  Worker Wages and Benefits
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MIRAMANT of Knox.
Cosponsored by Representative KUMIEGA of Deer Isle  and
Senators: BELLOWS of Kennebec, JACKSON  of Aroostook, WOODSOME of York, 
Representatives: KORNFIELD of Bangor, MASTRACCIO of Sanford, SPEAR of South Thomaston.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0055(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  26 MRSA §626, first and 3rd ¶¶, as amended by PL 1991, c. 162, are 2 
further amended to read:  3 
An employee leaving employment must be paid in full within a reasonable time after 4 
demand at the office of the employer where payrolls are kept and wages are paid, 5 
provided  cessation of employment, except  that any overcompensation may be withheld if 6 
authorized under section 635 and any loan or advance against future earnings or wages 7 
may be deduct ed if evidenced by a statement in writing signed by the employee. 8 
Whenever the terms of employment include provisions for paid vacations, vacation pay 9 
on cessation of employment has the same status as wages earned.  10 
For purposes of this subchapter, a reason able time means the earlier of either the next 11 
day on which employees would regularly be paid or a day not more than 2 weeks after the 12 
day on which the demand is made  cessation of employment . 13 
SUMMARY  14 
Current law provides that an employee whose employment h as ceased is entitled to 15 
earned wages from the employer, including unused vacation time when paid vacation was 16 
included in the terms of employment, upon a reasonable time after that employee makes a 17 
demand for such payment from the employer, and that the e mployee may bring a civil 18 
action against an employer that does not comply with this requirement.  19 
This bill eliminates the requirement that the employee make a demand for the earned 20 
compensation with the employer.  Instead, earned wages must be paid by the employer 21 
within a reasonable amount of time after the cessation of employment, regardless of 22 
whether the employee has made a demand for the wages.  23 
 
