 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 349
S.P. 115 In Senate, February 2, 2017
An Act  To Establish a Mattress Stewardship Program
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin.
Cosponsored by Senator:  CARSON of Cumberland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0445(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA ยง2145 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง2145.  Stewardship program for mattresses  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following terms have the following meanings.  5 
A.  "Brand" has the same meaning as in section 1771, subsection 1.  "Brand" includes 6 
both a registered and an unregistered trademark.  7 
B.  "Consumer" means a purchaser, owner or lessee of a mattress.  8 
C.  "Discarded mattress" means a mattress that a person discards, abandons or sends 9 
for recycling.  10 
D.  "Foundation" means any ticking -covered structure used to support a mattress and 11 
composed of one or more of the following: a constructed frame, foam or a box spring.  12 
"Foundation" does no t include a bed frame or base made of wood, metal or other 13 
material that rests upon the floor and serves as a brace for a mattress.  14 
E.  "Mattress" means any resilient material or combination of materials that is 15 
enclosed by ticking, used alone or in combin ation with other products, and intended 16 
or promoted for sleeping upon.  "Mattress" includes any foundation, renovated 17 
foundation or renovated mattress.  "Mattress" does not include:  18 
(1)  An unattached mattress pad or an unattached mattress topper, includin g any 19 
item with resilient filling, with or without ticking, intended for use with or on top 20 
of a mattress;  21 
(2)  A sleeping bag or pillow;  22 
(3)  A car bed;  23 
(4)  Juvenile products, including a carriage, basket, dressing table, stroller, 24 
playpen, infant carrie r, lounge pad, crib bumper or any pad for such products;  25 
(5)  A product that contains liquid -filled or gas -filled ticking, including a 26 
waterbed or air mattress that does not contain upholstery material; or  27 
(6)  Any upholstered furniture not otherwise conta ining a detachable mattress, 28 
including, but not limited to, a fold -out sofa bed or a futon.  29 
F.  "Mattress core" means the principal support system present in a mattress, 30 
including, but not limited to, springs, foam, an air bladder, a water bladder or resil ient 31 
filling.  32 
G.  "Mattress stewardship assessment" or "assessment" means the amount added to 33 
the purchase price of mattresses sold in the State necessary to cover the cost of 34 
collecting, transporting and processing discarded mattresses statewide under a 35 
mattress stewardship program established in accordance with this section.  36 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0445(01) -1 
 H.  "Mattress stewardship organization" or "organization" means a nonprofit 1 
organization created by one or more producers to design, submit a plan for, 2 
implement and operate a mattres s stewardship program.  3 
I.  "Mattress stewardship plan" or "plan" means a plan designed by a producer or 4 
mattress stewardship organization for the establishment of a mattress stewardship 5 
program.  6 
J.  "Mattress stewardship program" or "program" means a syste m implemented for 7 
the management of discarded mattresses in accordance with an approved mattress 8 
stewardship plan.  9 
K.  "Operator" means a producer or mattress stewardship organization that 10 
implements and operates a mattress stewardship program.  11 
L.  "Partic ipate" means, with respect to a producer, to, individually or through a 12 
mattress stewardship organization, establish and operate a mattress stewardship 13 
program in accordance with this section.  14 
M.  "Producer" means, with regard to a mattress that is sold, o ffered for sale or 15 
distributed for sale in the State, any person that manufactures or renovates the 16 
mattress under the person's own brand.  "Producer" includes:  17 
(1)  The owner of the brand under which a mattress is sold, offered for sale or 18 
distributed for  sale in the State; and  19 
(2)  Any person that imports a mattress into the United States for sale or 20 
distribution in the State, if the mattress is manufactured or renovated by a person 21 
that does not have a physical presence in the United States.  22 
N.  "Recycli ng" means the transforming or remanufacturing of an unwanted product 23 
or the unwanted product's components and by -products into usable or marketable 24 
materials.  "Recycling" includes incineration or energy recovery or energy generation 25 
by means of combusting  unwanted products, components and by -products with or 26 
without other waste.  "Recycling" does not include landfill disposal.  27 
O.  "Renovate" means to alter a mattress for the purpose of resale including replacing 28 
the ticking or filling of a mattress, to add  filling to a mattress or to replace mattress 29 
components with new or recycled materials.  "Renovate" does not include stripping a 30 
mattress of its ticking or filling without adding new material or sanitizing or 31 
sterilizing a mattress without otherwise alter ing the mattress.  32 
P.  "Retailer" means a person that offers a mattress for sale in the State in a retail sale, 33 
as defined in Title 36, section 1752, subsection 11, including remote sales conducted 34 
through sales outlets, catalogs or the Internet or any othe r similar electronic means.  35 
Q.  "Sell" or "sale" means any transfer of title for consideration, including remote 36 
sales conducted through sales outlets, catalogs or the Internet or any other similar 37 
electronic means.  38 
R.  "Ticking" means the outermost layer of fabric or material of a mattress.  39 
"Ticking" does not include any layer of fabric or material quilted together with, or 40 
otherwise attached to, the outermost layer of fabric or material of a mattress.  41 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR0445(01) -1 
 S.  "Upholstery material" means all material, loose o r attached, between the ticking 1 
and the core of a mattress.  2 
T.  "Wholesaler" means a person that offers a mattress for sale in the State in a sale 3 
that is not a retail sale, as defined in Title 36, section 1752, subsection 11, with the 4 
intention that the m attress be resold in a subsequent retail sale.  5 
2.  Submission of plan.  Except as provided in subsection 9, no later than one year 6 
after the effective date of this section, each producer, individually or through a mattress 7 
stewardship organization, shall s ubmit a plan for the establishment of a mattress 8 
stewardship program to the commissioner for approval.  The plan must include:  9 
A.  Identification and contact information for all persons that will be responsible for 10 
the operation of the program and a list o f the brands of mattresses to be covered 11 
under the program.  If the plan is submitted by an organization, it must include a 12 
description of the organization, tasks to be performed by the organization and 13 
information on how the organization is organized, inc luding administration and 14 
management of the organization;  15 
B.  A description of how the program will provide convenient, free, statewide 16 
collection opportunities for discarded mattresses and how the convenience and 17 
adequacy of the collection system will be monitored and maintained;  18 
C.  The criteria to be used by the program in determining whether an entity may serve 19 
as a collection location for discarded mattresses under the program. The plan must 20 
allow any retailer, wholesaler, municipality, solid waste man agement facility and 21 
other private or public entity that meets those criteria to voluntarily serve as a 22 
collection location;  23 
D.  The names and locations of recyclers, processors, disposal facilities and other 24 
entities that may be used by the program for th e collection, processing, recycling or 25 
disposal of discarded mattresses;  26 
E.  Information on how discarded mattresses collected through the program will be 27 
safely and securely transported, tracked and handled from collection through final 28 
disposition;  29 
F.   A description of the method to be used to ensure that, to the extent economically 30 
and technically feasible, collected discarded mattresses are recycled or otherwise 31 
responsibly managed.  The program must be designed to give preference to the 32 
recycling of d iscarded mattresses over any other disposal method;  33 
G.  A description of how the amounts of discarded mattresses collected, recycled, 34 
processed and disposed of will be measured;  35 
H.  A description of the education and outreach methods and activities that wi ll be 36 
used to provide notice of and encourage use of or involvement in the program by 37 
consumers, businesses, local agencies, retailers, wholesalers and solid waste 38 
transportation services;  39 
I.  The establishment of performance goals to measure the success o f the program and 40 
a description of how the program will be designed to meet or exceed those goals; and  41 
 
 Page 4 - 128LR0445(01) -1 
 J.  An anticipated budget for operation of the program and a description of how the 1 
program will be financed, including the method of calculating a mattr ess stewardship 2 
assessment that meets the requirements of subsection 6.  3 
3.  Approval of plan.  The commissioner shall review a plan submitted under 4 
subsection 2 and approve or reject the plan within 90 days of receipt.  5 
A.  The commissioner shall make a pla n submitted under subsection 2 available for 6 
public review at least 30 days prior to approving or rejecting the plan.  7 
B.  The commissioner shall approve a plan if the commissioner determines that the 8 
plan demonstrates the ability of the mattress stewardshi p program to meet the goals 9 
specified in subsection 2, paragraph I and meets the other requirements for 10 
submission of a plan under subsection 2.  The commissioner's approval of a plan must 11 
include approval of the method by which the program will be finance d.  The 12 
commissioner shall require the producer or organization submitting the plan to 13 
provide an independent audit indicating the appropriateness of the proposed mattress 14 
stewardship assessment.  15 
C.  If a plan is rejected, the commissioner shall provide th e reasons for rejecting the 16 
plan to the producer or organization submitting the plan.  The producer or 17 
organization submitting the plan may submit an amended plan within 60 days of a 18 
rejection.  19 
D.  A producer or organization whose plan is rejected by the c ommissioner may 20 
appeal the commissioner's decision in accordance with sections 341 -D and 346.  21 
4.  Implementation of plan.  A producer or mattress stewardship organization that 22 
submitted a plan approved by the commissioner under subsection 3 shall implement  the 23 
plan no later than 120 days after the date the plan is approved.  24 
5.  Amendment of plan.  A change to an approved and implemented mattress 25 
stewardship plan must be submitted to the commissioner for review prior to 26 
implementation of that change.  If the  change is not substantive, such as the addition of or 27 
a change to collection locations, the addition of a new producer to the program or a 28 
change in the contact information or officers of the organization, approval is not needed, 29 
but the operator must inf orm the commissioner within 14 days of implementing the 30 
change.  The commissioner shall review substantive plan amendments in accordance with 31 
subsection 3.  32 
6.  Stewardship assessment.  An operator shall administer a mattress stewardship 33 
assessment to be ap plied to all mattresses covered by the program sold in the State.  The 34 
amount of the assessment must be approved by the commissioner in accordance with 35 
subsection 3 and must be sufficient to recover, but may not be designed to exceed, the 36 
cost of the progr am.  If the funds generated by the assessment exceed the amount 37 
necessary to operate the program, excess funds must be used to reduce future assessments 38 
or improve services under the program.  39 
A.  A mattress stewardship assessment must be added to the cost of all mattresses 40 
covered by the program sold to retailers and wholesalers in the State.  A retailer or 41 
wholesaler shall add the assessment to the purchase price of mattresses sold by that 42 
 
 Page 5 - 128LR0445(01) -1 
 retailer or wholesaler.  The assessment must be clearly visible on invoices or 1 
functionally equivalent billing documents as a separate line item.  An assessment may 2 
not be imposed at the time a discarded mattress is collected.  The collection of the 3 
assessment must commence no later than the implementation date establishe d in 4 
subsection 4.  5 
B.  A producer participating in a mattress stewardship organization shall remit to the 6 
organization on a quarterly basis payment of the mattress stewardship assessment for 7 
all mattresses the producer sells in the State.  8 
7.  Sales prohibi tion.  Upon implementation of a mattress stewardship plan under 9 
subsection 4, a producer may not sell or offer for sale a mattress in the State unless the 10 
producer, or a mattress stewardship organization that the producer has created or joined, 11 
participate s in a mattress stewardship program established in accordance with this 12 
section.  13 
8.  Collection locations.  This subsection applies to collection locations for discarded 14 
mattresses under a program.  15 
A.  A retailer, a wholesaler, a municipality, a solid wast e management facility and 16 
any other private or public entity may voluntarily serve as a collection location for 17 
discarded mattresses under an approved and implemented plan, as long as the 18 
operator determines that the collection location meets the criteria for collection 19 
locations established under the plan.  20 
B.  The operator must fully underwrite the costs of pickup and transportation of 21 
discarded mattresses from each collection location established under the program and 22 
may not charge an entity serving as a  collection location for the cost of such services.  23 
C.  An entity serving as a collection location may not refuse collection of a discarded 24 
mattress based on the brand of the mattress.  An operator may not refuse the pickup 25 
or transportation of a collected  discarded mattress from a collection location based on 26 
the brand of the mattress.  27 
D.  An entity serving as a collection location may not impose on consumers any fee 28 
relating to the collection of discarded mattresses. An entity serving as a collection 29 
location may not impose any fee on an operator as a condition of agreeing to serve as 30 
a collection location under the program.  31 
9.  New producers.  A new producer must notify the commissioner and take other 32 
action in accordance with this subsection prior to sel ling or offering to sell a mattress in 33 
the State.  For the purposes of this subsection, "new producer" means a producer that is 34 
not participating in an existing program established under this section that seeks to sell or 35 
offer for sale a mattress in the S tate on or after the date that an approved mattress 36 
stewardship plan is first implemented under subsection 4.  37 
A.  Upon receiving notification under this subsection from a new producer, the 38 
commissioner shall list the producer as a new producer on the depar tment's publicly 39 
accessible website.  40 
B.  No later than 90 days following a new producer's notification under this 41 
subsection to the commissioner, the producer shall submit a plan to the commissioner 42 
 
 Page 6 - 128LR0445(01) -1 
 in accordance with subsection 2 or join an existing organ ization operating a program 1 
in the State.  2 
C.  If a new producer fails to submit a plan or join an existing organization within the 3 
90-day period under paragraph B, the producer may not sell or offer to sell a mattress 4 
in the State after the expiration of t he 90 -day period.  5 
A new producer that fails to submit a plan or join an existing organization within the time 6 
limits described in this subsection may not sell or offer for sale a mattress in the State 7 
until the producer submits a plan that is approved by t he commissioner or joins an 8 
existing organization.  9 
10.  List of producers and brands.  The department shall post on its publicly 10 
accessible website a list of the producers participating and brands included in a mattress 11 
stewardship program.  12 
11.  Annual rep ort.  By October 15th of the calendar year after the calendar year in 13 
which an approved mattress stewardship plan is implemented under subsection 4, and 14 
annually thereafter, the operator of a mattress stewardship program shall submit a report 15 
to the commis sioner regarding the activities carried out by the program during the 16 
previous calendar year.  The report must include, but is not limited to:  17 
A.  The total tonnage of discarded mattresses collected by the program, as well as the 18 
specific tonnages collecte d from municipalities, retailers and all other entities serving 19 
as collection locations; the total tonnage of discarded mattresses diverted for 20 
recycling; the weight of mattress materials recycled, as indicated by the weight of 21 
each of the commodities sold  to secondary markets; and the weight of mattress 22 
materials sent for disposal or processing at disposal facilities and other entities;  23 
B.  Based on the mattress stewardship assessment collected pursuant to the mattress 24 
stewardship program, the total number  of mattresses sold in the State by all producers 25 
participating in the program;  26 
C.  The location of each collection location established under the program and an 27 
evaluation of the convenience and adequacy of the collection system implemented by 28 
the program ; 29 
D.  A description of the manner in which discarded mattresses were collected, 30 
transported, sorted, consolidated and processed by the program;  31 
E.  A description of the methods and activities used by the program for education and 32 
outreach, including exampl es of any educational materials developed and used by the 33 
program, and an evaluation of the effectiveness of the education and outreach efforts 34 
implemented by the program;  35 
F.  The total cost of implementing the mattress stewardship plan and operating the 36 
mattress stewardship program during the reporting period, as determined by an 37 
independent financial audit funded from the mattress stewardship assessment.  The 38 
report of the total cost must include a breakdown of operation, collection, 39 
transportation, dispo sition and communication costs;  40 
G.  An evaluation of the effectiveness of the methods used to achieve the 41 
performance goals of the program included in the plan pursuant to subsection 2, 42 
 
 Page 7 - 128LR0445(01) -1 
 paragraph I, as well as an update to the performance goals, if necessa ry, based on the 1 
experience of the program during the previous calendar year; and  2 
H.  Any other recommendations for change to the program to improve the 3 
convenience of the collection system, education or outreach efforts or program 4 
evaluation methods or to  otherwise better facilitate the collection, recycling and 5 
management of discarded mattresses in the State.  6 
12.  Administration and enforcement; fees.  The department shall enforce this 7 
section and may adopt rules as necessary for the purposes of implement ing, administering 8 
and enforcing this section.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical 9 
rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 10 
The department shall charge a reasonable application fee, not to exceed $10,000, to be  11 
paid by an applicant under subsection 2 for review and approval of a mattress stewardship 12 
plan.  The department may establish a reasonable annual fee, not to exceed the greater of 13 
$25,000 and 1% of the total program costs as set forth in the independent f inancial 14 
auditing report required under subsection 11, paragraph F, to be paid by an operator, to 15 
cover the department's actual costs for annual report review, administration and 16 
enforcement.  17 
13.  Antitrust exclusions.  A producer or mattress stewardship o rganization, 18 
including a producer's or organization's officers, members, employees and agents that 19 
develop a plan for, implement and operate a mattress stewardship program in accordance 20 
with this section, is immune from liability for the producer's or orga nization's conduct 21 
under state laws relating to antitrust, restraint of trade, unfair trade practices and other 22 
regulation of trade or commerce only to the extent necessary to develop a plan for, 23 
implement and operate the program.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill provide s for the establishment of a new stewardship program in the State for 26 
discarded mattresses.  Under the bill, a producer of mattresses, or an organization 27 
comprising one or more producers of mattresses, submits a plan for the establishment of a 28 
mattress ste wardship program to the Commissioner of Environmental Protection for 29 
approval.  Once approved, a program operates to provide convenient, free statewide 30 
collection opportunities for discarded mattresses, and discarded mattresses collected 31 
through the progra m are recycled or otherwise responsibly managed.  A program is 32 
funded through the imposition of a mattress stewardship assessment, subject to review 33 
and approval by the commissioner, which is added to the purchase price of all mattresses 34 
sold in the State.  35 
 
