 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
~ 1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 Dare: Jft)JJ' W1 °'0 b (' ,' -\-y 
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT L.D.1484 
(Filing No. H-b ,g') 
Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
128TH LEGISLATURE 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT ";J .. to H.P. 1023, L.D. 1484, Bill, "An Act 
Authorizing the Deorganization of the Town of Atkinson" 
Amend the bill by incorporating the attached fiscal note. 
SUMMARY 
This amendment, which is the majority report, incorporates a fiscal note. 
Page 1 -128LR0446(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 03/21/18 ;:t,,,/ac. 
128th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 1484 LR 446(02) 
An Act Authorizing the Deorganization of the Town of Atkinson 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment •,/J( //-l <J9) 
Committee: State and Local Government 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Contingent future biennium cost increase -General Fund 
Contingent future biennium savings -Education in the Unorganized Territories 
Fiscal Detail and Notes 
This bill will become effective only if approved by the voters of the Town of Atkinson at the next general election to 
be held in November. If approved, the deorganization of the Town of Atkinson would take effect on July 1, 2019. 
This legislation will allow Atkinson, and all townships that deorganize on or after July 1, 2019, to contribute to the 
cost of education under the same state/local funding provisions as "organized" towns and municipalities. Under 
current law, 100% of the cost of education services for unorganized townships is borne by local taxpayers in all of the 
unorganized territory. The unorganized townships receive no state subsidy through the General Purpose Aid for Local 
Schools (GPA) program. This legislation will increase the total cost ofK-12 public education under Essential 
Programs and Services, and the State's share of that cost, beginning in fiscal year 2019-20 and decrease the cost to the 
local taxpayers of unorganized townships. 
Utilizing the preliminary state calculation for funding public education report (ED 279) prepared by the Department 
of Education for the 2018-2019 school year, the estimated total cost to provide education 'services to the Town of 
Atkinson ifit were to deorganize would be $327,693 and the state share would be $172,000. The remaining balance 
of$155,693 would be paid by the Division of State Schools -Education in the Unorganized Territories program in the 
Department of Education through General Fund appropriations. The General Fund would be fully reimbursed for 
these costs by higher collections made through the Municipal Cost Component program. It is important to note that 
the total cost of education for Atkinson if it were to deorganize would be higher than the estimate in the ED 279 
report, as Atkinson would need to pay tuition and transportation costs which are likely to be higher than amounts used 
in the essential programs and services model. 
Any additional costs incurred by Maine Revenue Services related to the deorganization of the Town of Atkinson can 
be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. The minor additional costs associated with the filing of certain 
election results can be absorbed by the Secretary of State utilizing existing budgeted resources. Any additional costs 
incurred by the Office of the State Auditor are expected to be minor and can be absorbed within existing budgeted 
resources. 
LR0446(02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
