 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 212
H.P. 168 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Require  That Signatures on a Direct Initiative of 
Legislation Come from  Each State Senatorial District
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HARVELL of  Farmington.
Cosponsored by Senator VOLK of Cumberland and
Representatives: FARRIN of Norridgewock, FREDETTE  of Newport,  HAWKE  of Boothbay  
Harbor, O'CONNOR of Berwick, PARRY of Arundel, SANDERSON  of Chelsea,  STETKIS of 
Canaan, WARD of Dedham.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0284(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub -ยง2 is amended to read:  4 
2.  Referral to electors u nless enacted by the Legislature without change; 5 
number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating signatures on 6 
petitions; competing measures.  For any measure thus proposed by electors, the number 7 
of signatures of voters from each sta te senatorial district  shall not be less than 10% of the 8 
total vote for Governor cast in that state senatorial district  in the last gubernatorial 9 
election preceding the filing of such petition.  The date each signature was made shall be 10 
written next to the  signature on the petition.  A signature is not valid if it is dated more 11 
than one year prior to the date that the petition was filed in the office of the Secretary of 12 
State.  The measure thus proposed, unless enacted without change by the Legislature at 13 
the session at which it is presented, shall be submitted to the electors together with any 14 
amended form, substitute, or recommendation of the Legislature, and in such manner that 15 
the people can choose between the competing measures or reject both.  When the re are 16 
competing bills and neither receives a majority of the votes given for or against both, the 17 
one receiving the most votes shall at the next statewide election to be held not less than 18 
60 days after the first vote thereon be submitted by itself if it receives more than 1/3 of 19 
the votes given for and against both.  If the measure initiated is enacted by the Legislature 20 
without change, it shall not go to a referendum vote unless in pursuance of a demand 21 
made in accordance with the preceding section.  The  Legislature may order a special 22 
election on any measure that is subject to a vote of the people.  23 
; and be it further  24 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 25 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify t he inhabitants of their 26 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 27 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 28 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the rat ification of the amendment 29 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  30 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require signatures 31 
on direct initiative petitions from voters from each state senatorial 32 
district?"  33 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 34 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 35 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 36 
decla red in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 37 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 38 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favo r of the 39 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 40 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on March 1, 2018; and be it further  41 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0284(01) -1 
 Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 1 
shall pr epare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 2 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  3 
SUMMARY  4 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require that the 5 
signature s on a petition to directly initiate legislation be of voters from each of the State's 6 
senate districts and that the number of signatures from each senate district be not less than 7 
10% of the total votes for Governor cast in that senate district in the pre vious 8 
gubernatorial election. The resolution provides that, if the required votes are cast in favor 9 
of the proposed amendment to the Constitution, the proposed amendment becomes part of 10 
the Constitution on March 1, 2018 instead of on the date of the Govern or's proclamation.  11 
 
