 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 112
H.P. 80 House of  Representatives, January 17, 2017
An Act  To Further Limit the Liability  of Landowners Who Permit 
the Use of Land for  Outdoor Recreational  Activity
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GINZLER  of Bridgton.
Cosponsored by Senator HAMPER of Oxford  and
Representative: FAY  of Raymond.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0511(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  14 MRSA §159 -A, sub -§1, ¶B, as amended by PL 2015, c. 20, §1, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
B.  "Recreational or harvesting activities" means recreational activities conducted 4 
out-of-doors, including, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, trapping, camping, 5 
environmental education and research, hiking, rock climbing, ice climbing, 6 
bouldering, rappelling, recreational caving, sight -seeing, operating snow -traveling 7 
and all -terrain vehicles, skiing, hang -gliding, noncommercial aviation activities, dog 8 
sledding, equine activities, boating, sailing, canoeing, rafting, biking, picnicking, 9 
swimming or activities involving the harvesting or gathering of forest, field or marine 10 
products. It includes  entry of, volunteer maintenance and improvement of, use of and 11 
passage over premises in order to pursue these activities as well as construction, 12 
maintenance or expansion of trails or ancillary facilities used to pursue these 13 
activities .  "Recreational or  harvesting activities" does not include commercial 14 
agricultural or timber harvesting.  15 
Sec. 2.  14 MRSA §159 -A, sub -§1, ¶D is enacted to read:  16 
D.  "Ancillary facilities" means facilities commonly associated with recreational or 17 
harvesting activities, inclu ding, but not limited to, parking lots, warming shelters, 18 
restrooms, outhouses, bridges and culverts.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
Current law limits the liability of landowners who allow certain outdoor recreational 21 
or harvesting activities on their land, as long as the land is not primarily used for 22 
commercial recreational purposes.  This bill extends that limited liability to landowners 23 
who allow their land to be used for the construction, maintenance or expansion of trails or 24 
ancillary facilities used to pursue outdoor recr eational activities.  25 
 
