 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 575
S.P. 190 In Senate, February 16, 2017
An Act  To Improve  the Enforcement of Maine's Lobster Laws
Reference to the Committee on Marine Resources  suggested and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LANGLEY of  Hancock.
Cosponsored by Representative TUELL  of East  Machias and
Senators: BRAKEY of  Androscoggin, COLLINS of York,  MAKER of Washington, 
WHITTEMORE of  Somerset.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1561(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill would enact measures to improve the enforcement of the State's lobster 5 
conservation laws and ensure the l ong-term sustainability of the lobster resource.  These 6 
measures may include:  7 
1.  Establishing minimum penalties such as license suspension to deter violations, 8 
including scrubbing lobsters, fishing over the trap limit, fishing sunken trawls or 9 
untagged ge ar and molesting lobster traps;  10 
2.  Establishing minimum monetary fines to deter violations, including keeping short, 11 
over-sized, v -notched or egg -bearing female lobsters, and higher minimum penalties for 12 
repeat offenders;  13 
3.  Allowing the Commissioner of Marine Resources to revoke the marine resources 14 
licenses of those found guilty of sinking, burning or otherwise destroying another 15 
fisherman's vessel;  16 
4.  Requiring lobster fishing license holders found guilty of violating marine 17 
conservation laws to pay r estitution equal to the cost incurred by the State to conduct the 18 
investigation for offenses, including scrubbing lobsters; fishing over the trap limit; fishing 19 
sunken trawls or untagged gear; keeping short, over -sized, v -notched or egg -bearing 20 
female lobs ters; molesting lobster traps; or sinking, burning or otherwise destroying 21 
another fisherman's vessel; and  22 
5.  Requiring a lobster fishing license holder convicted of a marine resources 23 
violation resulting in a license suspension who reenters the lobster f ishery to reenter as a 24 
new entrant limited to 300 traps and to have a vessel monitoring system aboard the 25 
license holder's vessel.  Such a lobster fishing license holder would be allowed to build up 26 
the number of traps at a rate of 100 traps per year up to  the lobster zone limit.  27 
 
