 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1053
H.P. 736 House of  Representatives, March 16, 2017
Resolve, Concerning the Format of Birth Certificates  of Deceased  
Persons
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GOLDEN of  Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  Speaker GIDEON  of Freeport, TIMBERLAKE of Turner, 
Senator: MASON of Androscoggin.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1935(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Format for indicating on birth certificate that a person is 1 
deceased.  Resolved:  That, on a copy of a birth certificate of a deceased person, the 2 
Office of Data, Research and Vital Statistics within the Department of Health and Human 3 
Services sha ll decrease the prominence of the words indicating the person is deceased.  4 
The changes must include decreasing the size of the words indicating the person is 5 
deceased and making the location of the words less prominent on the birth certificate.  By 6 
Januar y 1, 2018, the office shall begin working with its vendor to make the changes under 7 
this section.  8 
SUMMARY  9 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Data, 10 
Research and Vital Statistics to decrease the prominence of the wor ds indicating a person 11 
is deceased on a copy of a birth certificate.  The changes must include decreasing the size 12 
of the words and making the location of the words less prominent on the birth certificate.  13 
The resolve directs the office to begin working w ith its vendor to make the changes by 14 
January 1, 2018.  15 
 
