 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1309
H.P. 906 House of  Representatives,  April 4, 2017
Resolve, To  Establish the Commission To Study Business 
Ownership by  Racial  and Ethnic Populations and  the Wealth  Gap in 
the State
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TALBOT ROSS  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin and
Representatives: GATTINE of Westbrook, GOLDEN of Lewiston, SYLVESTER of Portland, TIPPING of Orono, WARREN of  Hallowell,  Senators: CHENETTE  of York, CYRWAY of 
Kennebec, ROSEN  of Hancock.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0563(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, recent reports reveal that the ongoing structural barriers to wealth equality 3 
in the natio n cannot be combated at the individual or household level, and that public 4 
policy is needed to eliminate racial wealth disparities; and  5 
Whereas, Maine needs to undertake a study to determine which policy interventions 6 
will have the most impact on bridging  the wealth gap between historically disadvantaged 7 
racial and ethnic populations and the rest of the citizens in the State; and  8 
Whereas, this legislation establishes the Commission To Study Business Ownership 9 
by Racial and Ethnic Populations and the Wealth  Gap in the State; and  10 
Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90 -day period expires in order that 11 
the study may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 12 
legislative session; and  13 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legisla ture, these facts create an emergency within 14 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 15 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 16 
therefore, be it  17 
Sec. 1.  Commission esta blished.  Resolved:  That the Commission To Study 18 
Business Ownership by Racial and Ethnic Populations and the Wealth Gap in the State, 19 
referred to in this resolve as "the commission," is established; and be it further  20 
Sec. 2.  Commission membership.  Resol ved:  That the commission consists of 21 
the following 13 members:  22 
1.  Two members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, including 23 
members from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the Legislature;  24 
2.  Four members of  the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the 25 
House, including members from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats 26 
in the Legislature;  27 
3.  A representative of a community development organization appointed by the 28 
Presiden t of the Senate;  29 
4.  A representative of an economic policy organization appointed by the Speaker of 30 
the House;  31 
5.  The administrator of the Maine District Office of the federal Small Business 32 
Administration, or the administrator's designee;  33 
6.  Two member s of the public engaged in working with communities of color in 34 
business development, one of whom is appointed by the President of the Senate and one 35 
of whom is appointed by the Speaker of the House; and  36 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0563(01) -1 
 7.  The president of the Maine State Chamber of Comm erce, or the president's 1 
designee.  2 
The commission shall invite the participation, as a voting member, of a representative of 3 
the Native American community; and be it further  4 
Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the first -named Senate member is the Senate 5 
chair and the first -named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the 6 
commission; and be it further  7 
Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of commission.  Resolved:  That all 8 
appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 9 
resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 10 
Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 11 
the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more 12 
after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 13 
made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 14 
for the commission to meet and conduct its business; and be  it further  15 
Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the commission shall study income levels of and 16 
opportunities available to historically disadvantaged racial and ethnic populations in the 17 
State and shall examine quantitative and qualitative data associated wi th those 18 
populations regarding business ownership, household assets, debts and income, housing, 19 
employment and access to inherited wealth, capital and benefits.  The commission shall 20 
consider proposals to diversify business ownership to include those popul ations and 21 
bridge the gaps in wealth acquisition, including but not limited to, proposals to:  22 
1.  Develop a program to provide to aspiring and new business owners technical 23 
assistance workshops and training on topics such as the creation of business plans,  24 
accessing capital and funding and securing job training;  25 
2.  Provide assistance to vendors to become state -certified and to create a register and 26 
clearinghouse to serve as a resource for state -certified vendors seeking government 27 
contracts; and  28 
3.  Establ ish an office to coordinate the educational and technical assistance needs of 29 
emerging small businesses and to provide information to small businesses seeking to 30 
open, operate and expand their businesses; and be it further  31 
Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resol ved:  That the Legislative Council shall provide 32 
necessary staffing services to the commission; and be it further  33 
Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 6, 2017, the commission 34 
shall submit a report that includes its findings and recomm endations, including suggested 35 
legislation, for presentation to the Second Regular Session of the 128th Legislature.  36 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 37 
legislation takes effect when approved.  38 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR0563(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolve establ ishes the Commission To Study Business Ownership by Racial and 2 
Ethnic Populations and the Wealth Gap in the State.  3 
 
