 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 779
H.P. 559 House of  Representatives, March 2, 2017
An Act  To Allow Aroostook County To Create Tax Increment 
Financing Districts
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MARTIN of Eagle Lake.
Cosponsored by Senator JACKSON of Aroostook and
Representatives: MARTIN of  Sinclair, McCREA of Fort Fairfield,  McELWEE of Caribou, 
SHERMAN of Hodgdon, STEWART of Presque  Isle,  Senator: CARPENTER of Aroostook.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2004(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  30-A MRSA ยง5236 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง5236.  Aroostook County  3 
For the purposes of this chapter, Aroostook County may act as a municipality for the 4 
area within the county and may designat e development districts within the county. When 5 
Aroostook County acts under this section, the county commissioners act as the 6 
municipality and the municipal legislative body; municipal and plantation assessors 7 
perform the functions of municipal and plantat ion assessors for municipalities or 8 
plantations within the development district; the State Tax Assessor acts as the municipal 9 
assessor for areas within the development district located within the unorganized 10 
territory; and the unorganized territory fund wi thin the county receives the funds 11 
designated for the municipal general fund.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This bill authorizes Aroostook County to establish development districts qualifying 14 
for tax increment financing within the county in the same manner that a municipality o r 15 
plantation may establish such a development district.  16 
 
