 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1134
H.P. 797 House of  Representatives, March 23, 2017
An Act  To Amend the Laws Governing Nursing  Facilities To Permit 
Nurse Practitioners,  Clinical  Nurse Specialists and Physician 
Assistants To Perform Certain  Physician Tasks
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative STEWART of  Presque Isle.
Cosponsored by Senator CARPENTER of Aroostook.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0951(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง1812 -L is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1812 -L.  Performance of certain tasks by physicians and others  3 
1.  Performance of certain tasks for residents receiving skilled nursing facility 4 
services.  For a nursing facility resident receiving skilled nursing facility level services:  5 
A.  The initial comprehensive visit through which a plan of care is developed for the 6 
resident and every alternate required visit thereafter must be performed by a 7 
physician;  8 
B.  The alternate required visits not performed by a physician may be performed, 9 
without requiring a physician's cosignature, by a physician assistant, nurse 10 
practitioner or clinical nurse specialist who is licensed or certified as such by the 11 
State and performing within the authorized scope of practice;  12 
C.  Medically necessary visits may be performed, without requiring a physician's 13 
cosignature, by a physician assistant, nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist 14 
who is licensed or certified  as such by the State and performing within the authorized 15 
scope of practice; and  16 
D.  Certifications and recertifications to verify that the resident requires daily skilled 17 
nursing care or rehabilitation services may be performed by a physician assistant, 18 
nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist who is licensed or certified as such by 19 
the State and performing within the authorized scope of practice and who is not 20 
employed by the facility and who is working in collaboration with a physician.  21 
2.  Perfo rmance of certain tasks for residents receiving nursing facility services.  22 
For a nursing facility resident receiving nursing facility level services, a physician 23 
assistant, nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist who is licensed or certified as su ch 24 
by the State and performing within the authorized scope of practice and who is not 25 
employed by the facility and who is working in collaboration with a physician may 26 
perform any physician task, including but not limited to:  27 
A.  The resident's initial com prehensive visit;  28 
B.  Any other required visit; and  29 
C.  Any medically necessary visit.  30 
SUMMARY  31 
This bill provides that, in accordance with federal regulations:  32 
1.  For nursing home residents receiving skilled nursing facility level services, a 33 
physician as sistant, nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist may provide medically 34 
necessary visits, certifications and recertifications and required visits that alternate with 35 
those performed by a physician; and  36 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0951(01) -1 
 2.  For nursing home residents receiving nursin g facility level services, a physician 1 
assistant, nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist may perform any physician task.  2 
 
