 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1160
S.P. 381 In Senate,  March  23, 2017
Resolve, To  Require a Study of Wages and  Working Conditions for 
Child Development Educators and Staff
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative FARNSWORTH  of Portland and
Senators: BREEN of  Cumberland, CARPENTER of Aroostook,  CARSON of Cumberland, 
MAKER of Washington,  VITELLI of Sagadahoc, Representatives: BERRY of Bowdoinham, 
HUBBELL of  Bar Harbor.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1889(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Study of wages and working conditions for child development 1 
educators and staff.  Resolved:   That the Child Development Services System, as 2 
defined in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20 -A, section 7001, subsection 1 -A and 3 
referred to in this res olve as "the system," shall examine the wage schedules for 4 
individuals who provide early intervention or special education services in school 5 
administrative units, referred to in this resolve as "individuals."  In performing this 6 
examination, the system sh all compare the working conditions and wages paid to such 7 
individuals with the working conditions and wages paid to child development educators 8 
and staff in comparable positions in the private sector and in elementary and secondary 9 
schools in this State.  The system shall determine a wage schedule for individuals that is 10 
equivalent to the wages paid to persons in comparable positions and methods of 11 
improving recruitment and retention of such positions.  The system shall report its 12 
findings and recommendatio ns, along with any necessary implementing legislation, to the 13 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs no later than December 6, 14 
2017.  The joint standing committee may report out a bill to the Second Regular Session 15 
of the 128th Legislat ure based upon the report and recommendations of the system.  16 
SUMMARY  17 
This resolve requires the Child Development Services System to examine the 18 
working conditions and wages paid to individuals who provide early intervention or 19 
special education services in  school administrative units and compare those working 20 
conditions and wages to those of persons in similar positions in the private sector and in 21 
elementary and secondary schools in this State.  The system is required to develop 22 
recommendations for a wage schedule and other methods of improving recruitment and 23 
retention of child development educators and staff and submit its findings to the Joint 24 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, which is authorized to report out 25 
a bill to the Second Reg ular Session of the 128th Legislature.  26 
 
