 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1377
H.P. 956 House of  Representatives,  April 11, 2017
An Act  To Prohibit Posing as a Governmental Entity in Commerce
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DUNPHY of Old Town.
Cosponsored by Senator WHITTEMORE of Somerset and
Representatives: FECTEAU of  Biddeford,  GUERIN of Glenburn,  MASTRACCIO of Sanford, 
MOONEN of Portland,  SCHNECK of Bangor, SHERMAN of Hodgdon,  SKOLFIELD of 
Weld, SYLVESTER of Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1481(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  10 MRSA c. 229 is enacted to read:  2 
CHAPTER 229  3 
POSING AS A GOVERNME NTAL ENTITY OR AGENT  IN COMMERCE  4 
ยง1500 -H.  Posing as a governmental entity or agent in commerce  5 
1.  Definitions.  As u sed in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 6 
following terms have the following meanings.  7 
A.  "Governmental entity" means a unit, subdivision or entity of the Federal 8 
Government, the State, a county, a municipality or another state, inc luding an agency, 9 
department, board, commission, bureau, division or military or public safety 10 
organization.  11 
2.  False representation of posing as a governmental entity or agent in 12 
commerce.  A person who is not an official, agent or representative of a go vernmental 13 
entity or who does not have express approval of a governmental entity may not in 14 
commerce:  15 
A.  Represent, imply or otherwise cause a likelihood of confusion that the person is 16 
an official, agent or representative of a governmental entity in the sale, advertising for 17 
sale, marketing, offering, distribution or solicitation of any goods or services;  18 
B.  Simulate a summons, complaint, jury notice, tax form or other judicial or 19 
administrative process or make an untrue statement that any good, service,  20 
advertisement or offer was sent or distributed by or has been approved, authorized or 21 
endorsed in whole or in part by a governmental entity;  22 
C.  Use language or a symbol, logo, representation, statement, title, name, seal, 23 
emblem, insignia, trade or brand  name, business or control tracking number, website, 24 
e-mail address or any other term or content that falsely represents or implies or 25 
otherwise causes a likelihood of confusion that any goods, services, advertisement or 26 
offer is from a governmental entity ; or 27 
D.  Offer a document that is available free of charge or at a lesser price from a 28 
governmental entity without displaying the following notice on the front or outside of 29 
the mailing envelope, at the top of the e -mail message, on each website page or on  30 
the top of each page of any advertisement containing the offer.  The notice must be in 31 
the largest type that appears in the offer or advertisement for the document, but no 32 
less than 14 -point black type:  33 
"IMPORTANT NOTICE  34 
The documents offered are availabl e to Maine consumers free of charge or for a 35 
lesser price from (insert name, telephone number, website and mailing address of the 36 
applicable governmental entity).  You are NOT required to purchase anything from 37 
this company, and this company is NOT affilia ted, endorsed or approved by any 38 
governmental agency.  The item offered has NOT been approved or endorsed by any 39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1481(01) -1 
 governmental agency, and this offer is NOT being made by an agency of the 1 
government."  2 
3.  Unfair trade practice.  A violation of this section constitutes an unfair or 3 
deceptive act or practice in violation of Title 5, chapter 10.  4 
SUMMARY  5 
This bill makes an untrue representation by a person that the person is an official, 6 
agent or representative of a governmental entity in the advertisement, offe r, sale or 7 
distribution of goods or services or that the goods or services are from or approved, 8 
authorized or endorsed by a governmental entity a violation of the Maine Unfair Trade 9 
Practices Act.  The bill also provides that it is a violation of that Act  for a person who is 10 
not an official, agent or representative of a governmental entity to simulate a summons, 11 
complaint, jury notice, tax form or other judicial or administrative process.  The bill also 12 
requires a notice be placed on every offer of the sal e of a governmental document that can 13 
be obtained from the applicable governmental entity for free or at a lesser charge 14 
informing the consumer and providing the contact information of the governmental 15 
entity.  16 
 
