 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 906
H.P. 634 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2017
An Act  Regarding the  Collection of Signatures for a Direct Initiative
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TIMBERLAKE of  Turner.
Cosponsored by Senator KATZ of Kennebec and
Representatives: SEAVEY of  Kennebunkport,  SIROCKI of Scarborough, STROM of 
Pittsfield, TURNER of Burlington, WINSOR of Norway, Senators: HAMPER  of Oxford,  
LANGLEY of Hancock, MASON of Androscoggin.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0684(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง901 -A, as amended by PL 2009, c. 611, ยง1, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
ยง901 -A.  Petition requirements for direct initiatives of legislation  4 
The following provisions apply to d irect initiatives of legislation under the 5 
Constitution of Maine, Article IV, Part Third, Section 18.  6 
1.  Full text of direct initiative and fiscal impact statement and opportunity to 7 
read full text of direct initiative, direct initiative summary and fisca l impact 8 
statement.   A person circulating a petition must give a voter that voter's own printed 9 
paper copy of the full text of the direct initiative and the fiscal impact statement and  10 
provide the voter the opportunity to read the full text of the direct i nitiative and  the 11 
proposed direct initiative summary and fiscal impact statement required by section 901 12 
prior to that voter signing the petition.  The summary presented to the voter must be as it 13 
appears on a publicly accessible website established by the  Secretary of State.  14 
2.  Required statements; placement of information.   On each page of a petition 15 
that contains space intended for voter signatures, the Secretary of State shall include a 16 
space at the top right or left corner of each such page to be subm itted to the voters, which 17 
must be filled in with the name of the circulator collecting signatures on that petition and 18 
a unique identifying number, and include the fiscal impact of the initiative as described in 19 
Title 1, section 353 directly below the fol lowing statement at the top of the petition in a 20 
type size of no less than 16 points:  21 
"Freedom of Citizen Information: Before a registered voter signs any initiative 22 
petition, signature gatherers must offer the voter the opportunity to read the full text 23 
of the proposed initiative,  proposed initiative summary and fiscal impact statement 24 
prepared by the Secretary of State."  25 
SUMMARY  26 
This bill requires a person circulating a petition for a direct initiative of legislation to 27 
give a voter that voter's own print ed paper copy of the full text of the direct initiative and 28 
the fiscal impact statement and provide the voter the opportunity to read the full text of 29 
the direct initiative prior to that voter signing the petition.  Current law also requires a 30 
person circu lating a petition for a direct initiative of legislation to provide the voter the 31 
opportunity to read the proposed direct initiative summary and fiscal impact statement.  32 
 
