 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1253
H.P. 876 House of  Representatives, March 30, 2017
An Act  To Make  Maine's  Casinos More Competitive by  Authorizing 
Extensions of Credit
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WADSWORTH  of Hiram.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  FARRIN of Norridgewock, HARRINGTON of Sanford, 
HERRICK of Paris, PIERCE of Dresden,  SIMMONS of Waldoboro, WHITE of Washburn, 
WINSOR of  Norway.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1626(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  8 MRSA ยง1067 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1067.  Issuing lines of credit by casino operator  3 
1.  Casino operator may accept credit instrument from qualified person.  A 4 
casino operator may accept  a credit instrument from a qualified person in exchange for 5 
currency, chips, tokens or electronic tokens that may be wagered on table games or used 6 
in slot machines at the casino operator's casino. For the purposes of this subsection, 7 
"qualified person" m eans a person who has completed a credit application provided by 8 
the casino operator and who is determined by the casino operator, after performing a 9 
credit check and applying usual standards to establish creditworthiness, to qualify for a 10 
line of credit a nd in an amount to be determined by the casino operator under the 11 
restrictions in subsection 2 based on the person's demand deposit accounts, including any 12 
checking account or savings account. Once the casino operator makes the determination 13 
that a person is a qualified person, additional credit checks are not required. A decision to 14 
accept a credit instrument from a qualified person must be made by the casino operator. If 15 
a new credit instrument is issued to consolidate or replace an existing credit instru ment or 16 
instruments, the new credit instrument must use the oldest date of the credit instrument or 17 
instruments being replaced. A lost or destroyed credit instrument remains valid and 18 
enforceable if the party seeking enforcement can prove its existence and  terms. The board 19 
has no authority to determine the validity or enforceability of a credit instrument or the 20 
enforceability of the debt that the credit instrument represents. Failure to comply with a 21 
rule adopted by the board does not affect the validity o r enforceability of the credit 22 
instrument or the debt that the credit instrument represents.  A credit instrument executed 23 
pursuant to this section on or after the effective date of this section is a valid contract 24 
creating debt that is enforceable by lega l process.  25 
2.  Limitations.  A casino operator may not lend anything of value or extend credit to 26 
any person for the purpose of permitting that person to wager on any table game or to 27 
play any slot machine except through the use of a credit instrument. A c redit instrument 28 
may not be secured by a person's house or other real property, tangible personal property, 29 
investments, individual retirement account, plan under Section 401(k) of the United 30 
States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, pension or other retiremen t account or college 31 
savings plan or any asset whatsoever other than a demand deposit account. A credit 32 
instrument must provide that any credit extended is due no later than 30 days from the 33 
date credit is extended. A credit instrument must be considered a n unsecured loan and 34 
may not bear interest.  35 
3.  Prohibition.  A casino operator may not extend credit pursuant to this section to a 36 
person who is intoxicated.  37 
SUMMARY  38 
This bill allows a casino operator to extend credit to qualified customers within 39 
certain  limitations.  40 
