 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1093
H.P. 767 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2017
An Act  To Clarify That Involuntary  Transfers of Teachers and 
Municipal Public Employees  Are Subject to Collective Bargaining
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SYLVESTER of Portland.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  COLLINGS  of Portland, McCREA of Fort Fairfield, PARRY 
of Arundel, TALBOT ROSS of Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1309(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  26 MRSA §965, sub -§1, ¶C, as amended by PL 2009, c. 107, §5, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
C.  To confer and negotiate in good faith with respect to wages, hours, working 4 
conditions , incl uding involuntary transfers,  and contract grievance arbitration, except 5 
that by such obligation neither party may be compelled to agree to a proposal or be 6 
required to make a concession and except that public employers of teachers shall 7 
meet and consult bu t not negotiate with respect to educational policies; for the 8 
purpose of this paragraph, educational policies may not include wages, hours, 9 
working conditions , including involuntary transfers,  or contract grievance arbitration .  10 
As used in this paragraph, "involuntary transfer" means the transfer of an employee, 11 
initiated by the employer, to another location ; 12 
SUMMARY  13 
This bill specifies that the involuntary transfer of a teacher or other municipal 14 
employee is included in working conditions that must be coll ectively bargained in good 15 
faith.  This bill specifies that an involuntary transfer is not considered an educational 16 
policy, which is not subject to negotiation.  17 
 
