 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1367
H.P. 944 House of  Representatives,  April 6, 2017
Resolve, To  Support Family-directed Housing Initiatives and 
Alternative Programming for Individuals with Disabilities  in 
Underserved Areas
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MALABY of Hancock.
Cosponsored by Senator LANGLEY of Hancock and
Representatives: CHACE of  Durham,  HANINGTON of Lincoln, HAWKE of Boothbay 
Harbor, HUBBELL of  Bar Harbor, MARTIN of Eagle Lake, O'CONNOR of Berwick.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1200(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to develop pilot 1 
projects.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services shall work 2 
with community partners to develop pilot projects, referred to in this resolve as "the pilot 3 
projects," to e stablish residences for up to 10 individuals in each facility for individuals 4 
with intellectual disabilities eligible for services under its rule Chapter 101:  MaineCare 5 
Benefits Manual, Chapters II and III, Section 20, 21 or 29 or other applicable section s for 6 
the population's needs.  The pilot projects must be developed in rural areas of the State 7 
that are underserved in terms of residential services for individuals with intellectual 8 
disabilities and serve local residents.  The department shall support pr ivate fund -raising 9 
by local communities.  The department shall develop contracts with local entities to 10 
determine the individuals to be served, make referrals and either carry out day -to-day 11 
functions or manage a contract for those services.  The pilot pro jects must assist the 12 
eligible individuals to build independent lives, including employment opportunities and 13 
community participation, in a residence in or near their home community in a place with 14 
modern facilities and communal spaces and served by skille d staff; and be it further  15 
Sec. 2.  Local funding.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human 16 
Services shall work with local entities to leverage private funding to contribute to the 17 
development of the pilot projects; and be it further  18 
Sec. 3.  In creased MaineCare rates.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health 19 
and Human Services shall consider the need for increasing reimbursement rates for the 20 
pilot projects above the existing reimbursement rates for services provided under its rule 21 
Chapter 101:   MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapters II and III, Section 20, 21 or 29 or 22 
other applicable sections for the population's needs in order to attract service providers in 23 
rural underserved areas.  The department shall seek any authorizations necessary from th e 24 
federal Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 25 
Services to reimburse at increased rates; and be it further  26 
Sec. 4.  Reporting.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human 27 
Services shall report to the joint stan ding committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction 28 
over health and human services matters no later than January 1, 2020.  The report must 29 
report progress on implementing the pilot projects and include the following measures:  30 
the number of facilities cr eated, the number of individuals served in the pilot projects and 31 
evidence of improving services in a previously underserved area; expenditures on the 32 
pilot projects; pilot project cost comparisons with services received by similar individuals 33 
under the de partment's rule Chapter 101:  MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapters II and 34 
III, Section 20, 21 or 29 and other related sections in other areas of the State; project 35 
outcome measures including average hours per week of community -based employment, 36 
income from employment, average hours per week volunteering in the local community 37 
and hours per week learning new skills and assessed in service plans; and any 38 
recommendations regarding the applicability of the pilot projects for future service 39 
models for similar pop ulations around the State.  The joint standing committee of the 40 
Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters is authorized to 41 
report out a bill to the Legislature regarding the recommendations in the report.  42 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1200(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolve r equires the Department of Health and Human Services to work with 2 
community partners to develop pilot projects for residential facilities that each serve up to 3 
10 individuals with intellectual disabilities eligible for services under its rule Chapter 4 
101:  MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapters II and III, Section 20, 21 or 29 or other 5 
applicable sections for the population's needs.  The department shall support private fund - 6 
raising by the local communities and develop contracts with local entities to determine  7 
admission standards, make referrals and either directly provide day -to-day services or 8 
contract for them.  The department shall consider the need to increase reimbursement 9 
under MaineCare for applicable services to counter high costs in underserved rural areas.  10 
The department must report by January 1, 2020 on the progress of the pilot projects, 11 
number of facilities created, number of individuals served, expenditures, cost 12 
comparisons and outcome measures together with any recommendations regarding 13 
applica bility of the pilot projects as a model for similar future projects around the State.  14 
 
