 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1161
S.P. 382 In Senate,  March  23, 2017
An Act  To Amend the Insurance Laws Governing the Provision of 
Rebates
Reference to the Committee on Insurance  and Financial Services suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator DOW of Lincoln.
Cosponsored by Representative COLLINGS of Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1928(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง2160, sub -ยง3 is enacted to read:  2 
3.  Services for free or less than fair market value.   This section does not prohibit a 3 
person from offering or providing services, whether o r not the services are directly related 4 
to an insurance contract, for free or for less than fair market value as long as the receipt of 5 
the services is not contingent upon the purchase of insurance.  A person that offers or 6 
provides services under this sub section for free or less than fair market value shall 7 
conspicuously disclose to the recipient before the purchase of insurance, receipt of a 8 
quote for insurance or designation of an agent of record that receipt of the services is not 9 
contingent on the purc hase of insurance.  A person may comply with this subsection by 10 
an oral or written disclosure.  11 
SUMMARY  12 
This bill amends the laws regarding rebates under life, health and annuity contracts 13 
and prohibiting unfair discrimination and rebates by property, casua lty and surety insurers 14 
to allow a person to offer or provide services, whether or not the services are directly 15 
related to an insurance contract, for free or for less than fair market value as long as the 16 
receipt of the services is not contingent upon the  purchase of insurance.  It also requires a 17 
written or oral disclosure to be made to the recipient of the services that the services are 18 
not contingent on the purchase of insurance.  19 
 
