 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 155
H.P. 113 House of  Representatives, January 19, 2017
An Act  To Protect  Voting  Integrity by Establishing a Residency 
Verification Requirement for  Purposes of Voting
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FREDETTE of Newport.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  FARRIN of Norridgewock, PIERCE  of Dresden.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0291(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง112, sub -ยง7, as amended by PL 2003, c. 407, ยง5, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
7.  Uniformed service voters, students, institutional patients, Indians.   A person 4 
does not gain o r lose a residence solely because of the person's presence or absence while 5 
employed in the uniformed service or the merchant marine of the United States, while a 6 
student in any institution of learning, while kept in any institution at public expense or 7 
while residing upon any Indian or military reservations.  This subsection may not be 8 
construed to prevent a student at any institution of learning from qualifying as a voter in 9 
the municipality where the student resides while attending that institution , exce pt that, 10 
when an applicant lists a residence address on the voter registration application required 11 
under section 152 that is a dormitory or domicile provided by, or located on the campus 12 
of, a postsecondary educational institution, the registrar shall ver ify the applicant's 13 
residency . Residency is considered established when the registrar can verify at least one 14 
of the following:  15 
A.  That the applicant's state identification card or driver's license lists the same 16 
address as listed on the voter registratio n application or that the address is on record 17 
with the Department of the Secretary of State, Bureau of Motor Vehicles;  18 
B.  That the applicant has a motor vehicle registered in the State; or  19 
C.  That the applicant pays personal income tax or property tax t o the State.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This bill requires the registrar of voters to verify residency when a voter registration 22 
application lists a residence address as a dormitory or domicile provided by, or located on 23 
the campus of, a postsecondary educational institution .  The bill provides that certain 24 
requirements must be met to establish residency.  25 
 
