 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1414
H.P. 972 House of  Representatives,  April 11, 2017
An Act  To Ensure the Availability of In-person  Visitation in County 
Jails
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TALBOT ROSS  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator ROSEN of Hancock  and
Representatives: COREY of  Windham, GATTINE  of Westbrook,  GROHMAN of Biddeford, 
LONGSTAFF of Waterville, WARREN of  Hallowell.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2055(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to enact measures designed to ensure the availability in county jails 5 
of in -person visitation be tween a prisoner and a visitor of the prisoner.  In addition to 6 
requiring that all prisoners have the opportunity for in -person visits in county jails, such 7 
measures may include:  8 
1. Limiting conditions on in -person visits to only those conditions and limit ations 9 
required for safety and security, except that the jail may provide video -only visitation if 10 
needed for a particular prisoner's safety and security or may provide video -only visitation 11 
on a short -term basis if the jail is unable to provide a safe and  secure location for in - 12 
person visitation;  13 
2. Requiring opportunities for informal communication between a prisoner and a 14 
visitor of the prisoner, including opportunities for physical contact, and prohibiting the 15 
use of devices that preclude physical conta ct except in cases of substantiated security 16 
risk; or  17 
3. Establishing a minimum number of in -person visit opportunities per week; 18 
requiring that video visitation be used only as a supplement to, and not a replacement of, 19 
in-person visitation; ensuring that  video visitation service fees are affordable for prisoners 20 
and their families; and using, as a reward for good behavior, a certain number of free 21 
video visits per month.  22 
 
