 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 208
H.P. 164 House of  Representatives, January 24, 2017
An Act  To Add Vehicles Hauling  Animal Bedding to Those Exempt 
from Posted Road  Restrictions
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative KINNEY of  Knox.
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS  of Piscataquis and
Representatives: BLACK of  Wilton,  DUNPHY of Old Town, GILLWAY of Searsport, 
HICKMAN of Winthrop,  MAREAN  of Hollis,  SKOLFIELD of Weld, TIMBERLAKE of 
Turner, Senator: DILL of Penobscot.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0818(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, Maine is an agricultural state with a long tradition of supporting its 3 
farmers and livesto ck producers; and  4 
Whereas, often the State, counties and municipalities cannot timely process or issue 5 
permits to traverse posted roads; and  6 
Whereas, agricultural interests and the needs of animals can be immediate, and 7 
delays in obtaining permits to trave rse posted roads can result in harm to or loss of 8 
livestock; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 11 
immediately necessary for  the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore,  13 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  14 
Sec. 1.  29-A MRSA ยง2395, sub -ยง9 is enacted to read:  15 
9.  Exemption.  A vehicle hauling animal bedding is exempt from thi s section.  16 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 17 
legislation takes effect when approved.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
This bill exempts vehicles hauling animal bedding from posted road restrictions 20 
imposed by the Department of Transportation, counties or municipalities.  21 
 
