 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1888
S.P. 721 In Senate,  March  28, 2018
An Act  To Amend the Workers' Compensation  Laws Governing 
Affiliated Self-insurance Groups
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator VOLK of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 128LR2976(01)-11 Be it enacted  by the People of  the State of Maine as  follows:
2 Sec. 1.  39-A  MRSA §403, sub-§3, as amended  by PL 2011, c. 98, §1 and c. 180, 
3 §1, is further amended to read:
4 3.  Proof of solvency  and financial ability to pay; trust.  The employer may 
5 comply with this section by furnishing satisfactory proof  to the Superintendent  of 
6 Insurance of solvency  and financial ability to pay the compensation and benefits, and 
7 depositing cash, satisfactory securities,  irrevocable standby letters  of credit issued by a 
8 qualified financial  institution or a surety bond with the superintendent, in such sum as the 
9 superintendent may determine pursuant to subsection 8, the Treasurer of State to be listed 
10 as beneficiary  of the bond or the irrevocable  standby  letter of credit and the bond or the 
11 irrevocable standby letter of credit to be conditional upon the faithful  performance  of this 
12 Act relating to the payment of compensation  and benefits  to any injured  employee. In 
13 case of cash or securities being deposited, or drawn on a surety bond or letter of credit,  
14 the cash or securities must be placed in an account at interest  by the Treasurer  of State, 
15 and the accumulation of interest  on the cash or securities so deposited  must be credited to 
16 the account and may not be paid to the employer to the extent that the interest  is required  
17 to secure the employer's self-insurance obligations, including the amount needed  to 
18 support any present value discounting in the determination of the amount  of the deposit.  
19 Any security deposit must be held by the Treasurer of State  in trust for the benefit of the 
20 self-insurer's employees for the purposes of making payments  under this Act.  If the 
21 superintendent determines  that the self-insurer has experienced a deterioration in financial 
22 condition that adversely affects  the self-insurer's ability  to pay obligations under  this Act, 
23 the security amount may be  in excess  of the minimum amount required by this Title.
24 A Except as provided  in subsection 5, paragraph  A-1, a self-insurer may,  with the 
25 approval of the Superintendent  of Insurance, use the following types of security  to satisfy 
26 the self-insurer's responsibility  to post security required by the superintendent: a surety  
27 bond; an irrevocable standby letter of credit;  cash deposits and acceptable securities; and 
28 an actuarially determined  fully funded trust.  For purposes of this section, "tangible net 
29 worth" means equity less assets that have no physical existence and depend  on expected 
30 future benefits for their ascribed value.  Unless disapproved by the superintendent 
31 pursuant to paragraph  C, subparagraphs (5) and (6), a group self-insurer that maintains  a 
32 trust actuarially  funded to the confidence level required by the superintendent may use an 
33 irrevocable standby letter of credit  as follows:  only in an amount not greater  than the 
34 difference between the funding to the required confidence level and funding to the 
35 confidence level reduced  by 10 percentage  points; only as long as the trust assets are not 
36 used as collateral for the letter of credit;  and only as long as the value  of trust assets, 
37 excluding the value  of the letter of credit, is at least equal to the present value,  evaluated 
38 to the 65% confidence  level, of ultimate  incurred claims, claims  settlement costs and, if 
39 determined necessary by the  superintendent, administrative costs.
40 A.  An individual  A self-insurer providing  an irrevocable standby letter of credit as 
41 security shall file with the Superintendent of Insurance a letter  of credit,  on a form  
42 approved by the superintendent, copies  of any agreements or other  documents  
43 establishing the terms and conditions  of the employer's or group's reimbursement 
44 obligations to the financial  institution issuing the letter  of credit,  together with copies 
Page 2 - 128LR2976(01)-11 of any required security agreements,  mortgages or other agreements  or documents  
2 granting security for the employer's or group's  reimbursement obligations and any 
3 other agreements  that contain conditions, restrictions or limitations of any kind upon 
4 the employer or group, the superintendent or the Treasurer of State.  The form of 
5 letter of credit  approved by the superintendent must include, but is not limited to, all 
6 terms specifically  required by this subsection and all terms reasonably required to 
7 secure the payment of compensation and benefits to claimants as required under this 
8 Act.  
9 In order to issue  an irrevocable standby  letter of credit as security under this 
10 paragraph, a financial institution or  its parent  company must either:
11 (1)  Maintain a long-term unsecured debt rating of at least A by either Moody's 
12 Investors Service, Inc.  or Standard and Poor's Corporation;
13 (2)  Maintain a short-term commercial  paper  rating  within the 3 highest 
14 categories established by Moody's Investors Service,  Inc. or Standard  and Poor's 
15 Corporation; or
16 (3)  Be certified in writing by the Superintendent of Financial Institutions to be 
17 well capitalized and well managed  in accordance with the criteria set forth in 
18 Title 9-B, section  446-A, subsections 1 and 2.  The Superintendent of Insurance 
19 shall keep the certification confidential, except  from the subject  financial 
20 institution, in accordance with Title 9-B, section 226.
21 The Superintendent  of Insurance may adopt rules to establish additional 
22 qualifications for financial  institutions issuing irrevocable standby  letters of credit.  
23 Rules adopted pursuant  to this paragraph  are routine technical rules  pursuant to Title  
24 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
25 The irrevocable  standby letter of credit must  be the individual obligation of the 
26 issuing financial institution, may not be subject  to any agreement, condition, 
27 qualification or defense  between the financial institution and the employer  or group 
28 and may not in any way be contingent on reimbursement by the employer or group.  
29 If the rating of an issuing financial institution that has issued an irrevocable  standby 
30 letter of credit pursuant to this section falls below the required standard, the employer 
31 or group shall obtain a new irrevocable  standby letter of credit from a qualified  
32 financial institution  or shall provide  other eligible security  of equal value approved 
33 by the Superintendent  of Insurance.  The irrevocable standby letter of credit is 
34 automatically extended for one year from the date of expiration unless, 90 days prior  
35 to any expiration date, the issuing financial institution notifies the Superintendent of 
36 Insurance that the financial  institution elects not to renew the irrevocable standby 
37 letter of  credit.
38 An irrevocable standby letter of credit  that has been issued by a qualified  financial 
39 institution and accepted by the Superintendent  of Insurance binds the issuing 
40 financial institution to pay one or more drafts drawn  by the Treasurer  of State, as 
41 directed by the superintendent, as long as the draft does not exceed the total amount  
42 of the irrevocable standby  letter of credit.   Any draft presented by the Treasurer of 
43 State, as directed by the superintendent,  must be promptly  honored if accompanied  by 
44 the certification of the superintendent that any obligation under this chapter has not 
Page 3 - 128LR2976(01)-11 been paid when  due or that a proceeding  in bankruptcy has been  initiated  by or with 
2 respect to the employer or group in a court  of competent  jurisdiction.
3 If the Superintendent of Insurance certifies that the superintendent has been  notified  
4 by the issuing  financial institution that the irrevocable standby letter of credit expires 
5 by its terms in 30 days or less and that the irrevocable standby letter of credit was not 
6 replaced within 15 days after that notice  to the superintendent by other  eligible  
7 security of equal value approved by the superintendent, then the financial institution 
8 must remit within 15 days the full amount of the irrevocable letter of credit  to the 
9 Treasurer of  State without further certification.
10 Any proceeds from  a draw on such an irrevocable standby letter of credit  by the 
11 Treasurer of State, as directed by the Superintendent of Insurance, must be held by 
12 the Treasurer of State  on behalf  of workers' compensation claimants  to secure 
13 payment of claims until either the superintendent authorizes  the Treasurer of State to 
14 release those proceeds to the employer or group  upon provision  by the employer or 
15 group of replacement  security  adequate to meet the requirements  for security  set by 
16 the superintendent or the superintendent directs distribution of the proceeds in 
17 accordance with this Title.
18 To the extent  not inconsistent with state law, the letter of credit is subject  to and 
19 governed by the International Standby Practices 1998 or successor practices 
20 governing standby letters of credit  duly adopted by the International Chamber  of 
21 Commerce.  If any legal  proceedings are initiated with respect to payment of the 
22 letter of  credit,  those  proceedings are  subject to the  State's courts and law.
23 B.  The Superintendent  of Insurance shall prescribe the form of the surety  bond that 
24 may be used to satisfy, in whole or in part, the self-insurer's responsibility under this 
25 section to post security.  The bond must  be continuous,  be subject  to nonrenewal only 
26 upon not less than 60 days'  notice to the superintendent, cover payment  of all present  
27 and future liabilities incurred under this Act while the bond is in force and cover 
28 payments that become due while the bond is in force that are attributable to injuries 
29 incurred in prior periods  and otherwise unsecured by cash, irrevocable standby letters 
30 of credit  or acceptable securities.   A bond must  be held until all payments  secured by 
31 the bond have  been made or until the bond has been replaced by other eligible 
32 security approved  by the superintendent that covers all outstanding liabilities.   
33 Payments under the bond are due within 30 days after notice  has been  given to the 
34 surety by the board that the principal has failed  to make a payment required under the 
35 terms of an award, agreement or governing  law.  A trust established  to satisfy the 
36 requirements of this section may not be  funded  by a  surety  bond.
37 C.  A self-insurer may establish an actuarially  determined fully funded trust, funded 
38 at a level sufficient  to discharge those  obligations incurred  by the employer pursuant 
39 to this Act as they become due and payable from time to time, as long as the 
40 Superintendent of Insurance  requires  that the value of trust assets be at least equal to 
41 the present value of ultimate expected incurred  claims  and claims  settlement costs, 
42 plus required safety margins and, if determined necessary  by the superintendent, 
43 administrative costs for the operation of the plan of self-insurance.  For the purpose 
44 of determining whether an a group self-insurer's  actuarially determined fully funded 
45 trust has a surplus of funds in excess  of that required by this subsection, the 
Page 4 - 128LR2976(01)-11 superintendent shall consider,  based upon the group's  audit for all completed plan 
2 years, only the following assets held outside the trust account:  cash up to $10,000; 
3 accounts receivable, limited to amounts collected and deposited in the trust account 
4 by the date of the surplus  distribution; accrued  interest on trust account assets that 
5 will be collected and deposited in the trust account  within 6 months from the date of 
6 the surplus determination;  tangible  assets  that will be converted to cash and deposited 
7 in the trust account  prior to the distribution date of any surplus; and a letter of credit  
8 to be used to partially fund the trust to the extent allowed  under  this section and rules 
9 adopted by the superintendent, as supported in the actuarial review.  The 
10 superintendent shall consider cash held outside  the trust account in excess of $10,000 
11 if the self-insurer provides, to the superintendent's satisfaction, documentation 
12 regarding why the money is being held outside the trust account.  An actuarially 
13 determined fully funded trust must  be funded as follows, as determined by the 
14 superintendent.
15 (1)  For individual and group self-insurers, the amount of security  must  be 
16 determined based upon an actuarial review.  The actuarial review  must  take into 
17 consideration the use by a group self-insurer of any irrevocable standby letter  of 
18 credit.  Except as provided in subparagraph (3), initial funding for each plan year 
19 must be maintained at the 90% or higher confidence level.   Funding  after the 
20 completion of the initial plan year may be established no lower  than the 75% 
21 confidence level if the  following has occurred:
22 (a)  A year considered  for reduction is  completed;
23 (b)  The supporting  actuarial review includes an evaluation of the completed 
24 year experience with claims  evaluated not less than 6 months  from the end of 
25 the plan year, or in the case of a group self-insurer  in existence for at least 36 
26 months, not less  than  4 months from the end  of the plan year; and
27 (c)  For individual self-insurers,  prior approval from the superintendent is 
28 obtained.
29 For the purposes of determining  the confidence level, all completed years  at the 
30 same confidence  level may be aggregated.  For individual self-insurers, funds 
31 may not be released from  the trust or transferred between years except as 
32 approved by the superintendent.  The governing body of a group self-insurer may 
33 at any time declare  a surplus of funds above the required  confidence level, but 
34 may only release funds after the completion of any plan year.  The superintendent 
35 may request  information  regarding any such declaration.  Any distribution of 
36 surplus must be based upon an actuarial review of all outstanding  obligations for 
37 all completed  plan years, an audited financial  statement of the group for all 
38 completed plan years and a surplus distribution worksheet for all completed plan 
39 years on a form approved by the superintendent.  The group self-insurer must 
40 provide the required information  within 10 days after the distribution.  Any 
41 surplus declared  or distributed pursuant  to this paragraph is subject to adjustment 
42 after review  by the superintendent within 60 days of the receipt of the required 
43 information.  Any deficit below the required confidence level,  as determined by 
44 the superintendent, that results from a distribution  under this paragraph must be 
45 funded within  45 days from  the date of the notice by the superintendent.
Page 5 - 128LR2976(01)-11 (2)  A group self-insurer  may elect to fund at a higher  confidence level through 
2 the use of cash, marketable securities  or reinsurance.  If a member of a group 
3 self-insurer terminates  membership in the group for any reason, that member 
4 shall fund the member's  proportionate share of the liabilities and obligations of 
5 the trust to the 95% confidence level.  If for any reason the departing member 
6 fails to fund the member's  proportionate share  of the trust's  exposure  to the 95% 
7 level of confidence, the trust is responsible for that member's  liabilities  and 
8 obligations to the trust. If the superintendent finds that a material risk to the 
9 trust's ability  to satisfy  its liabilities and obligations in full exists due to the 
10 failure of one or more departing members to fund the departing members' 
11 proportionate share of those liabilities and obligations to the 95% confidence 
12 level or due to the failure  of the group  trust to enforce the funding requirement, 
13 the superintendent shall consider the unfunded share of the trust's exposure when  
14 approving a determination of a  surplus or deficit in the trust.
15 (3)  Subject to prior approval by the superintendent in accordance with 
16 subparagraph (5), a self-insurer that has successfully maintained an actuarially 
17 determined fully  funded trust for a period of 5 or more consecutive years may 
18 fund all years,  including the prospective fund year, at the 75% or higher 
19 confidence level in the aggregate and a group  self-insurer that has successfully 
20 maintained an actuarially determined fully funded trust for a period of 10 or more 
21 consecutive years may fund all years, including  the prospective fund year, at the 
22 65% or higher confidence level in the aggregate.
23 (4)  Trust assets must  consist of cash or marketable  securities of a type and risk 
24 character as specified in subsection 9.  The trustee shall submit  a report to the 
25 superintendent not less frequently than quarterly that lists the assets comprising  
26 the corpus  of the trust, including a statement  of their market  value and the 
27 investment activity during the period covered by the report.  The trust must be 
28 established and maintained subject to the condition that trust assets may not be 
29 transferred or revert in any manner  to the employer except to the extent that the 
30 superintendent finds that the value of the trust assets  exceeds  the present value of 
31 incurred claims and claims  settlement costs with an actuarially indicated margin 
32 for future  loss development.  In all other respects,  the trust instrument, including 
33 terms for certification, funding, designation  of trustee and payout, must be as 
34 approved by the superintendent,  except that the value of the trust account must be 
35 actuarially calculated at least annually by a casualty  actuary who is a member of 
36 the American  Academy  of Actuaries  and adjusted to the required level of 
37 funding.
38 (5)  In determining whether a self-insurer that maintains an actuarially  
39 determined fully funded trust qualifies for a reduction in the required confidence 
40 level pursuant  to subparagraph  (1) or (3) or is subject to an enhanced confidence 
41 level pursuant to subparagraph (6), the superintendent shall consider the financial 
42 condition of the self-insurer in relation  to the potential  workers'  compensation 
43 liabilities.  The factors  the superintendent may consider include the self-insurer's 
44 liquidity, leverage, tangible net worth, size and net income.  For group self-
45 insurers, the superintendent's  review  must  be based on the aggregate  financial 
46 condition of the group members.  At the request of the superintendent,  a group 
Page 6 - 128LR2976(01)-11 self-insurer shall report  relevant financial  information, on a form prescribed by 
2 the superintendent,  at such intervals as the superintendent directs.  The 
3 superintendent may establish additional review criteria or procedures  by rule.  
4 Rules adopted pursuant  to this subparagraph are routine  technical rules as defined 
5 in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
6 (6)  If the superintendent determines, based  on an evaluation of a self-insurer's 
7 financial condition pursuant to subparagraph (5), that the confidence level  at 
8 which the self-insurer has been authorized to fund its trust is not sufficient  to 
9 provide adequate security for the self-insurer's reasonably anticipated potential 
10 workers' compensation  liabilities, the superintendent  shall make  a determination 
11 of the appropriate confidence level and order  the self-insurer to take prompt 
12 action to increase funding to that level within 60 days.
13 D.  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, authorization to self-insure may 
14 not be conditioned on a bond  or security deposit  that is in excess  of $50,000 for the 
15 State, the University of Maine System or any county,  city or town with a state-
16 assessed valuation equal to or in excess  of $300,000,000  and either a bond rating 
17 equal to or in excess of the 2nd highest  standard as set by a national bond rating 
18 agency or a net worth equal to or in excess of $35,000,000.   If a county, city or town 
19 that is a self-insurer  relies  upon a bond rating  to qualify under this paragraph, it shall 
20 value or cause to be valued  its unpaid workers'  compensation claims pursuant to 
21 sound accepted actuarial principles.  This value must be incorporated  in the annual 
22 audit of the county, city or town,  together  with disclosure of funds appropriated to 
23 discharge incurred claims  expenses.
24 E.  In consideration  of a self-insuring entity's application  for authorization  to operate 
25 a plan of self-insurance,  the Superintendent of Insurance may require or permit  an 
26 applicant to employ valid  risk transfer by the utilization of primary reinsurance,  
27 subject to the provisions  of subsection 8.  Standards respecting the application of 
28 reinsurance must be contained in a  rule adopted by the superintendent pursuant  to the 
29 Maine Administrative Procedure Act.  Reinsurance must be defined as insurance 
30 covering workers' compensation exposures in excess  of risk retained by a self-insurer.
31 F.  An employer may be eligible for approved self-insurance status pursuant to this 
32 Act if the employer  submits  a written guarantee of the obligations  incurred pursuant  
33 to this Act, the guarantee to be issued by a United States or Canadian corporation that 
34 is a member  of an affiliated  group of which the employer is a member, and which  
35 corporation is solvent and demonstrates  an ability to pay the compensation and 
36 benefits, and the guarantee is in a form acceptable  to the Superintendent of Insurance.  
37 The guarantor  shall provide audited annual financial  statements and such other 
38 information as the superintendent  may require,  including quarterly  financial 
39 statements, and the employer shall provide a cash deposit, satisfactory securities, 
40 irrevocable standby letters of credit issued by a qualified financial institution  or a 
41 surety bond as otherwise  required by this Act in an amount not less than $100,000.  
42 The guarantor is deemed  to have submitted to the jurisdiction of the board  and the 
43 courts of this State for purposes of enforcing  the guarantee.  The guarantor, in all 
44 respects, is bound by and subject to the orders, findings, decisions or awards rendered 
45 against the employer for payment of compensation  and any penalties or forfeitures 
46 provided under this Act.  The superintendent, following hearing, may revoke the self-
Page 7 - 128LR2976(01)-11 insured status  of the employer if at any time the assets of the guarantor become 
2 impaired or encumbered or are otherwise found to be inadequate to support the 
3 guarantee.
4 G.  A subsidiary employer  may be eligible for approved self-insurance status 
5 pursuant to this Act if:  the subsidiary employer  files an application  jointly with a 
6 qualified parent corporation that has direct ownership of a majority voting interest of 
7 the subsidiary  employer;  the parent corporation  and subsidiary employer submit an 
8 irrevocable contract of assignment, on a form approved  by the Superintendent  of 
9 Insurance, of the subsidiary employer's obligations incurred pursuant  to this Act; the 
10 parent corporation is solvent and demonstrates  an ability to pay the compensation and 
11 benefits of the subsidiary employer; and the subsidiary employer  meets all other 
12 requirements for application and qualification as a self-insurer under this chapter  and 
13 under any applicable rules adopted by the superintendent.  If the parent corporation is 
14 not a United  States corporation, the superintendent  may,  in the superintendent's sole 
15 discretion, establish the conditions of any approval  of the foreign  parent corporation 
16 or deny the application of the foreign parent corporation.   As part of its application 
17 for approval,  a foreign parent corporation must provide  the following  information to 
18 the superintendent: evidence that its country  of domicile  has substantially similar 
19 laws with respect to submission to the jurisdiction of the board  and the courts of this 
20 State for the purposes of payment  of workers'  compensation claims of the subsidiary 
21 employer; audited  financial statements, as otherwise required  by this Act, prepared  in 
22 the English  language  by a certified public  accountant licensed in a state in the United  
23 States in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards as prescribed by the 
24 American Institute of Certified  Public Accountants;  and security,  as otherwise  
25 required by the Act, in United States currency.   The irrevocable contract of 
26 assignment and application must be signed  by a duly authorized officer of each 
27 corporation and the application must  include a board of directors' resolution from 
28 each entity as evidence of each officer's authority  to enter into the contract.  The 
29 superintendent may determine the subsidiary employer's eligibility for self-insurance 
30 authority and the amount  of required security based upon the parent corporation's 
31 consolidated financial statement, as long as the employer complies with paragraph  H.  
32 A subsidiary  employer  currently authorized  to self-insure need not pay the 
33 application fee required of a new applicant in order to file an application to qualify  
34 under this subsection,  but the subsidiary employer and parent corporation must 
35 provide all information required under this subsection as if they were  a new 
36 applicant.  Once the subsidiary  employer  becomes authorized to self-insure  under this 
37 section, the parent corporation assumes liability  for all prior workers' compensation 
38 liabilities incurred by the subsidiary employer during  the period of self-insurance  
39 prior to the date of authorization under this subsection, unless the subsidiary  
40 employer files an alternative  plan approved by the superintendent.  The parent  
41 corporation and the subsidiary  employer must both be named on the certificate of 
42 authorization for self-insurance authority.  Upon  issuance  of a certificate of 
43 authorization pursuant to this subsection, the following applies.
44 (1)  The parent corporation  is deemed to have submitted to the jurisdiction of the 
45 board and the courts  of the State for the purposes  of payment of workers' 
46 compensation claims of the subsidiary employer and is deemed  to have submitted 
47 to the jurisdiction of the superintendent for purposes of implementation of this 
Page 8 - 128LR2976(01)-11 Act.  The parent corporation, in all respects,  is bound by and subject to all orders, 
2 findings, decisions or awards rendered  against the subsidiary employer for 
3 payment of compensation and any penalties or forfeitures provided under  this 
4 Act.
5 (2)  A subsidiary employer authorized  under this subsection and the parent 
6 corporation are considered  one employer  for the purposes of membership  in the 
7 Maine Self-Insurance Guarantee Association.  In the event  of termination, 
8 transfer, insolvency, dissolution or bankruptcy  of a subsidiary employer 
9 qualifying under this subsection, the parent corporation assumes all assessment 
10 obligations of the subsidiary employer  for its period  of self-insurance  and is not 
11 considered a new  member  of the association.
12 (3)  If the subsidiary  employer fails for any reason  to pay compensation and 
13 benefits as required under  this Act, the parent corporation stands in the place of 
14 the subsidiary  employer and is deemed to be the employer, subject  to all 
15 requirements and provisions  of this Act.  For the purposes of payment of benefits  
16 and compensation under  this Act, an employee of the subsidiary employer is 
17 deemed to be concurrently  employed by both corporations.  Concerning  
18 notification of injury to an employee of the subsidiary employer, notice  to or 
19 knowledge of the occurrence of the injury on the part of the subsidiary employer  
20 is deemed  notice or knowledge on the part of the parent corporation.  The 
21 transfer, insolvency, dissolution or bankruptcy  of a subsidiary employer 
22 qualifying under this subsection does not relieve  the parent corporation from 
23 payment of compensation for injuries or death sustained  by an employee during  
24 the time the subsidiary employer  was approved for self-insurance authority under  
25 this subsection  and the parent  corporation continues to be deemed an employer 
26 until such time as all outstanding workers' compensation claims  have been  
27 discharged.
28 (4)  The transfer, insolvency, dissolution or bankruptcy of a parent corporation 
29 causes the termination of the subsidiary  employer's authorization to self-insure 
30 and a termination plan must be filed pursuant to subsection 14.
31 H.  Each individual self-insurer shall submit  with its application, and not less 
32 frequently than annually thereafter, a financial statement of current origin that has 
33 been audited by a certified public  accountant.  When a self-insurer qualifies  on the 
34 basis of a financial  guarantee or on the basis of an irrevocable contract of assignment,  
35 the Superintendent of Insurance may accept  an audited financial statement of the 
36 guarantor or parent corporation in satisfaction  of this requirement and may also 
37 require combining  statements provided in an array that is reconciled to the 
38 consolidated report.
39 Sec. 2.  39-A MRSA §403, sub-§5,  ¶A, as amended by PL 1995, c. 594, §2, is 
40 further amended  to read:
41 A.  Any group of employers may adopt  a plan for self-insurance,  as a group, for the 
42 payment of compensation under this Act to their employees.  A group  may not be 
43 approved to operate a self-insurance plan in the form of a corporation, partnership or 
44 limited liability company.   Under a group  self-insurance plan the group shall assume  
Page 9 - 128LR2976(01)-11 the liability of all the employers within the group and pay all compensation for which 
2 the employers are liable under  this chapter. When the plan is adopted, the group shall 
3 furnish satisfactory proof  to the Superintendent  of Insurance of its financial ability to 
4 pay the compensation for the employers in the group and its revenues, their source 
5 and assurance of continuance.  The superintendent shall  require the deposit  with the 
6 board of such securities as the superintendent determines necessary of the kind 
7 prescribed in subsection 9 or the filing of a bond issued  by a surety  company  
8 authorized to transact business in this State, in an amount to be determined to secure 
9 its liability  to pay the compensation of each employer  as above  provided in 
10 accordance with subsection 9.  The surety bond must be approved  as to form by the 
11 superintendent. The superintendent may also require that any agreements, contracts  
12 and other pertinent  documents relating  to the organization of the employers  in the 
13 group be filed with the superintendent at the time the application for group self-
14 insurance is made.  The application must  be on a form prescribed  by the 
15 superintendent. The superintendent has the authority to deny the application  of the 
16 group to pay the compensation for failure to satisfy any applicable requirement of this 
17 section.  The superintendent shall approve  or disapprove an application within 90 
18 days. The group qualifying under this paragraph  is referred to as a  self-insurer.
19 Sec. 3.  39-A MRSA §403, sub-§5,  ¶A-1 is  enacted  to read:
20 A-1.  A group  self-insurer shall maintain an actuarially  determined  fully funded trust 
21 in compliance with subsection 3, paragraph C, except that, with the approval  of the 
22 Superintendent of Insurance,  an affiliated  group self-insurer may secure the liabilities 
23 of each  member  employer in accordance with this paragraph.
24 (1)  An affiliated group self-insurer shall  designate  a principal member, subject to 
25 the approval  of the superintendent.  The principal  member must be the direct or 
26 indirect parent company of every other  group  member.
27 (2)  If the principal member does not have employees  in the State, the principal 
28 member must  meet the same qualifications as a subsidiary employer applying to 
29 become an individual self-insurer under subsection 3, paragraph G, except that 
30 direct majority ownership  is not required and the group's indemnity agreement is 
31 deemed to meet the  requirement for an  irrevocable contract of assignment.
32 (3)  Unless  otherwise ordered by the superintendent, the principal  member may 
33 provide security for the affiliated group  self-insurer's obligations in the same  
34 form and amount as the security required for an individual self-insurer, based on 
35 the financial  condition of the principal member and the aggregate self-insurance  
36 exposure of  the group.
37 Sec. 4.  39-A MRSA §403, sub-§5,  ¶D, as amended by PL 2011, c. 180, §2, is 
38 further amended  to read:
39 D.  If for any reason the status of a group self-insurer under  this paragraph is 
40 terminated, the securities, the surety bond, the letter of credit or the deposit security 
41 required by this section  continues must continue to be held by the Superintendent of 
42 Insurance or Treasurer of State in accordance with this section and remains  subject to 
43 the control of the board until all claims secured by the securities, surety  bond, letter  
Page 10 - 128LR2976(01)-11 of credit  or deposit against  the group  self-insurer have been discharged. When all 
2 such claims have  been discharged or after such period  as the Superintendent of 
3 Insurance determines  proper, the superintendent may accept in lieu thereof, and for 
4 the additional purpose of securing such further and future contingent liability as may 
5 arise from prior injuries  to workers and be incurred by reason of any change in the 
6 condition of such workers warranting the board making subsequent awards for 
7 payment of additional compensation, a policy  of insurance furnished  by the group  
8 self-insurer, its successor or assigns or other  entity carrying on or liquidating such 
9 self-insurance group. The policy must be in a form approved by the superintendent 
10 and issued by any insurance company licensed to issue this class of insurance in the 
11 State. It may only be issued for a single complete premium payment in advance by 
12 the group self-insurer.  It must be given in an amount determined by the 
13 superintendent and when issued is noncancellable for any cause during the 
14 continuance of the liability secured and so covered.
15 Sec. 5.  39-A MRSA §403, sub-§10, as enacted  by PL 1991, c. 885, Pt. A, §8 and 
16 affected by §§9  to 11, is amended to read:
17 10.  Form of reinsurance  contracts.  All  reinsurance contracts issued or renewed  
18 after the effective  date of this subsection must be issued  by companies that meet the 
19 requirements of subsection 11 and must  name the self-insurer  and the Maine  Self-
20 Insurance Guarantee Association as coinsureds to the extent of their respective  interests  
21 an additional insured.  These  reinsurance contracts must  recognize the Maine  Self-
22 Insurance Guarantee Association's rights of recovery, within the terms  of coverage  
23 provided by the contract, for payments made by the association to or on behalf  of 
24 claimants regarding covered claims and for claims in the course  of settlement, the value 
25 of which when reduced  to payments will create  an obligation on the part of the  
26 reinsurance carrier to reimburse the association to the extent of funds disbursed by the 
27 association to discharge covered claims.  The requirements of this subsection apply  to any 
28 reinsurance contract issued to any individual or group  self-insurer as part of a self-
29 insurance program approved  for use within this State  and are in addition to any other 
30 requirement applicable to  reinsurance  contracts imposed  by law or rule.
31 Reinsurance contracts must further specify that the reinsurance carrier  and the Maine 
32 Self-Insurance Guarantee  Association may enter into agreements on the terms  of 
33 settlement and distribution of benefits accruing  to claimants within the limits of the 
34 authority of the parties to make settlements with respect to any  coverage  year.
35 To the extent  that the Maine  Self-Insurance  Guarantee Association  succeeds to a recovery 
36 of benefits  from any reinsurance carrier on behalf  of claimants, those benefits must be 
37 timely disbursed by the association to or on behalf  of claimants as they become due and 
38 payable pursuant to this Act.  Funds recovered under reinsurance  contracts  on behalf of 
39 claimants must be applied  consistent with the terms of coverage under the contract to 
40 loss, loss adjustment expense  and attorneys'  fees that  are payable under  this Act.
41 Sec. 6.  39-A MRSA §403, sub-§14,  ¶H-1 is  enacted  to read:
42 H-1.  A member of a group self-insurer and a successor  employer of a member of a 
43 group self-insurer may apply for continuing  membership  in the group self-insurer,  
44 subject to the approval of the Superintendent  of Insurance  and the group self-insurer, 
Page 11 - 128LR2976(01)-11 in accordance with procedures established by the group  self-insurer.  The procedures 
2 established by the group self-insurer must include requirements the superintendent 
3 determines are substantially similar to the relevant  provisions  of paragraphs C and D.  
4 As long as the successor employer  remains a member in good  standing and has fully 
5 assumed the former member's obligations, the former member may not be treated as a 
6 departing member for purposes of enhanced  security requirements under subsection 
7 3, paragraph C, subparagraph (2).
8 SUMMARY
9 This bill amends the workers' compensation laws governing self-insurers.  It requires 
10 a group self-insurer that provides an irrevocable  standby letter of credit as security to file 
11 with the Superintendent of Insurance a letter of credit  and other agreements or documents 
12 relating to the employer's  reimbursement obligations.
13 The bill amends the workers' compensation laws governing the participation of 
14 employers in a group self-insurance plan.   It requires  a group self-insurer to maintain  an 
15 actuarially determined fully  funded  trust as security for self-insurance,  except that the 
16 Superintendent of Insurance  may authorize an affiliated  group self-insurer meeting 
17 certain requirements to secure the liabilities of each of its members.  It requires that if the 
18 status of a group self-insurer is terminated the required security remains  subject to the 
19 control of the Workers'  Compensation Board until claims against the group  self-insurer 
20 have been discharged.
21 The bill removes a requirement that reinsurance contracts name the self-insurer  as a 
22 coinsured with the Maine Self-Insurance Guarantee Association.   It also authorizes a 
23 member of a group  self-insurer and a successor employer of a member to apply  for 
24 continuing membership  in the group  self-insurer.
