 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 53
H.P. 39 House of  Representatives, January 10, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Prohibit Payment  Per Signature for Citizen Petition 
Drives
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GUERIN of Glenburn.
Cosponsored by Senator MAKER  of Washington  and
Representatives: GILLWAY of Searsport,  LUCHINI of Ellsworth, NADEAU of Winslow, 
PICKETT of  Dixfield,  TUELL of East  Machias,  Senators: DIAMOND of Cumberland, DILL 
of Penobscot,  KATZ  of Kennebec.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0007( 01)-1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง20 is amended to read:  4 
Section 20.  Meaning of words "ele ctors," "people," "recess of 5 
Legislature," "statewide election," "measure," "circulator," and "written 6 
petition"; written petitions for people's veto; written petitions for direct 7 
initiative.   As used in any of the 3 preceding sections or in this section the words 8 
"electors" and "people" mean the electors of the State qualified to vote for Governor; 9 
"recess of the Legislature" means the adjournment without day of a session of the 10 
Legislature; "statewide election" means any election held throughout the Stat e on a 11 
particular day; "measure" means an Act, bill, resolve or resolution proposed by the 12 
people, or 2 or more such, or part or parts of such, as the case may be; "circulator" means 13 
a person who solicits signatures for written petitions, and who must be a  resident of this 14 
State and whose name must appear on the voting list of the city, town or plantation of the 15 
circulator's residence as qualified to vote for Governor , and a circulator may not be paid 16 
based upon the number of signatures the circulator colle cts; "written petition" means one 17 
or more petitions written or printed, or partly written and partly printed, with the original 18 
signatures of the petitioners attached, verified as to the authenticity of the signatures by 19 
the oath of the circulator that all  of the signatures to the petition were made in the 20 
presence of the circulator and that to the best of the circulator's knowledge and belief 21 
each signature is the signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and 22 
accompanied by the certificate of t he official authorized by law to maintain the voting list 23 
or to certify signatures on petitions for voters on the voting list of the city, town or 24 
plantation in which the petitioners reside that their names appear on the voting list of the 25 
city, town or pl antation of the official as qualified to vote for Governor.  The oath of the 26 
circulator must be sworn to in the presence of a person authorized by law to administer 27 
oaths.  Written petitions for a people's veto pursuant to Article IV, Part Third, Section 1 7 28 
must be submitted to the appropriate officials of cities, towns or plantations, or state 29 
election officials as authorized by law, for determination of whether the petitioners are 30 
qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the 5th day before the petiti on must be filed 31 
in the office of the Secretary of State, or, if such 5th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a 32 
legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal 33 
holiday.  Written petitions for a direct initiative pursuan t to Article IV, Part Third, 34 
Section 18 must be submitted to the appropriate officials of cities, towns or plantations, or 35 
state election officials as authorized by law, for determination of whether the petitioners 36 
are qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the 10th day before the petition must be 37 
filed in the office of the Secretary of State, or, if such 10th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or 38 
a legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal 39 
holiday.  Such offi cials must complete the certification of only those petitions submitted 40 
by these deadlines and must return them to the circulators or their agents within 2 days 41 
for a petition for a people's veto and within 5 days for a petition for a direct initiative, 42 
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, of the date on which such petitions were 43 
submitted to them. Signatures on petitions not submitted to the appropriate local or state 44 
officials by these deadlines may not be certified. The petition shall set fort h the full text 45 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0007(01) -1 
 of the measure requested or proposed.  Petition forms shall be furnished or approved by 1 
the Secretary of State upon written application signed and notarized and submitted to the 2 
office of the Secretary of State by a resident of this State w hose name must appear on the 3 
voting list of the city, town or plantation of that resident as qualified to vote for Governor.  4 
The full text of a measure submitted to a vote of the people under the provisions of the 5 
Constitution need not be printed on the o fficial ballots, but, until otherwise provided by 6 
the Legislature, the Secretary of State shall prepare the ballots in such form as to present 7 
the question or questions concisely and intelligibly.  8 
; and be it further  9 
Constitutional referendum procedure; fo rm of question; effective date. 10 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 11 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 12 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide el ection held in the month of November 13 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 14 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  15 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to prohibit a person 16 
who collects signatures for a written petition for a people's veto or for the 17 
direct initiative of legislation from being paid based upon the number of 18 
signatures the person collects?"  19 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by  ballot on this question 20 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 21 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 22 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and ret urns made to the Secretary of 23 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 24 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 25 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that f act without delay and the amendment 26 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 27 
further  28 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 29 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town an d plantation all ballots, returns and copies 30 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  31 
SUMMARY  32 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to prohibit a person who 33 
collects signatures for a written petition for a people's veto or for the direct initiative of 34 
legislation from being paid based upon the number of signatures the person collects.  35 
 
