 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 257
H.P. 190 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2017
An Act  To Enable Municipalities Working  with Utilities To 
Establish Microgrids
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DEVIN of  Newcastle.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: BERRY of Bowdoinham, GROHMAN of Biddeford, HARVELL  of 
Farmington, KUMIEGA  of Deer Isle, RYKERSON of Kittery, TIPPING of Orono, TUELL of 
East Machias, Senator: CHIPMAN of Cumberland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2117(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to establish measures to allow municipalities, working 5 
cooperatively with electrical utilities, to create microgrids, which are electricity 6 
distribution systems consisting of distributed energy sources, including demand 7 
management, storage and generation and loads capable of operating in parallel with, or 8 
independently from, the main power grid.  Thi s bill would address the following 9 
requirements:  10 
1.  The generation of electricity from renewable sources into the microgrid;  11 
2.  Methods for adding capacity for storage and managing or enabling a utility to 12 
manage the charging of the microgrid and the use  of the stored power;  13 
3.  An appropriate rate for power generation and stored power usage;  14 
4.  A credit applicable toward municipal electricity utilization or assignable to 15 
organizations or households according to municipal public service decisions; and  16 
5.  Contracts with utilities to receive compensation for scheduling or shedding of 17 
electrical load in order to lower peak demand and consequently ratepayer prices.  18 
 
