 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1778
H.P. 1224 House of  Representatives, January 9, 2018
Resolve, Regarding Medicaid Reimbursement  for Rehabilitation  
Hospitals
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative JORGENSEN of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator DION of Cumberland  and
Representatives: DENNO  of Cumberland, FARNSWORTH of Portland.

Page 1 - 128LR2687(01)-11 Emergency preamble. Whereas,  acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as  emergencies; and
3 Whereas, recent changes to the formula used by the Department of Health  and 
4 Human Services  for determining  Medicaid reimbursement rates  for providers  of 
5 rehabilitation services have placed an undue and inequitable financial burden on the 
6 providers of these services; and
7 Whereas, it is  imperative that this inequity be corrected as soon as possible; and
8 Whereas, in the judgment  of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
9 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine  and require  the following legislation as 
10 immediately necessary  for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety;  now, 
11 therefore, be it
12 Sec. 1.  Medicaid reimbursement rates.   Resolved:  That the Department  of 
13 Health and Human Services shall  increase  the Medicaid  reimbursement rate provided to 
14 rehabilitation hospitals.  This increase  in the Medicaid reimbursement rate must be 
15 funded using  existing hospital reimbursement resources  and have no net cost to the 
16 General Fund, Other Special Revenue  Funds or  the Federal Expenditures Fund.
17 Emergency clause.  In view  of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
18 legislation takes effect when  approved.
19 SUMMARY
20 This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services  to increase the 
21 Medicaid reimbursement  rate provided  to rehabilitation  hospitals.  This increase in the 
22 Medicaid reimbursement  rate must  be funded  using  existing hospital reimbursement 
23 resources and have  no net cost to the General Fund,  Other  Special  Revenue Funds or the 
24 Federal Expenditures Fund.
