 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 393
H.P. 284 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2017
An Act  To Clarify That the Department of Transportation Is 
Exempt from  Property Assessment Liabilities When Acquiring 
Property by Condemnation
Submitted by the Department of  Transportation pursuant to  Joint  Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GILLWAY of Searsport.
Cosponsored by Senator COLLINS of  York and
Representatives: BRYANT of Windham,  GRANT of Gardiner,  PARRY of  Arundel,  Senator: 
ROSEN of Hancock.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0754(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  23 MRSA ยง161, sub -ยง1, as amended by PL 1971, c. 593, ยง22, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
1.  Reimbursement.  When the department acquires real or personal property for 4 
transportation purpo ses, the department is not required to pay any taxes or assessments on 5 
that property.   The department, as soon as practicable after the date of payment of just 6 
compensation, shall reimburse the owner from whom land or rights in land were  the 7 
property has b een acquired for highway  transportation  purposes, to the extent the 8 
department deems fair and reasonable, for expenses such the owner necessarily incurred 9 
for: 10 
A.  Recording fees, transfer taxes and similar expenses, if any, incidental to 11 
conveying such pr operty to the State;  12 
B.  Penalty costs for prepayment of any preexisting recorded mortgage entered into in 13 
good faith encumbering such real property; and  14 
C.  The pro rata portion of real or personal  property taxes assessed or  paid which  that 15 
are allowable to a period subsequent to the date of vesting title in the State, or the 16 
effective date of possession of such real property by the State, whichever is earlier  the 17 
end of the municipal fiscal year during which the acquisition takes place .  An owner 18 
from who m real or personal property has been acquired for transportation purposes is 19 
not liable for assessments or other tax liabilities covering a period during which that 20 
owner no longer owns the property.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This bill clarifies that the Department of Trans portation is not required to pay taxes or 23 
assessments on property it acquires for transportation purposes.  The bill provides that the 24 
previous property owner is not liable for assessments or other tax liabilities on the 25 
condemned property for any period o f time during which that owner no longer owns the 26 
property.  27 
 
