 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1868
H.P. 1304 House of  Representatives, March 20, 2018
Resolve, To  Increase Funding  for Evidence-based Therapies  for 
Treating Emotional and Behavioral Problems in Children
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MADIGAN of Waterville.
Cosponsored by Senator BREEN of  Cumberland  and
Representatives: AUSTIN of Skowhegan, DENNO of Cumberland, DOORE of Augusta, HANDY of  Lewiston, HYMANSON  of York,  MALABY of Hancock,  TALBOT ROSS of 
Portland, WARREN of  Hallowell.

Page 1 - 128LR2909(01)-11 Emergency preamble. Whereas,  acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as  emergencies; and
3 Whereas, this legislation needs to take effect  before the expiration  of the 90-day 
4 period because MaineCare  reimbursement rates for evidence-based  therapies for treating 
5 emotional and behavioral problems in children have not been adjusted in 8 years and are 
6 insufficient to enable  some  providers  to continue to provide  services; and
7 Whereas, in the judgment  of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
8 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine  and require  the following legislation as 
9 immediately necessary  for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety;  now, 
10 therefore, be it
11 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to increase 
12 MaineCare reimbursement for outpatient psychosocial treatments for 
13 children.  Resolved:  That the Department  of Health and Human  Services shall 
14 increase reimbursement rates  under rule Chapter 101: MaineCare Benefits Manual, 
15 Chapters II and III, Sections 28, 65 and 97 for evidence-based therapies for treating 
16 emotional and behavioral problems in children.   These therapies include  multisystemic  
17 therapy, multisystemic  therapy  for problem sexualized behavior and functional family 
18 therapy.  These  rates must be sufficient  to cover all costs to the provider  of delivering the 
19 services, including  additional training,  to attract  enough providers  to clear waiting lists 
20 for services  and to attract providers to all areas of the State, including underserved rural  
21 areas.  These rates  must be  set on a  per case per week  basis.
22 Emergency clause.  In view  of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
23 legislation takes effect when  approved.
24 SUMMARY
25 This resolve  requires  the Department of Health and Human Services  to increase the 
26 MaineCare reimbursement  rates  for evidence-based therapies for treating emotional  and 
27 behavioral problems in children to rates that cover all costs to the provider of delivering 
28 the services,  including additional training, clear waiting lists and attract providers to all 
29 areas of the State, including underserved rural areas.   These  rates must  be set on a per 
30 case per week basis.
