 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1430
H.P. 984 House of  Representatives,  April 13, 2017
An Act  To Develop  a Statewide Resource  and Referral Center and 
Develop Hub-and-spoke  Models To Improve Access, Treatment and 
Recovery for Those  with Substance Use Disorder
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative VACHON of Scarborough.
Cosponsored by Senator DILL of Penobscot and
Representatives: CHACE of  Durham,  COREY of Windham, HYMANSON of York, 
MALABY of Hancock,  McCREIGHT of Harpswell, SIROCKI  of Scarborough,  STEWART  of 
Presque Isle, Senator: CUSHING of Penobscot.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1701(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
PART A  2 
Sec. A -1.  5 MRSA ยง20054 is enacted to read:  3 
ยง20054.  Statewide resource and referral center  4 
The department shall operate a statewide resource and referral center.  The center 5 
must provid e resources and referrals for any person seeking substance abuse treatment 6 
options, any family member of a person currently receiving substance abuse treatment, 7 
friends of a person currently receiving or seeking substance abuse treatment, any member 8 
of law  enforcement and any substance abuse treatment provider.  The center must allow 9 
for multiple ways for a person or provider to access the center including a telephone 10 
hotline and Internet access.  The department must develop protocols for referring a person  11 
needing substance abuse treatment to treatment services and must develop networks for 12 
providers of substance abuse treatment services.  This section does not prohibit any 13 
person from obtaining services and treatment for substance use disorder independent 14 
from the resource and referral center.  15 
PART B  16 
Sec. B -1.  Definitions.  For the purposes of this Part, unless the context otherwise 17 
indicates, the following terms have the following meanings:  18 
1.  "Department" means the Department of Health and Human Service s. 19 
2.  "Hub" means a licensed substance abuse treatment facility providing 20 
comprehensive services with an intensive outpatient program for individuals with acute 21 
needs including but not limited to licensed behavioral health providers, community 22 
mental heal th centers, methadone clinics, hospitals and federally qualified health centers.  23 
3.  "Integrated medication -assisted treatment" means a combination of medication, 24 
counseling and behavioral therapy that has proven effective in treating substance use 25 
disorde r. 26 
4.  "Spoke" means a primary care practice providing evidence -based medication - 27 
assisted therapy for substance use disorder, including but not limited to prescriptions for 28 
medication proven effective in the treatment of substance use disorder, and incorpo rating 29 
integrated behavioral health treatment either directly or through close relationships with 30 
integrated behavioral health providers.  31 
Sec. B -2.  Department of Health and Human Services to support hub -and- 32 
spoke model for substance use disorder treatment .  No later than October 1, 33 
2017, the Department of Health and Human Services shall contract for evidence -based 34 
treatment to support individuals with substance use disorder, including, but not limited to, 35 
hub-and-spoke models.  The department shall seek to  support treatment models that serve 36 
individuals across the State using integrated medication -assisted treatment.  An individual 37 
receiving treatment may receive treatment at a hub or a spoke, whichever is most 38 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1701(01) -1 
 appropriate for the individual's needs, and an  individual may move between hubs and 1 
spokes as needs change.  2 
Sec. B -3.  Department of Health and Human Services to seek federal 3 
funding.  The department shall seek federal funding to support integrated medication - 4 
assisted treatment and a hub -and-spoke mod el of delivery of services and distribute 5 
resources to hubs and spokes based on needs.  6 
Sec. B -4.  Development of grant funding for education.  The department shall 7 
provide grant funding to hubs to provide initial and continuing education and training to 8 
primary care providers across the State acting as spokes.  9 
Sec. B -5.  Provide treatment to uninsured individuals seeking treatment.  10 
The department shall provide funds to support treatment for uninsured individuals 11 
seeking integrated medication -assisted treat ment.  Services provided must include health 12 
care provider visits, prescription medications such as buprenorphine, behavioral health 13 
treatment, urine drug screening, case management and any other services associated with 14 
providing evidence -based medication -assisted treatment.  15 
Sec. B -6.  Primary care reimbursement rates.  The department shall develop a 16 
primary care reimbursement rate for integrated medication -assisted treatment that 17 
includes extended patient care visit times, urine drug testing, counseling a nd any other 18 
addiction treatment resources that are provided at a primary care practice.  19 
Sec. B -7.  Evaluation and assessment.  The department shall develop 20 
assessment measures for performance evaluation of the hub -and-spoke model.  21 
Assessment measures mus t include numbers and percentages of referrals of individuals 22 
seeking substance abuse treatment; substance abuse treatment success including sobriety, 23 
stability and workplace participation; adequacy of counseling services; adequacy of 24 
reimbursement rates; and any other relevant measures.  25 
Sec. B -8.  Department of Labor to develop program for individuals in 26 
recovery.  The Department of Labor shall develop a career center program to assist 27 
individuals in treatment for substance use disorders or in recovery wit h career planning 28 
and taking advantage of employment opportunities.  The Department of Labor and the 29 
Department of Health and Human Services shall jointly work to develop referral 30 
connections between the hub -and-spoke treatment services and the career cent er program.  31 
Sec. B -9.  Report.  No later than January 1, 2020, the department shall report to the 32 
joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human 33 
services matters on the progress and implementation of the hub -and-spoke  model, federal 34 
funding, grants dispersed and evaluation and assessment measures.  The joint standing 35 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters 36 
is authorized to report out legislation to the Second Regular Sess ion of the 129th 37 
Legislature related to the report.  38 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR1701(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill establishes a statewide resource and referral center for individuals with 2 
substance use disorders and friends and family members of individuals with substance 3 
use disorders, law enforcem ent and providers of substance abuse treatment.  It requires 4 
the Department of Health and Human Services to contract with evidence -based substance 5 
abuse treatment providers across the State to provide integrated medication -assisted 6 
treatment to individuals  with substance use disorders.  Hubs provide comprehensive 7 
services for acute needs, and spokes are primary care facilities that offer behavioral health 8 
services or are connected to providers of those services.  The Department of Health and 9 
Human Services is directed to fund treatment for individuals without insurance and 10 
develop a rate of reimbursement that takes into account the multiple parts of treatment an 11 
individual with a substance use disorder requires in addition to medication.  The 12 
Department of L abor is directed to develop a career center program to assist individuals 13 
in treatment for substance use disorders or in recovery with career planning and taking 14 
advantage of employment opportunities.  The Department of Health and Human Services 15 
is directe d to develop assessment measures to evaluate performance and present a report 16 
on progress, implementation and assessment to the joint standing committee of the 17 
Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters by January 1, 18 
2020.  19 
 
