 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1700
H.P. 1180 House of  Representatives, December  22, 2017
An Act  To Protect  Maine Residents and  Businesses from Rising 
Electricity Costs
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Received by the Clerk of the House on December 19, 2017.  Referred to  the Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology  pursuant  to Joint Rule  308.2 and ordered printed  pursuant to  
Joint Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BERRY of Bowdoinham.
Cosponsored by Senator WOODSOME of York and
Representatives: Speaker GIDEON of  Freeport,  GILLWAY of Searsport, GOLDEN of 
Lewiston, Senators: CARSON of Cumberland,  DILL of Penobscot, KEIM  of Oxford.

Page 1 - 128LR2786(01)-11 Be it enacted  by the People of  the State of Maine as  follows:
2 CONCEPT DRAFT
3 SUMMARY
4 This bill is  a concept  draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5 This bill proposes  to establish a task force to examine the cost of the delivery of 
6 electricity to homes and businesses in this State and the factors that may cause this cost to 
7 rise, including, but not limited to, requests by electric utilities for rate increases, the 
8 recovery of costs incurred  by electric utilities for recent storm  restoration efforts and the 
9 possibility that ratepayers in this State may be required to pay a portion of the cost for 
10 new transmission  lines  to meet the demand for power in Massachusetts.
11 The task force would include among its members representatives of consumers,  
12 producers, electric utilities, the Governor's Energy Office, the Public Utilities 
13 Commission and the Office of the Public Advocate  and Legislators.  The task force 
14 would report  its findings, including a proactive and comprehensive approach to protect 
15 residents and businesses in this State  from  rising electricity costs, to the Governor and the 
16 Legislature.
