 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 823
S.P. 268 In Senate,  March  2, 2017
An Act  To Promote Transparency with Respect to Surveillance 
Technology
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BELLOWS of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative MOONEN of Portland and
Senators: BRAKEY of  Androscoggin, KATZ of Kennebec, LANGLEY of Hancock,  
Representatives: BABBIDGE of Kennebunk, CEBRA of Naples, GUERIN of Glenburn, HARVELL of Farmington, JOHANSEN  of Monticello.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0999(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA §59 is enacted to read:  2 
§59.  State acquisition and use of surveillance technology  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
followin g terms have the following meanings:  5 
A.  "State entity" means any office, department, agency, authority, institution or other 6 
instrumentality of the State;  7 
B.  "Surveillance data" means any electronic data collected, captured, recorded, 8 
retained, processed , intercepted, analyzed or shared by surveillance technology; and  9 
C.  "Surveillance technology" means any electronic surveillance device, hardware or 10 
software that is capable of collecting, capturing, recording, retaining, processing, 11 
intercepting, analyzi ng, monitoring or sharing audio, visual, digital, location, thermal, 12 
biometric or similar information or communications specifically associated with, or 13 
capable of being associated with, any specific person or group or any system, device 14 
or vehicle that is  equipped with an electronic surveillance device, hardware or 15 
software.  16 
2.  Surveillance technology; requirements for acquisition and use.  A state entity 17 
may not seek funding or in -kind support to acquire surveillance technology; acquire, 18 
share or borrow surveillance technology; use surveillance technology for a purpose or in 19 
a manner not previously approved by the Legislature under this subsection; or request 20 
proposals for or enter into an agreement with another entity to acquire, share, borrow or 21 
otherwi se use surveillance technology or surveillance data, unless the state entity:  22 
A.  Holds a public hearing regarding the functionality of the proposed surveillance 23 
technology to be acquired or used; the proposed activity or activities relating to 24 
surveillanc e technology; adverse effects, if any, the use of the proposed technology 25 
could have on civil rights and civil liberties; measures that could be implemented to 26 
avoid any adverse effects; and with which other entities, if any, the state entity may 27 
voluntari ly share surveillance data. The state entity shall publish notice of the public 28 
hearing in a newspaper with general circulation throughout the State at least 14 days 29 
in advance of the public hearing. The state entity shall provide the opportunity for 30 
membe rs of the public to provide written and oral testimony at the public hearing and 31 
to file written testimony within 10 days of the close of the public hearing; and  32 
B.  Obtains legislative approval of the proposed activity or activities relating to 33 
surveillan ce technology. For the purposes of this paragraph, "legislative approval" 34 
means enactment of legislation that:  35 
(1)  Expressly approves the use of the surveillance technology for a specified 36 
activity or activities;  37 
(2)  Limits the use of the surveillance te chnology to the expressly approved 38 
activity or activities under subparagraph (1);  39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0999(01) -1 
 (3)  Enumerates with which other entities, if any, the state entity may voluntarily 1 
share the surveillance data; and  2 
(4)  Provides that legislative approval for the use of th e surveillance technology is 3 
contingent upon the implementation of any measures the Legislature considers 4 
necessary to avoid adverse effects of that use on civil rights and civil liberties.  5 
Sec. 2.  25 MRSA §4501, sub -§§3 and 4, as enacted by PL 2015, c. 3 07, §1, are 6 
amended to read:  7 
3.  Acquisition of unmanned aerial vehicles.  The Subject to the additional 8 
requirements imposed by Title 5, section 59, the  acquisition of an unmanned aerial 9 
vehicle by a law enforcement agency must be approved by the governin g body of the 10 
governmental unit overseeing the law enforcement agency seeking to make such an 11 
acquisition or, in the case of a state agency, by the commissioner of that agency.  12 
4.  Law enforcement agency operation of unmanned aerial vehicles.   A law 13 
enforc ement agency's operation of an unmanned aerial vehicle must fully comply with all 14 
Federal Aviation Administration requirements and guidelines, including the acquisition of 15 
a certificate of authorization or waiver from the Federal Aviation Administration and with 16 
the requirements imposed in Title 5, section 59 .  Additionally, a law enforcement 17 
agency's use of an unmanned aerial vehicle is governed by the following provisions.  18 
A.  A law enforcement agency may not use an unmanned aerial vehicle before 19 
adopting  standards that meet, at a minimum, the standards set forth in subsection 5.  20 
B.  Except as permitted by a recognized exception to the requirement for a warrant 21 
under the Constitution of Maine or the United States Constitution, a law enforcement 22 
agency may not use an unmanned aerial vehicle for criminal investigations without a 23 
warrant.  24 
C.  Notwithstanding paragraph A, a law enforcement agency may use an unmanned 25 
aerial vehicle for the purpose of a search and rescue operation when the law 26 
enforcement agency determines that use of an unmanned aerial vehicle is necessary 27 
to alleviate an immediate danger to any person or for training exercises related to 28 
such uses.  29 
D.  Notwithstanding paragraph A, a law enforcement agency may use an unmanned 30 
aerial vehicle for p urposes other than the investigation of crime, including, but not 31 
limited to, aerial photography for the assessment of accidents, forest fires and other 32 
fire scenes, flood stages and storm damage.  33 
E.  In no case may a weaponized unmanned aerial vehicle be used or its use 34 
facilitated by a state or local law enforcement agency in this State.  35 
F.  A law enforcement agency may not use an unmanned aerial vehicle to conduct 36 
surveillance of private citizens peacefully exercising their constitutional rights of free 37 
speech and assembly.  38 
G.  Notwithstanding paragraph A, a law enforcement agency may use an unmanned 39 
aerial vehicle for an emergency use approved by the chief administrative officer of 40 
the agency or the Governor.  41 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR0999(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill requires a state entity to hold a public hearing and obtain legislative 2 
approval prior to engaging in certain activities relating to the acquisition and use of 3 
surveillance technology.  4 
 
