 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1471
H.P. 1010 House of  Representatives,  April 18, 2017
An Act  To Amend the Laws Governing the Deduction for 
MaineCare Payments from a School Administrative Unit's State Subsidy
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SPEAR  of South  Thomaston.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BEEBE-CENTER  of Rockland, HANDY  of Lewiston, 
MELARAGNO of Auburn.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1529(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง15689 -A, sub -ยง22, as amended by PL 2015, c. 63, ยง1, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
22.  MaineCare seed for school administrative units.   The commissioner may 4 
deduct from a schoo l administrative unit's state subsidy and  pay on behalf of the a school 5 
administrative unit allowable school -based costs that represent the school administrative 6 
unit's portion of MaineCare payments.  Prior to establishing state subsidies for the school 7 
administrative units, the commissioner shall make payments under this subsection from 8 
an account capitalized in an amount estimated by the commissioner, based on prior years' 9 
experience, to represent the total amount of allowable school -based costs represent ing the 10 
MaineCare payments of all of the school administrative units; funds not distributed from 11 
the account do not lapse and must be carried forward to be used for the same purpose in 12 
subsequent years.   A transfer of payment by the department to the Depar tment of Health 13 
and Human Services must be made pursuant to a schedule agreed upon by the 14 
Department of Health and Human Services and the department and in a manner that 15 
remains in compliance with federal intergovernmental transfer requirements.  No later 16 
than 90 days after the incurrence of allowable school -based payments to schools, the 17 
Department of Health and Human Services shall provide the detailed payment 18 
information to the department.  The department shall make this information available and 19 
apply t he adjustment to the appropriate school administrative units within 30 days of 20 
receipt of the detailed payment information from the Department of Health and Human 21 
Services.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
Under current law, the Commissioner of Education is authorized to pay on be half of a 24 
school administrative unit allowable school -based costs that represent the school 25 
administrative unit's portion of MaineCare payments.  Current law also provides that the 26 
commissioner may then deduct that amount from the school administrative uni t's state 27 
subsidy.  This bill changes the law to require the commissioner to make payments from a 28 
nonlapsing account capitalized in an amount estimated by the commissioner to represent 29 
the total amount of allowable school -based costs representing the Maine Care payments of 30 
all of the school administrative units.  31 
 
