 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 270
H.P. 203 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2017
An Act  To Consolidate Administration of Kinship  Care  and Relative 
Placement Issues within the Department  of Health and Human 
Services
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  CHACE of Durham, CRAIG of Brewer, FOLEY of Wells, 
GUERIN of  Glenburn,  HARLOW of Portland, STEWART of Presque Isle, STROM  of 
Pittsfield, TURNER of Burlington.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0384(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง4010 -D is enacted to read:  2 
ยง4010 -D.  Kinship care and relative placement administration  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following terms have the following meanings.  5 
A.  "Kinship care" means the placement of a child with a relative on a temporary or 6 
permanent basis.  The placement may or may not involve the participation of the 7 
department.  8 
B.  "Relative placement" means the u se of a relative as a temporary placement for a 9 
child in the custody of the department or a comparable department in another state 10 
while the child and the child's parents are engaged in a rehabilitation and 11 
reunification process under subchapter 5.  12 
2.  Adm inistrator.  The commissioner shall appoint one person to administer all 13 
issues related to kinship care and relative placement.  14 
SUMMARY  15 
This bill requires the Commissioner of Health and Human Services to appoint one 16 
person to administer all issues related to the placement of a child with a relative.  17 
 
