 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1354
S.P. 462 In Senate, April 6, 2017
An Act  Relating  to Exempt Equity in a Primary Residence
Reference to the Committee on Insurance  and Financial Services suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CARPENTER  of Aroostook.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1948(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  9-B MRSA ยง439 -B is enacted to read:  2 
ยง439 -B.  Notice of exempt equity  3 
At the time of application, a financial institution that intends to make a secondary or 4 
home equity loan or refinanc e an existing loan on property that is the primary residence 5 
of the loan applicant shall inform the loan applicant of the total amount of exempt equity 6 
in the property under Title 14, section 4422, subsection 1 in a form substantially similar 7 
to: 8 
"NOTICE O F OPTIONS REGARDING THE EXEMPT EQUITY IN A PRIMARY 9 
RESIDENCE  10 
You have applied to refinance your primary residence.  If you are doing so to pay credit 11 
card or other unsecured debt, you should know that based upon the fair market value of 12 
your primary reside nce there is approximately $................... of unsecured EQUITY in 13 
your primary residence.  14 
Under Maine law, the unsecured EQUITY in your primary residence may be EXEMPT 15 
(off-limits) to unsecured creditors to attach by lien or otherwise obtain by debt c ollection 16 
efforts and actions, including court actions.  You have a right to seek legal advice about 17 
your rights as a Maine homeowner regarding the alternatives you have BEFORE you use 18 
your EXEMPT assets and refinance your primary residence to pay credit c ard and other 19 
unsecured debt.  If you cannot afford an attorney, the financial institution receiving this 20 
application can provide you with referrals to legal services organizations in your area."  21 
The financial institution shall maintain a list of available  legal services organizations 22 
for low -income persons to provide to an applicant who requests a referral for legal 23 
services under this section.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill requires a financial institution that makes a secondary or home equity loan 26 
or refinances an ex isting loan on a primary residence to inform the loan applicant of the 27 
total amount of equity in the residence that is exempt from unsecured creditors and 28 
provides a sample form for financial institutions to use to inform the applicant, including 29 
offering a referral to legal services organizations for a low -income applicant.  30 
 
