 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1715
H.P. 1195 House of  Representatives, December  22, 2017
An Act  To Ensure Rural Patient  Populations Receive Safe  and 
Effective Health Care
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Received by the Clerk of the House on December 19, 2017.  Referred to  the Committee on 
Health and Human Services  pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and  ordered printed pursuant  to Joint 
Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative STANLEY of Medway.
Cosponsored by Senator CARSON of Cumberland and
Representatives: GOLDEN of Lewiston, HERBIG of Belfast, NADEAU of Winslow, TUELL  
of East Machias, Senator:  JACKSON of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 128LR2713(01)-11 Be it enacted  by the People of  the State of Maine as  follows:
2 CONCEPT DRAFT
3 SUMMARY
4 This bill is  a concept  draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5 This bill proposes to ensure that patient populations located in rural areas of the State 
6 receive safe and effective  health care by placing certain reporting  and approval  
7 requirements on an acute  care or critical  access  hospital  that is considering closure  or 
8 terminating or reducing  services.  Any such hospital would  need to provide  at least 6 
9 months’ notice to the joint standing committee  of the Legislature having  jurisdiction over 
10 health and human services matters prior to the planned date of closure of the hospital or 
11 the termination or reduction of services.   The hospital would also need to provide  a study 
12 to the committee  conducted by an independent 3rd party describing the impact of the 
13 closure or the termination  or reduction of services  on the patient  population.  Any closure  
14 or any termination or reduction  of services would require approval prior to taking effect.
