 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 400
H.P. 291 House of  Representatives, February 7, 2017
An Act  Regarding the  Construction or  Placement  of Decks  within 
the Shoreland Zone
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TURNER of Burlington.
Cosponsored by Representative ESPLING of New Gloucester, Senator ROSEN of Hancock  
and Representatives:  ALLEY of Beals,  CAMPBELL  of Orrington,  FOLEY of Wells, 
HANINGTON of Lincoln, KINNEY of Limington, MARTIN of Eagle Lake, REED of Carmel, STANLEY of Medway.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0933(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA ยง439 -A, sub -ยง10 is enacted to read:  2 
10.  Decks.   A municipality may adopt an ordinance pursuant to this subsection that 3 
allows the construction or placement of a deck within the  setbacks established pursuant to 4 
subsection 4 if the following requirements are met:  5 
A.  The deck is for residential use or storage of portable docks and small watercraft;  6 
B.  The deck or construction or placement of the deck does not create a cleared 7 
opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy;  8 
C.  The deck does not exceed 192 square feet in area;  9 
D.  The deck does not extend over the water body or wetland; and  10 
E.  No portion of the deck, including any deck support, extends into the water bo dy or 11 
wetland.  12 
A person who applies for a permit under an ordinance adopted pursuant to this subsection 13 
must receive that permit prior to applying to the department for a permit under the 14 
Natural Resources Protection Act.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This bill allows municipal ities to adopt ordinances that allow the construction or 17 
placement of a deck within the setbacks established pursuant to the laws governing 18 
shoreland zoning as long as certain requirements are met.  19 
 
