 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1145
H.P. 808 House of  Representatives, March 23, 2017
An Act  To Allow the Department of Transportation To Recover 
Costs Incurred by the Department for Allowing Access to a Controlled Access Highway
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative LUCHINI of  Ellsworth.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2072(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  23 MRSA §704, sub -§6, as amended by PL 2013, c. 220, §1, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
6.  Access denied.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title and except as 4 
provided in subs ection 10 , the Department of Transportation and the municipalities shall 5 
deny ingress to and egress from property abutting a controlled access highway established 6 
by the department pursuant to chapter 7, except that the Commissioner of Transportation 7 
may a llow access for the development of state and state aid highways and may allow 8 
access upon a determination by the commissioner that such access will not adversely 9 
affect public safety and will not have a significant negative impact on the mobility of 10 
throug h-travelers.  The commissioner may approve or deny a relocation of an existing 11 
break in a control of access consistent with the rules adopted pursuant to subsection 2.  12 
When the department allows access under this subsection, it may recover from the 13 
applic ant costs incurred by the department to allow access, plus the lesser of the amount 14 
the department determines was paid to the landowner to extinguish rights of access on the 15 
portion of land to be used to gain access to the highway, adjusted by the percenta ge 16 
increase in the Consumer Price Index, and the difference between the appraised value of 17 
the affected property without the access and the appraised value of the affected property 18 
with the access.  19 
Sec. 2.  23 MRSA §704, sub -§10, as enacted by PL 2005, c. 188, §1, is amended 20 
to read:  21 
10.  Requirements waived.   The department may waive the requirements of rules 22 
adopted pursuant to this section and may issue a permit for a driveway when the property 23 
abuts no other road affording vehicular access to a person's  property and the property is 24 
outside the compact area of an urban compact municipality.  The department may not 25 
deny a person the right to build on or to have vehicular access to property owned by that 26 
person unless the access is determined inconsistent w ith access management safety 27 
standards.  When the department allows access under this subsection, it may recover from 28 
the applicant costs incurred by the department to allow access and any costs associated 29 
with maintaining the mobility of through -travelers , plus the lesser of the amount the 30 
department determines was paid to the landowner to extinguish rights of access on the 31 
portion of land to be used to gain access to the highway, adjusted by the percentage 32 
increase in the Consumer Price Index, and the dif ference between the appraised value of 33 
the affected property without the access and the appraised value of the affected property 34 
with the access.  35 
SUMMARY  36 
This bill provides that, when the Department of Transportation allows access onto a 37 
controlled access highway because the access will not adversely affect public safety and 38 
will not have a significant negative impact on the mobility of through -travelers, the 39 
department may recover from the applicant costs incurred by the department to allow 40 
access and any costs associated with maintaining the mobility of through -travelers, plus 41 
the lesser of the amount the department determines was paid to the landowner to 42 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR2072(01) -1 
 extinguish rights of access on the portion of land to be used to gain access to the highway, 1 
adjusted by the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index, and the difference 2 
between the appraised value of the affected property without the access and the appraised 3 
value of the affected property with the access.  4 
The bill also provides that, when the depar tment allows access onto a controlled 5 
access highway when the property abuts no other road affording vehicular access to the 6 
applicant's property, the department may recover from the applicant costs incurred by the 7 
department to allow access and any costs associated with maintaining the mobility of 8 
through -travelers, plus the lesser of the amount the department determines was paid to the 9 
landowner to extinguish rights of access on the portion of land to be used to gain access 10 
to the highway, adjusted by the  percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index, and the 11 
difference between the appraised value of the affected property without the access and the 12 
appraised value of the affected property with the access.  13 
 
