 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1314
H.P. 911 House of  Representatives,  April 4, 2017
Resolve, To  Improve Access to Neurobehavioral  Services
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MALABY of Hancock.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  CHACE of Durham, HAWKE of Boothbay Harbor, 
PARKER of  South Berwick, PERRY  of Calais.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1173(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to provide 1 
neurobehavioral beds.  Resolved:  That, no later than September 1, 2018, the 2 
Department of Health and Human Services shall provide 16 new neurobehavioral beds in 3 
one or more neurobehavioral center s to serve individuals with significant behavioral 4 
challenges and complex medical needs who need short -term treatment before 5 
transitioning to a long -term care environment.  A center shall serve individuals with 6 
dementia, brain injury, intellectual disabili ties or autism and accompanying behavioral 7 
issues who cannot be served appropriately in the community or in a nursing facility 8 
lacking specialized neurobehavioral services but are not in need of hospitalization.  A 9 
center shall provide short -term evaluatio n and treatment for no longer than one year and 10 
shall facilitate transition to a long -term care environment in the community or in a 11 
long-term care facility with appropriate treatment supports.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Hum an Services to provide by 14 
September 1, 2018 16 new neurobehavioral beds in one or more neurobehavioral centers 15 
to serve individuals with significant behavioral challenges and complex medical needs 16 
who need short -term evaluation and treatment before transit ioning to a long -term care 17 
environment either in the community or a long -term care facility.  18 
 
