 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 911
H.P. 639 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2017
An Act  To Prohibit Certain  Gifts  to Health Care Practitioners
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HAMANN of South Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland,  Senator  GRATWICK  of Penobscot and
Representatives: GATTINE of Westbrook, HEAD of Bethel, HICKMAN  of Winthrop,  
MALABY of Hancock,  PARKER of South Berwick, PERRY of  Calais,  SANDERSON of 
Chelsea, Senator: SAVIELLO of Franklin.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1395(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง13759 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง13759.  Gifts to practitioners prohibited  3 
1.  Gift defined.  For the purposes of this section, "gift" means anything of value, 4 
including forgiveness of an obligation or debt, given to a practitioner without that 5 
practitioner providing equal or greater consideration to the giver. "Gift" does not include:  6 
A.  Professional samples of a drug provided to a practitioner for free distribution to 7 
patients;  8 
B.  Items with a total combined retail value, in any calendar year, of not more than 9 
$50; 10 
C.  A payment to the sponsor of a medical conference, professional meeting or other 11 
educational program, as long as that payment is not made directly to a practitioner 12 
and is used solely for bona fide educational purposes;  13 
D.  Reasonable honoraria and payment of the reasonable expenses of a practitioner 14 
who serves on the faculty at a professional or educational conference or meeting;  15 
E.  Compensation for the substantial p rofessional or consulting services of a 16 
practitioner in connection with a genuine research project;  17 
F.  Publications or educational materials; or  18 
G.  Salaries or other benefits paid to employees.  19 
2.  Gifts to practitioners prohibited.  A manufacturer or wh olesaler, or an agent of a 20 
manufacturer or wholesaler, may not offer or give a gift to a practitioner. For purposes of 21 
this section, a medical device manufacturer that distributes drugs as an incidental part of 22 
its device business is not considered a manuf acturer or wholesaler or an agent of a 23 
manufacturer or wholesaler.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill amends the Maine Pharmacy Act to prohibit a person engaged in the 26 
manufacture of prescription drugs or a person who buys prescription drugs for resale and 27 
distribution to persons other than consumers from giving a gift to an individual who is 28 
licensed, registered or otherwise authorized in the appropriate jurisdiction to prescribe 29 
and administer drugs in the course of that individual's professional practice.  "Gift" does 30 
not include samples of prescription drugs to be given to patients for free, items with a 31 
total value of less than $50 over a calendar year, payments to sponsors of educational 32 
programs, honoraria and payments of expenses incurred at an educational conference  or 33 
meeting, compensation for research, publications or educational materials and salaries or 34 
other benefits paid to employees.  35 
 
