 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 665
S.P. 227 In Senate, February 28, 2017
An Act  To Give  the Courts  Sentencing Discretion When a Person 
with a Developmental Disability Has Been Convicted of a Crime
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator VOLK of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Senators:  CYRWAY of Kennebec, DIAMOND of Cumberland, 
Representatives: COREY of  Windham, NADEAU of Winslow.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0982(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง1152, sub -ยง2-E is enacted to read:  2 
2-E.   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, if the court finds that the 3 
individual has an abnormal condition of the mind a s a result of an intellectual disability or 4 
an autism spectrum disorder, the court may in its discretion impose a sentence that is less 5 
severe than any mandatory minimum sentence that is required by law, including, but not 6 
limited to, chapter 51 or 53.  Fo r the purposes of this subsection, "intellectual disability" 7 
means a disability characterized by significant limitations in both intellectual functioning 8 
and the conceptual, social and practical skills that are required for successful everyday 9 
functioning and that are recognized by professionals in the field of developmental 10 
disabilities as adaptive behavior.  11 
SUMMARY  12 
This bill provides that, notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, if the 13 
court finds that a convicted person has an abnormal cond ition of the mind as a result of an 14 
intellectual disability or an autism spectrum disorder, the court may in its discretion 15 
impose a sentence that is less severe than any mandatory minimum sentence that is 16 
required by law, including, but not limited to, th e Maine Revised Statutes, Title 17 -A, 17 
chapter 51 or 53.  The bill defines "intellectual disability" as a disability characterized by 18 
significant limitations in both intellectual functioning and the conceptual, social and 19 
practical skills that are required for successful everyday functioning and that are 20 
recognized by professionals in the field of developmental disabilities as adaptive 21 
behavior.  22 
 
