 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1106
H.P. 780 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Dedicate All  Sales  Taxes from  All Vehicle Sales and  Any 
Vehicle-related Sales  to the Highway Fund for Roads and Bridge 
Capital Improvements
Reference to the Committee on Taxation  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PARRY of Arundel.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: DEVIN of Newcastle,  GRANT of  Gardiner,  McLEAN  of Gorham,  
STEARNS of  Guilford, SYLVESTER of Portland, Senators: DION  of Cumberland,  
SAVIELLO of Franklin, President THIBODEAU  of Waldo.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1185(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IX, ยง26 is enacted to read:  4 
Section 26.  Revenues from motor vehicle sale s and use taxes.  Beginning in 5 
July 2019, the revenue from the tax imposed on sales of motor vehicles and sales related 6 
to motor vehicles must be deposited in the Highway Fund for roads and bridge capital 7 
improvements.  Beginning in August 2019, and every month thereafter, the State 8 
Controller shall transfer to the Highway Fund for roads and bridge capital improvements 9 
an amount that is equal to 100% of the revenue from the tax imposed on sales of motor 10 
vehicles and sales related to motor vehicles for the p revious month.  The tax amount must 11 
be based on actual sales for that month and may not consider any accruals that may be 12 
required by law.  The State Tax Assessor shall certify to the State Controller by the 15th 13 
day of each month the amounts to be distrib uted and credited under this section as of the 14 
close of the State Controller's records for the previous month.  15 
; and be it further  16 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 17 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State s hall notify the inhabitants of their 18 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 19 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in November 2018, to vote upon 20 
the ratification of the amendment proposed in this resolution by voting upon the 21 
following question:  22 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to dedicate all sales 23 
and use tax revenue from sales of motor vehicles and sales related to 24 
motor vehicles to the Highway Fund for roads and bridge c apital 25 
improvements?"  26 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 27 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 28 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be rec eived, sorted, counted and 29 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 30 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 31 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 32 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 33 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 34 
further  35 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved: That the Secretary of State 36 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 37 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1185(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolution proposes to amend the Cons titution of Maine to dedicate all sales and 2 
use tax revenue from sales of motor vehicles and sales related to motor vehicles to the 3 
Highway Fund for roads and bridge capital improvements.  4 
 
