 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 870
H.P. 619 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2017
An Act  To Protect  Life Insurance Beneficiaries
Reference to the Committee on Insurance  and Financial Services suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative TERRY of Gorham.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  AUSTIN  of Skowhegan,  CASÁS of Rockport.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2022(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA §2557 is enacted to read:  2 
§2557.  Notification prior to payment of benefits to beneficiary  3 
Prior to the payment of any benefits under a life insurance policy to a beneficiary  4 
following the death of an insured, an insurer shall provide the following notices to the 5 
beneficiary.  6 
1.  Right to elect full payment.   The insurer shall provide notice that the beneficiary 7 
has the right to elect full payment of any benefits due as a lump  sum.  8 
2.  Terms and conditions of benefits held for beneficiary.   If a beneficiary may 9 
elect that benefits be held in trust by the insurer, the insurer shall provide notice to the 10 
beneficiary of the terms and conditions for holding the benefits in trust, i ncluding, but not 11 
limited to, whether interest will be paid on benefits that remain in trust and whether 12 
amounts held in trust are protected from loss by insurance or other means.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This bill requires that, prior to the payment of any benefits, an in surer notify a 15 
beneficiary entitled to benefits following the death of an insured under a life insurance 16 
policy that the beneficiary has the right to elect payment of the death benefits in a lump 17 
sum and, if the beneficiary may elect that the insurer hold the benefits in trust, what the 18 
terms and conditions are for holding the benefits in trust.  19 
 
