 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1400
S.P. 478 In Senate, April 11, 2017
An Act  To Create the Bar Harbor Port Authority
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Transportation  suggested and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LANGLEY of  Hancock.
Cosponsored by Representative HUBBELL of Bar Harbor and
Senators: COLLINS  of York, MAKER  of Washington, ROSEN of Hancock, Representatives: 
GUERIN of  Glenburn,  TUELL of East  Machias.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0388(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the Town of Bar Harbor requires the immediate creation of a port 3 
authority for the proper operation of municipal government facilities, including 4 
transportation infrastructure maintenance and public safety; and  5 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 6 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and requir e the following legislation as 7 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 8 
therefore,  9 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  10 
Sec. 1.  Bar Harbor Port Authority created.  There is created th e Bar Harbor 11 
Port Authority, referred to in this Act as "the authority," which has the authority to 12 
acquire, construct, operate, maintain, repair and replace piers, terminals, industrial parks, 13 
transportation and warehouse facilities, roads and other facil ities on the land and in the 14 
waters within the limits of the Town of Bar Harbor and enter into contracts for 15 
administration, operations, bonding, management and consulting services within and 16 
beyond the boundaries of the Town of Bar Harbor.  17 
There is a boar d of 5 directors as follows:  18 
1.  Two directors are appointed by the Bar Harbor town council for 3 -year terms, 19 
except that the first appointment is for a 2 -year initial term; and  20 
2.  Three directors who are residents of the Town of Bar Harbor as verified by  the 21 
registrar of voters for voting purposes and who are elected by a majority of the legal 22 
voters voting at an election for 3 -year terms except that for the initial terms under this 23 
subsection, one director is elected for one year, one for 2 years and one  for 3 years.  24 
Directors begin their terms of office July 1st and serve until their successors are duly 25 
appointed or elected and qualified.  26 
The board of directors shall exercise the powers and duties of the authority.  27 
A vacancy of an elected director that m ay occur by death, resignation or otherwise is 28 
filled by appointment of the town council until a successor is elected in the same manner 29 
and at the same time as Bar Harbor town councilors to fulfill the remainder of the term.  30 
All directors are sworn to the  faithful performance of their duties by the town clerk.  31 
The members of the board of directors serve without compensation, but have the right 32 
to appoint assistants, agents, engineers, attorneys and other employees as they may 33 
consider necessary to carry ou t the purposes of this Act.  The board of directors shall 34 
determine the duties and compensation of such appointed persons.  35 
At each annual meeting, the directors shall elect from their membership a chair, who 36 
serves until the next annual meeting or until th e chair's successor is chosen and is 37 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0388(0 1)-1 
 qualified.  The time for the annual meeting may be established in the bylaws adopted by 1 
the directors.  2 
The directors are the administrative officers of the authority and may employ 3 
assistants as they may consider necess ary to carry out this Act.  They may make plans to 4 
obtain title to wharves, or locations for wharves, and they have the authority to acquire, 5 
construct, operate, maintain, repair and replace such piers, terminals, industrial parks and 6 
transportation and wa rehouse facilities, roads and other facilities on the land and in the 7 
waters within the limits of the Town of Bar Harbor as will in their judgment improve and 8 
increase the harbor, docking and warehousing facilities in the Town of Bar Harbor and 9 
may encumbe r debt and enter into contracts for administration, operations, management 10 
and consulting services within and beyond the boundaries of the Town of Bar Harbor.  11 
The authority may acquire within the limits of the Town of Bar Harbor real property by 12 
purchase or by gift or grant and hold the real property and rights and easements to the real 13 
property as the directors may from time to time consider necessary for the purpose of 14 
constructing and maintaining the Bar Harbor Port Authority piers, docks and warehouses , 15 
highways and other port facilities.  The authority has the right to construct suitable 16 
buildings, filling stations and restaurants and has the authority to lease the same, upon the 17 
terms as the directors or a majority of the directors may determine to be  in the best 18 
interests of the authority, the proceeds from leases to accrue to the credit of the Bar 19 
Harbor Port Authority.  These wharves, buildings and property are exempt from taxation 20 
by the Town of Bar Harbor, except that this exemption does not exemp t any lessee or 21 
person in possession, other than the port authority, from taxes or assessments payable 22 
under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 36, section 551. The authority may make a 23 
payment in lieu of taxes to the Town of Bar Harbor.  The authority has the right to 24 
acquire property without the approval of the town council, except that the property so 25 
acquired may not be exempted from taxation.  The authority shall pay all fees assessed by 26 
the Bar Harbor town council.  The authority shall render annually,  at the end of the fiscal 27 
year, a report to the town council, showing financial reports, together with 28 
recommendations and plans for the improvement and operation of facilities.  The board of 29 
directors has the power to establish bylaws and all rules and re gulations governing the 30 
operation and maintenance of facilities under the control of the authority; charge such 31 
fees as may, in the board's judgment, be necessary for parking, docking and storage 32 
privileges; contract for the construction of wharves or ware houses and borrow money for 33 
these purposes; arrange for construction financing; and provide for protection by 34 
insurance against damage by fire, water or wind and for any other casualty that the 35 
directors wish to insure against and for liability against inj ury to persons and property.  36 
The directors may accept federal, state and private grants and contributions for the 37 
purposes of this Act and may enter into partnerships, joint ventures or other business 38 
relationships, either directly or through an affiliate  corporation owned by the authority.  39 
Sec. 2.  How financed.  The authority is authorized to issue its bonds or notes.  The 40 
bonds may be issued to mature serially or for periods not to exceed 30 years from the date 41 
of issue with interest at such rate and up on such other and further terms and conditions as 42 
the directors, or a majority of the directors, may determine.  All bonds or notes must be 43 
signed by the directors of the authority or a majority of the directors.  Each bond and note 44 
must have inscribed upo n its face "Bar Harbor Port Authority," must bear interest at such 45 
rates as the directors determine, payable semiannually, and must be subject to such other 46 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR0388(01) -1 
 provisions as the directors determine.  Bonds and notes issued by the authority may be 1 
made callabl e at any interest date.  If coupon bonds are issued, each coupon must be 2 
attested by the facsimile signature of the chair printed on the coupon.  The bonds and 3 
notes are legal obligations of the authority, which is a quasi -municipal corporation 4 
pursuant to  the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 30 -A, section 5701, and all the provisions 5 
of Title 30 -A, section 5701 are applicable.  The bonds and notes are legal investments for 6 
trust companies and savings banks.  All notes, bonds or other securities issued by the 7 
authority are at all times free of taxation by the State.  8 
The directors are authorized to secure the payment of any bonds or notes of the 9 
authority by the granting of a mortgage, security agreement, assignment of lease, 10 
assignment of rentals or any other s ecurity instrument.  If the directors establish a sinking 11 
fund for the payment of the notes or bonds of the authority as they come due, all funds 12 
paid into that sinking fund must be deposited in a national bank or trust company or 13 
invested in the securitie s of the United States of America or the State of Maine.  14 
When the construction of all public facilities undertaken by the authority, together 15 
with all buildings and facilities of every kind, is free of all indebtedness, all obligations 16 
have been discharged , all leases have been terminated and the directors or a majority of 17 
the directors determine in writing that there is no further need for the authority to exist, 18 
the board of directors automatically ceases to function, all property of every description 19 
reverts to the Town of Bar Harbor and the directors of the authority must execute, sign 20 
and deliver a good and sufficient deed conveying all property of every description, 21 
together with all funds and things of value, to the Town of Bar Harbor.  22 
Sec. 3.  Invali dity of any part not to affect validity of remainder of Act.  If 23 
any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Act is for any reason adjudged by any court 24 
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that judgment is confined in its operation to the 25 
clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Act directly involved in the controversy in 26 
which the judgment has been rendered.  27 
Sec. 4.  Public lands.  Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Act, 28 
the powers and authority granted to the authority may n ot be construed as constituting a 29 
conveyance to the authority of any right, title or interest in real or personal property of the 30 
State or of any agency or instrumentality of the State and may not impair, modify or 31 
otherwise affect the powers and duties of  the Bureau of Parks and Lands within the 32 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry respecting the custody, 33 
management, control and receipt of funds upon disposition of the State's submerged, 34 
intertidal and other public lands pursuant to the Mai ne Revised Statutes, Title 12, section 35 
1862 and the rules and policies adopted by the bureau.  36 
Sec. 5.  Emergency clause; referendum; effective date.  In view of the 37 
emergency cited in the preamble, this Act takes effect when approved only for the 38 
purpose o f permitting its submission to the legal voters of the Town of Bar Harbor at a 39 
referendum called for that purpose and held within 2 years after the effective date of this 40 
Act.  The referendum must be called by the municipal officers and must be held at the  41 
regular voting places.  The referendum must be called, advertised and conducted 42 
according to the law relating to municipal elections.  The registrar shall make a complete 43 
 
 Page 4 - 128LR0388(0 1)-1 
 list of all the eligible voters of the Town of Bar Harbor as described in this Act.  The list 1 
prepared by the registrars governs the eligibility of a voter.  For the purpose of 2 
registration of voters, the registrar of voters must be in session the regular workday 3 
preceding the referendum.  The subject matter of this Act is reduced to the following 4 
question:  5 
"Shall  'An Act To Create the Bar Harbor Port Authority,' as passed by 6 
the First Regular Session of the 128th Legislature, be accepted?"  7 
The voters shall indicate by a cross or check mark against the word "Yes" or "No" 8 
their opinion of the same.  9 
Upon its acceptance by a majority of the legal voters voting at the election, this Act 10 
takes effect for all the purposes hereof, as long as the total number of votes cast for and 11 
against the acceptance of this Act equals or exceeds 20% of the tot al number of votes cast 12 
for Governor in the town at the last gubernatorial election. Another election may be held, 13 
if the total number of votes cast in the first election does not equal or exceed 20%.  14 
The result of the election must be declared by the mun icipal officers of the Town of 15 
Bar Harbor and due certificate filed by the town clerk with the Secretary of State.  16 
SUMMARY  17 
This bill provides for the creation of the Bar Harbor Port Authority.  18 
 
