 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1739
S.P. 638 In Senate, December  22, 2017
Resolve, Authorizing  the Lease  of the Colonial Pemaquid State 
Historic Site
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on December 19, 2017.  Referred to  the Committee  
on Agriculture,  Conservation and Forestry  pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator DOW of Lincoln.
Cosponsored by Representative DEVIN of Newcastle and
Senators: DAVIS of  Piscataquis, DILL of Penobscot.

Page 1 - 128LR2740(01)-11 Preamble.  The Constitution of Maine,  Article  IX, Section 23 requires that real 
2 estate held by the State  for conservation or recreation purposes may not be reduced or its 
3 uses substantially  altered  except on the vote of 2/3 of  all members elected to each House.
4 Whereas, certain real estate authorized  for lease by this resolve  is under the 
5 designations in  the Maine  Revised Statutes,  Title 12, section 598-A; and
6 Whereas, the Director  of the Bureau  of Parks and Lands within the Department  of 
7 Agriculture, Conservation  and Forestry may lease lands with the approval of the 
8 Legislature in accordance  with  the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 12, section  1814; and
9 Whereas, the State of Maine owns the historically significant site known as the 
10 Colonial Pemaquid State  Historic Site and the Friends of Colonial Pemaquid, a Maine  
11 nonprofit corporation, has a mission to preserve the Colonial Pemaquid State Historic 
12 Site; now, therefore, be  it
13 Sec. 1.  Director of Bureau of Parks and Lands  authorized  to lease the 
14 Colonial Pemaquid State Historic  Site, consisting of historic site land,  
15 improvements, structures  and historical collections, to the Friends  of 
16 Colonial Pemaquid. Resolved: That the Director  of the Bureau of Parks and Lands 
17 within the Department of Agriculture, Conservation  and Forestry may lease the historic 
18 site land and related improvements, structures and historical collections  known as the 
19 Colonial Pemaquid State Historic Site in the Town  of Bristol in Lincoln County to the 
20 Friends of Colonial  Pemaquid, a nonprofit corporation, to be used for historic 
21 preservation and to be open to the public for recreation and education purposes. If the 
22 director leases the site to the Friends of Colonial Pemaquid, the Friends of Colonial 
23 Pemaquid shall maintain the site in a clean, safe and attractive manner and continue  to 
24 offer historical programs for which the site is known in compliance with the Maine  
25 Revised Statutes,  Title  12, chapter  220 and associated bureau rules. The lease  must 
26 contain a reversion  clause specifying that, if the Friends of Colonial Pemaquid does not 
27 continue to use the Colonial Pemaquid State Historic  Site for public education, historical  
28 or cultural  purposes, the site will  revert to the bureau.
29 SUMMARY
30 This resolve authorizes  the lease of certain property associated with the Colonial 
31 Pemaquid State Historic  Site from the State to the Friends  of Colonial Pemaquid to be 
32 used for historic  preservation and to be open to the public for recreation and education  
33 purposes. The lease agreement  must require  that the property  and historical collections be 
34 used exclusively for  historic preservation and public education purposes.
