 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 641
H.P. 455 House of  Representatives, February 28, 2017
Resolve, To  Establish the Commission To Study the Availability  of 
Information Regarding Related Incidents in Domestic Violence  
Cases
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative RECKITT of  South  Portland.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BROOKS  of Lewiston, TALBOT  ROSS of  Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0341(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, this legislation establishes the Commission To Study the Availability of 3 
Information Regar ding Related Incidents in Domestic Violence Cases; and  4 
Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90 -day period expires in order that 5 
the study may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 6 
legislative session; and  7 
Whereas , in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 8 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 9 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 10 
therefore , be it  11 
Sec. 1.  Commission established.  Resolved:   That the Commission To Study 12 
the Availability of Information Regarding Related Incidents in Domestic Violence Cases, 13 
referred to in this resolve as "the commission," is established; and be it further  14 
Sec. 2.  Commission membership.  Resolved:   That the commission consists of 15 
13 members appointed as follows:  16 
1.  Three members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, including 17 
members from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of s eats in the Legislature. 18 
When making the appointments, the President shall give preference to members of the 19 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety and the Joint Standing 20 
Committee on Judiciary;  21 
2.  Four members of the House of Repr esentatives appointed by the Speaker of the 22 
House of Representatives, including members from each of the 2 parties holding the 23 
largest number of seats in the Legislature. When making the appointments, the Speaker 24 
shall give preference to members of the Joi nt Standing Committee on Criminal Justice 25 
and Public Safety and the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary;  26 
3.  The Attorney General, or the Attorney General's designee;  27 
4.  The Executive Director of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence, or the 28 
executive director's designee;  29 
5.  A representative of the Maine Commission on Domestic and Sexual Abuse under 30 
the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 19 -A, section 4013, appointed by the Speaker of the 31 
House of Representatives;  32 
6.  A judge from the District Court, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme 33 
Judicial Court;  34 
7.  A representative of the Maine Prosecutors Association, appointed by the Attorney 35 
General; and  36 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0341(01) -1 
 8.  A representative of a municipal police department, appointed by the Speaker of 1 
the House of Representatives; and be it further  2 
Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:   That the first -named Senate member is the Senate 3 
chair and the first -named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the 4 
commission; and be it further  5 
Sec. 4.  Appointments; conven ing of commission.  Resolved:   That all 6 
appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 7 
resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 8 
Council once all appointments have been  completed.  After appointment of all members, 9 
the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more 10 
after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 11 
made, the chairs may request  authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 12 
for the commission to meet and conduct its business; and be it further  13 
Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:   That the commission shall conduct a comprehensive 14 
examination of domestic violence prosecutions i n this State.  The commission shall 15 
review the system by which those prosecutions are based on specific incidents and the 16 
availability of information regarding related domestic abuse incidents to judges or 17 
prosecuting attorneys.  As part of its review, the  commission shall develop 18 
recommendations on the best method to provide judges and prosecuting attorneys with 19 
information regarding related domestic abuse incidents; and be it further  20 
Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:   That the Legislative Council shal l provide 21 
necessary staffing services to the commission; and be it further  22 
Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:   That, no later than December 6, 2017, the commission 23 
shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 24 
legislati on, for presentation to the Second Regular Session of the 128th Legislature.  25 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 26 
legislation takes effect when approved.  27 
SUMMARY  28 
This resolve establishes the Commission To Study the Availa bility of Information 29 
Regarding Related Incidents in Domestic Violence Cases, which is directed to conduct a 30 
comprehensive examination of domestic violence prosecutions in this State and develop 31 
recommendations on the best method to provide judges and pros ecuting attorneys with 32 
information regarding related domestic abuse incidents.  33 
 
