 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
 
 
  
 STATE OF MAINE  
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE  
SECOND REGULAR  SESSION  
SENATE ADVANCED JOURNAL AND CALENDAR  
 
Wednesday, March 28, 2018 
 
SUPPLEMENT NO. 1  
 
 
 
ORDERS  
 
Joint Order 
 
 
(4-1)  On motion by Senator LANGLEY  of Hancock, the following Joint Order:  
S.P. 723  
 
STATE OF MAINE  
128TH LEGISLATURE  
 
WHEREAS, the members of the Task Force on Maine's 21st Century Economy and 
Workforce worked together in a nonpartisan manner, with input from the State's businesses, 
education community and workforce and policy experts, to develop unanimous 
recommendations for targeted investments in places where workforce barriers were identified in 
order to provide some immediate alleviation of workforce shortages in priority sectors; and  
WHEREAS, the Task Force on Maine’s 21st Century Economy and Workforce focused 
most of its recommendations on the health care sector, while there are other priority sectors in 
the State, such as the construction and building trades; and 
WHEREAS, the Task Force on Maine’s 21st Century Economy and Workforce 
recommended that the task force be authorized to continue its important work in order to develop 
additional recommendations to address workforce issues in these additional priority sectors; now, 
therefore, be it  
ORDERED, the House concurring, that the Task Force on Maine's 21st Century Economy 
and Workforce, established by Joint Order 2017, S.P. 294, referred to in this order as "the task 
force," is reestablished and authorized to continue its work as foll ows. 
1.  Appointments; composition.  Notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the task force consists of 
members appointed as follows:  
A.  Four members of the Senate, appointed by the President of the Senate, including one 
member of the party holding the largest and one member of the party holding the 2nd largest 
number of seats in the Senate;  
B.  Four members of the House of Representatives, appointed by the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives, including one member of the party holding the largest and one mem ber of 
the party holding the 2nd largest number of seats in the House of Representatives;  
C.  One member representing the interests of the Maine Community College System, 
appointed by the President of the Senate;  
D.  One member representing the interests o f the University of Maine System, appointed by 
the Speaker of the House of Representatives;  
E.  One member representing the interests of the State's career and technical education 
system, appointed by the President of the Senate;  
F.  One member representin g the interests of apprenticeship programs in the State, appointed 
by the Speaker of the House of Representatives;  
G.  One member representing the interests of providers and teachers of adult education in the 
State, appointed by the President of the Senate ; 
H.  One member representing the interests of the construction and building trades, appointed 
by the Speaker of the House of Representatives;  
 SUPPLEMENT NO. 1 - Wednesday, March 28, 2018  Page 2 
 
 
I.  One member representing the statewide interests of the business community, appointed by 
the President of the Senate;  
J.  One member representing the interests of a Maine business that employs more than 1,000 
workers, appointed by the President of the Senate; and 
K.  One member representing the interests of a Maine business that employs fewer than 
1,000 workers, a ppointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.  
The President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall invite to 
participate as members of the task force the Commissioner of Education, or the commissioner's 
designee, and the Commissioner of Labor, or the commissioner's designee.  
2.  Chairs.  The first -named Senator is the Senate chair of the task force and the first -named 
member of the House of Representatives is the House chair of the task force.  The chairs may 
invite the participation of interested parties and stakeholders who represent the interests of those 
sectors of industry that have experienced significant workforce shortages and who are not task 
force members.  
3.  Appointments; convening.  All appointments must b e made no later than 15 days 
following passage of this order.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of 
the Legislative Council once all appointments have been made.  When the appointment of all 
members has been completed, the chai rs of the task force may call and convene the first meeting 
of the task force.  If 15 days or more after the passage of this order a majority of but not all 
appointments have been made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may 
grant  authority for the task force to meet and conduct its business. 
4.  Duties.  The task force shall develop strategies to make targeted and strategic investments 
in the State's workforce and businesses; to expand partnerships among the State's workers, 
educators and businesses to specifically address workforce needs and worker training; to develop 
strategies for attracting, retaining and training Maine workers in sectors of industry most acutely 
affected by workforce shortages, as identified in priority order  by the Maine Department of 
Labor, including the construction and building trades; and to help improve the ability of small 
businesses to innovate and expand. 
5.  Compensation.  The legislative members of the task force are entitled to receive the 
legislative per diem, as defined in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 3, section 2, and 
reimbursement for travel and other necessary expenses related to their attendance at authorized 
meetings of the task force.  Public members not otherwise compensated by their e mployers or 
other entities that they represent are entitled to receive reimbursement of necessary expenses and, 
upon a demonstration of financial hardship, a per diem equal to the legislative per diem for their 
attendance at authorized meetings of the task  force.  
6.  Quorum.  A quorum is a majority of the members of the task force, including those 
members invited to participate who have accepted the invitation to participate.  
7.  Staffing.  The Legislative Council shall contract for necessary staff support for the task 
force during the legislative session and may contract for such staff support for a longer period to 
the extent needed and if sufficient funding is available.  At the request of the task force, the 
Legislative Council may provide drafting assis tance to the task force during the legislative 
session and other staffing support to the task force when the Legislature is not in session. 
8.  Reports.  No later than November 7, 2018, the task force shall submit a final report that 
includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested legislation, to the Second 
Regular Session of the 128th Legislature.  
 
 
_________________________________ 
 
 
