 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
t~ •• 1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 L.D. 155 
(Filing No. H-q~ ) 
f1 / fV{)t(_ !T'/ 
VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
128TH LEGISLATURE 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
COMMITTEE AMENDivffiNT "fl" to H.P. 113, L.D. 155, Bill, "An Act To 
Protect Voting Integrity by Establishing a Residency Verification Requirement for 
Purposes of Voting" 
Amend the bill by inserting after the title and before the enacting clause the 
following: 
'Mandate preamble. This measure requires one or more local units of government 
to expand or modify activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures from local 
revenues but does not provide funding for at least 90% of those expenditures. Pursuant to 
the Constitution of Maine, Article IX, Section 21, 2/3 of all of the members elected to 
each House have determined it necessary to enact this measure.' 
Amend the bill by incorporating the attached fiscal note. 
SUMMARY 
This amendment adds a mandate preamble and incorporates a fiscal note. 
FISCAL NOTE REQUIRED 
(See attached) 
Page 1 -128LR0291(02)-l 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 04/04/17 ;J!;,fac 
128th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD155 LR 291(02) 
An Act To Protect Voting Integrity by Establishing a Residency Verification Requirement for 
Purposes of Voting 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment yf{fl-1iJ 
Committee: Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Potential State Mandate -Unfunded 
State Mandates 
Required Activity Unit Affected 
Requires registrars to verify residency when a voter registration application lists a Municipality 
residency address as a dormitory or domicile provided by, or located on the campus 
of, a postsecondary educational institution. Local Cost 
Insignificant 
statewide 
The required local activities in this bill may represent a state mandate pursuant to the Constitution of Maine. If the bill 
does require a local unit of government to expand or modify its activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures 
from local revenue, the state mandate provisions of the Constitution of Maine require either: (1) General Fund 
appropriations be provided to fund at least 90% of any additional necessitated local costs of the mandate; or (2) a 
Mandate Preamble be added to the bill and two-thirds of the members of each House vote to exempt the mandate from 
the funding requirement. If the bill does represent a state mandate and neither one of these actions occurs, the local 
units of government will not be required to implement the mandated activities. 
LR029 l (02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
