 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 465
S.P. 160 In Senate, February 9, 2017
An Act  To Assist Veterans  in Their Applications for Service-related 
Benefits
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator LIBBY of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Representative GOLDEN of Lewiston.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0583(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  37-B MRSA §501, first ¶, as amended by PL 2015, c. 465, Pt. A, §2, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
The Bureau of Maine Veterans' Services, referred to in this chapter as the "bureau," is 4 
established and shall provide informational services, program assistance, memorial 5 
facilities and financial aid to veterans in the State and their dependents in order to ensure 6 
that they receive all entitlements due under the law, are relieved to the extent possible of 7 
financial hardship, receive every opportunity for self -improvement through higher 8 
education and are afforded proper recognition for their service and sacrifice to the Nation.  9 
The bureau shall serve as the primary source of information for vete rans in the State 10 
regarding all services, benefits and honors administered by the State and, to the maximum 11 
extent possible, services and benefits provided by the United States Department of 12 
Veterans Affairs, veterans' service organizations and other organ izations dedicated to 13 
serving veterans.  The bureau shall provide all veterans in the State the opportunity to 14 
have their claims represented by the bureau acting under a power of attorney when filing 15 
for service -related benefits to the United States Depart ment of Veterans Affairs, veterans' 16 
service organizations and other organizations dedicated to serving veterans.  17 
SUMMARY  18 
This bill requires the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management, 19 
Bureau of Maine Veterans' Services to provide all vete rans in the State the opportunity to 20 
have their claims represented by the bureau acting under a power of attorney when filing 21 
for service -related benefits to the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, veterans' 22 
service organizations and other organi zations dedicated to serving veterans.  23 
 
