 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 723
S.P. 240 In Senate, February 28, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Reduce  Volatility in  State  Pension  Funding Requirements 
Caused by the Financial  Markets
Submitted by the Maine Public Employees  Retirement System  pursuant  to Joint Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator KATZ of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative GATTINE of Westbrook and
Senators: BREEN of  Cumberland, CUSHING of Penobscot, WHITTEMORE of Somerset, 
Representatives: FREY of  Bangor,  HUBBELL of Bar Harbor, POULIOT of Augusta.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0680(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IX, ยง18 -A is amended to read:  4 
Section 18 -A.  Funding of retirement benefi ts under the Maine Public 5 
Employees Retirement System.  Beginning with the fiscal year starting July 1, 1997, 6 
the normal cost of all retirement and ancillary benefits provided to participants under the 7 
Maine State  Public Employees  Retirement System must be  funded annually on an 8 
actuarially sound basis.  Unfunded liabilities may not be created except those resulting 9 
from experience losses.  Unfunded liability resulting from experience losses must be 10 
retired over a period not exceeding 10 20 years.  11 
; and be i t further  12 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 13 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 14 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law fo r 15 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 16 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 17 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  18 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to reduce volatility in 19 
state pension funding requirements caused by the financial markets by 20 
increasing the length of time over which experience losses are amortized 21 
from 10 years to 20 years, in line with pension indust ry standards?"  22 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 23 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 24 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 25 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 26 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 27 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the leg al votes are cast in favor of the 28 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 29 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 30 
further  31 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolv ed: That the Secretary of State 32 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 33 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  34 
SUMMARY  35 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitutio n of Maine to reduce volatility in 36 
state pension funding requirements caused by the financial markets by increasing the 37 
length of time over which experience losses are amortized from 10 years to 20 years.  38 
 
