 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 18
H.P. 19 House of  Representatives, January 10, 2017
An Act  To Make  Exposing a Law Enforcement Officer to a 
Disorienting Substance a Crime
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative O'CONNOR of Berwick.
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS  of Piscataquis and
Representatives: GERRISH of Lebanon, HARRINGTON  of Sanford, HARVELL of 
Farmington, ORDWAY  of Standish, THERIAULT  of China,  Senators: COLLINS of York, 
CYRWAY of Kennebec.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0687(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง752 -F is enacted to read:  2 
ยง752 -F.  Assault on a law enforcement officer through unlawful exposure  3 
1.  A person is guilty of assault on a law enforcement officer through unlaw ful 4 
exposure if that person:  5 
A.  Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly exposes a law enforcement officer to any 6 
substance in a manner that could temporarily disable, disorient, impair the sight of or 7 
impair the breathing of the law enforcement officer.  V iolation of this paragraph is a 8 
Class D crime; or  9 
B.  Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly exposes a law enforcement officer to any 10 
substance in a manner that could temporarily disable, disorient, impair the sight of or 11 
impair the breathing of the law en forcement officer and that exposure could cause 12 
serious bodily injury or death to the law enforcement officer.  Violation of this 13 
paragraph is a Class C crime.  14 
SUMMARY  15 
This bill creates the crime of assault on a law enforcement officer through unlawful 16 
exposure.  A  person commits a Class D crime if the person intentionally, knowingly or 17 
recklessly exposes a law enforcement officer to any substance in a manner that could 18 
temporarily disable, disorient, impair the sight of or impair the breathing of the law 19 
enforcement officer; a person commits a Class C crime if the exposure could cause 20 
serious bodily injury or death to the law enforcement officer.  21 
 
