 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1173
S.P. 394 In Senate,  March  28, 2017
An Act  To Require  That Information on Prisoners' Furlough  Be 
Reported to the National  Crime  Information Center, Department of 
Public Safety and State Bureau of Identification
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CYRWAY of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative PIERCE  of Dresden  and
Senators: DIAMOND of Cumberland, President THIBODEAU of Waldo, Representatives: GERRISH of Lebanon,  GROHMAN of  Biddeford, HAWKE of Boothbay Harbor, HERRICK  
of Paris,  NADEAU of Winslow, PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0496(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  30-A MRSA ยง1556, sub -ยง5 is enacted to read:  2 
5.  Reporting of furlough.   The sheriff or administrator of a county jail or regional 3 
jail shall report information on a prisoner who is gran ted a furlough to the Federal Bureau 4 
of Investigation, National Crime Information Center; the Department of Public Safety for 5 
access to that information by law enforcement officers; and the Department of Public 6 
Safety, Bureau of State Police, State Bureau of Identification.  This information must 7 
include the name and date of birth of the prisoner, the name of the county jail or regional 8 
jail to which the prisoner is committed, the beginning and end times for the furlough and 9 
any conditions of release.  10 
Sec. 2.  34-A MRSA ยง3014 is enacted to read:  11 
ยง3014.  Reporting of furlough  12 
The chief administrative officer shall report information on a prisoner who is granted 13 
a furlough to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, National Crime Information Center; the 14 
Departmen t of Public Safety for access to that information by law enforcement officers; 15 
and the Department of Public Safety, Bureau of State Police, State Bureau of 16 
Identification.  This information must include the name and date of birth of the prisoner, 17 
the name of the correctional facility or detention facility to which the prisoner is 18 
committed, the beginning and end times for the furlough and any conditions of release.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This bill requires the sheriff or administrator of a county jail or regional jail and  the 21 
chief administrative officer of a correctional facility or detention facility to report 22 
information on a prisoner who is granted a furlough to the Federal Bureau of 23 
Investigation, National Crime Information Center; the Department of Public Safety for 24 
access to that information by law enforcement officers; and the Department of Public 25 
Safety, Bureau of State Police, State Bureau of Identification.  This information must 26 
include the name and date of birth of the prisoner, the name of the county jail, reg ional 27 
jail, correctional facility or detention facility to which the prisoner is committed, the 28 
beginning and end times for the furlough and any conditions of release.  29 
 
