 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1747
S.P. 646 In Senate, December  22, 2017
Resolve, To  Establish a Task  Force  To Examine Agricultural Issues
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on December 19, 2017.  Referred to  the Committee  
on Agriculture,  Conservation and Forestry  pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator JACKSON of  Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Representative MARTIN of Eagle  Lake and
Senators: CARPENTER of Aroostook, DAVIS of Piscataquis, DILL of Penobscot, SAVIELLO of Franklin, VITELLI of Sagadahoc, Representatives: FREDETTE of Newport, TUELL of  East Machias.

Page 1 - 128LR2742(01)-11 Emergency preamble. Whereas,  acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as  emergencies; and
3 Whereas, this resolve establishes the Task Force To Examine Agricultural Issues to 
4 study barriers to economic prosperity  in rural parts of the State and examine how 
5 innovation, infrastructure and technology  may play a role in long-term,  sustainable rural  
6 success; and
7 Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90-day period expires in order  that 
8 the study  may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 
9 legislative session; and
10 Whereas, in the judgment  of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
11 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine  and require  the following legislation as 
12 immediately necessary  for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety;  now, 
13 therefore, be it
14 Sec. 1.  Task  force  established.  Resolved:  That the Task Force To Examine 
15 Agricultural Issues, referred to in this resolve as "the task force," is established;  and be it 
16 further
17 Sec. 2.  Task force membership.  Resolved:   That the task force consists of 13 
18 members appointed as follows:
19 1.  Four members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate,  including 
20 members from  each of the 2 parties  holding the largest number of seats in the Legislature,  
21 a member of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
22 and a member of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government;
23 2.  Four members of the House of Representatives appointed  by the Speaker of the 
24 House, including members from each of the 2 parties holding  the largest  number of seats 
25 in the Legislature, a member of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
26 Conservation and Forestry  and a member  of the Joint Standing Committee on State and 
27 Local Government;
28 3.  The Commissioner of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry or the 
29 commissioner's designee;
30 4.  The Director of the  Bureau  of General Services or  the director's  designee;
31 5.  Two public members representing blueberry harvesters  appointed by the Speaker 
32 of the House.   The Speaker of the House  shall consider any recommendations submitted 
33 within 20 days of the effective date of this resolve by the Wild Blueberry  Commission of 
34 Maine regarding persons who have such expertise; and
35 6.  One public member representing forest products landowners appointed by the 
36 President of the Senate.  The President  of the Senate shall  consider any recommendations 
37 submitted within 20 days of the effective  date of this resolve  by the Maine Forest 
38 Products Council regarding  persons who have such expertise;  and be it further
Page 2 - 128LR2742(01)-11 Sec. 3.  Chairs.   Resolved:  That the first-named Senate member is the Senate  
2 chair and the first-named House  of Representatives member is the House chair of the task 
3 force; and be it  further
4 Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of task force.  Resolved:  That all 
5 appointments must be made  no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 
6 resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 
7 Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 
8 the chairs  shall call and convene the first meeting of the task force.  If 30 days or more 
9 after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been  
10 made, the chairs  may request  authority and the Legislative Council may grant  authority 
11 for the task  force  to meet  and conduct its  business; and be  it further
12 Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the task force shall examine agricultural issues 
13 that create  barriers to economic prosperity in rural  parts of the State, including investment  
14 and development challenges, workforce training, labor shortages and marketing  and 
15 branding opportunities, such as the "Made in Maine"  initiative.  The task force shall also 
16 examine how innovation,  infrastructure  and technology may play a role in long-term,  
17 sustainable rural success.  The task force shall also examine the potential impact of 
18 requiring state facilities to use a certain percentage of biofuel  and the effect  the 
19 consolidation of the former  Department of Agriculture,  Food and Rural  Resources and 
20 the former Department of Conservation has had on agricultural issues in the State; and be 
21 it further
22 Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:   That the Legislative  Council shall provide  
23 necessary staffing services  to the task force; and be it further
24 Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than November 7, 2018, the task force 
25 shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 
26 legislation, for presentation  to the First Regular Session  of the  129th Legislature.
27 Emergency clause.  In view  of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
28 legislation takes effect when  approved.
29 SUMMARY
30 This resolve establishes the Task Force To Examine  Agricultural Issues to examine 
31 the barriers  to economic  prosperity in rural parts  of the State and examine how 
32 innovation, infrastructure and technology  may play a role in long-term,  sustainable rural  
33 success.
