 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 757
H.P. 537 House of  Representatives, March 2, 2017
An Act  To Amend the Charter of the Richmond Utilities District
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PIERCE of Dresden.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  AUSTIN  of Gray, FARRIN of Norridgewock, O'CONNOR 
of Berwick,  PICKETT of Dixfield, SIMMONS  of Waldoboro, TUCKER of Brunswick, 
WADSWORTH of Hiram, WOOD of Greene.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1079(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  P&SL 1961, c. 154, ยง14 -A, as amended by P&SL 1999, c. 23, ยง1, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
Sec. 14 -A.  Authorized to borrow money, to issue bonds and notes.  For 4 
accomplishing the purpos e of this Act, the district, by vote of its board of trustees, 5 
without district vote except as provided, is authorized to borrow money temporarily and 6 
to issue its negotiable notes; and for the purpose of renewing and refunding the 7 
indebtedness so created,  of paying necessary expenses and liabilities incurred under the 8 
provisions of this Act, and in acquiring properties, paying damages, laying pipes, mains, 9 
sewers, drains and conduits, purchasing, constructing, maintaining and operating a water 10 
system and a  sewerage system and making renewals, additions, extensions and 11 
improvements to such systems and to cover interest payments during the period of 12 
construction, the Richmond Utilities District, by votes of its board of trustees, without 13 
district vote except as provided, is also authorized to issue, from time to time, bonds, 14 
notes or other evidences of indebtedness of the district in such amount or amounts, 15 
bearing interest at such rate or rates, and having such terms and provisions as the trustees 16 
determine; except that the total indebtedness of the district may not exceed the sum of 17 
$2,000,000 at any one time outstanding or such other amount as may be established 18 
pursuant to section 14 -B and in the case of a vote by the trustees to authorize bonds or 19 
notes to  pay for the acquisition of property, except for the original acquisition of property 20 
of Richmond Water Works, for the cost of a water system or sewerage system or part of a 21 
water system or sewerage system, for renewals or additions or for other improvemen ts in 22 
the nature of capital costs, the estimated cost of which singly or in the aggregate included 23 
in any one financing is $30,000 or more, but not for renewing or refunding existing 24 
indebtedness or to pay for maintenance, repairs or for current expenses, notice of the 25 
proposed debt and of the general purpose or purposes for which it was authorized must be 26 
given by the clerk by publication at least once in a newspaper having a general circulation 27 
in the Town of Richmond.  No debt may be incurred under such vote of the trustees until 28 
the expiration of 7 full days following the date on which such notice was first published.  29 
Prior to the expiration of that period, the trustees may call a special district meeting for 30 
the purpose of permitting the voters of the district to express approval or disapproval of 31 
the amount of debt so authorized, and the trustees shall call a special district meeting, if 32 
within 7 days following the publication of the notice, there shall have  has been filed with 33 
the clerk of the distric t a petition or petitions signed by not less than 50 qualified voters of 34 
the district requesting that such a special district meeting be called.  If at the district 35 
meeting a majority of voters present and voting thereon  expresses disapproval of the 36 
amount  of debt authorized by the trustees, the debt shall  may not be incurred and the vote 37 
of the trustees authorizing the same shall be  is void and of no effect.  The bonds, notes 38 
and evidences of indebtedness may be issued to mature serially in annual installm ents of 39 
not less than 1% of the face amount of the issue and beginning not later than 2 years from 40 
the date thereof  of issue , or made to run for such periods as the trustees may determine, 41 
but no issue thereof shall  of bonds, notes or evidences of indebted ness may  run for a 42 
longer period than 40 years from the date of original issue thereof .  Bonds, notes or 43 
evidences of indebtedness may be issued with or without provision for calling the same 44 
prior to maturity, and if callable may be made callable at par o r at a premium as the 45 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1079(01) -1 
 trustees may determine.  All bonds, notes or other evidences of indebtedness shall  must  1 
have inscribed upon their face the words "Richmond Utilities District," shall  must  be 2 
signed by the treasurer and countersigned by the chairman  chair of the board of trustees 3 
of the district, and if coupon bonds are issued, the interest coupons attached thereto shall  4 
to the coupon bonds must  bear the facsimile of the signature of the treasurer.  All bonds, 5 
notes and evidences of indebtedness so issu ed by the district shall be  are legal obligations 6 
of the district , which is hereby  declared to be a quasi -municipal corporation within the 7 
meaning of the Maine  Revised Statutes, Title 30 30-A, section 5053  chapter 120 .  The 8 
district may, from time to time,  issue its bonds, notes and other evidences of 9 
indebtedness, for the purpose of paying, redeeming or refunding outstanding bonds, notes 10 
or evidences of indebtedness, and each authorized issue shall constitute  constitutes  a 11 
separate loan.  All bonds, notes and evidences of indebtedness issued by the district shall 12 
be are legal investments for savings banks in the State of Maine and shall be  are tax 13 
exempt.  The district is hereby  authorized and empowered to enter into agreements with 14 
the State or Federal Gov ernment, or any agency or of either, or any corporation, 15 
commission or board authorized by the State or Federal Government to grant or loan 16 
money to or otherwise assist in the financing of projects such as the district is authorized 17 
to carry out, and to ac cept grants and borrow money from any such government agency, 18 
corporation, commission or board as may be necessary or desirable to enforce the 19 
provisions of this Act.  All notes and bonds with the maturity of more than one year shall 20 
must  be first approved  by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to the Maine  Revised 21 
Statutes, Title 35 35-A, section 171 902.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
This bill amends the charter of the Richmond Utilities District to remove the cap on 24 
the district's total indebtedness and to update obsole te language and references.  25 
 
