 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
HOUSE ADVANCE JOURNAL AND CALENDAR - Wednesday, Mar ch 28, 2018  Page 4  
 
 
 
ORDERS 
 
 (4-1)  On motion of Representative BERRY of Bowdoi nham, the following Joint Order:  
(H.P. 1320) 
 
 ORDERED, the Senate concurring, that, notwithstand ing Joint Rule 353, the Task 
Force To Study Rising Transmission and Distribution  Costs is established as follows. 
 
 1. Task Force To Study the Rising Transmission and Distribution Costs 
established.  The Task Force to Study Rising Transmission and Di stribution Costs, 
referred to in this order as "the task force," is e stablished. 
 
 2. Membership.   The task force consists of 13 members appointed a s follows: 
 
 A.  Two members of the Senate appointed by the Pre sident of the Senate, including 
a member from each of the 2 parties holding the lar gest number of seats in the 
Legislature; 
 
 B.  Two members of the House of Representatives ap pointed by the Speaker of the 
House, including a member from each of the 2 partie s holding the largest number 
of seats in the Legislature; 
 
 C.  Five members appointed by the President of the  Senate as follows: 
 
 (1)  A representative from each of the 2 investor- owned transmission and 
distribution utilities in the State; 
 
 (2)  A representative of a consumer-owned transmis sion and distribution utility; 
 
 (3)  A representative of a small energy consumer; and 
 
 (4)  A representative of an industrial energy cons umer; and 
 
 D.  Four members appointed by the Speaker of the H ouse as follows: 
 
 (1)  A representative of a conservation organizati on; 
 
 (2)  A representative of an energy generator locat ed in the State; 
 
 (3)  A representative of an organization with expe rtise in elder and aging 
advocacy; and 
 
 (4)  A representative of an economic development o rganization in the State. 
  
HOUSE ADVANCE JOURNAL AND CALENDAR - Wednesday, Mar ch 28, 2018  Page 5  
 
 
 
 3.  Task force chairs.   The first-named Senator is the Senate chair of th e task 
force and the first-named member of the House of th e Representatives is the House chair 
of the task force. 
 
 4.  Appointments; convening of task force.   All appointments must be made no 
later than 30 days following the effective date of this order.  The appointing authorities 
shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislat ive Council once all appointments have 
been made.  When the appointment of all members has  been completed, the chairs of the 
task force shall call and convene the first meeting  of the task force.  If 30 days or more 
after the effective date of this order a majority o f but not all appointments have been 
made, the chairs may request authority and the Legi slative Council may grant authority 
for the task force to meet and conduct its business .  
 
 5.  Duties.   The task force shall: 
 
 A.  Review of transmission and distribution costs for both residential and industrial 
consumers since 2000 for: 
 
 (1)  Consumer-owned transmission and distribution utilities; 
 
 (2)  Small investor-owned transmission and distrib ution utilities; and 
 
 (3)  Large investor-owned transmission and distrib ution utilities; 
 
 B.  Compare the costs of transmission and distribu tion in the ISO-NE region, as 
defined in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 35-A, section 1902, subsection 3, to 
other regions in the United States in which the bul k power system is operated by a 
system operator; 
 
 C.  Review and evaluate the cost differences betwe en transmission and distribution; 
 
 D.  Review and evaluate the legislative and regula tory policies affecting 
distribution costs; 
 
 E.  Review and evaluate the cost containment provi sions of law designed to prevent 
overbuilt transmission and distribution lines; 
 
 F.  Review and evaluate different compensation mod els for transmission and 
distribution utilities in other regions in the Unit ed States in which the bulk power 
system is operated by a system operator; 
  
HOUSE ADVANCE JOURNAL AND CALENDAR - Wednesday, Mar ch 28, 2018  Page 6  
 
 
 
 G.  Review current transmission and distribution r ate structures in the State and 
evaluate the effectiveness of lower rates in promot ing economic development;    
 
 H.  Determine if the costs of advocacy before the Legislature and administrative 
bodies on behalf of transmission and distribution u tilities are borne by ratepayers; 
 
 I.  Develop recommendations for changing current r egulatory policies and 
determine the costs of implementing those recommend ations versus the cost of 
leaving current policies in place;  
 
 J.  Review and evaluate wheeling charges; 
 
 K.  Review and evaluate time-of-use billing; and 
 
 L.  Examine any other issues to further the purpos es of the task force. 
 
 In conducting the duties under this subsection, th e task force shall seek public 
input and shall consult and collaborate with stakeh olders and experts in the fields of 
energy policy and economic development. 
 
 6.  Meetings.   The task force shall hold at least 4 meetings. 
 
 7.  Staff assistance.   The Legislative Council shall provide staffing se rvices to the 
task force, except that the Legislative Council sta ff support is not authorized when the 
Legislature is in regular or special session. 
 
 8.  Report.  No later than November 7, 2018, the task force sha ll submit a report 
that includes its findings and recommendations, inc luding suggested legislation, to the 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and T echnology. 
 
 
_________________________________ 
 
 
 
  
