 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1097
H.P. 771 House of  Representatives, March 21, 2017
An Act  To Develop  and Distribute Work Training Pamphlets To 
Educate State  Agencies,  Private Businesses  and Other Organizations 
about Dementia
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HARLOW of  Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator LIBBY  of Androscoggin and
Representatives: BATTLE of South Portland, CAMPBELL of Orrington,  HAMANN of  South  
Portland, HARRINGTON of Sanford,  MARTIN of Eagle Lake, O'NEIL of Saco, ORDWAY  
of Standish, STANLEY of  Medway.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1911(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง5107 -K is enacted to read:  2 
ยง5107 -K.  Educational program on dementia  3 
1.  Program.  Pursuant to section 5106, subsection 11, the department shall 4 
administer an educational progr am that informs state agencies, municipalities, businesses, 5 
religious organizations and others on dementia, including Alzheimer's disease and other 6 
dementia -related conditions.  The program must provide a training component available 7 
on a publicly accessib le website and develop a pamphlet for public distribution with 8 
information on:  9 
A.  Understanding facts about dementia;  10 
B.  Recognizing signs of dementia in a person;  11 
C.  Communicating and interacting with a person who has dementia;  12 
D.  Creating a dementia -friendly physical space; and  13 
E.  Locating dementia -related resources in the community.  14 
2.  Distribution.  The department shall distribute the pamphlet developed pursuant to 15 
subsection 1 to all state agencies and offices of the executive, legislative and ju dicial 16 
branches, private businesses and nonprofit organizations and any other person who 17 
requests a pamphlet and shall make the pamphlet available on a publicly accessible 18 
website.  19 
3.  Review.  The department annually shall review the program under this se ction and 20 
make any revision the department determines necessary based upon changes in law, 21 
medical advances in understanding and treatment of dementia and other relevant 22 
information the department determines appropriate.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
This bill requires the Depa rtment of Health and Human Services to administer an 25 
educational program on dementia.  The department is required to create a pamphlet to be 26 
distributed to state agencies, businesses, nonprofit organizations and others that informs 27 
and educates about demen tia-related conditions and how to recognize and communicate 28 
with persons who have dementia.  29 
 
