 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 144
H.P. 102 House of  Representatives, January 19, 2017
An Act  To Create a Pilot  Project  To Reduce Substance Use 
Disorders among Youth in Piscataquis  County To Be  Used as  a 
Model for All  Maine Communities
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HIGGINS of Dover-Foxcroft.
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS  of Piscataquis and
Representatives: BABBIDGE of Kennebunk, DUCHESNE  of Hudson, LYFORD of 
Eddington, RYKERSON of Kittery, STANLEY of  Medway, STEARNS of Guilford, TUELL  
of East Machias, VACHON of Scarborough.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1851(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to establish a comprehensive, evidence -based pilot project in 5 
selected Piscataquis County commun ities and schools with the goal of reducing the 6 
harmful effects of substance use disorder and addiction.  The pilot project will use best 7 
practices for screening high -risk children, early intervention and community and family 8 
support to prevent addiction a nd promote public health and safety.  The pilot project must 9 
be administered by a local nonprofit entity with expertise in management and in the 10 
subject matter of the project.  11 
The bill provides funding for the planning and implementation of the pilot proje ct, 12 
including, but not limited to, funding to:  13 
1.  Employ one full -time person to lead and manage the implementation of the 14 
project;  15 
2.  Engage outside consultants with expertise in planning, evaluation, training and 16 
technical assistance;  17 
3.  Convene commu nity partners to leverage local, state and federal resources;  18 
4.  Train school staff and others working with priority populations;  19 
5.  Screen and provide early intervention to children and families most at risk for 20 
substance use disorder and its related im plications;  21 
6.  Build school and community capacity to mitigate trauma and improve resilience; 22 
and 23 
7.  Promote understanding of and decrease stigma surrounding substance use 24 
disorder.  25 
The bill also provides funding for a professional evaluation of the pilo t project and 26 
requires a report to the Legislature on the pilot project's effectiveness and ease of 27 
replication in other communities that are being affected by the opiate epidemic.  28 
 
