 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 543
H.P. 387 House of  Representatives, February 9, 2017
An Act  Regarding Political  Action Committee Expenditures
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative LUCHINI of  Ellsworth.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  FARRIN of Norridgewock, LONGSTAFF  of Waterville,  
SCHNECK of Bangor, Senator: MASON of Androscoggin.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0075(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง1054 -B is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1054 -B.  Payments to Legislators by political action committees  3 
If a Legislator is a principal officer or treasurer of a political action committe e or is 4 
one of the individuals primarily responsible for raising contributions or making decisions 5 
for the political action committee, the committee may not compensate the Legislator or a 6 
member of the Legislator's immediate family or household for service s provided to the 7 
committee. The committee may not make payments to or compensate a business owned 8 
or operated by the Legislator.  The committee may reimburse the Legislator or family or 9 
household member for expenses incurred in the proper performance of t he duties of the 10 
Legislator, for purchases made on behalf of the committee and for travel expenses 11 
associated with volunteering for the committee.  Allowable reimbursement for expenses 12 
does not include payments from the committee that are determined by the  commission to 13 
be for the purpose of personal financial enrichment of the Legislator or a member of the 14 
Legislator's immediate family or household.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This bill prohibits a political action committee from compensating a Legislator or 17 
member of the Leg islator's immediate family or household or a business owned or 18 
operated by the Legislator for services provided to the committee if the Legislator is a 19 
principal officer or treasurer of the committee or is one of the individuals primarily 20 
responsible for r aising contributions or making decisions for the committee.  21 
 
