 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
~ 1 
2 Date: 
3 HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES L.D. 1134 
(Filing No. Hd$) 
4 Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
5 STATE OF MAINE 
6 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
7 128TH LEGISLATURE 
8 FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
9 COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "B" to H.P. 797, L.D. 1134, Bill, "An Act To 
10 Amend the Laws Governing Nursing Facilities To Permit Nurse Practitioners, Clinical 
11 Nurse Specialists and Physician Assistants To Perform Cettain Physician Tasks" 
12 Amend the bill in section 1 in § 1812-L in subsection 1 by striking out all of 
13 paragraphs B and C (page 1, lines 9 to 16 in L.D.) and inserting the following: 
14 'B. The alternate required visits may be performed by a physician assistant, nurse 
15 practitioner or clinical nurse specialist who is licensed or certified as such by the 
16 State and performing within the authorized scope of practice if delegated by a 
17 physician; 
18 C, Medically necessary visits may be performed by a physician assistant, nurse 
19 practitioner or clinical nurse specialist who is licensed or certified as such by the 
20 State and performing within the authorized scope of practice if delegated by a 
21 physician; and' 
22 SUMMARY 
23 This amendment clarifies that alternate required visits and medically necessary visits 
24 in skilled nursing facilities may be perfonned by physician assistants, nurse practitioners 
25 and clinical nurse specialists operating within their scope of practice if those tasks have 
26 been delegated by a physician. 
FISCAL NOTE REQUIRED 
(See attaebed) 
Page 1 -128LR0951(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 05/18/17 feac:. 
128th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 1134 LR951(02) 
An Act To Amend the Laws Governing Nursing Facilities To Permit Nurse Practitioners, Clinical 
Nurse Specialists and Physician Assistants To Perform Certain Physician Tasks \ 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment 'A" CH "'j, 5 3) 
Committee: Health and Human Services 
Fiscal Detail and Notes Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Potential future biennium savings -General Fund 
Potential future biennium savings -Federal Expenditures Fund 
This bill provides that, in accordance with federal regulations for certain nursing home level services, a physician 
assistant, nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist may provide medically necessary visits currently performed by 
a physician. For nursing facilities a prospective case mix payment system is utilized in which the payment rate for 
services is set in advance of the actual provision of those services. The rate is established in a two-step process: 1) 
facility's base-year cost report is reviewed to extract those costs that are allowable costs and 2) the costs which must 
be incuned by an efficiently and economically operated facility are identified. Since these rates are set ahead of 
service, any savings from using a lower clinical level to provide ce1iain services would not be acheived until a future 
bie1mium. The efficiencies gained tlu·ough this bill may not lead to immediate savings in the MaineCare system 
because skilled nursing facilities are not reimbursed for each direct service, but rather on a per diem basis. Long-term 
the per diem rates should be adjusted lower because of this bill and the MaineCare system should incur savings. 
LR0951(02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
