 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1211
S.P. 405 In Senate,  March  28, 2017
An Act  To Amend the Laws Governing Legislative Political Action 
Committees
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Senators:  CHENETTE  of York, MAKER of Washington, Representatives: 
ACKLEY of  Monmouth, CASÁS of Rockport, HANINGTON of Lincoln, MONAGHAN of  
Cape Elizabeth.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1122(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA §1006 is enacted to read:  2 
§1006.  Participation in political action committees by legislative candidates  3 
1.  Establishing a political action committee prohibited.  A legislati ve candidate 4 
may not establish a political action committee for which the candidate is a treasurer or 5 
principal officer or for which the candidate is primarily responsible for fund -raising or 6 
decision making.  This prohibition applies between April 1st imm ediately preceding a 7 
general election through:  8 
A.  The date on which the candidate withdraws from a race;  9 
B.  The date of the primary election or general election for a candidate who loses 10 
either election; or  11 
C.  January 1st immediately preceding the next general election for a candidate who 12 
wins the general election.  13 
This prohibition also applies to a legislative candidate in a special election, except that 14 
the prohibition begins on the date of the candidate's nomination.  This subsection does not 15 
prohibit  a legislative candidate, including a legislative candidate who wins a general or 16 
special election, from engaging in fund -raising or decision making for a party caucus 17 
political action committee, a ballot question committee or a political action committee 18 
formed for the purpose of promoting or opposing a ballot question.  This prohibition 19 
applies to a legislative candidate regardless of the date on which the political action 20 
committee was established.  21 
Sec. 2.  21-A MRSA §1125, sub -§6-F, as enacted by PL 201 5, c. 116, §1 and 22 
affected by §2, is amended to read:  23 
6-F.  Gubernatorial candidate participation in political action committees.  A 24 
participating gubernatorial  candidate or a certified gubernatorial  candidate may not 25 
establish a political action committee  for which the gubernatorial  candidate is a treasurer 26 
or principal officer or for which the gubernatorial  candidate is primarily responsible for 27 
fund-raising or decision making.  This prohibition applies between April 1st immediately 28 
preceding a general el ection through:  29 
A.  The date on which the gubernatorial  candidate withdraws from a race;  30 
B.  The date of the primary election or general election for a gubernatorial  candidate 31 
who loses either election; or  32 
C.  January 1st immediately preceding the next gen eral election for a gubernatorial  33 
candidate who wins the general election.  34 
This prohibition also applies to a participating gubernatorial  candidate or certified 35 
gubernatorial  candidate in a special election, except that the prohibition begins on the 36 
date o f the candidate's nomination.  This subsection does not prohibit a participating 37 
gubernatorial  candidate or certified gubernatorial  candidate, including a certified 38 
gubernatorial  candidate who wins a general or special election, from engaging in 39 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1122(01) -1 
 fund-raising or decision making for a party caucus political action committee, a ballot 1 
question committee or a political action committee formed for the purpose of promoting 2 
or opposing a ballot question.  This prohibition applies to a participating gubernatorial  3 
candidate or certified gubernatorial  candidate regardless of the date on which the political 4 
action committee was established.  5 
SUMMARY  6 
This bill prohibits a legislative candidate from establishing political action 7 
committees for which the candidate is a tre asurer or principal officer or for which the 8 
candidate is primarily responsible for fund -raising or decision making.  The bill also 9 
makes a change to a provision under the Maine Clean Election Act, which includes the 10 
same prohibition, to clarify that the p rohibition in that Act applies only to participating 11 
gubernatorial candidates and certified gubernatorial candidates.  12 
 
