 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 287
H.P. 220 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2017
Resolve, Prohibiting the Commissioner of Marine  Resources from 
Adopting or Enforcing Certain Rules Limiting the  Quantity of 
Smelts a Person May  Take  from the Coastal Waters of the  State 
until after  Completion of a Study
Reference to the Committee on Marine Resources  suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HANLEY of  Pittston.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  PICKETT  of Dixfield, SHERMAN of Hodgdon, SIMMONS 
of Waldoboro, WHITE  of Washburn, Senator:  VOLK of Cumberland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0547(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Rules limiting taking of smelts from coastal waters prohibited; 1 
study.  Resolved:  That the Commissioner of Marine Resources may not adopt or 2 
enforce rules that limit the quantity of smelts a person may take from the coastal waters 3 
of the State be fore a study of the smelt population in the State's coastal waters is 4 
conducted by the Department of Marine Resources and presented to the joint standing 5 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over marine resources matters.  6 
SUMMARY  7 
This resolve p rohibits the Commissioner of Marine Resources from adopting or 8 
enforcing a limit on the quantity of smelts a person may take from the coastal waters 9 
before the Department of Marine Resources conducts a study of the smelt population in 10 
the State's coastal w aters and presents its findings to the joint standing committee of the 11 
Legislature having jurisdiction over marine resources matters.  12 
 
