 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1640
S.P. 590 In Senate,  June 15, 2017
Resolve, To  Allow  the Issuance of Open Burn  Permits through 
Private Online Services
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin.
Cosponsored by Senator:  MASON of Androscoggin.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR2392(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, under current law, anyone performing out -of-door burning, including 3 
burning for agricultur al purposes and of brush, leaves, wood waste and grass fields, is 4 
required to obtain a permit from the town forest fire warden or from the forest ranger 5 
having jurisdiction over the location where the fire is to be set; and  6 
Whereas, until recently, as a co nvenience to the residents of the State, burn permits 7 
were available online and for free through a 3rd -party provider; and  8 
Whereas, due to a change in interpretation of policy by the Commissioner of 9 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, residents of the State are no longer able to get 10 
free online burn permits; and  11 
Whereas, the burn permits issued online by the Department of Agriculture, 12 
Conservation and Forestry carry a cost of $7 per permit; and  13 
Whereas, in order to restore to the residents of the State the convenience of 14 
obtaining burn permits online and for no charge, it is necessary that this legislation take 15 
effect as soon as possible; and  16 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 17 
the meaning of the Constituti on of Maine and require the following legislation as 18 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 19 
therefore, be it  20 
Sec. 1.  Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of 21 
Forestry to allow municip alities to purchase burn permit software. Resolved:   22 
That the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of Forestry shall 23 
allow municipalities to purchase and use burn permit software sold from a private party to 24 
issue burn permits pursu ant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 12, section 9325 if all 25 
statutory requirements of issuing burn permits are met by the software.  26 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 27 
legislation takes effect when approved.  28 
SUMMARY  29 
This resolve directs the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, 30 
Bureau of Forestry to allow municipalities to purchase and use burn permit software from 31 
a private party to issue burn permits online if all statutory requirements of issuing b urn 32 
permits are met by the software.  33 
 
Approved: 06/14/17
LD     LR 2392 (01)
Fiscal Detail and NotesFiscal Note
Minor revenue decrease - General Fund
Allowing municipalities to use third party software to issue burn permits will result in fewer permits issued by the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, reducing General Fund revenue by a minor amount.128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
Resolve, To Allow the Issuance of Open Burn Permits through Private Online Services
Fiscal Note for Original Bill
Sponsor: Sen. Saviello of Franklin
Committee: Not Referred
Fiscal Note Required: Yes
LR2392(01) - Fiscal Note - Page 1 of 1
