 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
1 
2 
-·:;'_~~-, 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 Date: '-1 / (Q / J. CJ J ? 
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES L.D. 812 
(Filing No. S-'-/lf¥ ) 
Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Secretary of the Senate. 
STATE OF MAINE 
SENATE 
128TH LEGISLATURE 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "A " to S.P. 257, L.D. 812, "Resolve, To Establish 
a Pilot Project To Save Lives and Support People with Substance Use Disorder in 
Washington County" 
Amend the resolve by striking out everything after the title and before the summary 
and inserting the following: 
'Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and 
Whereas, substance use disorder is a crisis in Washington County requiring a 
systems approach to combat the issue; and 
Whereas, a pilot project in Washington County developed without the need for state 
general funds must be evaluated and provide data allowing for replication in other rural 
areas of the State; and 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
therefore, be it 
Sec. 1. Washington County Substance Use Disorder Pilot Project 
established. Resolved: That the Department of Health and Human Services shall 
establish a Washington County Substance Use Disorder Pilot Project, referred to in this 
resolve as "the pilot project," to develop a systems approach to providing services in a 
rural area for residents of Washington County with substance use disorder through 
helping to coordinate service needs among organizations and providers to help bridge any 
gaps in services and ultimately assisting individuals in accessing treatment and recovery 
services when they are ready. The department shall work with Healthy Acadia as the lead 
agency in Washington County for developing the pilot project. The department shall 
provide advice and assistance to Healthy Acadia in applying for federal grant funding 
from the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and 
Page 1 -128LR1859(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITfEEAMENDMENT "A" to S.P. 257, L.D. 812 
1 Mental Health Services Administration to fund the pilot project, including any requests 
2 for proposals required by this resolve; and be it further 
3 Sec. 2. Telephone system. Resolved: That the Department of Health and 
4 Human Services shall work with Healthy Acadia to establish a central coordinating 
5 telephone system located in Washington County no later than October 1, 2018. The 
6 department may expand an existing hotline or use some other strategy to establish the 
7 telephone system. The telephone system must be staffed at all times so that it is available 
8 at any time to any person in Washington County. The telephone system must be made 
9 widely available to organizations in Washington County, including law enforcement, 
10 medical and emergency personnel, public officials, educational staff and members of the 
11 public, to connect those in need of substance use disorder treatment with counseling, 
12 referral services, recovery coaches and other related assistance. Telephone system staff 
13 answering the telephone calls must be qualified to provide counseling in addition to 
14 referral services. The department and the coordinating council established pursuant to 
15 section 3 shall develop a system that coordinates the Washington County telephone 
16 system with the State's 2-1-1 system to ensure maximum access for any person who calls 
17 the telephone system; and be it further 
18 Sec. 3. Washington County Coordinating Council. Resolved: That the 
19 Department of Health and Human Services shall work with Healthy Acadia to establish 
20 and support a Washington County Coordinating Council consisting ofup to 15 members 
21 representing persons and organizations in Washington County and surrounding areas 
22 involved in substance use disorder prevention, treatment and recovery, including a 
23 representative from Healthy Acadia as lead agency; a representative from the Department 
24 of Health and Human Services; members of organizations representing health care, 
25 including primary care, emergency care, hospitals, mental health agencies and providers 
26 of substance use disorder treatment, including faith-based treatment; members of law 
27 enforcement, including county jails; organizations involved in education, prevention and 
28 advocacy; a person involved in the local business community; and persons in recovery 
29 living in the area. The council shall choose a chair to preside over meetings and it shall 
30 meet at least once every 2 months. The Department of Health and Human Services shall 
31 work with Healthy Acadia to ensure that an executive assistant coordinates record 
32 keeping and meetings and other administrative tasks. The council shall coordinate 
33 services in the pilot project, including access to the telephone system established pursuant 
34 to section 2 and accuracy of information relating to services, medication-assisted 
35 treatment, detoxification, residential and other treatment services, peer recovery and 
36 coaching services, education programs in schools, pain and chronic disease self-
37 management classes, jail treatment programs and other programs as well as tracking 
38 barriers to treatment and recovery and facilitating system improvements to reduce or 
39 eliminate identified barriers; and be it further 
40 Sec. 4. Recovery coaching. Resolved: That the Department of Health and 
41 Human Services shall establish and support recovery coaching services in Washington 
42 County. A coordinator shall assist in developing, training and establishing recovery 
43 coaches who provide volunteer services around Washington County, including ensuring 
44 that recovery coaches are connected to persons in treatment and recovery, including 
45 through the telephone system established pursuant to section 2, and that recovery coaches 
46 are available at all times, and in keeping track of the system of recovery coaches. The 
Page 2 -128LR1859(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMJvfITIEEAMENDMENT 'A "to S.P. 257, L.D. 812 
1 
: 1 department and coordinator shall endeavor to provide assistance to volunteers such as 
2 recruiting, training, transportation assistance, facilitating connections to community 
3 organizations and other assistance; and be it further 
4 Sec. 5. Evaluation program. Resolved: That by June 30, 2019 the Department 
5 of Health and Human Services shall establish and report baseline and recovery outcome 
6 measures to be used in evaluating the pilot project. To the extent required and supported 
7 by federal grant funding, the department shall conduct an evaluation of the pilot project. 
8 The department, in conjunction with the coordinating c_ouncil established pursuant to 
9 section 3, shall report the :findings of the evaluation to the joint standing committee of the 
10 Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters no later than 
11 March 1, 2021. The committee may report out legislation related to the report to the First 
12 Regular Session of the 130th Legislature. 
13 Emergency clause. In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 
14 legislation talces effect when approved.' 
15 SUMMARY 
16 This amendment replaces the resolve. It amends the proposed Washington County 
17 Substance Use Disorder Pilot Project in the following ways. 
18 1. It establishes the pilot project under the Department of Health and Human 
19 Services working with local organizations, with Healthy Acadia as the lead organization. 
20 The department is required to assist Healthy Acadia with seeking federal funding for the 
21 pilot project. 
22 2. It requires the establishment of a central coordinating telephone system available 
23 to anyone in Washington County at any time to assist individuals with accessing services 
24 related to substance use disorder treatment and recovery. Individuals receiving the phone 
25 calls must be qualified to provide counseling services to all callers in addition to 
26 providing referrals. 
27 3. It requires the establishment of a coordinating council made up of representatives 
28 of persons and organizations in the area involved in the health and welfare of Washington 
29 County residents. The council is responsible for providing a coordinated system of 
30 services for prevention, treatment and recovery for substance use disorder. 
31 4. It requires the establishment of a recovery coach coordinator position. The 
32 coordinator is required to establish a system of recovery coaches available in all areas of 
33 the treatment and recovery system in Washington County and provide education and 
34 support to volunteer recovery coaches. 
35 5. It requires the Department of Health and Human Services to conduct an evaluation 
36 of the success of the pilot project in Washington County. The department must report to 
37 the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human 
3 8 services matters on the evaluation no later than March 1, 2021. 
39 FISCAL NOTE REQUIRED 
40 (See attached) 
Page 3 -128LR1859(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 04/01/18 feac 
128th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 812 LR 1859(02) 
Resolve, To Establish a Pilot Project To Save Lives and Support People with Substance Use Disorder 
in Washington County 
Fiscal Detail and Notes Fiscal Not~ for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment A" ( ~ -4'-14) 
Committee: Health and Human Services 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Potential cuuent biennium cost increase -Federal Expenditures Fund 
Minor cost increase -General Fund 
The bill establishes a pilot project under the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) working with local 
organizations with Healthy Acadia as the lead organization. It establishes a central coordinating telephone system 
available to anyone in Washington County at any time to assist individuals with accessing services related to 
substance use disorder treatment and recovery services. Additionally, it establishes a coordinating council responsible 
for providing a coordinated system of services for prevention and treatment of, and recovery from, substance use 
disorder. It also establishes a recove1y coach coordinator position to be supported by DHHS. The bill requires the 
DHHS to conduct an evaluation of the success of the pilot project in Washington County, if federal funding is 
available. Finally, it requires the DHHS to advise and provide assistance to Healthy Acadia in applying for federal 
grant funding from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration to fund the pilot project, 
including any requests for proposals required by the bill. This is all to be done without requiring state general fund 
dollars. It is expected that provisions of this bill will require additional federal funding. 
LR1859(02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
