 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 361
H.P. 267 House of  Representatives, February 2, 2017
An Act  To Ensure Fair  Compensation  for Licensed Insurance  
Agents
Reference to the Committee on Insurance  and Financial Services suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FOLEY of Wells.
Cosponsored by Senator CHENETTE of York and
Representatives: CRAIG of  Brewer, PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield, PRESCOTT of Waterboro, 
VACHON of Scarborough,  WALLACE  of Dexter, Senator: WHITTEMORE of Somerset.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1077(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง2189 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง2189.  Requirements related to enrollment in qualified health plans  3 
1.  Definition.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates , 4 
"exchange" has the same meaning as in section 2188, subsection 1, paragraph A.  5 
2.  Requirements.  An insurer that offers a qualified health plan in this State through 6 
the exchange or outside of the exchange shall:  7 
A.  Pay a commission to a licensed insu rance producer or consultant for the 8 
enrollment of an individual or employee in a qualified health plan;  9 
B.  Require that the enrollment of an individual or employee in a qualified health plan 10 
during any special enrollment period authorized under the feder al Affordable Care 11 
Act is made by a licensed insurance producer or consultant;  12 
C.  Pay a commission to a licensed insurance producer or consultant for enrollment in 13 
a qualified health plan during any special enrollment period that is equal to the 14 
commissi on paid for enrollment during the insurer's annual enrollment period; and  15 
D.  Prior to authorizing a licensed insurance producer or consultant to enroll an 16 
individual or employee during a special enrollment period, require the licensed 17 
insurance producer o r consultant to undergo training to recognize potential cases of 18 
fraud, waste and abuse related to special enrollment periods.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This bill requires insurers that offer qualified health plans in this State to ensure that 21 
only licensed insurance produc ers and consultants enroll individuals and employees 22 
during special enrollment periods and to meet certain compensation requirements for 23 
enrollment during annual and special enrollment periods.  The bill also requires that these 24 
insurance producers and con sultants receive training to recognize potential cases of fraud, 25 
waste and abuse related to special enrollment periods.  26 
 
