 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 903
H.P. 631 House of  Representatives, March 7, 2017
An Act  To Protect  Rights and  Privileges Granted under the United 
States Constitution  and the Constitution of Maine
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SAMPSON of Alfred.
Cosponsored by Senator WOODSOME of York and
Representatives: CHACE of  Durham,  FOLEY of Wells, GERRISH of Lebanon,  LOCKMAN 
of Amherst, PRESCOTT of Waterboro,  SUTTON of Warren,  TUELL  of East Machias, 
TURNER of  Burlington.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1882(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  14 MRSA c. 15 is enacted to read:  2 
CHAPTER 15  3 
APPLICATION OF FOREI GN LAW  4 
§351.  Findings  5 
The Legislature finds that it is the public policy of this State to protect its citizens 6 
from the  application of foreign laws when the application of a foreign law will result in 7 
the violation of one of the following fundamental liberties, rights and privileges 8 
guaranteed by the United States Constitution or the Constitution of Maine: due process, 9 
equal protection, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of the press and the 10 
right to keep and bear arms; and any right of privacy or marriage as specifically defined 11 
by the Constitution of Maine.  12 
The Legislature fully recognizes the right to contra ct freely under the laws of this 13 
State and also recognizes that this right may be reasonably and rationally circumscribed 14 
pursuant to the State's interest to protect and promote these fundamental liberties, rights 15 
and privileges granted under the United St ates Constitution and the Constitution of 16 
Maine: due process, equal protection, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of 17 
the press and the right to keep and bear arms; and any right of privacy or marriage as 18 
specifically defined by the Constituti on of Maine.  19 
§352.  Definitions  20 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms 21 
have the following meanings.  22 
1.  Court.  "Court" means a court, board, administrative agency or other adjudicative 23 
or enforcement authority  of this State.  24 
2.  Foreign law, legal code or legal system.  "Foreign law, legal code or legal 25 
system" means a law, legal code or legal system of a jurisdiction outside of any state or 26 
territory of the United States, including, but not limited to, interna tional organizations and 27 
tribunals, applied by that jurisdiction's courts, administrative bodies or other formal or 28 
informal tribunals.  For the purposes of this chapter, "foreign law, legal code or legal 29 
system" does not mean or include any laws of the fe derally recognized Indian tribes in 30 
this State.  31 
3.  Religious organization.  "Religious organization" means a church, seminary, 32 
synagogue, temple, mosque, religious order or religious corporation, association or 33 
society, whose identity is distinctive in te rms of common religious creed, beliefs, 34 
doctrines, practices or rituals, of any faith or denomination, including any organization 35 
qualifying as a church or religious organization under the United States Internal Revenue 36 
Code of 1986, Section 501(c)(3) or 5 01(d).  37 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1882(01) -1 
 §353.  Rulings and decisions based on foreign law void and unenforceable  1 
A court, arbitration panel, tribunal or administrative agency ruling or decision 2 
violates the public policy of this State and is void and unenforceable if the court, 3 
arbitratio n panel, tribunal or administrative agency bases its ruling or decision in the 4 
matter at issue in whole or in part on any foreign law, legal code or legal system that 5 
would not grant the parties affected by the ruling or decision one or more of the followi ng 6 
fundamental liberties, rights and privileges granted under the United States Constitution 7 
or the Constitution of Maine: due process, equal protection, freedom of religion, freedom 8 
of speech, freedom of the press and the right to keep and bear arms; and any right of 9 
privacy or marriage as specifically defined by the Constitution of Maine.  10 
§354.  Contract and contract provisions  11 
1.  Choice of law.  A contract or severable contractual provision that provides for the 12 
choice of a foreign law, legal code or le gal system to govern some or all of the disputes 13 
between the parties adjudicated by a court of law or by an arbitration panel arising from 14 
the contract mutually agreed upon violates the public policy of this State and is void and 15 
unenforceable if the forei gn law, legal code or legal system chosen includes or 16 
incorporates any substantive or procedural law, as applied to the dispute at issue, that 17 
would not grant the parties one or more of the following fundamental liberties, rights and 18 
privileges granted und er the United States Constitution or the Constitution of Maine: due 19 
process, equal protection, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of the press 20 
and the right to keep and bear arms; and any right of privacy or marriage as specifically 21 
defined by  the Constitution of Maine.  22 
2.  Choice of jurisdiction for personal jurisdiction.  A contract or severable 23 
contractual provision that provides for a jurisdiction for purposes of granting the courts or 24 
arbitration panels personal jurisdiction over the parti es to adjudicate any disputes between 25 
parties arising from the contract mutually agreed upon violates the public policy of this 26 
State and is void and unenforceable if the jurisdiction chosen includes any foreign law, 27 
legal code or legal system, as applied to the dispute at issue, that would not grant the 28 
parties one or more of the following fundamental liberties, rights and privileges granted 29 
under the United States Constitution or the Constitution of Maine: due process, equal 30 
protection, freedom of religio n, freedom of speech, freedom of the press and the right to 31 
keep and bear arms; and any right of privacy or marriage as specifically defined by the 32 
Constitution of Maine.  33 
§355.  Denial of claim  34 
If a resident of this State, subject to personal jurisdiction in this State, seeks to 35 
maintain litigation, arbitration, agency or similarly binding proceedings in this State and 36 
the courts of this State find that granting a claim of forum non conveniens or a related 37 
claim violates or would likely violate the fundamen tal liberties, rights and privileges 38 
granted under the United States Constitution or the Constitution of Maine of the 39 
nonclaimant in the foreign forum with respect to the matter in dispute, it is the public 40 
policy of this State that the claim be denied.  41 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR1882(01) -1 
 §356.  Application  1 
Without prejudice to any legal right, this chapter does not apply to a corporation, 2 
partnership, limited liability company, business association or other legal entity that 3 
contracts to subject itself to a foreign law, legal code or legal s ystem in a jurisdiction 4 
other than this State or the United States.  5 
§357.  Free exercise of religion, establishment of religion  6 
A court or arbitrator may not interpret this chapter to limit the right of any person to 7 
the free exercise of religion as guaran teed by the First Amendment to the United States 8 
Constitution and by the Constitution of Maine.  A court may not interpret this chapter to 9 
require or authorize any court to adjudicate or prohibit any religious organization from 10 
adjudicating ecclesiastical matters, including, but not limited to, the election, 11 
appointment, calling, discipline, dismissal, removal or excommunication of a member, 12 
officer, official, priest, nun, monk, pastor, rabbi, imam or other member of the clergy of 13 
the religious organization  or determination or interpretation of the doctrine of the 14 
religious organization, where adjudication by a court would violate the prohibition of the 15 
establishment clause of the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or violate 16 
the Constitution of Maine.  17 
§358.  Treaties and international agreements  18 
This chapter may not be interpreted by any court to conflict with any federal treaty or 19 
other international agreement to which the United States is a party to the extent that the 20 
treaty or internationa l agreement preempts or is superior to the law of this State on the 21 
matter at issue.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
This bill addresses the application of foreign law in this State with the goal of 24 
protecting American citizens' constitutional rights when foreign laws and foreign  legal 25 
doctrines are applied in judicial and administrative tribunals.  The bill provides that:  26 
1.  A court or administrative ruling violates the public policy of this State and is void 27 
and unenforceable if it is based in whole or in part on a foreign law,  legal code or legal 28 
system that would not grant the same liberties, rights and privileges as are granted under 29 
the United States Constitution and the Constitution of Maine;  30 
2.  A contract's choice of law provision that chooses such a foreign law, legal co de or 31 
legal system to govern aspects of the contract is void and unenforceable if the foreign 32 
law, legal code or legal system does not protect the same liberties, rights and privileges as 33 
are protected under the United States Constitution and the Constitut ion of Maine;  34 
3.  A contract's choice of personal jurisdiction provision that provides jurisdiction 35 
over the parties that applies a foreign law, legal code or legal system to govern aspects of 36 
the contract is void and unenforceable if the foreign law, lega l code or legal system does 37 
not protect the same liberties, rights and privileges as are protected under the United 38 
States Constitution and the Constitution of Maine; and  39 
 
 Page 4 - 128LR1882(01) -1 
 4.  The court must deny a claim of forum non conveniens or related claim if granting 1 
the claim would subject the nonclaimant to a foreign forum that applies a foreign law, 2 
legal code or legal system that does not protect the same liberties, rights and privileges as 3 
are protected under the United States Constitution and the Constitution of Maine.  4 
The bill provides that these provisions do not apply to a corporation, partnership, 5 
limited liability company, business association or legal entity that contracts to subject 6 
itself to a foreign law, legal code or legal system in a jurisdiction other  than this State or 7 
the United States and do not limit the free exercise of religion or require or authorize a 8 
court to adjudicate issues within a religious organization that would violate the First 9 
Amendment's establishment clause.  10 
The bill also provides that these provisions may not be interpreted to conflict with 11 
any relevant treaty or international agreement.  12 
 
