 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 71
H.P. 58 House of  Representatives, January 11, 2017
Resolve, Directing the Secretary of State To Request That the United States Secretary  of Transportation  Place  Maine in the 
Atlantic Standard Time Zone
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DILLINGHAM of Oxford.
Cosponsored by Senator BRAKEY  of Androscoggin and
Representatives: CAMPBELL of Orrington,  CRAIG  of Brewer, HANINGTON of Lincoln, 
ORDWAY of Standish, PICKETT of Dixfield,  TEPLER of Topsham, TUELL of East 
Machias, Senator: HAMPER of Oxford.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0609(01) -1 
 Preamble. Whereas, pursuant to an order of the United States Secretary of 1 
Transportation, the State of Maine is in the Eastern Standard Time zone; and  2 
Whereas, there would be many benefits to the State of Maine if the State were 3 
placed in the Atlantic Stan dard Time zone, including more daylight in the afternoon, 4 
increased economic opportunities and less energy consumption; now, therefore, be it  5 
Sec. 1.  Secretary of State to request that United States Secretary of 6 
Transportation place Maine in Atlantic Stan dard Time zone.  Resolved:  That 7 
the Secretary of State shall request that the United States Secretary of Transportation 8 
place the State in the Atlantic Standard Time zone; and be it further  9 
Sec. 2.  Statutory referendum procedure; submission at election; form of 10 
question; effective date.  Resolved:  That this resolve must be submitted to the legal 11 
voters of the State at a statewide election held in the month of November following 12 
passage of this resolve. The municipal officers of this State shall notify th e inhabitants of 13 
their respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 14 
holding a statewide election, to vote on the acceptance or rejection of this resolve by 15 
voting on the following question:  16 
"Do you favor placing Mai ne in the Atlantic Standard Time zone?"  17 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 18 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within a corresponding square 19 
below the word "Yes" or "No."  The bal lots must be received, sorted, counted and 20 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 21 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 22 
review the returns. If a majority of t he legal votes are cast in favor of this resolve, the 23 
Governor shall proclaim the result without delay and this resolve becomes effective 30 24 
days after the date of the proclamation.  25 
The Secretary of State shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and p lantation all 26 
ballots, returns and copies of this resolve necessary to carry out the purposes of this 27 
referendum.  28 
SUMMARY  29 
This resolve directs the Secretary of State to request that the United States Secretary 30 
of Transportation place Maine in the Atlantic Standard Time zone.  This resolve is 31 
subject to approval by the voters at referendum.  32 
 
