 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 713
H.P. 504 House of  Representatives, February 28, 2017
Resolve, Authorizing  Legislation To Streamline the Laws Governing 
the Licensing and Conduct of Beano and Games  of Chance
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DEVIN of  Newcastle.
Cosponsored by Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, BATTLE  of South Portland, CASÁS  of Rockport, 
HANINGTON of Lincoln, KINNEY of Limington, STROM  of Pittsfield, Senators: CARSON  
of Cumberland, WHITTEMORE of Somerset.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1417 (01)-1 
 Sec. 1.  Development of proposals to streamline laws regarding beano and 1 
games of chance.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the Joint 2 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, or a subcommittee of its members as 3 
jointly appointed by  the chairs, shall hold up to 4 meetings beginning no later than 4 
October 1, 2017 to develop proposals to streamline the laws governing beano and games 5 
of chance with the purpose of simplifying licensure, maximizing revenue to licensed 6 
charitable organizati ons that are eligible to conduct beano and games of chance and 7 
easing administrative burdens of the Chief of the State Police with regard to enforcement.  8 
The Chief of the State Police, or the chief's designee, shall provide information to the 9 
committee or  subcommittee with regard to the number of licenses issued, revenue from 10 
license fees and the general costs of administration and enforcement of the laws 11 
governing beano and games of chance.  The joint standing committee shall complete its 12 
work, including drafting implementing legislation, by December 6, 2017 for the 13 
consideration of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs during the 14 
Second Regular Session of the 128th Legislature.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This resolve directs the Joint Standing Committee  on Veterans and Legal Affairs to 17 
meet to develop proposals to streamline the laws governing beano and games of chance 18 
with the purpose of simplifying licensure, maximizing revenue to licensed charitable 19 
organizations and easing the administrative and enfo rcement burdens of the Chief of the 20 
State Police.  The resolve requires the chief to provide certain information regarding 21 
licensing, revenues and costs of administration to the committee.  22 
 
