 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1361
S.P. 469 In Senate, April 6, 2017
An Act  Regarding State  Hiring  and Retention for  Persons  with  
Disabilities
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator VOLK of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative HERBIG of Belfast and
Senators: BELLOWS of Kennebec, LANGLEY  of Hancock, Representatives: FECTEAU of 
Biddeford, HANDY of Lewiston, MASTRACCIO  of Sanford, SYLVESTER of Portland, 
VACHON of Scarborough.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR 0979(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง7054 -C is enacted to read:  2 
ยง7054 -C.  Person with disability preference  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following terms hav e the following meanings.  5 
A.  "Person with a disability" means a person who has been determined by a qualified 6 
professional to have a physical or mental impairment that constitutes a substantial 7 
barrier to employment but who can benefit in terms of an empl oyment outcome from 8 
the provision of vocational rehabilitation services.  9 
B.  "Qualified professional" means a vocational rehabilitation counselor or other 10 
professional with advanced disability training and certification.  11 
C.  "Special appointment program" m eans the program established by rule by the 12 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of Human Resources to 13 
provide persons with disabilities increased access to positions in the classified 14 
service.  15 
D.  "Ticket to Work program" means the Ticket to Work and Self -Sufficiency 16 
Program under Section 1148 of the federal Social Security Act.  17 
2.  Interview.  In filling a position in the classified service, the employing agency 18 
shall offer an interview to a person with a disability who is eligible for the Ticket to Work 19 
program and who meets the minimum qualifications established for the position and to a 20 
person who has been determined by a qualified professional to have a disability and who 21 
meets the minimum qualifications established for the posit ion. 22 
3.  Guidance and referral if not hired.  If a person with a disability applies for a 23 
position described in subsection 2 but is not selected, the Department of Administrative 24 
and Financial Services, Bureau of Human Resources shall provide guidance to t he person 25 
regarding other available state positions, including opportunities in the special 26 
appointment program, for which the person might qualify.  The Bureau of Human 27 
Resources may also refer the person to the Department of Labor, Bureau of Rehabilitati on 28 
Services for potential vocational rehabilitation services if the person has not been referred 29 
by a qualified professional.  30 
4.  Retention preference.  In any reduction in personnel in the state service, 31 
employees who are eligible for the Ticket to Work p rogram or who are persons with 32 
disabilities must be retained in preference to all other competing employees in the same 33 
classification with equal seniority, status and performance reviews.  34 
5.  Right to nondisclosure.  A person with a disability or who is e ligible for the 35 
Ticket to Work program has the right to not disclose that person's disability at the time of 36 
hire but may not assert a right to a retention preference pursuant to subsection 4 at a later 37 
date.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0979(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill creates a preference in state  hiring that grants an interview to a person with a 2 
disability who is eligible for the Ticket to Work and Self -Sufficiency Program under the 3 
federal Social Security Act and who meets the minimum qualifications for the position 4 
and to a person who has been determined by a qualified professional to have a disability 5 
and who meets the minimum qualifications for the position.  If the person is not selected 6 
for the position, the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of 7 
Human Resources must provide guidance to the person regarding other available state 8 
positions, including opportunities in the bureau's special appointment program for which 9 
the person might qualify.  The bureau may also refer the person to the Department of 10 
Labor, Bureau of Re habilitation Services for vocational rehabilitation services.  11 
The bill provides that in any reduction in personnel in the state service, employees 12 
who are eligible for the Ticket to Work and Self -Sufficiency Program or who are persons 13 
with disabilities mus t be retained in preference to all other competing employees in the 14 
same classification with equal seniority, status and performance reviews.  15 
 
