 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1168
S.P. 389 In Senate,  March  23, 2017
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Establish a Victims'  Bill of Rights
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by President THIBODEAU of Waldo.
Cosponsored by Representative HERBIG of Belfast and
Senators: CUSHING of Penobscot, JACKSON of Aroostook, MASON of Androscoggin, Representatives: FREDETTE of Newport, Speaker GIDEON of Freeport, GOLDEN  of 
Lewiston, RILEY of Jay.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1535(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. I, ยง6 -B is enacted to read:  4 
Section 6 -B.  Victims' bill of rights  5 
1.  Vic tims' rights.   To preserve and protect victims' rights to justice and due 6 
process, a victim of crime or juvenile crime has the following rights:  7 
A.  To be treated with fairness and dignity and with respect for the victim's safety and 8 
privacy throughout the  criminal justice process;  9 
B.  To be informed, upon request, when the accused is released from custody or has 10 
escaped;  11 
C.  To be present at and, upon request, to reasonable and timely notice of all public 12 
proceedings involving the criminal or juvenile crim inal conduct;  13 
D.  To be heard at any public proceeding involving a release, a plea or sentencing, 14 
disposition or parole and any other proceeding at which a right of the victim is 15 
implicated;  16 
E.  To refuse an interview, deposition or other discovery request  by the accused, the 17 
accused's attorney or another person acting on behalf of the accused;  18 
F.  To confer with the prosecution regarding the rights of the victim pursuant to this 19 
section;  20 
G.  To read presentence reports relating to the crime against the vic tim; 21 
H.  To receive prompt and full restitution;  22 
I.  To proceedings free from unreasonable delay and a prompt conclusion of the case; 23 
and 24 
J.  To be informed of victims' constitutional rights.  25 
2.  Victim defined.   "Victim" means a person against whom a crim e or juvenile 26 
crime has been committed or a person who is directly and proximately harmed by the 27 
commission of the offense or crime.  "Victim" does not include the accused or, if the 28 
victim is deceased or incapacitated or a minor, a person who the court fi nds would not act 29 
in the best interests of that victim.  30 
3.  Right of victim to assert rights and have rights enforced.  The victim, the 31 
victim's attorney or another lawful representative of the victim, or, upon request of the 32 
victim, the attorney for the g overnment, may assert in any trial or appellate court or 33 
before any other authority with jurisdiction over the case and have enforced the rights 34 
enumerated in this section and any other rights afforded by law.  35 
4.  Remedy for and effect of exercise of right s.  The court or other authority with 36 
jurisdiction over a case to whom a request is made pursuant to subsection 3 shall act 37 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR1535(01) -1 
 promptly on the request and shall protect the rights of the victim no less vigorously than 1 
the court or other authority protects the  rights afforded to the accused and shall provide 2 
the victim a remedy, including, but not limited to, the right to appeal a sentence, but not 3 
including the dismissal of any criminal proceeding or setting aside of any conviction or 4 
sentence.  5 
This subsection  does not create a cause of action for compensation or damages against the 6 
State or a political subdivision of the State or any officer, employee or agent of the State 7 
or a political subdivision of the State, including the court or an officer or employee o f the 8 
court.  9 
5.  Other rights not impaired.   The enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights 10 
for victims may not be construed to deny or disparage others granted.  11 
; and be it further  12 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective da te. 13 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 14 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 15 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 16 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 17 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  18 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to enact a Victims' 19 
Bill of Rights, design ed to ensure specific rights to the victim of a crime 20 
or juvenile crime and allow the victim to contest a sentence?"  21 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 22 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mar k placed within the corresponding 23 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 24 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 25 
State in the same manner as votes for members  of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 26 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 27 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 28 
becomes part of the Constitution of Mai ne on the date of the proclamation; and be it 29 
further  30 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 31 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 32 
of this resolution necessary t o carry out the purposes of this referendum.  33 
SUMMARY  34 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to enact a Victims' Bill 35 
of Rights, designed to ensure specific rights for victims of crime.  The purpose of this 36 
resolution is to place into t he Constitution of Maine various rights regarding notification 37 
of public proceedings at which the victim has a right to be heard, the right to confer with 38 
the prosecution and the right to prompt and full restitution.  This resolution requires a 39 
court to gr ant a request by the victim to enforce the rights of the victim and to provide a 40 
remedy for violations of the victim's rights, including the appeal of a sentence.  This 41 
 
 Page 3 - 128LR1535(01) -1 
 resolution does not provide a victim a cause of action for compensation or damages 1 
against the State or a political subdivision of the State, including the courts, or any 2 
officer, employee or agent of the State or a political subdivision of the State.  3 
 
