 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 368
H.P. 274 House of  Representatives, February 2, 2017
An Act  To Welcome Statewide Economic Investment
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GUERIN of Glenburn.
Cosponsored by Senator VOLK of Cumberland and Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, BATES of Westbrook, BRYANT of  Windham,  DOORE of Augusta, LUCHINI of Ellsworth, 
MARTIN of  Eagle Lake, VACHON  of Scarborough,  WARD  of Dedham.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1676(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to provide incentives for statewide economic investment to 5 
businesses whose income is currently taxed at lower rates due to offshore investment of 6 
that income.  This bill would offset federal taxes paid on repatriated income with state 7 
and local property tax, income tax and employment tax reductions.  The offset of real 8 
estate, personal, property and  employment taxes would be reduced over a 10 -year period 9 
by an amount equal to federal taxes paid at an assumed tax rate of 10%.  10 
The offset would be allowed for capital invested in or dedicated to, without 11 
limitation, business expansion, including construc tion and site development and new 12 
equipment purchases; historic property or brownfield redevelopment and relocation, 13 
subject to state and municipal oversight; and new job creation or job retraining for any 14 
jobs the investment causes to be displaced.  A bus iness qualifying for the incentives 15 
would be required to commit to fulfilling the terms of an incentive plan for a period of 16 
time double to that of the length of time the incentives are provided.  17 
 
