 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 218
S.P. 64 In Senate,  January  24, 2017
An Act  To Reduce  Criminal Justice  System Costs by Allowing 
Arraignments and Hearings in the Unified Criminal Docket To Be Held by Means of Audiovisual Telecommunications
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Senators:  LIBBY of Androscoggin, MASON of Androscoggin, 
Representative: GOLDEN of Lewiston.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1559(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  4 MRSA ยง1060 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1060.  Audiovisual arraignments and hearings  3 
In any criminal action in the Unified Criminal Docket, as determined by the court to 4 
be appropriate with r espect to the defendant and to make sound fiscal sense, an 5 
arraignment or hearing may be held by means of audiovisual telecommunications.  When 6 
an arraignment or hearing is held by means of audiovisual telecommunications pursuant 7 
to this section, the court  shall ensure that a recording of the arraignment or hearing is 8 
made and retained as part of the case file.  For the purposes of this section, "Unified 9 
Criminal Docket" means the unified criminal docket established by the Supreme Judicial 10 
Court.  11 
SUMMARY  12 
This bill provides that in any criminal action in the Unified Criminal Docket, as 13 
determined by the court to be appropriate to the defendant and to make sound fiscal 14 
sense, an arraignment or hearing may be held by means of audiovisual 15 
telecommunications.  Th e bill provides that when an arraignment or hearing is held by 16 
means of audiovisual telecommunications, the court is required to ensure that a recording 17 
of the arraignment or hearing is made and retained as part of the case file.  18 
 
