 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1372
H.P. 951 House of  Representatives,  April 11, 2017
An Act  To Increase Broadband Access for Rural Communities
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HERBIG of Belfast.
Cosponsored by Senator MAKER  of Washington  and
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, HARVELL  of Farmington, HIGGINS of  Dover-Foxcroft, 
RILEY of Jay, SANBORN of Portland, STANLEY  of Medway, TUELL of East Machias, 
Senator: DILL  of Penobscot.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1961(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to enact measures designed to increase broadband access for rural 5 
communities.  Specifically, th is bill proposes to:  6 
1.  Direct the ConnectME Authority to create an accurate map of broadband coverage 7 
in the State.  The mapping project should delineate, at a minimum:  8 
A.  Those areas of the State that do not have access to broadband coverage;  9 
B.  For t hose areas of the State without access to broadband coverage, the 10 
infrastructure in place that might be used to expand access, including, but not limited 11 
to, poles, nodes, and fiber optic cable; and  12 
C.  For those areas of the State with access to broadband  coverage, the type or types 13 
of available broadband coverage and the associated connection speeds; and  14 
2.  Direct the ConnectME Authority to provide funding for the provision of digital 15 
literacy programs, particularly in rural areas of the State.  A digita l literacy program 16 
funded pursuant to this requirement must have a history of success in increasing fluency 17 
in the use and security of interactive digital tools and searchable networks, including the 18 
ability to use digital tools safely and effectively for learning, collaborating and producing.  19 
 
