 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1911
H.P. 1350 House of  Representatives,  April 18, 2018
An Act  To Improve  Access to Services for Adults  with Serious and  
Persistent Mental Illness
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MALABY of Hancock.  (GOVERNOR'S BILL)

Page 1 - 128LR3029(01)-11 Be it enacted  by the People of  the State of Maine as  follows:
2 Sec. 1.  34-B MRSA ยง3613  is enacted  to read:
3 ยง3613.  Access to services
4 1.  Department review.   An adult with serious and persistent mental  illness, as 
5 defined in rules adopted by the department pursuant to this section,  who is receiving or is 
6 eligible to receive mental health  services from  a provider operating an agency, facility or 
7 program under contract with the department may seek department review of the 
8 provider's actions  in the following  circumstances:
9 A.  When the provider refuses to accept a referral  to provide a mental  health  service 
10 for which the adult is clinically eligible that is included in rules  of the department 
11 governing the MaineCare program or otherwise required to be provided under  the 
12 terms of the provider's contract with the department and that the adult's treatment or 
13 discharge planning team has determined is necessary in order for that adult  to 
14 transition from  a hospital into the community, unless accepting the referral  would 
15 cause the provider to exceed preestablished staff-client ratios required by law, rule or 
16 contract or unless the service is a residential service and the provider has no 
17 vacancies;
18 B.  When the provider refuses  to accept a referral to provide community  integration 
19 services or assertive  community  treatment as defined  in section 3801, subsection  11 
20 to an adult with serious and persistent mental illness who is clinically  eligible  for the 
21 services, unless accepting  the referral would cause  the provider to exceed 
22 preestablished staff-client  ratios required by law, rule  or contract; or
23 C.  When the provider  terminates or suspends a mental health  service included in 
24 rules of the department governing the MaineCare program  or otherwise  required to be 
25 provided under the terms of the provider's  contract  with the department  in violation of 
26 the terms of that  contract.
27 2.  Private right of action.  An adult with serious and persistent mental  illness who 
28 is aggrieved by the action of a provider as described in subsection 1 and whose  access to 
29 services has not been resolved following department review may bring a private civil 
30 action in District  Court to restrain or enjoin  a provider by restraining  order or injunction, 
31 temporarily or permanently,  or enforce by restraining  order or injunction, temporarily or 
32 permanently, the terms  of the provider's contract with the department.
33 A.  An individual bringing an action under this subsection is not required  to allege or 
34 prove that the refusal, termination or suspension of services would cause irreparable 
35 injury or harm to that individual.
36 B.  An individual bringing an action under this subsection is not required to post a 
37 bond.
38 C.  The remedies available  in an action under this subsection include both mandatory 
39 and prohibitory injunctive relief.
Page 2 - 128LR3029(01)-11 D.  An individual  who obtains injunctive relief in an action  under this subsection  may 
2 recover reasonable attorney's fees and costs, not to exceed $1,000, from the provider  
3 against whom judgment was entered.
4 E.  An individual who brings an action under this subsection is not liable  to the 
5 provider for damages  resulting from  bringing  or pursuing the action unless the action 
6 was brought in bad faith or without  a reasonable belief that the provider was not 
7 acting in compliance with its  obligations under its contract with the department.
8 3.  Rulemaking.   The department shall  adopt rules, which are routine technical rules 
9 pursuant to Title  5, chapter 375, subchapter  2-A, governing the process  for department  
10 review described in this section.  The rules must  include  a definition of "adult with 
11 serious and persistent mental illness."
12 SUMMARY
13 This bill establishes the right of an adult with serious and persistent mental illness 
14 who is denied access  to services by a provider  contrary to the terms of the provider's 
15 contract with the Department of Health and Human Services to seek department review 
16 of that action.   If department review  does not resolve the matter, the consumer may bring  
17 a private right of action in District Court for injunctive relief.
