 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 666
S.P. 228 In Senate, February 28, 2017
An Act  To Improve  Access to Cost-effective Health Care Services
Reference to the Committee on Insurance  and Financial Services suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator VOLK of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative VACHON of Scarborough and
Senator: WHITTEMORE of Somerset, Representatives: FOLEY  of Wells, HYMANSON of 
York, PARKER  of South  Berwick, PERRY of Calais.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1921(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง4303, sub -ยง21 is enacted to read:  2 
21.  Access to low -cost services.   If an enrollee elects to obtain a covered outpatient 3 
health care service from an out -of-network provider at a cost that is the same or less than 4 
the statewide average for the same covered health care service based on data reported on 5 
the publicly accessible health care costs website of the Maine Health Data Organization, 6 
the carrier shall allow the enrollee t o obtain the service from the out -of-network provider 7 
at the provider's charge and apply the payments made for that health care service toward 8 
the enrollee's member cost sharing, deductible and out -of-pocket maximum as specified 9 
in the enrollee's health pl an as if the health care services were provided by a network 10 
provider.  11 
SUMMARY  12 
This bill requires health insurance carriers to apply the amount paid for a health care 13 
service provided by an out -of-network provider toward the enrollee's member cost 14 
sharing as specified in the enrollee's health plan as if the health care services were 15 
provided by a network provider if the cost of the out -of-network service is the same or 16 
less than the statewide average payment for the same service based on data reported on 17 
the publicly accessible health care costs website of the Maine Health Data Organization.  18 
 
