 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1140
H.P. 803 House of  Representatives, March 23, 2017
An Act  To Preserve the Economic Viability of Maine's Historic 
Properties
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GUERIN of Glenburn.
Cosponsored by Senator LIBBY  of Androscoggin and
Representatives: FREY of  Bangor,  GILLWAY  of Searsport, HARRINGTON  of Sanford, 
MALABY of Hancock,  MOONEN of  Portland, TALBOT ROSS of Portland, Senators: 
CARSON of  Cumberland, CHIPMAN of Cumberland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1677(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  10 MRSA ยง9726 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง9726.  Historic properties  3 
If an existing condition of a historic property occupied by a business is found out of 4 
compliance with the Maine Uniform Bu ilding and Energy Code or the fire safety codes 5 
and standards under Title 25, sections 2452 and 2465 during a routine inspection for 6 
business license renewal or a building permit for renovation or new construction or 7 
during a random inspection, the propert y owner must meet only the standards for the 8 
condition under the version of the code adopted most recently after the license to operate 9 
the business was first issued by the municipality in which the property is located and 10 
must update the condition to the next subsequent version of the code in increments of 11 
time of no more than 3 years until the condition is brought up to current code standards. 12 
For purposes of this section, "historic property" means a property listed on the National 13 
Register of Historic Pl aces or designated as a historic property by a certified municipal 14 
historic preservation ordinance.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This bill requires that an owner of a historic property occupied by a business has to 17 
meet only the standards of the version of the Maine Uniform Bu ilding and Energy Code 18 
or the fire safety codes and standards adopted most recently after the business first 19 
received its license to operate for a condition found out of compliance during a routine 20 
inspection for business license renewal or a building perm it for renovation or new 21 
construction or during a random inspection.  22 
 
