 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 261
H.P. 194 House of  Representatives, January 31, 2017
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services To Prepare  for Implementation  of the Federal Family  First  
Prevention Services Act
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  CHACE of Durham, CRAIG of Brewer, FOLEY of Wells, 
GUERIN of  Glenburn,  HARLOW of Portland, STROM of  Pittsfield.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0385(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to prepare for 1 
implementation of federal foster care legislation.  Resolved:  That the 2 
Department of Health and Human Services shall monitor federal legislative activities 3 
related to the potential enactment by the United States Congress of the federal Family 4 
First Prevention Services Act or any other federal law that makes significant changes to 5 
foster care under Title IV -E of the United States Social Security Act.  The Department of 6 
Health and Human Services  shall report on the progress of those activities and shall 7 
report any recommendations for legislation to the Joint Standing Committee on Health 8 
and Human Services no later than December 30, 2017; and be it further  9 
Sec. 2.  Authorization for legislation.  Resolved:  That the Joint Standing 10 
Committee on Health and Human Services is authorized to report out legislation in the 11 
Second Regular Session of the 128th Legislature related to the report and 12 
recommendations under section 1.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This resolve require s the Department of Health and Human Services to monitor the 15 
progress of the federal Family First Prevention Services Act or any other federal law that 16 
makes significant changes to foster care under Title IV -E of the United States Social 17 
Security Act.  The  Department of Health and Human Services is required to report to the 18 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services regarding the progress and with 19 
any recommendations for legislation.  The committee is authorized to report out 20 
legislation related to the report and recommendations.  21 
 
