 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 676
H.P. 467 House of  Representatives, February 28, 2017
Resolve, To  Study the  Development  of a Behavioral Health Unit  at 
the Cumberland  County  Jail
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FARNSWORTH  of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland  and
Representatives: BRYANT of Windham,  COOPER  of Yarmouth,  DENNO  of Cumberland, 
FAY of Raymond, MOONEN of Portland, TALBOT  ROSS of  Portland.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1466(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services, Department of 1 
Corrections and Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office to study development 2 
of behavioral health unit at the Cumberland County Jail.  Resolved:   That the 3 
Department of Health and Human Services, t he Department of Corrections and the 4 
Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office shall jointly study the development of a behavioral 5 
health unit at the Cumberland County Jail.  The study must consider the most effective 6 
way of housing prisoners with behavioral issu es at the Cumberland County Jail and 7 
providing the prisoners with support, including substance abuse and mental health 8 
services and a diversion program to allow for the rehabilitation of the prisoners, and make 9 
a recommendation for the development of the b ehavioral health unit; and be it further  10 
Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services, 11 
the Department of Corrections and the Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office shall submit 12 
a joint report and recommendations, including reco mmended legislation, resulting from 13 
the study under section 1 to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 14 
and the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety no later than 15 
December 6, 2017.  The Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services and 16 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety may report out 17 
legislation based upon the study and recommendations to the Second Regular Session of 18 
the 128th Legislature.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This resolve directs the  Department of Health and Human Services, the Department 21 
of Corrections and the Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office to jointly study and 22 
recommend a proposal for the development of a behavioral health unit at the Cumberland 23 
County Jail to provide support su ch as substance abuse and mental health services and a 24 
diversion program to allow for the rehabilitation of prisoners with behavioral issues. This 25 
resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of 26 
Corrections and the Cumberland  County Sheriff’s Office to submit the results of the 27 
study along with recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 28 
Human Services and the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, 29 
who may report out legislation to th e Second Regular Session of the 128th Legislature.  30 
 
