 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1893
H.P. 1326 House of  Representatives, March 29, 2018
An Act  To Ensure Fair  Employment Opportunity  for Maine 
Citizens and Legal  Residents by  Requiring the Use of a Federal  
Immigration Verification System
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative LOCKMAN of Amherst.  (GOVERNOR'S BILL)
Cosponsored by Representatives:  AUSTIN  of Gray, ESPLING  of New  Gloucester, GINZLER 
of Bridgton, KINNEY  of Knox,  PICKETT of Dixfield, PRESCOTT  of Waterboro, STETKIS 
of Canaan,  Senator: DAVIS of Piscataquis.

Page 1 - 128LR2982(01)-11 Be it enacted  by the People of  the State of Maine as  follows:
2 Sec. 1.  26 MRSA  ยง871-A  is enacted to read:
3 ยง871-A.  Public employer and public  contractor; work eligibility verification
4 1.  Definitions.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
5 following terms  have the following  meanings.
6 A.  "Federal immigration verification  system" means  the electronic verification of the 
7 work authorization  program of the federal Illegal  Immigration  Reform  and Immigrant  
8 Responsibility Act of 1996, 8 United States Code,  Section 1324a, known as the 
9 E-Verify program, or an equivalent federal program designated by the United States 
10 Department of Homeland Security or other federal  agency authorized to verify  the 
11 work eligibility status of a newly hired employee pursuant to the federal Immigration  
12 Reform and Control Act of 1986.
13 B.  "Public contractor" means a contractor  that is awarded a contract by a public 
14 employer for the physical  performance of services  in the State and any subcontractor 
15 of the contractor.
16 C.  "Public  employer" means an agency or  political subdivision of the  State.
17 2.  Verification required.   A public employer  and a public contractor shall register  
18 with and use a federal  immigration verification system to determine  the work eligibility 
19 status of new employees physically performing services in the State.  A contract between 
20 a public employer  and public contractor  must contain a provision requiring  the public 
21 contractor to use a federal immigration verification system to determine the work 
22 eligibility status of new  employees physically performing  services  in the  State.
23 SUMMARY
24 This bill requires  every  public employer  and public contractor to register  with and use 
25 a federal immigration verification system, currently known as E-Verify, to determine the 
26 work eligibility status of  new employees  physically performing services  within the  State.
