 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 615
H.P. 431 House of  Representatives, February 16, 2017
Resolve, To  Establish a Work Group To Update  the Maine 
Pharmacy Act
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CHACE of Durham.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  AUSTIN  of Gray, BICKFORD of Auburn, GILLWAY of 
Searsport, HANLEY  of Pittston,  LOCKMAN of  Amherst,  TIMBERLAKE of Turner.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1118(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Maine Board of Pharmacy to convene work group. Resolved:  That 1 
the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation, Maine Board of Pharmacy shall 2 
convene a work group to propose updates to the Maine Pharmacy Act and any laws 3 
associated with th e provisions of that Act.  The work group must include 2 members of 4 
the Maine Board of Pharmacy, including the administrator of the board; one member 5 
representing a college of pharmacy in the State; one member representing the American 6 
Society of Hospital Pharmacists; one member representing the Maine Pharmacy 7 
Association; and stakeholders representing the pharmaceutical industry, wholesale 8 
pharmacies, retail pharmacies and hospital pharmacies; and be it further  9 
Sec. 2.  Report. Resolved:  That, by December  15, 2017, the Department of 10 
Professional and Financial Regulation, Maine Board of Pharmacy shall submit a report on 11 
the work group's recommended legislation to the Joint Standing Committee on Labor, 12 
Commerce, Research and Economic Development.  The joint standing committee may 13 
report out a bill concerning the report to the Second Regular Session of the 128th 14 
Legislature.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This bill requires the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation, Maine 17 
Board of Pharmacy to convene a work group to pr opose updates to the Maine Pharmacy 18 
Act and submit a report to the Joint Standing Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research 19 
and Economic Development.  The joint standing committee may report out a bill 20 
concerning the report to the Second Regular Session of th e 128th Legislature.  21 
 
