 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2018
Legislative Document No. 1876
H.P. 1308 House of  Representatives, March 22, 2018
An Act  Regarding Financial Orders  Requested by the Attorney 
General
(AFTER  DEADLINE)
Approved for  introduction by a majority  of the Legislative Council  pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FREY of Bangor.
Cosponsored by Senator HILL of York and
Representatives: GATTINE of Westbrook, LUCHINI of Ellsworth, McLEAN of Gorham, MOONEN of Portland,  Senator: SAVIELLO of Franklin.

Page 1 - 128LR2885(01)-11 Be it enacted  by the People of  the State of Maine as  follows:
2 Sec. 1.  5 MRSA §196, first ¶, as amended by PL 2017,  c. 284, Pt. DDD, §1, is 
3 further amended  to read:
4 The Attorney General may appoint one or more deputy attorneys  general, assistant  
5 attorneys general  and staff attorneys who serve  at the pleasure of the Attorney  General or 
6 until their successors are duly appointed and qualified.  They may perform  all the duties 
7 required of the Attorney  General and other  duties  the Attorney General delegates to them. 
8 The Attorney General may appoint research assistants with any powers  and duties the 
9 Attorney General  delegates.  Research assistants may perform duties delegated to them by 
10 the Attorney General,  including activities authorized by Title 4, section  807.  
11 Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the compensations  of research assistants, 
12 law office  manager and deputy attorneys general are fixed  by the Attorney General.  The 
13 compensation of the Deputy Chief Medical Examiner is fixed by the Attorney General in 
14 consultation with the Chief Medical Examiner  and with the approval of the Governor.   
15 The compensations of the staff attorneys, assistant attorneys  general and secretary to the 
16 Attorney General  are fixed by the Attorney General  with the approval of the Governor, 
17 but such by financial  order.  If the Governor  disapproves or takes no action  on a financial  
18 order within  30 days of submission of the financial order request  to the State Budget 
19 Officer, that financial  order is deemed approved  as long as the position  is established and 
20 the compensations may do not in the aggregate  exceed  the amount appropriated for those  
21 positions and may do not result in an increased request  to future Legislatures.  The 
22 Governor may not impose upon  the Attorney General any precondition on the submission 
23 of a financial order  request or the filling of any position that does not require a financial 
24 order.
25 SUMMARY
26 This bill provides that, if the Governor disapproves or takes no action within 30 days 
27 of submission of a financial order  request by the Attorney General regarding the 
28 compensation of staff attorneys, assistant  attorneys general and the secretary  to the 
29 Attorney General, the financial order  is deemed  approved as long as the positions  are 
30 established and the compensations do not in the aggregate exceed the amount  
31 appropriated for the positions and do not result in an increased request  to future 
32 Legislatures.  It also provides that the Governor  may not impose upon the Attorney 
33 General any precondition on the submission of a financial order request or the filling of 
34 any position that  does not require a financial  order.
