 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 714
H.P. 505 House of  Representatives, February 28, 2017
An Act  To Create an Award Program  for Maine's Veteran-friendly 
Workplaces
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DEVIN of  Newcastle.
Cosponsored by Senator CARSON of Cumberland and
Representatives: BATTLE of South Portland, CASÁS of Rockport, HANINGTON of Lincoln, KINNEY of Limington, STANLEY of Medway, STROM of Pittsfield, Senators: CARPENTER of  Aroostook, WHITTEMORE of Somerset.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR1247(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  37-B MRSA §516 is enacted to read:  2 
§516.  Veteran -friendly workplace award  3 
1.  Award program established.  The veteran -friendly workplace award program is 4 
established to recognize veter an-friendly employers that employ veterans and support 5 
those veterans by making accommodations for the veterans in the workplace.  The 6 
program is administered by the bureau as set out in this section.  7 
2.  Award criteria.  The bureau shall present an award under subsection 1 to an 8 
employer that:  9 
A.  Makes accommodations for veterans employed by the employer to access or 10 
attend medical treatments and appointments or other veteran -related services during 11 
the work day, including flexible scheduling, shift chang es and any other measure that 12 
does not cause the veteran to lose pay, compensation time or full -time employment 13 
status;  14 
B.  On an annual basis conducts an approved military culture and mental health 15 
awareness training for the employees of the employer and allows a flexible schedule 16 
for the employees to access or participate in military culture and mental health 17 
awareness training, including an online course provided by the bureau or another 18 
source approved by the bureau; and  19 
C.  In making hiring decisions a bout and determining proper roles and duties for 20 
veterans employed by the employer, gives consideration to military education, 21 
training and experience.  22 
3.  Rules.  The bureau shall adopt routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 23 
375, subchapte r 2-A to carry out the purposes of this section.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill creates a veteran -friendly workplace award program through which the 26 
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management, Bureau of Maine 27 
Veterans' Services recognizes employers that e mploy veterans and that support those 28 
veterans by making accommodations to allow the veterans to access or attend medical 29 
treatments and appointments and other veteran -related services during the work day.  30 
 
