 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 589
S.P. 204 In Senate, February 16, 2017
Resolve, To  Establish a Working Group  To Review the Function 
and Mission of  Probation Officers and  Establish a Licensing 
Procedure
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Representative GUERIN of Glenburn, Representative CARDONE  of Bangor  
and
Senators: DIAMOND of Cumberland, DILL of  Penobscot, DION  of Cumberland, 
MIRAMANT of Knox, ROSEN of Hancock, Representatives: FECTEAU of Biddeford,  
HAMANN of South Portland, McCREA of Fort Fairfield.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0142(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Working group on the profession of probation officer.  Resolved:  1 
That the Commissioner of Corrections shall convene a working group to review the 2 
function and mission of probation officers within the Department of Corrections and to 3 
make recommen dations to the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public 4 
Safety by January 1, 2018 regarding legislation to update the laws and rules regarding 5 
probation officers and establish a procedure and statute for licensure of probation 6 
officers.  7 
1.  The working group must include, but is not limited to:  8 
A.  A representative of the Department of Corrections and a representative of the 9 
Department of Health and Human Services, who shall cochair the working group;  10 
B.  A representative of a statewide organ ization of religious or faith communities; 11 
and 12 
C.  A representative of a prison advocacy organization; a representative of a 13 
grassroots community organization; a representative of the judicial branch; a 14 
journalist; and any other interested persons who will  broaden the perspective and add 15 
to the strength of the review and recommendations of the working group.  16 
2.  The working group shall review the function and mission of probation officers and 17 
shall make recommendations to:  18 
A.  Strengthen the role of probati on officers in the rehabilitation of juvenile and 19 
criminal offenders and the reduction of recidivism;  20 
B.  Develop a procedure and proposed statute for licensing probation officers that 21 
will provide regulation, licensing and disciplinary responsibilities wi thin the 22 
Department of Professional and Financial Regulation;  23 
C.  Develop performance standards for probation officers; and  24 
D.  Develop 3 regional community resource units to reinforce standards of job 25 
performance and provide support to probation officers.  26 
3.  The Department of Corrections and the Department of Health and Human 27 
Services shall provide staffing and support services to the working group; and be it 28 
further  29 
Sec. 2.  Sunrise review.  Resolved:  That the Commissioner of Professional and 30 
Financial Regulation shall undertake the sunrise review procedure for licensure of 31 
probation officers in accordance with the procedure and criteria set forth in the Maine 32 
Revised Statutes, Title 32, sections 60 -J, 60 -K and 60 -L.  In conducting the sunrise 33 
review pro cedure, the commissioner shall take into consideration the work and 34 
recommendations of the working group convened pursuant to section 1 of this resolve.  35 
The commissioner shall report to the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 36 
Public Safety by  February 1, 2018 regarding the results of the sunrise review procedure 37 
and any recommendations regarding licensure of probation officers.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0142(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolve directs the Commissioner of Corrections to convene a working group to 2 
review the function and mi ssion of probation officers within the Department of 3 
Corrections and to make recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 4 
Justice and Public Safety by January 1, 2018 regarding legislation to update the laws and 5 
rules regarding probation off icers and establish a procedure and statute for licensure of 6 
probation officers.  The resolve directs the Commissioner of Professional and Financial 7 
Regulation to undertake a sunrise review procedure for licensure of probation officers and 8 
directs the comm issioner to take into consideration the work and recommendations of the 9 
working group.  The commissioner is required to report to the Joint Standing Committee 10 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety by February 1, 2018 regarding the results of the 11 
sunrise re view procedure and any recommendations regarding licensure of probation 12 
officers.  13 
 
