 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper128th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2017
Legislative Document No. 1341
S.P. 455 In Senate, April 6, 2017
An Act  To Clarify Eligibility for Unemployment  Benefits  during  
Labor Disputes
Submitted by the Department of  Labor  pursuant to Joint Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic  Development 
suggested and ordered printed.
HEATHER  J.R. PRIEST
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator VOLK of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative VACHON of Scarborough and
Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, LOCKMAN of Amherst, STETKIS of Canaan.

 
 Page 1 - 128LR0714(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  26 MRSA ยง1193, sub -ยง4, as amended by PL 1997, c. 391, ยง1, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
4.  Labor dispute.   For any week with respect to which the deputy, after notification 4 
by the Direct or of Unemployment Compensation under section 1194, subsection 2, finds 5 
that the claimant's total or partial unemployment is due to a stoppage of work that exists 6 
because of  a labor dispute at the factory, establishment or other premises at which the 7 
claim ant is or was employed , or there would have been a stoppage of work had 8 
substantially normal operations not been maintained with other personnel previously and 9 
currently employed by the same employer and any other additional personnel that the 10 
employer may  hire to perform tasks not previously done by the striking employees . This 11 
subsection does not apply if it is shown to the satisfaction of the deputy that:  12 
A.  The claimant is not participating in or financing or directly interested in the labor 13 
dispute that caused the stoppage of work ; 14 
B.  The claimant does not belong to a grade or class of workers of which, 15 
immediately before the commencement of the stoppage  labor dispute,  there were 16 
members employed at the premises at which the stoppage  labor dispute  occurs, any of 17 
whom are participating in or financing or directly interested in the dispute;  18 
C.  The claimant has obtained employment subsequent to the beginning of the 19 
stoppage of work  labor dispute  and has earned at least 8 times the claimant's weekly 20 
bene fit amount in employment by an employer or has been in employment by an 21 
employer for 5 full weeks;  22 
D.  The claimant became unemployed because of a strike or lockout caused by an 23 
employer's willful failure to observe the terms of the safety and health secti on of a 24 
union contract; an employer's willful failure to comply in a timely fashion with an 25 
official citation for a violation of federal and state laws involving occupational safety 26 
and health; or the quitting of labor by an employee or employees in good f aith 27 
because of an abnormally dangerous condition for work at the place of employment 28 
of that employee or employees; provided that the strike or lockout does not extend 29 
past the time of the employer's compliance with the safety and health section of the 30 
union contract, the employer's compliance with the official citation or the finding that 31 
an abnormally dangerous condition does not exist by a federal or state official 32 
empowered to issue official citations for violation of federal and state laws involving 33 
occupational safety and health; or  34 
E.  The claimant became unemployed because of a lockout by the employer.  For 35 
purposes of this subsection, the word "lockout" means the withholding of 36 
employment by an employer from its employees for the purpose of resisti ng their 37 
demands or gaining a concession from them.  38 
If in any case separate branches of work that are commonly conducted as separate 39 
businesses in separate premises are conducted in separate departments of the same 40 
premises, each department must, for the p urposes of this subsection, be deemed to be a 41 
separate factory, establishment or other premises;  42 
 
 Page 2 - 128LR0714(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill removes the provision of law affecting the disqualification for 2 
unemployment benefits of employees at an establishment at which there is a la bor dispute 3 
and at which there would have been a work stoppage but for the employer's maintaining 4 
substantially normal operations through the use of other personnel.  It also broadens the 5 
disqualification from unemployment benefits in current law for unemp loyment that is due 6 
to a stoppage of work caused by a labor dispute by eliminating the requirement that there 7 
be a stoppage of work.  Instead, unemployment that is due to a labor dispute is sufficient 8 
grounds for a denial of benefits.  It also updates the language of the exceptions to this 9 
disqualification in current law to reflect the elimination of the stoppage of work 10 
requirement.  11 
 
