 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association   
 
In Support of  
LD 1648 , An Act  to Make Changes to the Farm and Open Space Tax Law    
 
May 17, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in support of LD 1648 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s Leg islative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest.   
Municipal leaders support the changes in LD 1648 , which in a nutshell provide greater  
regulatory  structure  to the farm and open spac e current use program , which is necessary.  In 
exchange for the generous property tax benefits  enjoyed by enrollees, the program places 
limitations on the development of the property, which in turn supports the state’s natural 
resources protection goals.   
While the program benefits Maine residents  generally, unfortunately, the communities 
where these properties are located bear the lion’s share of related tax revenue losses.   
LD 1648 is a step in the right direction  for remedying these inequities.  Although it is not 
without its issues , by using the current Tree Growth Property Tax program  as a model , the bill 
provides a better process for ensur ing the state’s goals are met and that property taxpayer 
investments are protected.   
For example, LD 164 8 more clearly define s the restrictions on enrolled property; that is, 
the provision s that must be in place for a property owner to receive the reduced property tax 
assessment .  Property owners who to take advantage  of additional  reducti ons in assessed values  
associated with the protection of wildlife habitats or for carbon sequestration efforts, are further 
required to submit related land ma nagement plans to ensure compliance with state goals .  
Finally , the bill includes a concrete formula for calculating the state reimbursement for a portion 
of the lost property tax revenues.    
While municipal leaders applaud these amendments to the program , those most familiar 
with the day -to-day implementation of current use programs , prima rily municipal assessors,  may 
have suggestions for further improving the proposal .  As a result, our policy committee members 
respectfully  urge you to work with these subject matter experts  to affect the needed refinements.  
Thank you for taking into consideration the municipal perspective on this issue.   
 

