1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 5/17/23 
  
LD 1648 – An Act to Make Changes to the Farm and Open Space Tax Law 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good morning, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 1648 – 
An Act to Make Changes to the Farm and Open Space Tax Law. 
LD 1648 repeals the tiered categories and rate valuation reductions set forth 
in 36 MRSA § 1106-A under the Farm and Open Space tax benefit program, 
replacing it with a new method, categories, and rates of valuation reductions.  
Moreover, the bill provides for municipal reimbursement by the State – an element 
not present in the current farm and open space tax law or in the other “current use” 
programs except for the Tree Growth program.  Current use valuations are not 
“exemptions” and thus are not subject to constitutionally required 50% 
reimbursement.  Expanding municipal reimbursement here likely opens the door to 
similar proposals for the other current use programs. 
The bill does not expressly contain an enforcement mechanism, such as is 
provided under the Tree Growth Tax Law program, for landowners who do not 
comply with the ten-year renewal period for wildlife habitat management plans or 
carbon conservation management plans. 
2 
 While this bill will significantly reduce the value of most land in the Open 
Space program, there may be some taxpayers with an increase in value due to this 
change.  Further, many of the nearly 3,000 taxpayers with land currently in the 
Open Space program will have to apply for applicable agreements with the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (“DACF”) and then reapply 
for the Open Space program, creating a significant amount of work for both 
municipal assessors and DACF.  Finally, this bill will trigger the 90% State 
reimbursement for mandated costs as required by the Maine Constitution, Article 
IX, Section 21.   
In sum, this bill substantially changes the Farm and Open Space program 
and creates a municipal reimbursement for current use program that is not 
constitutionally required to be reimbursed.  A change of that magnitude should be 
carefully considered for both the precedent it creates with respect to other current 
use programs and its budget impact. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
