Crystal Hitchings
Sunrise County Economic Council, DownEast Acadia Regional Tourism
LD 1141
LD 1141 
This bill is a bad bill for bicyclists as it does not address the needs of people all across
Maine who have no place to walk or bike safely in their own neighborhoods.  The bill
proposes dedicating funds that are much needed in rural communities to pave 5' bike 
lanes in highly trafficked State Parks.  These bike lands would not address the needs 
of the general population, they would only serve those who use high traffic state parks
or state/regionally important destination, which would primarily be tourists in 
southern & mid-coast Maine, or those on Mount Desert Island biking to/near Acadia 
National Park.
I work in tourism, transportation planning, and community development across 
Washington and Hancock Counties.  Every single time I have a meeting with 
community members about town planning, transportation, tourism, and just life in the 
area people raise concerns about safe biking and walking.  
WE NEED SAFE BIKING AND WALKING FACILITIES IN OUR DOWNTOWNS
AND NEIGHBORHOODS WAY MORE THAN WE NEED THEM ON HIGHLY 
VISITED STATE PARKS!!!!!!!!
Dedicating funds to paved bike lanes at state parks does NOTHING to help the vast 
majority of communities across Maine and only removes funds that could have been 
used to help them.
The Bicycle Coalition of Maine has a mission of developing safe biking and walking 
in Maine, but their focus has primarily been on southern and central Maine.  What 
Maine needs is for the Bicycle Coalition of Maine to actually serve all Mainers per 
their mission, including RURAL Maine.  Rural Mainers want bicycle programs, 
safety improvements, and advocacy in Hancock, Washington, and Aroostook County.
I am sure the same is true for other rural regions of Maine.  People want to bike and 
walk in their own hometowns; the average person does not travel to highly visited 
State Parks to do this.
If our Representatives and the Bicycle Coalition of Maine truly want to help bicyclists
and pedestrians in Maine, they would be much more effective in expanding their 
reach to rural regions that want them and have committed people and resources to 
help.  This is what MaineDOT is trying to do with the funds and time that they have 
now, adding another program to their list of things to do will only detract from their 
ability to help rural communities.  BCM already has a partnership with MaineDOT 
but puts their focus on urban areas.  If any Bill is proposed to help Mainers by forcing
MaineDOT’s hand, then the bill should require that MaineDOT funds given to BCM 
should serve ALL Mainers, not just those in urban areas.  MOST OF MAINE IS 
RURAL WITHOUT ADEQUATE BIKE/PED FACILITIES!!
The person who requested that Marianne Moore draft this bill is a bicyclist from 
Roque Bluffs, which includes the low-trafficked Roque Bluffs State Park.  This bill 
specifically indicates bike lanes on the highest trafficked State Parks, meaning it will 
NOT help the folks in Roque Bluffs at all, and it will help NO ONE in the rural 
regions of Maine.  In summary, this is a bad bill for bicyclists because it doesn't really
help the people who want to bike in their own communities and who NEED to bike 
for transportation.  In Washington County, where I live, and probably in many areas 
of Maine, people actually use bicycles because they do not have cars.  
Please oppose this bill and send BCM and our Representatives back to the drawing 
board to work directly with constituents, MaineDOT, and people who walk and bike 
in their home communities to draft something that actually helps Mainers, not just 
tourists or people who live in urban areas.

