Dirk Gouwens – Executive Director  
Ski Maine Association,  PO Box 689, Farmington, ME  04938  
www.skimaine.com   (207) 773-SNOW (7669  (o)  (207) 653- 5590 (mobile)  
       
      
      
      
      
      
       
 
April 3, 2 023 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION  
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1141   
An Act to Improve Access and System Preservation by Providing Shoulders and 
Bicycle Lanes on State Roadways Leading to State Parks and Other Significant 
Destinations   
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation.  My name is Dirk Gouwens and I am the Executive Direct or 
of the Ski Maine Association and I live in New Portlan d, Maine.  
The idea of adding bike lanes to Maine roads is sound and deserves your attention.  
However, using the Maine Tourism P romotion budget as a funding source is flawed and 
would adversely impact the ability of the state to attrac t the tourists who ultimately would 
use these bike lanes.  
We encourage you to fully discuss this idea for Maine roads leading to state parks but also would like to see bike lanes (and bike paths) expanded in and around tourist destinations 
across the state, not just those le ading to state par ks.  Bike friendly destinations are 
increasingly important to families and other visitors who look to Maine for their vacation plans.  A recent study  by the league for a bicycle friendly  America ranked Maine 20
th for 
bike friendliness and gave it a rank of just D+ (among its worst ) for bike in frastructure and 
planning.  This  is a much larger issue  that should be vigorously  addressed by the 
Committee on  Transportation.  
Direct tourism expenditures in 2022 totaled over $8.6 billion, up from $7.8 billion in 
2021. The overall economic impact is $15.8 billion, with 151,000 jobs supported by 
tourism . Yet our tourism promotion  budget in Maine is miniscule compared to some 
other nearby states. The funding for tourism promotion is a dedicated funding 
source generated by  a small percentage of the  8% and 9% taxes on hotels and 
meal s which is much higher than the state sales tax of 5.5%.  These fu nds need to 
be used exclusively for tourism promotion , not for paving and other infrastructure  
needs.  
We encourage  you to vote ought not to pass in its current form  and instead look for 
a dedicated funding source within the transportation sector for this c oncept. . 
 

