Senator Chipman , Representative Williams  and distinguished  members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on My name is Don Kleiner and I live in Union .  
I’m a working Guide and Maine Outdoors (my company) has been in existen ce for 37 years offering 
Outdoor experiences in the mid coast specializing in families and beginners. I offer fishing on fresh and 
saltwater; recently retired from offering short canoe trips and upland bird hunting o ver trained dogs (for 
the last 20 years at Libby camps in T8R9) . 
I am asking you to opp ose LD 1141, An Act to Improve Access and System Preservation by Providing 
Shoulders and Bicycle Lanes on State Roadways Leading to State Parks and Other Significant 
Destinations  as written. While  I support the addition  of bike lanes wher ever possible . Let me explain I 
spend much of my summer towing  a boat trailer to one body of water or another. My trailer is wide and 
fills most of the lane on a small  rural road. When there is a bike on one of those roa ds given the space I 
am now required to allow for a bicycle and the narrowness of the road , my travel goes at the speed of a 
bicycle . Sometime s that is much slower than I would like to go. Seems to me that allowing more room 
for th ose bicycles would  help us all  in terms of ease of travel and safet y. 
What I must oppose though i s using the Tourism Marketing Promotion Fund as a funding source. I have 
been in the outdoor recreation business for a very  long time and am here  to report that only recently 
has the fund been used to promote businesses like mine.  
Allow  me to explain; the Tourism Marketing Promotion Fund is a dedicated account  that gets  funding 
from 5% of the meals and lodging taxes collected; the other 95% goes to the General Fund.  Small 
businesses  like mine depend on the state carrying much of the marketing or our  state  to others across  
the country. Using a portion of that funding for a capital expense w ould  impact not only me but ma ny 
others like me with small businesses that depend on folks interes ted in spending  time outdo ors in our 
state.  
I under stand that the re will be an am endment proposed that will change the funding source making it a 
much better initiative in my opinion.  
Thank you for considering my opinion . 
