were ."-13' i :' 
comma it * 
él ’ ’" 
1 W“ .. .‘ :.s, .r,- §> X" ,, L“ , ’7?‘3‘*“' *9” ml 9955* 
April 4, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1141 with Amendments 
An Act to Improve Access and System Preservation by Providing Shoulders and Bicycle Lanes on 
State Roadways Leading to State Parks and Other Signiﬁcant Destinations 
Greetings Chairs Chipman and Williams and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Transportation: 
My name is James Tassé and I am the Assistant Director of the Bicycle Coalition of Maine 
(BCM). Our mission is to make Maine better and safer for bicycling and walking. On behalf of 
our more than 20,000 members and supporters, I am submitting this testimony in support of LD 
1141 with amendments. The BCM believes that passing this bill, with the amendment proposed 
below, will create some clearer priorities and timeframes with respect to shoulder construction 
Maine. For these reasons, the BCM urges an “Ought to Pass with Amendment ” report from the 
committee. 
Maine has many attractive destinations that appeal to tourists both in-state and from away. State 
parks, historic sites, and intrinsically beautiful roads are places that many folks would like to 
visit on foot or by bicycle. However, the lack of shoulders or any other accommodation for 
persons not in cars makes these locations unsafe and uncomfortable. 
There is strong public demand for better vulnerable user accommodation on many roads in 
Maine. The BCM coordinated the public outreach for the MaineDOT ’s recently completed 
Statewide Active Transportation Plan, and in that process over two thousand public comments 
were received, signiﬁcantly outstripping the comments for the Rail and Transit plans. In 
comment after comment, the public called for shoulders on rural highways that access popular 
routes and destinations such as state parks. LD 1141 would help answer thepublic call for 
improved access to our public ways. 
That said, the BCM does not support using tourism marketing or state park operational fundst 
achieve this laudable goal. We therefore recommend that bill be amended so as to: 
0 Delete all references to transfers from the “Tourism Marketing Promotion Fund Other 
Special Revenue "Funds account within the Department of Economic and Community 
Development ” and/or the “Parks - General Operations program, General Fund account 
within the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. ” ~ 
38 Diamond Street I Portland, ME 04101 
www.bikemaine.urg|2[l7-623-451l l1'1
Ol
amt cmiiron -‘- $5‘ >>‘" * “\5§‘;§ ”*% 
‘I42 ? <“1<;>'i3\ 
at; iiiim 
0 Direct the MaineDOT to fund and undertake the analysis and prioritization Work as part 
of its implementation of the State Active Transportation Plan 
The amendment directing the MaineDOT could be some version of this draft statement, which 
would replace the deleted funding language: 
D. The MaineDOT shall include and fund this program in the process of ld6l1'[lfVlI]E High-Priority 
AT (HPAT) road corridors as part of its implementation of goals outlined in the Statewide Active 
Transportation Plan. 
We have discussed such an amendment with Senator Moore, the bill s sponsor, and she is in 
agreement With us. We have included a complete draft of the possible changes recommended 
here. 
The BCM urges an Ought to Pass, with Amendments, vote on this bill 
Thank you for your time and service to the people of Maine. 
Sincerely, 
James Tassé 
Assistant Director 
Bicycle Coalition of Maine 
38 Diamond Street I Portland, ME 04101 
www.bikemaine.org|207-623-4511
