 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1141, An Act to Improve Access and System Preservation by 
Providing Shoulders and Bicycle Lanes on State Roadways Leading to State Parks and 
Other Significant Destinations  
 
To the Committee on Transportation  
by Josh Caldwell, Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
April 3 , 2023  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Committee on Transportation, 
my name is Josh Caldwell. I am the Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator at the 
Natural  Resources Council of Maine. NRCM has been working for more than 60 years to 
protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment, on behalf of our 25,000 members and 
supporters. I’m here today to testify in support of  LD 1141 , An Act to Improve Access and 
System Preservation by Providing Shoulders and Bicycle Lanes on State Roadways Leading to 
State Parks and Other Significant Destinations.  
 
Maine’s bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure is behind the curve . The 2022 Bicycle Friendly 
State Report Car d gave Maine’s bike and pedestrian infrastructure a C - rating, ranking Maine 
10th out of 11 st ates in the Eastern region.1 2021 was the most dangerous year on record for 
pedestrians in Maine despite reduced traffic rates from the pandemic, pointing to a system that 
prioritizes cars over people’s safety.2 Despite our history of not adequately inves ting in 
infrastructure for people who walk, bike, or roll , 2023 has the potential to be an inflection point 
for Maine. An unprecedented amount of funding is available from the federal government for 
improvin g bike and pedestrian infrastructure, and the creation of the first ever Maine Statewide 
Active Transportation Plan earlier this year show s promise for a more connected, safe, and 
environmentally  friend ly system for Maine pedestrians. LD 1141 represents an opportunity to 
continue on th is recent trajectory and implement sensible solutions to an existing tran sportation 
problem.  
 
Our beautiful State Parks are a draw for Maine residents and visitors alike, and as such, the 
routes to access them can become congested easily with car traffic. Increasing safe access for 
bicyclists and pedestrians will help to reduce congestion, improve safety for everyone , and 
 
1 https://bikeleague.org/sites/default/files/BFS_Report_Card_2022_Maine.pdf  
2 https://www.bangordailynews.com/2022/04/15/news/pedestrian -deaths -increased -in-maine -last-year -
joam40zk0w/  

encourage engagement with Maine’s protected natural spaces  in ways that create no pollution at 
all.  
Maine’s bipartisan Climate Action Plan identifies reducing emissions from the transportation 
sector as “Plan A,” citing that 54 percent of greenhouse g as emissions come from cars and trucks 
in Maine.2 The Clean Transportation Roadmap, commissioned in 2021 to establish a pathway for 
reducing emissions from the transportation sector, identifies improving bicycle and pedestrian 
infrastructure as  a key recommendation to reduce vehicle miles traveled and diversify Maine’s 
transportation system.3 A sustainable transportation future for Maine features safe , affordable, 
and accessible alternatives to driving – including  walking and biking infrastructure  throughout 
the state . It makes sense that  this should start with the places that are most heavily trafficked 
each year.  
 
People will not use alternative modes of transportation unless the infrastructure is there for them 
to do so safely and reliably.  Making this investment in our most  heavily trafficked areas and 
incorporating quality bike and pedestrian planning for all new transportation projects will result 
in long -term dividends for our state from  an economic, public safety, and environme ntal vantage .  
Safe biking and walking infrastructure is a key facet of our statewide transportation system , for 
which the Maine Department of Transportation (MDOT) has primary responsibility. It follows 
that MDOT should be tasked with planning and paying for these investments . We would like to 
see this effort around high -traffic State Parks incorporated into t he implementation of the MDOT 
Statewide Active Transportation Plan developed earlier this year. Further, a dedicated funding 
source for shoulder -widening , bike lane development , and pedestrian safety  would be prudent for 
MDOT to create and resource  as the Department moves forward with the implementation of the 
Statewide Active Transportation Plan.  
For these reasons, we urge the Committee to vote Ought To Pass on this important legislation.  
Thanks, and I would be happy to answer any questions that you have.  
 
