/3/My Senator Marianne Moore 
» ‘ 
1,- 
-1 
3 State House Station' 
_‘ . 
Augusta, ME 04333- .0003
V 
- ' ' 
1"?‘ 
-; . 
(2_07).287-1505 
.' 
. 
Q, Marianne.M0ore@legislature.mainegov 
Good afternoon, Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, anddistinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation. My name is 
Marianne Moore. I proudly represent Senate District 6, which includes all of 
Washington County along with 16 Communities in Eastern Hancock County as 
well.‘ 
I amhere to introduce LD 1141, ”An Act to Improve Access and System 
Preservation by Providing Shoulders and Bicycle Lanes on State Roadways Leading 
to State Parks and Other Significant Destinations" .
_ 
Last year, while attending a Chamber of Commerce Annual Meeting, I wasasked 
by a constituent to submit this bill. We were both complimentary of the bike 
lanes installed last year on the major roadway leading to Cobscook Shores in 
Lubec. Prior to cloture, l reached out to the Bicycle Coalition forassistance in 
developing the bill. The goal is to identify state and ‘state aid highways serving. 
high-use state parks near population centers and state aid highways. 
In an effort to propose a funding source, my initial bill proposed using Tourism 
Marketing Promotion funds along with general funds from the Department of 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry's Parks General Operations program. 
After receiving quite a bit of feedback, I agreed to amend the bill to suggest the 
MaineDOT include and fund this program in the process of identifying High- 
Priority AT (H PAT) road corridors as part of its implementation of goals outlined in 
the Statewide Active Transportation Plan. I have attached the proposed 
amendment to my testimony. 
My'constituent,_Wayne Peters, is unable to attend today's public hearing and has_ 
asked me to read his testimony. (Copy attached as well) 
Thank you for allowing me to presentthis bill, and I ask for your support. @ 
"Fax: (207) 287-1527 * TTY (207) 287-1583 * Message Service 1-800-423-6900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
