Steve Dobson
SRD Rentals, Washburn
LD 1141
To: The Joint Standing Committee on Transportation
From: Steve Dobson
           SRD Rentals/ Steve’s Place  
Re: LD 1141
 
Dear Committee members;
Thank you for the opportunity to express my thoughts on LD1141.
You may or may not know that tourism in Aroostook County is beginning to grow. I 
owned and operated two "mom & pop" motels in Aroostook County until November 
of 2021. In the summer of 2022, I built a small campground, which I intend to operate
this season. 
I am sure you are aware that tourism is one of, if not, the largest industries in the state.
Can you name a business that is NOT tourism related?  You cannot, because every 
business benefits from tourism. I feel the biggest reason for that growth is the 
Tourism Marketing Promotion Fund. 
I support the idea of making bicycling a more accessible and safer sport. I used to see 
bicyclists come into my motels and be thrilled with the biking routes in Aroostook 
County.
However, I am vehemently opposed to taking One Million Dollars from the Tourism 
Marketing Promotional Fund. If you take these funds from the Maine Office of 
Tourism's marketing budget you are hurting the very people and organizations that 
can help the sport of bicycling grow. If MOT does not have enough money to 
promote tourism, then everyone is hurt. The more robust promotion program MOT 
has, the better it is for ALL businesses in the Great State of Maine. 
I just recently attended the Governor’s Conference on Tourism. MOT's  new 
promotion program seeks to expose visitors to more parts of the state. They want 
more visitors to be drawn inland from the ocean areas. This is exactly what is needed 
to help the bicycling community. If you take a million dollars away from this 
program, the areas that the bicycling community enjoys is going to get less exposure. 
Will that be helpful? I think not!
Thank you for taking time to consider my thoughts in this matter before making your 
final decision.
Steve Dobson
SRD Rentals / Steve’s Place
Washburn, ME
