Testimony from Wayne A. Peters in support of LD1 141 
April l, 2023 
My address is 224 Great Cove Road in Roque Bluffs, which is 6 miles to 
Route l in Machias and 3 miles to Roque Bluffs State Park. I write from 
the perspective of an automobile driver, a pedestrian, and a bicycle rider. 
1. As a driver — I have encountered both pedestrians and bicycle 
riders on the roads that connect Route 1 to Roque Bluffs State 
Park. Because there is essentially no shoulder on any of these 
connector roads (Great Cove Road, Roque Bluffs Road, Kennebec 
Road, or Shoppee Point Road) the non-motorized users are put at 
risk especially when the vehicular traffic is heavy. One terrifying 
experience occurred when I encountered two people walking side- 
by-side with one on the shoulder and the other on the road. An 
oncoming car with bright headlights made it extremely difﬁcult to 
see the walkers. I saw them at the last second and braked hard to 
avoid hitting anyone. If there had been a shoulder, pedestrians 
would have a safe place to walk without being in the road. The 
same lack of shoulders also puts bicyclists at great risk. This isa 
lovely area to walk and cycle in when it can be done safely. This is 
especially true for bike riders headed to and from the state park 
since the distance from Route l in Machias and Route 1 in 
Jonesboro makes for an ideal loop ride. 
2. As a pedestrian -- I routinely walk my dog on these same roads, 
and I ﬁnd I need to leave the narrow road shoulder and go into the 
snow or mud to feel safe when vehicles approach this is especially
1
Testimony from Wayne A. Peters in support of LD1 141 
April l, 2023 
true when cars are approaching from both directions. A paved 
shoulder would make walking along these roads much safer and 
more enjoyable. With an eye to improving personal physical 
ﬁtness and the reduction of automobile traffic, walking would 
likely be encouraged if it could be done safely. 
3. As a bicyclist — I routinely ride a bicycle along the roads that 
connect Route l to Roque Bluffs State Park and to the Sunrise 
Trail in Machias. Even though the traffic on Route 1 can be heavy 
at times, there is a wide, paved shoulder that allows for safe 
cycling. However, the roads from Route l to the state park make 
riding a bicycle dangerous. If there were a paved shoulder along 
the connector roads to Roque Bluffs State Park like the shoulder 
along Route 1, this fantastic state park would be far more 
accessible, which would allow more people to take advantage of 
the resource with low-energy transportation. With the growing 
popularity of electric bikes, a shoulder along these roads would 
likely be a boon to this form of travel. 
My examples are centered around Roque Bluffs State Park because this 
is where I live. However, there are many other state resources that would 
be more accessible for residents and tourists alike if there were paved 
shoulders. The growing number of trafﬁc accidents involving both 
pedestrians and cyclists makes this a priority bill to pass.
2
