Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth Fr ench Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Support of  
LD 1128: An Act to Address Student Hunger and Nutrition Through Expanded Access to Free 
Milk in Schools  
Mallory Cook , Director of Training and Early Educator Engagement ,  
Maine Education Association  
Before the Committee  on Education and Cultural Affairs  
March  9, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs,   
 
My name is Mallory Cook (pronouns she/her/hers), and I am the Director of Training and Early 
Educator Engagement at the Maine Educatio n Association, and a certified English teacher and Building 
Administrator. I am here to provide testimony in support of LD 1128: An Act to Address Student 
Hunger and Nutrition Through Expanded Access to Free Milk in Schools.  
 
MEA represents approximately 2 4,000 educators across the state, including many food service workers.   
In a recent conversation , a Food Service Director voiced concerns about the amount of waste generated 
in her district’s cafeterias. Per USDA requirements schools must offer five meal components, three of 
which must  be taken for a student to qualify for a free meal th rough the National School Lunch Program . 
This is true even if a student just wants milk to accompany a bagged lunch from home. In other words, 
they are required to take two additional  food items to gain access to free milk ; otherwise, they must pay 
the a -la-carte price for the beverage. This is contributing to significant food waste  and deterring students 
from taking milk . This food service worker said on average, at the district’s one  elementary school, 30 
students request milk only.   
 
Maine’s commitment to providing universal access to free meals in school s is a tremendous step in the 
right direction when it comes to meeting the nutritional needs of our students ; expanding that access to 
cover the cost of a milk -only option would alleviate unnecessary food waste, while  providing a nutrient -
dense drink option , an option we should be encouraging. The 2021 Maine Integrated Youth Health 
Survey demonstrated that only 7% of high school ers and 9.6% of middle schoolers  reported having the 
three recommended  servings of milk per day . Adoption of this bill would ensure students have access to 
milk at least twice per day, hopefully increasing that number drastically.  
 
Thank you for your consideration, and I will do my best to answer any questions you may have.  
 
 
  
