l 
l il‘dAllilE 
JGBS 
ﬁﬁlilliiil. 
Testimony In Opposition To 
LD 1385, An Act to Amend the Workers’ Compensation Act of 1992 Regarding Employee Liability 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Honorable Members of the Labor and Housing Committee, 
My name is Alexander Price. I am here today on behalf of the Maine Jobs Council to speak in opposition to LD 
1385, An Act to Amend the Maine Workers’ Compensation Act of 1992 Regarding Employee Liability. The Maine 
Jobs Council is a statewide, nonpartisan, member~driven advocacy organization that advances public policies to 
support the creation and preservation of foundational jobs in Maine. 
The Maine Workers’ Compensation Act is the exclusive remedy available to employees who sustain work-related 
injuries for claims against employers who have secured workers’ compensation coverage. The employer is 
immune from civil liability for injury to the employee if the employer has met its obligation to provide workers’ 
compensation benefits. This immunity extends to all employees, supervisors, officers, and directors of the 
employer. The current system has been working reasonably well since the reforms enacted by the Maine 
Legislature went into effect three decades ago. 
We oppose LD 1385 because, when combined with the other workers’ compensation bills that have been 
introduced this session, it would create more uncertainty and increase costs on Maine businesses, making them 
less attractive and less competitive at a time when Maine's business and regulatory environments already rank 
among the lowest in the nation. Workers’ compensation has been one of the most volatile economic issues in 
l\/laine's history. While the current system isn't perfect, employers and employees can be assured that the remedy 
is exclusive, and the benefits are predictable. Further, this bill would lead to a significant increase in the number 
of lawsuits, leading not only to significant and unavoidable litigation costs, but also the potential for more hostile 
work environments. Although undoubtedly well-intended, this bill could very easily cause serious damage and 
create tremendous economic difficulties for Maine businesses. 
While the Maine Jobs Council certainly supports making workers a top priority, we believe the best way to do that 
is with a robust economy full of quality foundational jobs that provide choices, career growth, and increasing 
wages. Individual pieces of legislation such as LD 1385 are not the solution to solving our state’s economic 
problems. Our overall business environment is 46th, we have the 3rd highest tax burden, the 9th highest 
healthcare cost, the 11th highest cost of living, and the 13th highest energy cost. Our overall economic ranking is 
last in New England. We encourage this committee to take a comprehensive look at how workforce challenges, 
taxes, regulations, infrastructure, and other issues act as a barrier to job creation in our state. Maine needs to 
develop and follow a long-term strategic plan to create a tax base that works for all Mainers. 
The MJC thanks the committee for its time and consideration ofthis issue, and we would welcome any opportunity 
to discuss it with you. 
Thank you, 
Alexander Price, Pierce Atwood 
On behalf of the Maine Jobs Council
