 
Written Testimony for Hearing (LD 1385) 
 
I would like to thank Jim Libby for his support in sponsoring bill LD 1385, 
and to Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and all members of the 
committee on Labor & Housing for allowing me an opportunity to share my 
family’s story and to testify today.  
 
On September 24, 2020, our family’s world changed forever when our 19-
year-old son, Henry Hugh O’Neill, was killed in a tragic work truck accident.  
Henry had been working for a local landscaper for only 2 ½ weeks when 
the crash occurred.  He was a passenger in a work truck.  On a beautiful 
fall afternoon, on a straightaway road, in a picturesque Maine town heading 
to a job site, Henry lost his young life in horrific circumstances.  After an 11-
month-long investigation into the cause of the accident that brought crash 
and accident reconstruction experts to Maine from across the country on 
two occasions, the fault for the accident was determined to be driver 
distraction and excessive speed.  Because this accident happened in a 
work vehicle, worker’s compensation came into play immediately.   
 
Worker’s Compensation principals have been around for over 100 years, 
and this insurance coverage protects businesses and employers, large and 
small, from liability should accidents occur in the work environment.  Every 
state has different interpretations of the laws.  In Maine, the protections 
provided to employers, extend to employees as well, even if fault can be 
proven.  In Maine, if an employer engages in an illegal act or criminal act or 
gross negligence can be proven (which causes harm to an employee) that 
employee can seek damages from the employer.  However, it is not 
extended to fellow employees who cause harm or even death to other 
employees.  An employee who causes harm or death to another employee 
is exempt, no exceptions, even if the employee has broken other laws. 
 
Current workers’ compensation laws in Maine prohibit an injured worker, or 
in the case of their death, any family member representing their estate, 
from bringing a tort action against a fellow employee who through willful, 
malicious, or even criminal acts has caused the harm or death to a fellow 
employee.  No exceptions.  LD 1385 seeks a defined opportunity for an 
aggrieved employee (or their family) to penetrate the exclusivity exception 
within the worker’s compensation statutes when egregious, intentional, 
negligent, or unlawful actions by an employee causes harm or death to 
another employee.   
 
Worker’s compensation death benefits are distributed (first) to an 
employee’s spouse and/or dependent children, then to the employee’s 
parents.  None of the benefit paid to an at fault employee’s family can ever 
recovered by the aggrieved party and there is no avenue for the aggrieved 
party to recover any personal assets or life insurance benefits that may 
exist.  No exceptions. 
 
Our family’s tragedy has provided me with a unique perspective into the 
specifics of workers' compensation reimbursement policy, and specifically 
benefits for families whose loved ones are either seriously injured or killed 
on the job.  This has opened my eyes to some inequities that exist within 
the system, and my objective is to improve things for future families who 
may face this same heartache.   
 
A few recent revisions to the bill have diminished my original intent. 
At the most unimaginably impossible time for a grieving family, this bill's 
revised language is proposing a limited time frame (30-days) in which to 
receive workers' comp benefits under the Act or roll the dice in civil court 
under a tort action and try to recover for greater damages.  This bill should 
not impact the 2019 legislation (The Act to Improve Maine Workers’ 
Compensation Act of 1992) that allows parents or guardians of deceased 
employees to collect a death benefit.  Allowing a fellow employee and/or 
the estate of a deceased employee to potential recovery will not increase 
workers’ compensation costs for Maine employers, as any recovery would 
be through a civil tort action in the courts and not through the workers’ 
compensation system. This should not be an either/or choice, and a short 
window (30-days) would not provide fair or adequate time for a grieving 
family to plan a path forward.  The injured party should be able to collect 
WC benefits and recover from a fellow employee when gross negligence 
can be proven.  The protections provided to an employer should not extend 
to a fellow employee who has engaged in criminal or gross negligence. The 
purpose of this bill is to assign fault where fault is due and to recover some 
monies for being wronged by the fellow employee's negligent and/or 
criminal actions.  The WC insurance carrier should be allowed to gain back 
some recovery if there is a win, but not all.   
 
Gross negligence is defined in this bill as "willful, wanton and reckless 
conduct affecting the life or property of another."  The bill does not currently 
define a "criminal act".  With the increases in distracted driving cases 
nationwide, work vehicles are not immune from the growing epidemic of 
motor vehicle accidents, and the resulting injuries and fatalities.  Our 
family's interest is to include language specifically related to motor vehicle 
violations that cause these tragic outcomes (texting while driving, using 
FaceTime or using a handheld device while driving, excessive and 
dangerous speed, DUI or illegal drug use, etc.).  Under a very defined 
definition, we seek to repeal the law that currently protects fellow 
employees from tort action under the employer’s workers’ compensation 
policy should they engage in such acts (as defined) which result in serious 
injury and/or death to a fellow employee(s). 
 
Anyone who has ever taken a driver’s education course, and has a driver’s 
license, knows that drinking and driving is illegal.  However, DUI doesn’t 
apply if you’re driving a work vehicle.  An employee could be drunk, high on 
drugs, speeding and Facetiming (potentially all at the same time), cause 
serious injury or death to a fellow employee, and receive NO 
consequences.  There might even be malicious or evil intent, and there 
would still be no consequences.  Workers’ compensation insurance would 
protect this at-fault employee.  No exceptions. 
 
An important consideration for families of injured or deceased workers is 
the assignment of fault.  Currently, investigations into the ‘at fault’ 
employee’s actions are not conducted (no investigation into phone use 
while driving, speed, toxicology, etc.).  An employee who causes harm or 
even death to another employee is currently protected by complete 
immunity, regardless of what other law/s have been broken. 
 
An employee who is found to be in violation of existing, commonsense 
laws, should not be immune and protected from fault if their "criminal 
actions" have caused the injury or death of a fellow employee.  The 
protections provided to an employer should not extend to a fellow 
employee who has engaged in criminal or gross negligence.  There is 
currently NO exception to this exclusive remedy in Maine.  However, there 
is precedent in the State of Connecticut that allows an employee to receive 
WC benefits AND seek damages from the at-fault co-worker under very 
strict and specific circumstances.  In CT, an injured employee (or aggrieved 
family) can sue his fellow employee if the injury was caused by an 
employee's willful or malicious act or by the fellow employee's negligent 
operation of a motor vehicle.   
 
Our family has sought facts and truth in this tragedy.  Through a family 
connection, we were even able to locate the two U.S. Secret Service 
Agents who were the first responders at the accident scene that claimed 
our son’s life. Through personal meetings with these caring and heroic 
individuals, we’ve been able to piece together some facts of the case that 
even the accident report didn’t reveal.  Though difficult for all, we were able 
to offer our thanks to these individuals for their efforts in what was an 
unimaginable and traumatic rescue attempt. 
 
 
 
 
