Testimony in Opposition to LD 1385 
An Act to Amend the Maine Workers’ Compensation Act of 1992 Regarding Employee Liability 
April 13, 2023 
Presented by Elizabeth Brogan 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee, my name is Elizabeth Brogan and I am the Executive Director of the Workers’ 
Compensation Coordinating Council and Maine Council of Self-Insurers. |\/Iy testimony is in 
opposition to LD 1385. 
in 1916, Maine transitioned from a common law tort system—injured workers having to prove 
some fault on the part of their employer to receive an uncertain amount of compensation —toa 
comprehensive workers’ compensation system in which defined benefits to an injured worker 
were swift and assured. While the system has changed over the years, it remains a no-fault 
system in which an injured worker is compensated for lost-time and medical expenses, having 
to show only that the injury arose out of and in the course of employment (basically at work 
and because of work). Employers are required to insure against these losses, but do so knowing 
the remedy is exclusive and the costs predictable. 
This bill, if enacted, would substantially remove one half of the so-called ”grand bargain" of 
workers’ compensation, that part which protects employers, and their employees, from civil 
lawsuit when an injury happens at work and because of work. 
While this bill pertains to “employee ” liability, I ask the Committee to consider who that 
employee may be. While the "employer" in Maine would remain exempt from civil liability, it is 
not necessarily the case that the owner of that business would be exempt. Take, for instance, 
the fictional Harry and Meghan’s Service Center, lnc., with four employees: Harry, Meghan, Will 
and Cathy. lf this bill becomes law, Will's personal injury case would not be allowed against 
Harry and Meghan’s Service Center lnc., but it would be allowed against Harry or Meghan, co- 
employees, who own the service center and pay workers’ compensation premiums. Any of the 
four employees of the service center could sue each other. Harry and Meghan could sue each 
other. Under the current Act, any work injuries would be covered with workers’ compensation 
benefits with claims filed against only against Harry and l\/leghan's Service Center. 
The current exemption forms an umbrella of workplace protection. lt protects not only the 
employer but also employees. Losses for small business owners, who also work at their 
businesses, would be much less predictable, while they would still remain strictly liable for 
work-related injuries in a no-fault workers’ compensation system. The cost of doing business in 
Maine could become out of reach for many, as the cost of defending civil lawsuits would be 
added to the cost of workers’ compensation, in a much less stable and functional business 
environment.
The modern workers’ compensation system is designed to reduce litigation, with a requirement 
that contested claims go through both troubleshooting and a mediation process. This bill, if 
enacted, would increase litigation. 
For these reasons, I urge the committee to vote ought not to pass on LD 1385. I am happy to 
answer any questions.
