MAINE S T A TE 
COMMERCE 
Testimony of 1/re voice Q/‘ Mai/1e /2//\/nrsx 
Peter M. Gore 
Government Affairs Consultant 
Maine Street Solutions 
On behalf of the 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
in opposition to 
L.D. 1385, An Act to Amend the Maine Workers; Compensation Act of 1992 Regarding Employee Liability 
April 13, 2023 
Sen. Tipping, Rep. Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, my name 
is Peter Gore, and I am a Government Affairs Consultant with Maine Street Solutions, and l am here on behalf of 
my client, the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association representing both large and 
small businesses speaking to you today in opposition to L.D. 1385, An Act to Amend the Maine Workers; 
Compensation Act of 1992 Regarding Employee Liability.S 
As presented, LD 1385, represents a significant departure from the workers compensation system this 
state has operated under for the past 50-plus years. The bill inserts fault back into our comp system, piercing 
exclusive remedy which is the foundation on which our entire societal contract is based, and returns attorneys, 
litigation and the specter of the kind of friction costs to workers’ comp law that nearly brought our economy and 
our state to its knees in the early 1990's. 
LD 1385 would allow an injured worker or in the event of death, their family, who believed that their 
injury or death resulted from the intentional actions, gross negligence, or criminal activity of another employee, to 
effectively choose between recovery of benefits through the courts, or through the workers compensation scheme 
found in Title 39A. If the worker or their designee chose a civil action though litigation, then any comp benefits 
paid in the interim by the employer would be repaid by the injured worker or the designee, less attorney's fees. If 
the injured worker or their designee elect to chose comp benefits, the employer would have alien against the liable 
employee. If the injured employee elects not to pursue their rights under this act within 30 days, the employer has 
the right to sue the liable employee in their name or that of the injured worker and recover damages. 
lf this process sounds convoluted, it is. And it encourages plaintiff attorneys to pursue any and all 
workplace injury claim as potentially negligent or intentional. We are strongly opposed to this proposal. Earlier 
this year, Maine's current workers’ compensation law turned 30 years old. The result of the reforms put in place in 
1992 have brought stability and certainty to our workers compensation system and our economy. The goals of the 
Blue-Ribbon Commission, the 3-person commission that recommended the implantation of our law — lower costs 
and a safer workplace- have come to pass. 
As I indicated to this committee on another bill you heard earlier this session, there have been a half- 
dozen or more similar bills on this same subject since I began my career with the State Chamber. And as with this 
situation, the case is a compelling one. However, as with past legislature, LD 1385 should be rejected because it 
effectively eliminates exclusive remedy. 
Exclusive remedy is the law we have operated for more than 50+ years. Often referred to as the "social 
contact" or ”grand bargain," it represents the underpinnings of our entire workers’ compensation system. In the 
even to a workplace injury — regardless of fault — the injured worker is entitled to certain, swift, but time limited 
benefits. The employer, and any liable employees, are thus shielded from liability litigation, as the system is ”n0- 
28 State Street Suite 101 E Augusta, Maine 04330-5630 E1 tel (207) 623-4568 B fax (207) 622-7723 H website: www.mainechambeixorg B e-mail: info@n1ainecl1ambe1 org
MAINE S T A T F, 
C O M M E R (fl F. 
H20 m/' t":,> Q/' ,'l/in///<2 /21/.i‘/' /iw/< 
fault." Additionally, employers in‘ 
Maine are required to purchase and maintain workers’ compensation coverage 
for their employees. 
The legislation before you is exceptionally broad, far more so than a pervious bill heard earlier this session. 
Almost every action in the workplace can be considered "intentional." Additionally, what exactly constitutes 
“negligence, ” and how far up the chain does a negligent, or intentional act extend? In either case, only a jury will 
decide. Thus, torts and litigation are once more introduced as a common practice into our comp system. In our 
opinion, LD 1385 incentives trial attorneys to litigate all workplace injuries, as someone, somewhere in the 
business should have or could have prevented a tragedy. 
The bill pits employee against employee in the workplace and fails to protect the small business owner 
who may be the boss as well. Technically, the business is held harmless, but if the owner is the individual employee 
who is sued and found liable, then a tort as envisioned by LD 1385 could take the business down as part ofa 
settlement. 
No system is perfect, but our comp system in place now, as envisioned by the Blue-Ribbon Commission 
and ratified by the legislature, has served both employers and employees well these last 30 years. A stable comp 
system is critical to our economy now and into the future. LD 1385 injects uncertainty, fault and litigation back into 
our states law — the same three factors that almost lead it to its demise in 1991. We strongly oppose sucha 
change. It is bad for workers, bad for business and bad for our state as a whole. We urge you to give LD 1385 an 
ought not to pass report. Thank you. 
28 State Street, Suite 101 H Augusta, Maine 04330-5630 <5! tel (207) 623-4568 ii fax (207) 62257723 8 website: www.inaiilechambenorg B c-mail: inlb@mainechznnber.org
