3 - 
5 5 Senator Anne Carney /3/at 
3 State House Station 
all Q 6 Augusta, A4/E 04333-0003 S Qﬂice (207) 287-1515 
Senate Qhtzici Z9 
Testimony of Senator Anne Carney introducing 
LD 1220, An Act to Require Lyme Disease Vaccine Coverage for 
State-regulated Health Plans 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Connnittee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services, my name is Senator Aime 
Carney, and I proudly represent Senate District 29, which includes South Portland, Cape 
Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough. Today, I am pleased to introduce LD 1220, “An Act to 
Require Lyme Disease Vaccine Coverage for State-regulated Health Plans.” 
In the 2022 Lyme and Other Tickborne Illness Annual Report, the Maine Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention shared data showing that Lyme disease cases increased from 1,118 in 
2020 to 1,508 in 2021 (p. 15). In Cumberland County, the cases increased from 178 to 225, 
which is an increase of over 125% in just one year. Compared to the entire United Sates and our 
New England neighbors, Maine has the highest incidence of Lyme disease (p. 16), affecting 
Mainers of all ages. There are a number of reasons why Lyme disease cases are increasing, such 
as the fact that climate change and deforestation are increasing the range of the ticks that transmit 
the bacteria that causes Lyme disease. We’ve also removed the natural predators that used to 
control populations of deer and mice, which are two species that carry Lyme disease and spread 
it to humans. 
Lyme disease is medical condition that people get from the Borrelia bacteria. Its symptoms 
include fever, headache, joint and muscle pains, fatigue, arthritis, facial palsy, meningitis, and 
carditis. Once diagnosed, the patient can take oral antibiotics for ten days to a few weeks. For 
more serious cases, in which the nervous system, joints, or heart are affected, the patient may 
need intravenous antibiotics for up to 28 days. Not all cases can be cured. According to the U.S. 
Center for Disease Control, “The state of the science relating to persistent symptoms associated 
with Lyme disease is limited, emerging, and unsettled. ” [Italics added for emphasis.] For these 
patients, a Lyme disease vaccine could have prevented them from suffering from incurable late 
Lyme disease. It reminds me of the long COVID patients who still experience little-understood 
symptoms that signiﬁcantly impact their daily lives. 
Aside from the medicine, public health ofﬁcials recommend that people take precautions to 
avoid tick bites:
1
Wear light-colored, long-sleeved clothing and pants. 
Tuck your pants into your socks. 
Use an EPA-approved bug spray. 
Stay in the middle of trails. 
Do daily tick checks. 
In addition to these actions, Pﬁzer and Valneva are developing a Lyme disease vaccine — VLA15 — which is in the third phase of a clinical study in humans. According to Pﬁzer and Valneza, if 
the study is successful, then the two companies would seek ofﬁcial authorization in 2025, which 
is just a year and half away. Some of you may recall the last Lyme disease vaccine, LYMERix, 
which was withdraw two decades ago. Since then, pharmaceutical companies have not developed 
a new Lyme disease vaccine and brought it to the market. 
LD 1220 would require state-regulated health insurance plans to cover Lyme disease vaccines, 
starting on or after January l, 2024. Although there will be more tests and trials, I hope that we 
can prepare for the vaccine to return to the market. I urge the Committee to support this proactive 
bill that would help prevent Mainers from contracting Lyme disease. 
I thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any questions. 
aJ\N\\1- 
Anne Carney 
State Senator, Senate District 29 
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough
2
