STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL & FINANCIAL REGULATION 
BUREAU OF INSURANCE 
 
 
 
 
 
Office Location: 76 Northern Avenue, Gardiner, Maine 04345 
Mailing Address: 34 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
www.maine.gov/insurance 
Phone: (207) 624-8475  TTY: Please Call Maine Relay 711 Consumer Assistance: 1-800-300-5000 Fax: (207) 624-8599 
 
Janet T. Mills
Governor
Anne L. Head
DPFR Commissioner
Timothy N. Schott
Acting Superintendent
 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333-0100 
Re: L.D. 1220, An Act to Require Lyme Disease Vaccine Coverage for State-regulated Health Plans 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee: 
The Bureau of Insurance takes no position on L.D. 1220.  The purpose of this letter is to provide you with 
background information.  This bill would require carriers offering health plans in the State to provide 
coverage for Lyme disease vaccines authorized by the federal Food and Drug Administration.  Carriers 
would not be allowed to impose any deductible, copayment, or other cost-sharing requirements on 
enrollees, including the costs associated with administration.  The requirements of the bill apply to health 
plans issued or renewed on or after January 1, 2024. 
Pursuant to §4320-A “Coverage of preventive and primary health services,” it is already required that 
health plans provide coverage for vaccinations that have a rating of A or B in the recommendations of the 
United States Preventive Services Task Force or equivalent rating from a successor organization.   
Please note that currently, there is not an approved Lyme vaccination available.   
Beginning in 2014, states were required to defray the costs of all mandates that are included in Qualified 
Health Plans, unless those mandates are required as part of the essential benefit package.  The Affordable 
Care Act (ACA) directs states to make payments either to the individual enrollee or to the insurer.  
Generally, any mandate adopted by a state after December 31, 2011 is subject to the requirement for the 
state to defray the additional premium cost of that mandate, unless it is an extension of an existing 
mandate, a provider mandate, or a cost-sharing requirement. 
Title 24-A M.R.S. § 2752 requires a review and evaluation of a mandated benefit proposal by the Bureau 
of Insurance before the bill may be enacted.  These reviews include an evaluation of the financial impact, 
social impact and medical efficacy of the mandate. If a report is requested it could cost the Bureau up to 
$13,500 for outside contract consulting work plus staff time, estimated at a cost of $1,600 to collect 
information, review consultant work, and prepare the final report.  We anticipate that current resources 
will allow us to conduct up to two studies during the current session, and we will need eight weeks for 
each report to ensure a high-quality evaluation.  
I hope this information is useful to the Committee.  Please let me know if I can provide any further 
assistance. 
Sincerely, 
 
Timothy N. Schott 
Acting Superintendent 
