Testimony in OPPOSITION  
of LD  1062, “An Act  to Allow a Landowner or Maintainer of Trails  
to Lethally Remove Nuisance Beaver”  
 
Before the Committee on Inland Fisheries & Wildlife  
Presented by  Jayne Winters, South China, ME  
 
April 24 , 2023  
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative  Landry , distinguished members of the Inland Fisheries & 
Wildlife  Committee, my name is Jayne Winters. I have lived in Maine all my life and currently 
reside in South China, as well as maintain a summer home on Sebec Lake . I am su bmitting 
comments in OPPOSITION to LD 1062, “An Act to Allow a Landowner or Maintainer of Trails to 
Lethally Remove Nuisance Beaver.”  
 
This bill would take the IF&W Commissioner out of the authorization  process  and while that isn’t 
necessarily a major sticking point with me, I am concerned about 1) who will determine what 
qualifies as a nuisance beaver , and 2) how “lethally removed” is defined.  
 
First and foremost, people need to recognize that beavers play an important role in establishing 
and maintaining wetlands. They’re healthy for our environment by providing habitat for many 
plant and animal species, improving water quality, and controlling floods by slowing fast water . 
Beaver ponds help limit soil erosion  and agricultural pollution.  These “natural engineers”  are 
vital to our local ecosystems. There are a variety of options available for landowners to  deal 
with them humanely , without killing them .  
 
Trapping or shooting resident beavers is ineffective  as it creates a vacuum into which new 
beavers will move, often sooner rather than later. It’s better to repel beavers from your 
property or even work with  them.  Trees can be protected with tree guards and/or fencing. 
Natural ingredient r epellents (such as hot sau ce) also work well. “Beaver Deceivers” and other 
“Beaver Bafflers” control beaver damage, require little maintenance, maximize environmental 
benefits, and have a 99% success rate.  Whatever option (s) people choose, they should contact 
a local Animal Control Of ficer and/or IF&W Warden for professional help.    
 
LD 1062 seems open -ended to me, reducing IF&W oversight and allowing property owners or 
trail maintenance staff unlimited and unsupervised wildlife management.  I respectfully urge you 
to vote Ought Not To P ass on LD 1062.  Thank you  for your consideration . 
 
