 
131st Legislature 
Senate of 
Maine  
Senate District 6 
 
    
Senator Marianne Moore 
                                            3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
 (207) 287-1505  
  Marianne.Moore@legislature.maine.gov 
 
 
    
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 Good afternoon, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished 
members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Joint Standing Committee.  My 
name is Marianne Moore.  I proudly represent Senate District 6, which includes all 
of Washington County along with 16 Communities in Eastern Hancock County as 
well.   
I am here to introduce LD 1062, “An Act to Allow a Landowner or Maintainer of 
Trails to Lethally Remove Nuisance Beaver”. 
 
I was asked by a constituent to put in this bill prior to cloture. 
 
As you can see by the current statute, the Commissioner may at any time 
authorize a landowner, a person on behalf of the landowner, or an agent of the 
department to take or kill nuisance beaver.  When reviewing the Trapping License 
Requirements, it reads “Except for certain landowners , full-time Department 
employees engaged in official duties, and children under 10, everyone, including 
animal damage control agents and animal control officers appointed pursuant to 
Title 7, must have the appropriate trapping license before setting a trap for wild 
animals or before assisting another person who is trapping. An unlicensed person 
may accompany a trapper only as an observer.”  The Trapping License Information 
goes on to say: “Resident landowners, and immediate family members may trap 
without a license on their own land as long as their license to trap is not under 
revocation or suspension, if they currently live on that land and the land is used 
only for agricultural purposes.” 
 
Nuisance Beavers are continuing to be an issue.  With very few licensed trappers 
available, it is becoming more and more difficult to remove nuisance beavers who 
are beginning to back up our rivers and streams, often causing flooding.  This is 
beginning to affect not only private lands but also roads and multi-purpose trails. 
 
My bill is proposing to allow a landowner, a person on behalf of a landowner or a 
person who maintains a trail as part of a club or organization that maintains trails 
to take or kill nuisance beaver. 
 
I ask for your support of this important bill and will do my best to answer any 
questions at this time.   There will be others after me who can describe in better 
detail the problem we are facing in our rural areas as it relates to these nuisance 
beavers. 
  
Thank you!  
  
 
