April 24, 2023 
Testimony ofMike Look 
LD 1062 Nuisance Beaver Bill 
To: Chairman LaFountain and Chairman Landry 
Distinguished Members of the MDIFW Committee- 
My name is Mike Look, and I initiated this bill because the state is overrun with beaver. I 
represent three different groups of people, The Downeast Salmon Federation, two ATV clubs thatI 
belong to, and many landowners. 
The fur market is extinct, dead in the water, and it isn't coming back. The beaver harvest peaked 
in the winter of 79-80 at 19,209. Sixteen years later, in 95-96 it hit 16,640. Twenty years later it dipped 
to a low of just over three thousand. The past 10 years have an average of 5336. That leaves a lot of 
extra beavers out there, and guess What folks, they're making more. The population is out of control. I 
wish I could show you pictures of places where I hunt and ﬁsh. There is a beaver dam every 100 to 200 
yards. They destroy the trout ﬁshing because trout need gravel to spawn in. From the DSF perspective, 
beaver dams prevent salmon from migrating in either direction. We're told that when the Water is high 
the salmon can get over them, but that could take months. From the ATV club or land owner 
perspective beaver can cause roads to washout costing sometimes tens of thousands of dollars to repair. 
The process of having a family of beavers legally removed is very confusing, could be very 
expensive, and time consuming. Also, often the job does not get done completely. Meaning, not all of 
the beavers are caught and removed. Finding a new home for the beavers is also next to impossible. 
I didn't even attempt to explain here the actual process for getting a beaver removed because the 
more people I talked with the more confusing it got. Apparently, it is cloaked in secrecy, because 
otherwise, it would be published in the annual lawbook and everyone would know how to get the job 
done. As a board member of DSF, we don't want to be involved in illegal activities, but there is a lot of 
shoot, shovel, and shutup going on out there. 
Sincerely, 
Wm Km Mike Look
