TESTIMONY ‘ OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 1062 
“AN ACT TO ALLOW A LANDOWNER OR MAINTAINER OF TRAILS TO 
LETHALLY REMOVE NUISANCE BEAVER" 
PRESENTED BY: Senator Moore of Washington 
CO-SPONSORED BY: Representative Davis of East Machias 
DATE OF HEARING: April 24th , Z023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Nate Webb, Wildlife Division Director at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in 
opposition to L.D. 1062. 
This bill allows a landowner, a person on behalf of a landowner or a person who 
maintains a trail as part of a club or organization that maintains trails to take or kill 
nuisance beaver. 
ln 2021, 12 MSRA §12404 was amended to allow the Department to give a landowner or 
landowner ’s representative permission to take or kill beaver causing damage. ln 
response to those changes, the Department amended our Wildlife Conflict policy to 
streamline and standardize the issuance of depredation permits for landowners that 
have conflict with beavers. This bill proposes to remove the requirement fora 
landowner, a person on behalf of the landowner, or a person who maintains a trail as 
part of a club or organization to receive Department permission prior to taking or killing 
a beaver. 
Measures to protect beavers have been in place for a long time because of the positive 
habitat benefits they provide for hundreds of species in Maine. Beaver continue to be 
one of the most sought-after furbearers targeted during the trapping season. The 
Department's current Wildlife Conflict policy utilizes a step-down approach for dealing 
with animals causing conflict. The removal of the offending animal is not always the
most cost-effective or best long-term solution for landowners. ln certain situations, site 
modification or exclusion measures can be employed to provide long-term relief fora 
landowner facing a conflict with beavers, while allowing beavers to maintain quality 
wetland habitat and provide opportunities for Maine's trapping community. 
We recognize the intent of the bill is to remove constraints to protect property, but we 
believe that the recent changes to this section allow flexibility for landowners while also 
maintaining some oversight to ensure lethal removal of beaver is the most appropriate 
course of action. Additionally, the Department, through our regional wildlife staff, 
district game wardens, and landowner relations program, has invested staff time and 
resources into working with landowners to help resolve conflicts with beavers, while 
maintaining quality habitat and harvest opportunities. 
l would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
