TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN OPPOSITION TO   
L.D. 1062  “An Act to Allow a Landowner or Maintainer of Trails to Lethally Remove Nuisance Beaver  
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife : April  24, 202 3 
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry  and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank y ou for considering  my testimony regarding  L.D. 1062 “An Act to Allow a Landowner or Maintainer of Trails to Lethally 
Remove Nuisance Beaver .” 
 
Last session, upon the recommendation  of this committee,  an amended  version of  L.D. 547 , “An Act Regarding Nuisance 
Beavers ” was passed into  law.  As a result, t he statute  now states : “In accordance with section 10105, subsection 1, the 
commissioner may at any time  authorize a landowner,  a person on behalf of the landowner or an agent of the  
department to take or kill nuisance beaver. ”  The existing statute  seems more than reas onable and allow s landowner s / 
landowner agents to tak e timely  action  to prevent property damage  caused by beavers . 
 
Last session, during the public hearing for L.D 547 Dan Scott , Maine  Warden Service  proposed the amendment that Is now 
law.  He stated :  
 
“We are transitioning from a time when there weren’t enough beaver to create wetland  habit at to a time when some areas 
are over capacity. We seek a balance to keep the  reputation of beaver as a valuable wildlife resource rather than a 
nuisance . We would  suggest to the Committee a friendly amendment to the bill to  bette r reflect current practice. This 
language would allow wardens and biologists, on  behalf of the department, to give a landowner or landowner’s 
representative authority to  take beaver causing conflicts. We believe this would provide the middle ground we are  aiming 
for.” 
 
To remove t he “middleman ” (the Department) from this decision  (as the proposed  bill suggests ) feels unwise.   I suspect  that 
the Department rarely, if ever,  denies  a landowner request to kill a beaver , but it is still important for this approval process to 
exist to ensure protection of  beavers, healthy ecosy stems , and to assist  in the collection of population  data. This 
communication also allows for landowner education regarding alternative s available to address conflicts with beavers.   
In 2021,  5,325  beavers were trapped and killed in Maine  - more than all other animals trapped in Maine  combined. This 
number reflects an extremely aggressive , lethal approach to beaver management, which is not sensible , especially when 
professionally installed  flow devices  such as Beaver Deceive rs offer more effective  long term , ecologically -sound, 
humane, and economical solutions to road flooding and other human/beaver conflicts .  We almost wiped out our 
beaver population once due to over -trapping.  We need to be careful not to do so again.  
 
Maine already has an extensive trapping season for beavers .  MDIFW  allow s up to 6 months of unlimited "opportunity" (no 
bag limits) to trap and kill beavers    Additionally, i f someone has  complaints  about  "nuisance" beavers outside of trapping  
season, all th at person  must do is call MDIFW  to ask for permission to act. 
 
This bill proposes to expand Maine’s  already heavy reliance on  lethal beaver “management”  – a management  strategy that 
is not  only wasteful but  offset s the critical ecological  and environmental benefits that beavers provide.  
 
• Removing beavers by trapping is not a lasting, economical, or ecologically smart solution; any emptied beaver 
habitat is soon resettled, and the never -ending cycle of conflict and killing simply begin again.   
 
• The “nuisance animal” label for beaver is often used to justify the extensive trapping program, but high-quality  flow 
devices – Beaver Deceivers, for example – can n ow solve road flooding and other problems caused by beavers. 
When these devices are well -designed, well -constructed, and professionally installed, they prevent flooding, keep 
beavers and their benefits on the landscape, and offer humane, long -term solution s to human/beaver conflicts at 
lower cost than road repairs and beaver trapping.  
 
• Beavers are a keystone species; they create ecosystems that nourish a multitude of other animals and plants. The 
marshes and meadows they build create ecological stability. The wetlands beavers produce hav e the potential to 
reverse the accelerating extinction of freshwater fish and amphibians.  
 
• Beavers are intelligent and resourceful animals with strong family bonds.  Beca use beaver kits stay with their 
parents fo r up to  two years, trapping  and killing  adults often leaves helpless kits behind.   Therefore,  regulated 
oversight an d alternative non-lethal management strategies are  necessary  to pro tect Maine  beavers.  
 
In closing , beavers, or other wildlife, should not be classified as “nuisance” animals.  Every wild animal  plays an important  
role in maintaining healthy, balanced  ecosystems  that benefit us all.  As a result , we, as humans, mus t stop viewing wild  
animals as intrusive or  disposable .  We need to  recognize  their value  to our own survival and  make more of a n effort to 
coexist .  To that end,  I urge members of the Joint Standing C ommittee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to vote “ought not to 
pass”  L.D. 1062 “An Act to Allow a Landowner or Maintainer of Trails to Lethally Remove Nuisance Beaver .” 
 
Thank you for your t ime and consideration.  
 
Susanna Richer  
Portland, ME  
 
 
Sources:  
 
How one man tricked beavers and saved them — and roads — in the process  
https://www.bangordailynews.com/2017/10/10/outdoors/how -one-man-tricked -beavers -and-saved -them -and-roads -in-the-
process/   
 
N.H. DOT Turns To 'Beaver Deceivers' To Stop Rt. 28 Flooding In Londonderry  
https://www.nhpr.org/environment/2018 -12-12/n-h-dot-turns -to-beaver -deceivers -to-stop-rt-28-flooding -in-londonderry   
 
State Biologists Report Successful 2021 Hunting, Trapping Season  
https://www.themainewire.com/2022/11/state -biologists -report -successful -2021 -hunting -trapping -season/   
 
Testimony  L.D. 547 , Colonel Dan Sc ott, Maine Wa rden Service  
https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=146447   
 
