 
1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
   
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.org 
April 11, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D.1354 An Act to Protect Medicare Beneficiaries from Surprise 
Bills and to Inform Medicare Beneficiaries About Medicare Part B Excess 
Charges before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
 
Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonprofit legal services 
organization and our mission is to provide free legal assistance to Maine’s 
older adults when their basic human needs are threatened. On behalf of 
Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer brief comments in 
support of LD 1354 and suggest a change that may improve the accuracy of 
two lines in the bill.  
 
We support the change suggested in line 16 and 17 on page 1 of the bill 
amending the disclosure requirements Medicare Supplement policies to 
include “A statement disclosing whether the standardized Medicare 
supplement policy or  certificate provides coverage for Medicare Part B 
excess charges.” Since there is only one policy currently sold that covers that 
expense it is important that this information is presented to a prospective 
buyer.     
 
We have a suggestion regarding the definition of “Balance bill” on line 23 
page 1 and line 6 page 2 of the bill. Some Medicare providers are allowed to 
bill 15% over the “Medicare approved amount”. This is called the “limiting 
charge” and is a cap on what Medicare providers who do not “accept 
assignment” may bill the patient. Not accepting assignment means you do 
not agree to accept Medicare’s approved amount as payment in full for your 
 
2 
 services. Unless the “limited charge” term is added to the definition it will 
be a prohibited charge under the heading “Balance billing prohibited.” 
section beginning on line 29 page 1 and line 6 page 2 of the bill.  
 
22 A. "Balance bill" means to charge to or collect from a Medicare beneficiary any amount 
23 in excess of the Medicare-approved amount or limiting charge for a service, procedure or 
treatment paid 24 to a physician. 
 
5 A. "Balance bill" means to charge to or collect from a Medicare beneficiary any 
6 amount in excess of the Medicare-approved amount or limiting charge for a service, procedure  
7 treatment paid to a physician. 
 
A final comment. While the posting of a summary of this bill as required in 
the Notice section will alert some patients about the billing prohibitions it 
might be worthwhile to consider adding to the notice language that informs 
patient about the 15% limiting charge if the provider does not accept 
assignment. This may help avoid a “surprise billing”. 
 
Thank you for giving us the opportunity to share our thoughts with you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
