 
Dirigo Materials  
801 Odlin Road  
Bangor, ME 04401  
(207) 307-3610  
 
        
 
Brian Raymond Dirigo Materials  
Bangor, Maine   
 April 27, 2023  RE: LD 367 -  An Act to Authorize General Fund Bond Issues to Improve Highways, Bridges and 
Nonhighway Modes of Transportation  
 
Esteemed mem bers of the Appropriations Committee , 
 
My name is Brian Raymond, Senior Area Manager for D irigo  Materials .  Dirigo Materials is a n 
aggregate producer  which operates  throughout  the S tate of Maine.   I am writing this letter today in  
support of LD 367.   
 As part of Eurovia Atlanti c Coast, Dirigo Materials  suppl ies aggregates and recycled materials to 
both our own company and others in the industry to build i nfrastructure  in Maine and to support our 
local communities .  We offer solid, well -paying jobs  more than 350 Union and non- Union 
employees throughout  many of the  rural areas of the State  of Maine .  Much  of the work we do is  in 
support of the  Maine DOT . 
 The production of aggregates relies heavily on large investments in specialized equipment  to 
produce the quality and quantity of materials needed .  These investments require solid business plans 
that can demonstrate a return into the future.  Our industry also relies on a dedicated, skilled and 
talented workforce who in turn count  on us to provide  them  with safe  and stable employment to  
support their families.  Neither  of these can be accomplished without reliable and consistent funding 
to the Maine DOT .  LD 367  will allow the Maine DOT to leverage additional Federal funds and in 
turn do the needed repairs to Maine’s infrastructure that will benefit all stakeholders including our employees . 
 All the hard -working people of Maine deserve safe road s to travel on each day.  We take pride 
in the hard work we do to that end and the infrastructure we maintain and build in our local communities.  We strongly support the passing LD 367 to support Maine’s infrastructure and the many employees  like our own throughout the state  who r ely on this funding in their daily 
lives.  
 Sincerely , 
 
Brian Raymond 

