   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
 Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Test imony in Support of LD 367, An Act to Authorize General Fund Bond Issues to Improve Highways, Bridges and 
Nonhighway Modes of Transportation ” 
May 1, 2023  
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst  
 
Dear Se nator Rotundo , Represen tative Sachs , and Mem bers of the J oint Standing Committee  on Appropriati ons and 
Financial Affairs . I am writing on behalf of the M aine Center for Economic Pol icy to testify in support of LD 367, “An Act to 
Authorize General Fund Bond Issues to Improve Highways, Bridges and Nonhighway Modes of Transportation .” Even with 
recent increases in interest rates, bonding re mains the best way to pay for invest ment s in our state ’s transportation 
network – investments that are important  for our continued economic growth.  
 
MECEP’s support fo r LD 367 is rooted in the b elief  that spending  on highways and other transportation infra structure 
represents  an investment in our future pro sperity, and therefore it is appropriate to pay for this spending over ti me. 
Bonding for these expenses allows u s to pa ve roads and build bridges today, while asking tomorrow ’s road users to pay 
for the re pairs from which they are benefitting. And because spending on highw ays and other infrastruct ure s upports 
economic growth , the state is effectively repaying the expense with the tax revenue generated by that grow th. 
 
Currently, the Governor ’s proposed biennial b udget includes transferring $ 200 million of general f und revenues to the 
highway fund.1 MECEP believes  this is a poor use of those funds. Issuing  a bond for that spending would allow th e $100 
million to be allocated to the ongoing needs of Maine people, of which there are many – housing,  health care, and 
child care, to name a few.  
 
Maine voters have consistently recogni zed the appropriateness of bonding for tran sportation expenses  by approv ing such 
issues at the ballo t almost every time they are presented.  We believe they will do so again, if given  the opportunity this 
year.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony. I f you have any quest ions I’m available  at jmyall@m ecep. org   
 
 
 
Notes  
 
1 See Part  RRR. https://www.maine.gov/budget/sites/maine.gov.budget/files/inline -files/Final%20GF%20Language%202024 -
2025%20Biennial%201 -11-23%20v2.pdf   
