188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
 
Testimony of Matthew Marks in Support of  LD 367 
“An Act to Authorize General Fund Bond Issues to Improve Highways, Bridges and Nonhighway Modes 
of Transportation ” 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
April 27, 2023 
 
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs  my name  is Matthew Marks,  I am a Principal  at Cornerstone  
Government  Affairs,  and here  today  to speak  on behalf  of my client  The Associated  General  Contractors  
of Maine.  AGC  Maine  is a statewide  commercial construction  trade  association  and a Chapter  of AGC  
America.  
 
Spring in Maine  signals  that summer  is around  the corner,  but also evidence  of winter  damage  to our 
transportation  infrastructure  as construction  cones  blossom  around  the state  on our roads  and bridges.  
I’ve been  working  in various  capacities  with  AGC  Maine  for fifteen  years  and in every  legislative  session  
we’ve  been  faced  with  a growing  backlog  of transportation  needs  and funding challenges.  Hundreds  of 
hearings,  and studies  including the 2020  Blue  Ribbon Commission , all resulted  in creative  solutions  by 
the Legislature  and implementation  by the Department.  Many  of you know  the Blue -Ribbon  Commission  
reported  in finding #1 “Assuming an annual $100 million general obligation bond package, the 
current unmet annual transportation funding need in Maine is approximately $232 million.    
 
The Department  under  Commissioner Van Note’s  leadership  has continued  to leverage  federal  funding 
opportunities  through  grants  and other  programs  to enhance  the annual  work  plan.  The three -year  plan,  
2023- 2025,  contains  2,599  individual  work  items  with  a total  value  of $3.94 billion . The Federal  
Bipartisan  Infrastructure  Law may  result  in a 30%  increase  in the funding formula for our state but 
requires  continued  Maine  legislative  support  of 25% of that amount  in matching funds . It’s critical  we 
continue  to work  to close  our funding gap.    
 
During budget  hearings,  you heard  from  the Commissioner  in response  to Committee  questions  on the 
impact  inflation  continues  to have  on the construction  market.  In Maine,  we were  fortunate  the 
Department  and the Governor  allowed  the industry  to continue  working  during Covid  and even  
accelerate  projects  making  the best  use of lower  traffic  counts  to address  our highway  infrastructure.  
This decision  also helped  Maine’s  construction  industry  continue  our growth  of skilled  workers  and 
today  we are ranked  19th in the country,  adding 1,600 workers  since  2020,  while  New  Hampshire  ranks  
29th and Massachusetts  is 24th.   
 
Shortly  thereafter  the industry  saw the steepest  s in spike  materials  and operation  costs  in 50 years.  In 
2022,  the US Census  Bureau  reported  a 17.5%  year- over -year  increase  from  2020 to 2021.  During 
budget  hearings  this year  I presented  the Committee with  the AGC  America inflation  report  with  details  
on the individual  product  increases  including diesel,  steel, asphalt , and concrete.  While  full reports  on 
188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741 the cause  have  not been  fully  evaluated,  many  citations  are clear  that the global impacts  of our supply  
chain  and labor shortages  across  markets  were  primary  drivers  of the inflation.   
 
TRIP,  a national  transportation  research  nonprofit  released  in October  2022  a report  titled  “Rural 
Connections:  Examining the Safety,  Connectivity,  Condition  and Funding Needs  of America’s  Rural Roads  
& Bridges .” 20%  of Maine’s  rural road  pavement  was listed  in poor  condition  and 15%  of rural bridges  
are poor  or structurally  deficient.  Statewide  a 2021 TRIP  report  stated  325 bridges  are listed  as 
structurally  deficient,  a staggering  6th highest  rate in the country.  In that same  report,  it was estimated  
that the annual  cost for motorists  for vehicle  repairs,  congestion,  and safety  totals  $1.3 billion  annually.  
It pains  me to report  these statistics,  I know  the Commissioner and his Department are putting the 
available  dollars  to the best  use, and the members  of the Legislature  continue  to work  on permanent  
funding solutions,  and the construction  industry  appreciates  that continued  support.  A fully  funded  work  
plan  allows  companies  to continue  investing in equipment  and building their  skilled  workforce.    
 
I appreciate  the time  today  to speak  on behalf of this bond  and am thankful  for the bill’s  sponsor  
Senator  Farrin  and members  of this Committee  for their  ongoing work.  As the busy  construction  season  
has kicked  off, we recognize  first-hand  the value  our transportation  infrastructure  means  to our 
economy  and the safety  of our citizens.  Thank  you for your  time,  conside ration,  and continued  work,  I 
am happy  to answer  any questions.  
 
  
