 
LD 367 - VHB Letter of Support - Tony Grande.docxApril 27, 2023
Ref:  LD 367 Letter of Support
Senator Peggy Rotundo
Representative Melanie Sachs
Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee
Maine State Legislature
Augusta, ME   04333
Re:  LD 367 -  An Act to Authorize General Fund Bond Issues to Improve Highways, Bridges and 
Nonhighway Modes of Transportation
Dear Committee Chairs,
This letter is being provided to express my support of LD367 - An Act to Authorize General Fund Bond 
Issues to Improve Highways, Bridges and Nonhighway Modes of Transportation.  
As you are hopefully aware, MaineDOT has a huge unmet need in their capital projects program, including 
matching dollars for federal grants. In recent testimony, the Commissioner of Transportation identified the 
unmet need at $265 million per year (to match anticipated grants). At this point, the Department counts 
on either General Fund bonds or General Fund appropriations or both – every year – to fund their state 
capital account, which provides matching funds for federal dollars. One of my concerns is that MaineDOT 
has already implemented many cost-cutting measures, including re-classifying hundreds of miles of roads, 
so that many will only get Light Capital Paving once every seven years. As a result, this reclassification 
then precludes them from completing some much-needed safety projects in various parts of the state.
In 2020,  the Blue Ribbon Commission To Continue Studying and Recommend Funding Solutions for the 
State’s Transportation Systems, pegged the unmet need at $330 million per year, and since then costs 
have increased in Maine and in every state in the country.  A Transportation Bond would help the state to 
Improve Public Safety, Support the State’s Economy and Mobility, and maximize Federal Funds through 
discretionary grants and other funding options.
Below are several additional points to consider related to this bond issue:
People in Maine support transportation.  Let the voters decide.
Local match programs administered by MaineDOT include Municipal Partnership, Business 
Partnership, and Village Partnerships. Bond funds could be used for those programs which are 
extremely popular with municipalities and businesses.
LD 367 – Letter of Support
April 27, 2023
Page 2
LD 367 - VHB Letter of Support - Tony Grande.docxOur firm does work all across this great state, and we see firsthand the need for improvements 
and the resulting increased costs required once a roadway shifts from a maintenance need to 
reconstruction.
I am also a member of the South Portland Bicycle-Pedestrian Committee, and we constantly hear 
about rising costs which prevent much-needed improvements from moving forward.
I am hopeful that you will support LD 367 and move it forward for passage.  Should you or any of the 
committee members have any questions or require additional information, please do not hesitate to 
contact me.
Sincerely, 
Tony Grande, P.E.
Director of Transportation Engineering - Maine
agrande@vhb.com

