_, . HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
'%\< j AUGUSTA, MAINE 043330002 
(207) 287-1400 
Rebecca Jauch TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
676 Cathance Rd. 
Topsham, ME 04086 
Phone: (207) 522 -7438 
Rebecca.Jauch@legislature.maine.gov 
April 6, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Rebecca Jauch presenting 
LD 1114, An Act to Eliminate the Annual Medical Eligibility Determinations 
of Need for Families of Children with Disabilities 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Rebecca J auch and I represent 
House District 51 which is the majority of Topsham. I am pleased to be here today to present 
LD 1114, An Act to Eliminate the Annual Medical Eligibility Determinations of Need for 
Families of Children with Disabilities. 
I submitted this bill after a conversation with my good friend Abby. She has a wonderful son 
who in addition to being a curious, silly and happy little boy, also happens to have an extra 
chromosome. Every year since his birth, Abby has to ﬁll out a sizeable stack of paper proving 
her son has Down syndrome so that he can continue to qualify for and receive the medical 
services he needs. This process is not only burdensome on a family’s time as they run around 
getting papers signed by a list of medical professionals, it is also stressful as they worry about 
missing a fonn, misﬁling a document or accidentally overlooking a section — all of which can 
cause them to be dropped from the system at which point the process starts over and can take 
weeks or months to correct. The conditions these children have are permanent — they will 
always have their disability, Abby’s son will always have that extra chromosome and they will 
always need services. So Why do we make them go through this exercise every year which not 
only wastes their time and creates additional stress in their lives, but is also a poor use of our 
state’s resources? 
My friend and her family are one among thousands in our state that must go through this process 
every year. LD 1114 looks to remove this stress from these families by eliminating the 
requirement to continually prove eligibility after it has been initially established. Instead of 
starting from scratch every year, families should just update their infonnation to reﬂect changes 
in medical needs and personal information. I am asking you today to please support Maine 
families of children with disabilities, to remove this burden from their lives and to remove this 
burden on our limited state resources. I ask you to please support LD lll4, I thank you for your 
consideration and I am happy to answer any questions. 
District 51: Topsham
