 
 
Maine Lobstermen’s Association  
 
In Support of  
 
LD 710 An Act to Fund the Lobster Legal Defense Fund  
 
March 23, 2 023 
 Senator Reny , Representative Hepler , and members of the Marine Resources Committee, my 
name is Patrice McCarron , and I am the policy director for  the Maine Lobstermen’s Association  
(MLA). The MLA strongly supports LD 710 to invest $1 million from the state’s General Fund to 
reimburse statewi de industry associations for the legal costs incurred in defense of our state’s 
economically critical lobster industry .  
 
As a result of a 10 -year whale plan released by the  National Marine Fisheries Services (NMFS) in 
2021, the Maine lobster fishery must  reduce its already minimal risk to right whales by 98 
percent.  This is an unachievable  goal  that will devastate  Maine’s  lobster  industry  and the 
families,  businesses and com munities  that depend  on it. 
 
The MLA  has been  actively  engaged  in efforts  to protect endangered  right  whales  since  the first 
federal whale  plan  was drafted  in 1997.  In the years  leading  to the release  of the 10-year  whale  
plan  in 2021, the association  exhausted  all options  to avoid  the situation  that we now  face:  a 
whale  plan  that will eliminate  the Maine  lobster  fishery  and fail to reverse  the right  whale  
population decline.   
 
The MLA , the state  of Maine  and other  industry  groups  have  had no choice  but to fight this plan  
through  the courts . In September  2021,  the MLA  took  the bold  step  of suing  NMFS  over  the 10-
year  whale  plan  in the United States  District  Court  for the District  of Columbia.    
 MLA argued that NMFS failed to implement the Endangered Species Act (ESA) as Co ngress 
intended by basing its plan on “worst -case scenarios”  which  overestimat e the lobster industry’s 
risk to right whales . MLA  argued that NMFS cherry -picked the science and us ed unsupported 
assumptions and to justify its mandate for Maine ’s lobster fishery to reduce its already minimal 
risk to right whales by 98% by 2030.  
 In September 2022, the Court ruled against the MLA in an opinion that deferred to NMFS on all 
counts without disputing the validity of MLA’s concerns.  The MLA immediately appealed this 
decision and was granted an expedited appeal before the DC Court of Appeals. Opening briefs were filed in November 2022, or al arguments were heard in February 2023 , and supplemental 
briefs were filed in March. A decision is expected as soon as April.  

 
The MLA is also a n intervenor in a case filed in DC District Court against NMFS by several non -
governmental organizations (NGOs) which claim that NMFS has not done eno ugh to protect the 
right whale. In July 2022, t he Court ruled in favor of the NGO’s on several of its claims resulting 
in an expedited rulemaking schedule for the lobster industry  to achieve a 90%  risk reduction  in 
2024 as an interim phase of  the 10 -year whale plan . Fortunately, with strong support from 
Maine’s governor and entire congressional delegation, Congress intervened in December 2022 with a law paus ing any new whale rules for 6 years  (until 2028) and providing $50 million in 
new fundi ng to conduct research to understand the actual cause of the right whale decline . 
 It is important to understand that, to be successful,  this fight requires  a coordinated, multi -
faceted strategy between lobster industry groups and the state of Maine . The MLA is nimble 
and has been able to act quickly in executing  an aggressive legal strategy in pursuit of our goal 
to save  Maine’s lobster industry . The state of Maine provides essential expertise through its 
science and policy staff , as well as critical credibility to the lobster industry’s claims against 
NMFS given the state’s  public trust obligation to manage t he lobster fishe ry and protect marine 
wildlife. This means that both the lobster industry groups and Maine DMR must have adequate 
financial resources to hire expert legal teams.   
 These legal battles are extremely expensive, but without a legal challenge, the lobster industry as we know it will cease to exist. That is guarantee d. At each phase of this legal fight, the MLA 
has sought the best attorneys to represent Maine’s iconic lobster industry. The MLA is currently 
working with two of the best law firms in the nation.  
 
The MLA launched a three -year, $10 million Save Maine Lob stermen fundraising campaign in 
2021 to support this effort. While the MLA has received tremendous financial contributions  
from Maine lobstermen, businesses, municipalities, the state of Maine, and many community members , our small organization  still face s an extraordinary challenge  to raise the funds 
needed to continue to lead this fight.  
 A $1 million investment from the state’s  General Fund to reimburse industry associations for 
the legal costs incurred in defense of the lobster industry is a sound investment for  the state of 
Maine. The Maine lobster industry is the most valuable fishery in the nation, and critical to the 
econom y of Maine. Lobster dollars are the first dollars earned and spent in m ost coastal 
communities . This money  supports  not only lobstermen, but also their families, local 
businesses, school s, non -profit organizations,  and the town. If the lobster industry fails as a 
result of this onerous whale plan, the economic impact on the people, businesses , and 
communities that depend on it will be harsh.  
 Investing General Fund dollars in the Lobster Legal Defense Fund would help the MLA achieve its fundraising goals and ensure that the association is  able to  continue to  lead  this fight to save 
Maine’s lobster industry . The MLA does not support diverting funds from  other  importan t 
programs to support the industry’s legal defense.   The lobster industry will not go down without a fight –  we have too much worth fighting for. 
The MLA  urge s you to strongly support LD 710  to help us save Maine’s lobster industr y and our 
way of life.   
Patrice McCarron
Maine Lobstermen's Association
LD 710
MLA is not able to attend the public hearing in person today. We are happy to provide
any additional information at the request of the committee.
