Testimony of 
DANA A. DORAN - it 
Executive Director 
Before the Joint Standing Cormnittee on Labor and Housing, In Opposition to LD 511, An 
Act to Clarify that Haulers are Under the Jurisdiction of the Logging Dispute Resolution 
Board 
Tuesday, March 21, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing, my name is Dana Doran, and I am the Executive Director of the Professional Logging 
Contractors of Maine. The Professional Logging Contractors of Maine (PLC) is a trade association that 
represents logging and associated trucking contractors throughout the state of Maine. The PLC was 
formed in 1995 to give independent contractors a voice in a rapidly changing forest industry. 
As of 2021, logging and trucking contractors in Maine employed over 3,000 people directly and were 
indirectly responsible for the creation of an additional 2,500 jobs. This employment and the 
investments that contractors make contributed $582 million to the state’s economy. Our 
membership, which includes 200 contractor members and an additional 120 associate members, 
employs more than 75% of the individuals who work in this industry and is also responsible for 80% 
of Maine’s annual timber harvest. 
The logging industry in Maine was in the midst of a resurgence until the onset of COVID 19 and the 
digestor explosion at the Jay mill in 2020. As a result of mill closures, curtailments and inﬂation 
created by the response to COVID 19, we are estimating that Maine has lost 30% of its harvesting 
capacity since 2020. In just four years, the industry has shrunk from an annual economic impact of 
$620 million to $582 million and total jobs have been reduced from 9,000 to 5,500. 
Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify on behalf of our membership in opposition to LD 
511, An Act to Clarify that Haulers are Under the Jurisdiction of the Logging Dispute Resolution Board. 
While we respect the sponsor’s intent, and the fact that he represents more than 50 of our members in 
his district, this bill has no support from our members in his District and no support from the rest of our 
membership in the state. 
Like LD 1724 from the 130"‘ Legislature, this bill was not created at the request of the logging and 
trucking industry, was not vetted with anyone in the industry and has Q support from the industry. In 
2022, LD 1724 was opposed by 26 logging contractors at the public hearing. Those same contractors are 
in opposition to LD 511, but they feel so disenfranchised based upon the activity that took place last year 
with respect to LD 1724, that they don’t feel it’s Worth their time to voice their opinion again because it 
will be completely disregarded. _ 
The bill before you is ﬂawed and will only make a previously ﬂawed statute even more so. No one will 
use the previously enacted statute, and no one will use this proposed addition.5 
if
x 
li 
it 
11
,
7
F
Timber hauling contractors that work on a land base that is owned by a large landowner, in this case 
5 0,000 acres or more, generally have contracts with land management companies or with the logging 
contractor that hired them to transport the wood. These land management companies and loggers have 
separate contracts with those landowners. There are only three landowners in the state that own 50,000 
acres or more and contract directly with logging and trucking contractors (Irving, Acadian Timber and 
Weyerhaeuser). Thus, this bill will do virtually nothing for contractors throughout the state, except for 
those that work for one of these three landowners, because based upon the statute, there is no standing for 
them to bring a complaint. 
LD 511 will allow also allow timber hauling contractors to bring a dispute to an open-ended dispute 
resolution board within the executive branch (Maine Labor Relations Board) of state government that has 
no experience with business issues and never will. The Maine Labor Relations Board (MLRB) is tasked 
with settling disputes of state workers and their union contracts but now has been given the authority to 
settle private contractual disputes between logging companies and landowners. 
Resolution boards in the state of Maine (i.e. Maine Labor Relations Board, Maine Workers Comp. Board, 
Unemployment Commission, and the Maine Human Rights Commission) exist to hear disputes from 
employees, as does the MLRB. Logging and trucking business owners do not want a board with no 
experience and no statutory authority pertaining to business issues involved with their contractual 
disputes.L 
Other boards and commissions that do regulate industries (Maine Blueberry Commission, Maine Potato 
Board, Harness Racing Commission) oversee and regulate businesses, similar to the Maine Forest 
Service, but are not set up to hear their individual business disputes. Businesses do not have access to any 
type of resolution board in state government as their current means of recourse is the judicial court 
system, which is where it should remain. 
There is already a dispute resolution system set up in the Maine Dept. of Ag., Conservation and Forestry, 
with the Maine Agricultural and Bargaining Board to hear disputes in this industry. The Maine 
Agricultural and Bargaining Board Act of 1973 was created so that agricultural businesses, including 
loggers and truckers, can form cooperatives. A cooperative, which is a group of similar businesses that 
join together for negotiation and sales purposes, can use the Maine Ag. Bargaining Board to settle 
disputes between Cooperatives and the businesses that they work with. Perhaps we should allow that 
statutory authority to work rather than creating something that no one will use. 
As designed, the resolution Board has three members: a forest landowner that owns more than 50,000 
acres, a logging or timber hauling contractor and the Chair of the State Board of Arbitration and 
Conciliation, except with one major caveat: the logging/timber hauling contractor will be chosen froma 
recommendation by the AFL-CIO (labor union). Why would logging and timber hauling businesses want 
to be represented by someone chosen by the AFL CIO, which is not involved in logging and doesn’t 
represent business owners? 
The bottom line is that no one on this Board represents the logging and trucking industry and no one from 
the industry wanted this solution in search of a problem last year and they don’t want it this year either. 
We respectfully ask the Committee to listen to the industry and vote Ought Not to Pass.
