Janet T. Mills  
GOVERNOR   
S T A T E  O F  M A I NE  
B O A R D  O F  A R B I T R A T I O N  A N D  C O N C I L I AT I O N  
90 S T A T E  H O U S E  S T A T I O N  
A U G U S T A ,  M A I N E   0 4 3 3 3 -0 0 5 4  
( 2 0 7 )  2 8 7 -2015  
W W W . M A I N E . G O V / M L R B  
 
  
 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST L.D. 511 
 
“An Act to Clarify That Haulers Are Under the Jurisdiction of the Logging 
Dispute Resolution Board ” 
 
Neil P. Daly, Executive Director  
Maine Labor Relations Board  
March 21 , 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Neil Daly, and it is my privilege to serve as the Executive 
Director of the Maine Labor Relations Board (MLRB)  and its affiliate organizations, including 
the State Board of Arbitration and Conciliation  (BAC) . 
 
The following  testimony  is neither for , nor against , L.D. 511. 
 
As background,  the 130th Legislature enacted Chapter 665 of Public Law 2021, “An Act To  
Create a Logging Dispute Resolution Board and To Require Proof of Ownership Documents To 
Be Available within 14 Days of Request”  (LD 1724) .  That bill  create d a gubernatorially 
appointed tri -partite panel  (Logging Board)  composed of one member representin g logging 
contractors, one member representing forest landowners, and the chair of the BAC , who serve s 
as chair of the newly created board.  The Logging Board has the authority to decide disputes 
between logging contractors and forest landowners over “wage violations, payout amounts, 
contract violations, [and] disputes in hiring.”  The law only appl ies to forest landowners who 
own more than 50,000 acres of land.  I n terms of process, the Logging Board follow s most of the 
existing, applicable BAC procedures.  
 
During the Labor and Housing Committee’s review of L.D. 1724, I testified neither for nor 
against that bill, but I did raise certain questions as to the adminis tration of the then -proposed 
Logging Board.  Thereafter, I engaged  with certain Committee members and staff to discuss the 
administrative framework  and provide technical guidance  for the Logging Board, should it be 
enacted into law.   Much of that discussio n is reflected in the bill that was ultimately enacted.  
 
To an extent , the Logging Board is similar to a forestry rates proceedings panel that was in effect 
from approximately 2003 to 2009.  See Chapter 670 of Public Law 2003.  The BAC chair also 
served as  the chair of the forestry rates panel, joined by a representative of forest products 
harvesters and a representative of forest landowners as the other panel members.  The forestry 
 
 rates panel had the authority to decide compensation rates for harvesting a nd, notably (as it 
relates to LD 511), the panel also held j urisdiction for  hauling services . 
 
Should L.D. 511  be implemented as currently drafted, the Maine Labor Relations Board, which 
provides administrative services for the BAC and the Logging Board, should be able to 
accommodate the expected volume of filings with in existing resources.  If the number of actual 
filings greatly exceeds expectations, the MLRB may request additional resources or 
administrative assistance.   As always, we will endeav or to effectively implement any bill enacted 
as law . 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to discuss L.D. 511.  I will try to answer any questions you have  
at the work session for this bill . 
 
