Testimony in Opposition to LD 1055
An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop Boxes
March 22, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, I’m here today to testify on behalf of Mainers for Modern Elections in opposition 
to LD 1055, An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop Boxes.
Mainers for Modern Elections is a coalition committed to ensuring that our right to vote safely 
transcends politics and partisanship. We advocate for safe, secure, modern elections. Our coalition 
is committed to securing equitable access to the ballot for every eligible Maine voter.
Coalition members include the ACLU of Maine, AARP of Maine, the Center for Secure and Modern 
Elections, Common Cause, Defend Our Health, Gateway Community Services, the League of 
Women Voters of Maine, the Maine AFL-CIO, Maine Citizens for Clean Elections,
Maine Conservation Voters, Maine Education Association, Maine Equal Justice, Maine Immigrant 
Rights Coalition, Maine People's Alliance, Maine Service Employees Association-SEIU Local 1989, 
Maine Women's Lobby, Maine Youth Power, Planned Parenthood of Northern New England, and 
Represent Us.
Maine has a long, proud tradition of making sure every eligible voter can cast a ballot if they wish, 
and in the manner that works best for them. As a result, we have some of the highest voter turnout 
in the country[1]. Whether you vote by mail, in person on election day, or by returning your ballot to 
your town clerk’s office or ballot drop box, Maine’s election officials ensure your vote is counted 
and our elections remain safe, secure, and accurate.
Unfortunately, we are once again seeing attempts to limit Mainers’ freedom to vote and undermine 
our democracy. Today it is an effort to ban ballot drop boxes in Maine.
To be clear: the freedom to vote is a fundamental right in our democracy. It should not be more 
accessible for some Mainers than others. Maine laws and practices like same-day voter 
registration, absentee voting, and ballot drop boxes ensure eligible Mainers can cast their ballot in 
a safe, secure way that works best for them.
While some voters enjoy going to their polling place on Election Day, others are not able to do so 
or prefer to vote absentee from the comfort of their own home. Voters who choose to cast an 
absentee ballot may return their ballot in person to their town clerk, depend upon the post office to 
deliver their ballot, or return their ballot to a ballot drop box in their town.
With increasing delays and gaps in mail delivery and limited town office hours outside of standard 
work hours, it is not surprising many voters prefer to return their ballot to their town’s ballot drop 
box. It is a safe and convenient way to cast their ballot.
While proponents of this measure may argue that eliminating ballot drop boxes will increase 
confidence in Maine’s elections, researchers at MIT[2] have found that the strongest influence on 
levels of voter confidence is whether one’s candidate has won or lost an election and voter 
confidence does not cause higher voter turnout.
In short, there is no good reason to ban ballot drop boxes in Maine. Please vote ought not to pass 
on LD 1055.
[1] With 61.5%, Maine had the second highest turnout rate in 
2022 https://www.electproject.org/2022g 
[2] MIT Election Data and Science Lab “Voter Confidence” last updated April 2021. 
electionlab.mit.edu/research/voter-confidence.     
