Testimony in Opposition to LD 1055
An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop Boxes
March 22, 2023 
Good morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am Alysia Melnick and I am here to represent the 
Center for Secure and Modern Elections in opposition to LD 1055 An Act to Prohibit the Use of 
Ballot Drop Boxes. This bill creates undue burdens on local elections officials and voters without 
any benefits to election security. 
Different methods of voting should not be more accessible for some than others. Whether you 
vote by mail, in person on election day, or by returning your ballot to your town clerk’s office or 
ballot drop box, Maine’s election officials ensure your vote is counted and our elections remain 
safe, secure, and accurate. Banning ballot drop boxes significantly reduces the accessibility and 
convenience of absentee voting. 
Drop boxes are considered to be more secure than your average USPS postal box. Current 
Maine statute requires that ballot drop boxes meet specific criteria to ensure that they are 
secure –  including measures to ensure that the drop box cannot be removed by an 
unauthorized person and to prevent an individual from being able to reach into the chute to 
access its contents. Additionally, drop boxes must be monitored by law enforcement personnel, 
municipal staff, or surveillance cameras. 
Once received by election officials- ballots that come through drop boxes also go through the 
same security checks as any ballot that comes through the mail. And our election officials 
confirm that ballots returned via drop boxes do not belong to people who have already voted 
using another method. 
The existing measures for overseeing and managing ballot drop boxes have kept Maine 
elections secure and accessible to eligible voters.
Furthermore, banning drop boxes in Maine would make it more difficult for eligible Mainers to 
cast their ballot, especially those who are already underrepresented in our democracy, such as 
seniors, young people, and disabled voters. 
The Elections Assistance Commission reports that some voters also simply prefer to deliver 
their mail ballots to a drop box rather than returning them through the mail because of concerns 
about missing the postmark deadline and to ensure their ballot is counted. Drop boxes ensure 
that even voters who wait until the last minute to vote or voters who have things that come up in 
their lives will be able to return their ballots in time to be counted. 
Lastly, secure ballot drop boxes help reduce election administration costs and work for local 
election officials. Banning drop boxes could require local election officials to hire more poll 
workers, find additional or larger polling locations, and generally increase the resources spent 
on election administration to accommodate the voters who would be pushed to vote in-person 
because of limited options to cast their ballots. 
Mainers deserve safe, secure, and accessible elections. Banning drop boxes would create 
undue burdens for Maine voters without any security benefits. Please vote no on LD 1055, An 
Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop Boxes.
