Chair Hickman, Chair Supica, and Members of the Committee, 
My name is Celia Canavan, and l live in Farmington, Maine, where l’ve spent many years as an 
advocate for a multitude of issues related to Mainers, including election accessibility, voter 
registration, and voter education; all of which uplift the voices of students and marginalized 
communities within our state. It is with great concern for our future that I come to you today to 
ask you to oppose Senator Brakey's bill, LD1055: “An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop 
Boxes". 
I feel very strongly about the inherent right of all Mainers to have an active voice in their 
government, something that absentee voting and ballot drop boxes perpetuates for students, 
the working class, Black and other people of color, disabled people, and rural Mainers. Banning 
ballot drop boxes is a feeble attempt at stripping these people of the most basic right to civic 
engagement. The ideology that there is widespread voter fraud in our state is not only blatantly 
false, but is weaponized to monger fear and distrust in the very government that elects the 
proponents of this bill. As a resident of a rural county and frequent flier in many town ofﬁces;l 
know all too well that our town clerks can be all but accessible for an in-person drop-off - I've 
seen town ofﬁces only open two days a week, holding hours only from 10:00AM-2:00PM, and at 
times, closed randomly without proper posting or notice. The idea that absentee voting is 
accessible in rural districts without these drop boxes is not only untrue, but profusely unaware of 
the reality of the lack of access to resources in Maine’s most rural areas. 
Ballot Drop Boxes are a vital resource to Maine residents — and it is an abuse of power to 
attempt to destroy this resource rather than expand on the dire need for election resources 
within our state prior to bills like this being introduced. Protecting Maine’s most vulnerable voting 
populations is not only a communal responsibility, but is the sole responsibility of you, our 
elected officials. l urge you to not only OPPOSE LDiO55, but to urge your fellow legislators of 
the dangers of setting such a terrible precedent: that the right of voters does not matter. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Celia Canavan
