 
 
 
 
March 22, 2023  
 
Sen. Craig Hickman , Chair  
Rep. Laura Supica , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1055  An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop Boxes  
Chair Hickman , Chair Supica , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs. My name is David O’Brien and I am Policy Director for RepresentUs, the nation’s leading 
nonpartisan anti -corruption organization. RepresentUs is submitting testimony today in opposition to LD 
1055 An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop Boxes.  
RepresentUs is a nonpartisan advocacy organization dedicated to the idea that the government  
should be representative of and accountable to the people. It advocates for policies to  
strengthen our democracy and provides activists with the resources and training to bring  
meaningful change.  Regarding the electoral process, we work to  pass powerful state and local laws that 
expand voter access , make e lections more representative,  and enhance  election  security.   
LD 1055  would prohibit the use of drop boxes for Maine elections. This would be a major step back for 
Maine’s election process and would make elections less accessible for Maine voters.  
Drop box es are a secure , locked  locations where voters can safely return their absentee ballots . Drop 
boxes give voters flexibility and make elections more accessible because a voter can drop off their ballot 
at a time that is convenient and fits within their sche dule.  Using a drop box can also be a more reliable 
way to return a ballot given recent concerns with the timeliness of the U.S. Postal Service.  
Absentee voting is on the rise nationally and in Maine. In the November 2022 election, 23 percent of 
Maine vote rs cast absentee ballots. Maine should maintain all its current methods for returning 
absentee ballots, while also prioritizing in -person voting, in order to make its elections as accessible as 
possible to all voters.  
For those reasons, we urge you to vot e “Ought Not to Pass” on LD 1055.  

