:1 , 9 ,. 
- ea ll* 
it 
Eric Brakey 1315‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 1055, An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop Boxes 
Before the Maine Legislature ’s Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Wednesday, March 22, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Veterans and Legal Affairs: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of 
Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. I am before you today to present L.D. 
1055, An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop Boxes. 
On June 3, 2020, under the specter of COVID-19, Governor Janet Mills signed Executive 
Order 56 FY 19/20. As part of that order, she gave municipal clerks the ability to provide 
drop boxes for voters to return absentee ballots. The argument for this was to ensure 
people could return ballots without fear of public gathering — ultimately leading to a larger 
public health crisis. 
Drop boxes were implemented in Maine as an emergency measure. Yet, here we are 
three years later and they are still being used. The monitoring and security of drop boxes 
is far from ideal. Under Title 21-A, Chapter 9, it states, “During the absentee voting period, 
each secured drop box must be monitored periodically by law enforcement personnel, 
municipal staff or a surveillance camera.” 
I am grateful for the important work conducted by members of law enforcement and 
municipal staff, but they are busy and I can't imagine monitoring drop boxes, especially 
for municipal staff as they prepare for Election Day, is high on their list. I also think about 
the smaller municipalities that may not have the funds to set up a sun/eillance system or 
resources to have someone around when the town office may only be open a few daysa 
week. 
The integrity of our ballots is a concern. Drop boxes free from consistent monitoring widen 
the avenues for ballot harvesting and ballot destruction. I know that other legislation being 
presented to this committee by Rep. Boyer would seek to increase monitoring of drop 
boxes, while maintaining their existence. That is something I hope this committee will 
consider alongside this legislation.
Further, I believe it is worth asking the question, in the constant focus on increasing 
access no matter the cost, what are the costs and where is the line? lt used to be that 
voting was a solemn act with a certain ceremony to it. You showed up on Election Day, 
went behind the curtain where no one could see you, weighed the significance of the 
choices before you, and cast your ballot. Now, many states are moving to universal and 
automatic vote-by-mail and even pushing for online voting, where you can cast your vote 
from the bathroom. Does the increasing casualness with which we treat voting result in 
increased casualness with the decisions of voters? l suspect so. 
While I acknowledge that they served a need at a specific time, I hope the committee will 
reexamine whether the use of drop boxes on a permanent basis promotes the integrity 
and seriousness of voting. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
