§ ‘\€‘°wN<$ . . , .. 
\ Mame Town & City Clerks Association 
r;- 
Local Government Center - 60 Community Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486 
6. 
A330 1-800-452-8786 (In Maine) » 207-623-8428 
Fax 207-626-5947 
Date: March 9, 2023 
To: Senator Craig Hickman, Senate Chair 
Representative Laura Supica, House Chair 
And members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
From: Patti Dubois, Chairperson, Legislative Policy Committee 
Maine Town and City Clerks’ Association 
Re: LD 1055 — An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop Boxes 
Position: Oppose 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association is opposed to LD 1055 and we thank you for the 
opportunity to outline our points for your Committee. 
Our members noted that absentee ballot drop boxes have only been available for a few 
years but are widely popular with absentee voters. The Secretary of State's ofﬁce funded 
the purchase of the drop boxes for any municipality that requested one. Many voters love 
the convenience of having the ability to drop off their voted ballots anytime. 
Although this appears to be in response to security issues related to the drop boxes, the 
statute requires periodic monitoring of the drop box during the absentee voting period by 
law enforcement, municipal staff or a surveillance camera. In addition, the unit must be 
securely attached to the exterior of the municipal building or affixed to a concrete pad or 
structure that prevents removal by an authorized person. Removal of ballots is required to 
be conducted at least once per day or more to ensure that the box doesn't over fill. There 
were no known instances of security issues with the use of ballot drop boxes. 
By allowing this method of return, concerns about mail delays and increased volume are 
alleviated. Municipal offices that utilize drop boxes also experience reduced foot traffic 
inside the building during absentee voting. 
Although this is a relatively new option for voters, removing this option for returning 
absentee ballots will add to voter confusion and will waste the money that was just spent to 
purchase and install this equipment. 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association appreciates the opportunity to share its 
testimony with the Committee. Should any questions arise, please feel free to contact me at 
207)680-4210 or by email: pdubois@waten/ille-me.gov . 
Representing Over 400 Municipalities
