 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
In Opposition to  
LD 1055 , An Act to Prohibit the Use of Ballot Drop Boxes  
 
March 22, 2023 
 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Lambert , and I am providing testimony in opposition to  LD 1055  
on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association’s (MMA) elected 70 -member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC). For refer ence , the LPC provides direction to the advocacy team at MMA and 
establishes the position on bills of municipal interest.    
Amid a time of borderline panic and uncertainty during a pandemic, the increased usage 
of ballot drop boxes became  a symbol of secu rity and gave American’s a sense of normalcy as 
they were able to exercise their constitutional voting right, safely . Absentee and mail voting 
surged during this time period and accounted for approximately 41% of the ballots returned  
across the nation . By current standards,  these same symbols of security and normalcy have been 
altered to assume an attack on voter access.  
There are not typically  many positive things that can be discussed when talking about a 
pandemic, but an unintended outcome has been  the convenience and ease that ballot drop boxes 
have added to the election process. Society has transformed us to be accustomed to and seek 
out convenience  and avenues to increase efficiency . This small measure of convenience is 
significant to those who face  challenges , such as transportation, childcare, or people with 
disabilities and their caregivers,  when it comes to voting access . 
Ballot boxes are designed to be secure , complete  with a waterproof style , tamper proof 
hinges, and  locked  ballot collection  doors with some  featur ing automatically lock ing ballot 
collection doors . Their unassailable blueprint along with the ballot chain of command, video 
surveillance, and the integrity of our Maine clerks and election workers, provide security 
sufficient fo r ballot drop box collection.  
Most individuals do not think twice about putting an important parcel or letter through 
the U .S. Postal Service and assume those employed with the task of processing the mail will 
follow through with their responsibilities. F urther, tampering with the post is a federal crime, yet 
there are blue mailboxes perched on various corners, with access permitted only by postal 
employees.  
So, this begs the question, why should a ballot box, that is designed to be secure , provide s 
increased voter access and convenience to the citizens of Maine , and  is only accessed by 
authorized personnel , be any different?  
The LPC urges you to consider voting  ought not to pass on LD 10 55. Thank you for  your 
time and for  considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  

