 
 
 
 
 
April 12, 2023 
 
Sen. Craig Hickman, Chair 
Rep. Laura Supica, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 1344 An Act to Improve the State's Election Laws by Amending the Laws Relating to Automatic 
Voter Registration 
Chair Hickman, Chair Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs: My name is David O’Brien and I am Policy Director for RepresentUs, the nation’s leading 
nonpartisan anti-corruption organization. RepresentUs is submitting testimony today in support of LD 
1344, Rep. Supica for bringing forward this important legislation.  
RepresentUs is a nonpartisan advocacy organization dedicated to the idea that the government 
should be representative of and accountable to the people. It advocates for policies to 
strengthen our democracy and provides activists with the resources and training to bring 
meaningful change. Regarding the electoral process, we work to pass powerful state and local laws that 
expand voter access, make elections more representative, and enhance election security.  
For the most part, LD 1344 is a housekeeping bill which updates automatic voter registration (AVR) to 
include digital voter files.  It also aligns the effective date with the rest of the AVR legislation.  
The underlying policy of AVR, which is already Maine law, is an effective tool to increase access to voting 
and to increase the accuracy of voter files.   
The United States is 31st among the 50 developed nations for the lowest voter turnout rates . Voter 
registration is one of the barriers to participation. Nearly a quarter of eligible voters are not registered 
to vote , and about one in eight registration records is invalid or has serious errors.   
AVR allows eligible citizens who interact with government agencies, such as the Department of Motor 
Vehicles, to have their existing registration information updated automatically , unless they actively 
decline. The voter’s information is transmitted to election officials electronically rather than via paper 
registration forms. These cost-effective reforms increase registration rates and clean up the voter rolls.  
The modest housekeeping measures proposed in this legislation will strengthen this important law, and 
for that reason we urge you to support LD 1344.  
 
 

