Department of the Secretary of State 
15 .-<si.~§\ TY- 
Bureau of Corporations, Elections and Commissions . ....,..~.-
Q \“I‘ ‘ ﬁiziiiw 
Julie L. Flynn 
Shenna Bﬁnows Deputy Secretary of Sta te 
Secretary of State 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
April 12, 2023 
Testifying in favor 
L.D. 1344 “An Act to Improve the State's Election Laws by Amending the Laws Relating to Automatic 
Voter Registration ” 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
officer. I am speaking today in support of L.D. 1344. 
Maine should be proud of our WCll—I‘L11'l elections, and automatic voter registration (AVR) continues 
this tradition. While other states are making it hard er to vote, we should celebrate Maine’s progress 
making our elections more accessible. Automatic voter registration was initially passed into law and 
signed by Gov. Janet Mills in 2019, making Maine the 22nd state to offer automatic voter registration. 
Last summer, we unveiled AVR at our motor vehicle branches. Now, when a customer goes to renew 
their license or state identification card or update their address, they can also either register to vote or 
update their voter registration information. The information compiled, including name, address, and 
date of birth and the applicant ’s selected enrollment option (if any), is sent electronically to the voter’s 
municipality to complete the registration process. While paper forms remain an option for BMV 
customers, sending data electronically reduces transcription errors and cuts down on processing time 
for municipal election officials. 
We support the underlying goal of this bill but offer suggestions for the committee to consider. To 
begin, sections 1, 3, and 4 of the bill remove the use of “printed” regarding the incoming voter list. 
However, this does not appear to address all the places in Title 21-A where the incoming voter list is 
considered a paper list, and any other sections of law that would be impacted as well. Additionally, we 
would caution that removal of the word “printed” could lead to open interpretation of these provisions 
of law where towns could use electronic poll books on their own in 2024 or require our Elections 
Division to implement electronic poll books in 2024, neither which we are prepared to do at this time. 
Although we support changing the cutoff date for AVR to be received by the BMV to the 7th day 
before the election, we would suggest that the effective date for this Act should be changed to a date 
I 01 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -01 01 
www.Main.e.g0v/sos/cec' tel. 20 7-624~7736
after the November 7, 2023 election. As it currently reads, the effective date for this section of the bill 
is the 7th day before the November 2023 election, which may lead to confusion about whether the 
cutoff change is effective for this election. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -0101 
www.Maine.g0v/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
