L OF WOMEN VOTERS“ 
2 M, \v ., 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: April 12, 2023 
RE: LD 1344 — An Act to improve the State's Election Laws by Amending the Laws Relating to 
Automatic Voter Registration 
Good morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee. 
My name is Will Hayward. I'm a resident of Portland. l am here today as the Advocacy Program 
Coordinator on behalf of the League of Women Voters of Maine. I am testifying in support on LD 1344. 
The League of Women Voters of Maine is a nonpartisan political organization that has been working for 
over 100 years to encourage informed and active participation in government, to increase understanding 
of major public policy issues, and to influence public policy through education and advocacy. We never 
support or oppose any political party or candidate. 
We support LD 1344 because it makes two small but important changes to improve Maine's elections: it 
improves the administration of our automatic voter registration (AVR) system and it modernizes 
outdated pieces of Maine statute. The change to AVR is a routine improvement: it ensures that people 
who register at the BMV between 7 and 21 days prior to an election are on the voter rolls on Election 
Day. In November 2022, League observers reported several instances of voters who had registered fewer 
than 21 days prior to an election at the BMV needing to re-register on Election Day; this bill will eliminate 
unnecessary time in line and confusion for a substantial portion of those voters. We believe this change 
will not require any major technical adjustments to the AVR system. 
The second change is to bring part of Maine's election laws into the 21st century. According to the NCSL, 
Maine is the only state whose statutes specify that the voter list at the polling place is a paper list. While 
technology-based systems like electronic pollbooks may be several years down the line, we believe now 
is a good time to update Maine's statutes to eliminate specific references to paper voter lists. Making 
these changes will make any implementation of electronic pollbooks, widely considered a best practice 
in election administration, substantially easier. Together, these two changes will continue to improve 
Maine's election laws, and we urge the committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1344. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@1wvme.org 207.622.0256 www.1wvme.0rg
