1320 Westem Road
Warren, Maine 04964
April24,2023
Testimony on LD 1458, AnAct to Increase Funding to the Maine School of Science and
Mathematics
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee of
Education and Cultural Affairs:
My name is Barbara Brusila and I'm the parent of two alumnae of the Maine School of Science
and Mathematics (MSSM). My daughters graduated in2014 and2016. I was quite involved in
the school during their six calendar years when one or both of them were enrolled; during three
of those years, I was the chair of the Parents' Association. I had the good fortune to get to know
many of the students, staff, faculty and administrators who create the vibrant academic and social
community which is MSSM. I strongly urge you to vote YES on LD 1458.
MSSM provided an exceptional education for my daughters as well as a safe high school
environment to explore independence. Every qualified Maine student should have the
opportunity to experience this education. The cost of room and board should NOT be a deterrent
to applying and enrolling, as it now is. The $990,903 requested in this bill would give many
Maine families the opportunity to send their students to MSSM, one of the very best public high
schools in the country.
The flat funding which MSSM has received since FY 2017 has hurt the school's ability to
provide this exceptional education to its students. Since my younger daughter graduated in2016,
th'e Dean of Faculty and Dean of Students positions, and multiple adjunct instructor contracts
have been eliminated, and real wages for faculty and staffhave diminished due to not keeping up
rvith inflation. I can only imagine the hardships these unfortunate budget cuts have made to the
school's hardworking faculty, staff, and students. The funding increase of $910,875 provided by
l,D 1458 would support increased wages for staff, operational expenses, and reinstatement of '
some of the eliminated positions. These are all critical to the continued success of MSSM.
Please vote YES on LD 1458 to support Maine's stellar but underfunded public high school, the
MSSM. Thank vou. A
1Ubn^{3*r,Arl^
Barbara Brusila
