Testimony of Beverly Uhlenhake, Brewer 
In support of LD 1458 
An Act to Increase Funding to the Maine School of Science and Mathematics 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Millett, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Educational and Cultural Affairs, my name is Bev Uhlenhake and I'm here to testify in support of 
LD1458. 
I come to you today as a parent of a very bright young man whom I just sent back to Limestone 
yesterday to finish off his first year at MSSM. I also come to you as a parent of two seventh 
graders who desperately want to follow in their brother's footsteps. 
The staff and board members of MSSM will give you the details of the dollars that are being 
suggested and how they will be spent, so I'll focus on what's really important for you to 
understand: what MSSM is for the students, and what MSSM can and should be for the State of 
Maine. 
As someone who keeps themselves informed about many things the State of Maine has to 
offer, I've known about MSSM for a long time, but I never considered it as an option for my 
kids. The Brewer school system is amazing. Our kids have had wonderfully individualized 
experiences in the classrooms where highly qualified teachers are somehow able to challenge 
the uber-bright students while also supporting kids who struggle. The gifted and talented 
programs are top-notch, offering everything from deep dives in literature in sixth grade about 
books that I read in college to activities like the Wind Storm Challenge in collaboration with the 
University of Maine. 
So l was surprised when Ben came to us last year and said that he thought he wanted to apply 
to attend MSSM. And honestly, I was intimidated. As a product of the public school system and 
as someone whose family could never and would never consider boarding school, I was out of 
my comfort zone. I'm so glad Ben pushed me there and beyond because when I think about the 
experience he is now getting, I can't even imagine a typical high school education for him. 
I know I am biased just like any parent. We all think our kids are special and exceedingly bright, 
and we are all correct. But there are times when we realize our kids are scary intelligent, and 
we need to do something to make sure they are able to embrace that scary intelligence, be 
proud of it, and use it. 
The students of MSSM are those kids. Some of them, like Ben, have been taking high school 
classes for a while. When they took their SATs to get into MSSM, many of their scores were in 
the top 1-5% of all test takers, and I'll remind you that they are taking these students are taking 
them as eighth graders when the vast majority of test takers are juniors and seniors. They 
aren't just smart kids that need an extra challenge. These are brilliant kids who will run outof
classes to take in their local high schools. They deserve something more. And l think we have an 
obligation to make it happen. 
Because of the geography of the state, there is no way for this to be anything other thana 
boarding school. When I think about my own personal costs to send my son to MSSM, I know 
that $10,000 for room and board is a good investment in his future. But I'm lucky because I can 
afford it. Even if both daughters go to MSSM, I'll have the ability to get the loans necessary to 
fund that investment. But super bright kids don't just come from middle income families. Some 
of the brightest kids come from our poorest families, and they also deserve to have the level of 
education that comes from a school like MSSM. 
The boarding school aspect also means that the school must be a home and a community anda 
place that can provide the social and emotional support that the kids can't get from family 
three or more hours away. My master's degree is in higher education/student affairs, andl 
actually first moved to Maine to work in the University of Maine residence hall system. I know 
what supports are needed by the eighteen years and older kids that attend college. When 
considering younger students, the residence hall staff and supports are even more vital and 
need even greater funding. 
As mentioned in my introduction, I also think we need to think about what MSSM can do for 
Maine. If we take our top students across the state and help them reach even greater potential 
than could be available at their local schools, what will they bring to Maine over the life of their 
careers? Will they be the future researchers spending our R&D funds in better ways than we 
could have expected? Will they be the entrepreneurs who start up the next Fortune 100 
company in Maine? Will they be the scientists and engineers who can figure out a solution to 
the PFAS situation we are in or the municipal solid waste conundrum we are facing in eastern 
Maine? I've met these students. It's all entirely possible. And actually, it's all entirely possible 
that they solve these issues while still in high school. MSSM is a future economic driver and the 
investment in these students are an investment in Maine. 
Finally, I want to reiterate the special place MSSM is for Maine and for our kids. We created this 
thing the in the 90$ as a wonderful experiment, and it's become so much more. My son talks 
about courses that are a challenge. He talks about friends who are excited to discuss world 
current events like the war in Ukraine and how Taiwan situation is similar around the dinner 
table. He talks about whether he'll take an advanced chemistry class during next year's J-term, 
or maybe he'll travel with students going to Silicon Valley. These kids are already having an 
amazing experience. But they need you to fund it in a manner that supports a real education in 
the 2020s, not as if it were still the 1990s. 
Thank you very much for your time today and your consideration for the future of Maine's 
brightest students.
