 
Educational and Cultural Affairs Committee 
Testimony in FAVOR of LD 1458 - An Act to Increase Funding for the Maine 
School of Science and Mathematics 
Douglas Baston, Gardiner 
 
My name is Doug Baston, I live in Gardiner, and I am submitting this testimony in support of LD 
1458 - An Act to Increase Funding for the Maine School of Science and Mathematics. 
In 2000, my son transferred from Wiscasset High School to MSSM as a junior. There he met his 
future wife, of Bucksport. They both graduated in 2002 and went to colleges that they would 
not have aspired to had they not been challenged by the standards of academic excellence set 
by our nationally recognized magnet school. They have gone on to successful careers as a 
software engineer and an actuary. 
To partially repay the debt my family owes to MSSM, and the taxpayers of Maine who support 
it, I have served on the school’s fund-raising board, the MSSM Foundation, continuously for 
almost twenty years. 
In that time I’ve seen firsthand how the MSSM experience has changed the lives of countless 
other Maine children. The most poignant stories are those of kids who came from our poorer 
and more isolated small towns and through the MSSM experience saw that they could do great 
things – the kid from Eastport who is now a senior software engineer at Google; the kid from 
rural Somerset County who now manages a family wealth fund; the child of millworkers who 
became a Rhodes Scholar, and countless others. 
I am a fervent believer in public schools, because in our increasingly siloed society they are the 
socializing institution of a healthy democracy. They put kids from all sorts of social and 
economic backgrounds together and help them learn from each other, work with each other, 
and succeed with each other – thereby becoming better citizens. 
MSSM is a crown jewel in our public education system. The kids who go there not only go on to 
great success, but they also form life-long friendships and become better and more active 
citizens: witness Sen. Nichole Grohoski. The school deserves the financial support it needs to 
ensure that every Maine child who has the ability, the work ethic, and the desire to go there 
can do so. 
Please vote Yes on LD 1458. 
Thank you. 
