Edward Copelin
Cumberland Foreside
LD 1458
Dear Members of the Committee,
My name is Clark Copelin. I was born in Waterville, ME and after some years lived 
out of state I have returned to raise my family in Cumberland Foreside. I am writing 
to testify on behalf of the Maine School of Science and Mathematics (“MSSM”) and 
to urge you all to act to fully fund LD 1458.
Maine is a special and lovely state full of natural beauty and good people. Though 
small, Mainers have always contributed to the nation in outsized fashion. From 
Joshua Chamberlain to George Mitchell, Maine has produced leaders and thinkers 
who contribute to not just our home but to the entire world. It is a rich history and one
of which we should be proud.
As we look out into the 21st century and beyond, Maine should continue to be a place
of remarkable beauty, people, and achievement, and this is why a vibrant and healthy 
MSSM is critical. In spite of years of flat funding and often being a forgotten star in 
Maine’s educational constellation, the MSSM has consistently ranked as one of the 
best high schools in America. This is a testament to the quality of the teachers who 
often move north to teach and the raw talent of the students drawn from across our 
great state. But this achievement cannot continue without support from the legislature.
Just as a plant denied water will eventually wilt and die, so too this rare and 
exceptional school, if not maintained and supported, will begin to crack, break, and 
slowly fail if denied the financial resources required to make any institution of 
learning a success.
We live in a fast-paced and changing world. The next generation will be confronted 
with shifting the world’s energy sources, putting an end to diseases that have ravaged 
humanity since the dawn of time, and voyaging to the stars and beyond as we extend 
humanity’s reach into the cosmos. Our knowledge of math and science will make all 
of this possible and schools like the MSSM will guarantee our success. If we do not 
nourish these rare and wonderful institutions, who will be there to captain the ark of 
our species through the challenges of the future? If we are not willing invest in the 
very learning that makes our present possible, then what value can we expect to 
achieve in our tomorrow?
As a 1998 graduate of the MSSM and the current Chair of the MSSM Foundation, I 
have a keen appreciation for the power of this transformative school in the north. The 
future will need Maine to continue to produce thinkers and leaders, and Maine will 
need halls of learning that make this possible. The sewing will be proven sound in the 
harvest as the MSSM continues to produce the leading minds of Maine’s future. 
Invest in MSSM for the students there now and for the betterment of our world in the 
future. Please support and fully find LD 1458.
Truly,
E. Clark Copelin, MSSM ‘98
Cumberland Foreside, ME 
