Erica McNally
Falmouth 
LD 1458
Hello Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Honorable Members of the 
Education Committee,
I am writing today as a graduate of the Maine School of Science and Mathematics and
asking you to pass LD 1458 An Act To Increase Funding for the Maine School of 
Science and Mathematics. I can speak directly to the impact and success the school 
has had on my life, opportunities and success here in Maine as well as all the impact 
on past, present and future students of MSSM. The funding LD 1458 will provide 
MSSM, will continue to support a strong future for the children and citizens of Maine.
I have personally benefited from the education and opportunities provided to me 
through MSSM and never would have been able to give back to Maine as much as I 
have without this education. MSSM provided me opportunities for education and 
advancement that I never would have had in MSAD15 in 1995. The very work I did 
as a legislative aide for the Maine State Legislature and with Senator Ned Claxton's 
campaign would never have been possible in my life if not for the early success 
MSSM provided me. Generations of students and the state have benefited from the 
education, advancement and opportunities MSSM has provided us. It is imperative we
provide the school the necessary funding to keep this legacy of growth, enrichment 
and success for the state of Maine and the future of our children.
MSSM has received flat-funded appropriations since FY2017, and it is recommended 
by the Department of Education to remain at this level through FY2025 which is not a
sustainable model for the school. It would result in diminished wages for employees, 
the elimination of additional essential staff positions and threaten the ability for the 
school to serve Maine's students in the future and for those students to then serve the 
state of Maine. Virtually every department of the school has seen cuts over the past 
six years due to the impact of flat-funding. The school has had to re-organize multiple
times to make do with limited human resources, including the elimination and 
reduction of many positions.
A timely and sustained increase in state appropriations to the school is needed to 
continue to provide the high-quality educational and residential program envisioned 
in the school's mission, vision and founding statute. MSSM employees are to be 
commended for their creativity and flexibility in filling gaps that prior funding have 
left. This goodwill and dedication to the education and well-being of Maine students 
is to be praised, but not relied upon as a lasting solution. Indeed no educator should 
have to go beyond innovation and rely on personal resources to maintain the quality 
of education their students need. Please do not let this school fall into such dire 
circumstances. No other school in the state of Maine has been asked to operate under 
such fiscal constraints.
MSSM is one of the most decorated schools in the country, regularly ranked as the 
best public school in Maine and in 2019 US News and World Report ranked MSSM 
as the second best public high school in the Country.  MSSM graduates contribute 
significantly to Maine: almost 20% of college MSSM graduates over the last five 
years attended the University of Maine at Orono. Many MSSM graduates stay in 
Maine or return to Maine and work in the areas of life sciences, education, non-profit,
finance, software development, finance, engineering and politics. MSSM graduates 
enrich all corners of our state including the Maine State House. This kind of success 
will not continue without the adequate funding and support of LD 1458.
Thank you for your consideration and please support LD 1458 An Act to Increase 
Funding for the Maine School of Science and Mathematics.
Sincerely,
 
Erica L. McNally
MSSM pioneer class of 1997
Falmouth, ME 

