Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished 
members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, my name 
is Jeff Candura and l am the Development Director for the MSSM 
Foundation, a 501(c)3 set up alongside the Maine School of Science 
and Mathematics with the goal of supporting the school, and its 
faculty, staff, and students. 
l am here on behalf of the Board of the MSSM Foundation — made up 
of MSSM alumni, parents, and friends — to urge your support for 
LD1458. 
The statute that established MSSM allows for a scholarship and 
educational enhancement fund — the MSSM Foundation. The statute 
also clearly states that those private funds raised “may not be used to 
offset, reduce or eliminate the appropriation of state funds” and “may 
not reduce or eliminate the State's funding obligations." 
Support for MSSM from donors has been strong and continues to 
increase as alumni age and become more established in their careers 
In the last school year alone, the MSSM Foundation has transferred 
almost $100,000 in private donations to the school for purposes 
including: professional development for faculty and staff, the purchase 
of new classroomequipment, student travel to competitions, the 
establishment of a summer bridge program for incoming students, the 
development of an updated website, physical improvements to the 
dorm, and student financial aid. We expect to transfer a greater 
amount of funds in the next school year. 
The need for private donations is growing at MSSM, and we at the 
Foundation are more than happy to work to fill that need. But our 
workt is increasingly blurring the line between enhancing the 
academic experience and “reducing the State’s funding obligations. ”
There is only so much that philanthropy can do — the State must take 
the lead. 
MSSM is a jewel in the crown of Maine. Over the last decade plus it 
has been ranked, by several measures, as one of the best public 
schools, notjust in the state of Maine, but in New England, and the 
Country. ln the 2022 school year, MSSM students hailed from all 16 of 
Maine’s counties. MSSM students and alumni often talk about arriving 
at MSSM and “finding their place.” A place where their academic 
achievements are celebrated, where they are challenged, where 
expectations for them are high, and support for their endeavors is 
unwavering. MSSM should be rightfully lauded as one of the state’s 
great achievements. Instead, it can often feel like we are forgotten. 
Except for a one-time pandemic related allocation, MSSM’s state 
subsidy has been flat since 2017. If this bill is not approved and 
funded, MSSM is slated to continue to receive the same level of 
funding through 2025. That would be extraordinarily damaging. No 
other school in the state has had to operate under these 
circumstances. School districts around Maine are currently submitting 
budgets to their cities and towns — most of them with large increases. 
Here are some of the increases according to news reports: MSAD75- 
6.5%; Westbrook 9.6%; RSU1 - 3.6%; SAD51 - 7%; Camden Hills 
Regional High School - 17.26%; SAD44 - 10.39%. l could go on. 
Again, this is just a single year’s increase - MSSM has not seen an 
increase in five years. MSSM has no municipality it can go to to 
request additional funds, it has no voters it can appeal to. It only has 
you. lt is up to the State to support MSSM.
The flat state subsidy, at a time when all fixed costs have increased, 
has put an incredible burden on MSSM faculty and staff and has 
impacted enrollment. Too often administrators need to focus on how to 
keep the doors open rather than having the freedom to innovate and 
push the educational envelope. This bill would help return our state 
subsidy to a reasonable level. 
This bill also requests an elimination of room and board fees for Maine 
students. Room and Board at MSSM is currently $9,800. While 
financial aid is available, many students and families around Maine 
will hear that sticker price and immediately turn away. MSSM is meant 
to sen/e all Maine families, no matter their background. This room and 
board fee is putting attending MSSM out of reach for too many andl 
have no doubt that if this bill passes you will see enrollment at MSSM 
grow and diversify. 
Yet, even with these headwinds, MSSM has remained a top 
performing school and an economic engine for the state of Maine. 
While MSSM graduates routinely attend top ranked colleges and 
universities around the country, 33% of college bound graduates in the 
last five years stayed in state for higher education, with the #1 school 
for applications, acceptances, and attendances being the University of 
Maine at Orono. l think you will be struck as you listen or read through 
testimony provided in support of this bill how many folks connected 
with MSSM attended UMaine, stayed in Maine, or returned to Maine. 
At a time when the state is stressing the importance of STEM 
education, and STEM jobs, you have the opportunity in front of you to 
support the best STEM school in the region. With hundreds of millions 
of dollars being invested in developing a STEM workforce, you have 
the incubator for that workforce sitting in Limestone waiting for your 
support. MSSM students graduate ready to contribute to our state,
creating more of them can only be a net positive for our state. MSSM 
is Maine's High School. Let’s treat it as such. 
I have spent most of my career in educational fundraising. I have done 
so because I believe that education is the greatest social mobilizer 
available to us. If we have any chance of solving the problems of the 
future, we need to start by providing those who will shape the futurea 
strong education now. Many of the future leaders of our state are in 
Limestone at MSSM. On behalf of the MSSM Foundation Board of 
Directors, I strongly urge you to pass LD1458 and work with your 
colleagues to fully fund the bill. 
Thank you.
