Jeremy Shute
Yarmouth
LD 1458
To the members of the Educational and Cultural Affairs Committee,
My name is Jeremy Shute, and my wife’s name is Sarah Clark. We have been 
Yarmouth residents since 2016, having moved back to Maine to raise our young 
family with the same quality of life we both enjoyed growing up here. We are both 
Maine School of Science and Mathematics graduates (1998).
We’re writing to support LD1458.
I come from Eastport where I grew up “living in a condemned house” poor. Our local 
school district served the needs of many students, but did not offer MSSM’s 
Computer Science curriculum. My experience at MSSM would eventually lead to a 
successful career at both Apple and Google. I’ve been fortunate to be able to bring my
out-of-state income back to Maine’s tax rolls and reinvest it through the Maine Seed 
Capital Tax Credit. My fortunes have changed, and MSSM was where they changed.
As of 2021, the Maine DOE listed 713 schools. The MSSM is unique in concept: 
move the kids with the needs to the curriculum, versus attempting to offer specialized 
programming relevant to only a small fraction of the student body in each of 713 
schools. Simply stated, the overhead of the first strategy is cheaper and the quality 
control is easier. It’s also difficult to argue with the results: MSSM has consistently 
ranked in the top 10 high schools out of circa 18,000 in the country according to US 
News and World Report.
My success means that my kids, if they present the ability, don’t lack the birthright a 
$9,800 MSSM room and board “sticker price” demands. However, my family needed 
assistance in 1998 when MSSM was much, much cheaper. Time travel 15 years 
forward and my parents likely would have recoiled in horror, unable to afford even a 
fraction. I would remain a bored, disillusioned Valedictorian at my sending school for
“free,” once you discount my lowered ceiling of future success.
Supporting MSSM is not a District 1 expenditure. LD1458 supports a high quality, 
low cost method of serving the otherwise unmet needs of exceptional rural students 
from all Maine districts. It educates kids just like me who come back, roll up their 
sleeves, and help build Maine’s future.
Please support LD1458.
Jeremy Shute
14 High Winds Dr.
Yarmouth, ME 04096

