 April 22, 2023  
 Dear Committee on Education and Cultural Af fairs,  
 As a parent of a current MSSM student, I am writing to urge you to pass LD1458  
 through the Education and Cultural Af fairs Committee. It is hard to express how  
 important MSSM (Maine School of Science and Mathematics) has been to my child  
 Peter . 
 MSSM has been a transformative experience for Peter , one he could not have received  
 at his sending school and one which he desperately needed. I am a passionate  
 advocate of local public schools. I have joyfully taught in them most of my career , even  
 when I have had the choice to teach in private or non-traditional settings.  I support my  
 local public school system enthusiastically .  The education Peter received in our  
 economically challenged town surpassed (in my opinion) the education children receive  
 at the private schools in our area.  
 But I was also grateful that when the time came for him to go to high school, he had the  
 choice to attend MSSM.   MSSM has given him something our small high school could  
 not - a peer group.  This peer group, fostered by extraordinary teachers and staf f, is the  
 “transformative” magic that happens at MSSM.  At W aterville High School, Peter would  
 likely have been the only student who created his own language for fun or dreamed in  
 math equations. At MSSM, he is secure in who he is and is surrounded by like-minded  
 peers, which led him to achieve academically:  he is a National Merit Scholar , served as  
 the Maine Y outh in Government Governor for 2021-22, and will attend Rice University , a 
 highly selective university that accepts fewer than 10% of applicants.  He achieved  
 these things because he thrived emotionally and socially at MSSM.  
 The Maine legislature had the foresight to understand the needs of students like Peter  
 well before educators talked much about Gifted and T alented or about Social Emotional  
 Learning.   Now we have a fuller understanding of these fields, in addition to our  
 understanding of the role STEM will play in Maine’ s future.  I hope that understanding  
 gives the legislature the vision to truly support MSSM so it can continue to thrive, and  
 continue to help students like Peter thrive.  
 If I could vote for an increase of funding for MSSM, I would - just as I have voted to  
 increase the budget at my local school. But MSSM is funded by the state, and so I turn  
 to you for help. Please support LD1458 and support MSSM!  
 Laura Renick  
 MSSM parent  
 Waterville, Maine  
Laura Renick
Waterville, ME
LD 1458
April 22, 2023
Dear Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs,
As a parent of a current MSSM student, I am writing to urge you to pass LD1458 
through the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. It is hard to express how 
important MSSM (Maine School of Science and Mathematics) has been to my child 
Peter.
MSSM has been a transformative experience for Peter, one he could not have 
received at his sending school and one which he desperately needed. I am a passionate
advocate of local public schools. I have joyfully taught in them most of my career, 
even when I have had the choice to teach in private or non-traditional settings.  I 
support my local public school system enthusiastically.  The education Peter received 
in our economically challenged town surpassed (in my opinion) the education 
children receive at the private schools in our area.  
 But I was also grateful that when the time came for him to go to high school, he had 
the choice to attend MSSM.   MSSM has given him something our small high school 
could not - a peer group.  This peer group, fostered by extraordinary teachers and 
staff, is the “transformative” magic that happens at MSSM.  At Waterville High 
School, Peter would likely have been the only student who created his own language 
for fun or dreamed in math equations. At MSSM, he is secure in who he is and is 
surrounded by like-minded peers, which led him to achieve academically:  he is a 
National Merit Scholar, served as the Maine Youth in Government Governor for 
2021-22, and will attend Rice University, a highly selective university that accepts 
fewer than 10% of applicants.  He achieved these things because he thrived 
emotionally and socially at MSSM.   
The Maine legislature had the foresight to understand the needs of students like Peter  
well before educators talked much about Gifted and Talented or about Social 
Emotional Learning.   Now we have a fuller understanding of these fields, in addition 
to our understanding of the role STEM will play in Maine’s future.  I hope that 
understanding gives the legislature the vision to truly support MSSM so it can 
continue to thrive, and continue to help students like Peter thrive.
If I could vote for an increase of funding for MSSM, I would - just as I have voted to 
increase the budget at my local school. But MSSM is funded by the state, and so I 
turn to you for help. Please support LD1458 and support MSSM!
Laura Renick
MSSM parent
Waterville, Maine

