Nicole Grohoski P.O. Box I732 
Senator, District 7 g Ellsworth, ME 04605 
ll 
‘@'\'” 
TI-IE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LDt458, “An Act to Increase Funding for the 
Maine School of Science and Mathematics ”~ 
Before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
24 April 2023‘ 
Good morning Senator Rafferty, Representative B1‘6I]I12l1'1, and distinguished members of the 
Education & Cultural Affairs Committee. My name is Nicole Grohoski and I am honored to 
represent the 22 coastal and island communities of Senate District 7. Thank you for the 
opportunity to speak in support of LD 1458, An Act to Increase Funding for the Maine School of 
Science and Mathematics (MSSM). 
I am here today as a MSSM graduate and also as a voice for many families in my district who 
have sent their students to this public high school and who are grateful for the difference it has 
made in their lives. 
MSSM has been ﬂat-funded since 2017, which means its operating budget is actually decreasing 
due to inﬂation. The Department of Education has not recommended any additional funding in 
the budget for the next two years. This is unacceptable. 
Here is an excerpt of testimony I delivered in January of 2020 in my ﬁrst term as a legislator in 
support of a general fund bond for a new dormitory for the school (LD 2060 in the 129th): 
The Maine School of Science and Mathematics, or MSSM, is a shining star within 
Maine’s public education system. You may recall that in 2019, MSSM was ranked #2 
Best High School in the nation by U.S. News and World Report. Behind this number is 
more than just smart kids and good test scores. This is an achievement earned by the 
whole state of Maine. Students at MSSM come from all corners of Maine where they 
were educated in their local school districts and supported by dedicated family and 
community members. When they arrive at MSSM, they are met by an enthusiastic and 
tireless group of teachers and staff who guide them as they continue on their educational 
joumey. This opportunity is available to any Maine student, regardless of their family’s 
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
State House (Z07) 287-1515 * Fax (207) Z87-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Nicole.Grohoski@legislature.maine.gov * legislaturemaine.gov/senate
income or location, because of the investment and commitment to MSSM that the Maine 
Legislature has provided. 
Fast forward to 2023 and this is no longer true. Funding declines have made it harder to keep 
excellent faculty and staff, and essential positions have been cut. Room and board is $9800 and 
While ﬁnancial aid is available, sticker shock keeps a lot of families from applying. Emollment is 
down and the school is truly teetering. I am saddened and embarrassed that the state has allowed 
this to happen but also hopeful that this Legislature will take action to save the school. 
In 2020, this committee asked the school to see What it could do to help itself ﬁnancially, which 
resulted in the establishment of an ad hoe “Business Planning Committee ” of the MSSM Board.‘ 
At the end of 2020, this committee shared its ﬁndings with the Board and Department of 
Education? The committee compared the MSSM funding structure to six states’ science and 
math public residential magnet schools; here are a few slides of particular interest: 
In 2020, Maine ranked lowest for the state share of the school budget at 68%, with Mississippi 
second lowest at 75% and North Carolina and Arkansas at 100% (Slide 40). 
1 
The Business Planning Committee Charter is available here: bit.Iy/MSSM-business-plan-charter 
2 The Committee's presentation can be viewed here: bit.|y/MSSM-presentation
2
Maine also charged families signiﬁcantly more for room and board, which is now up to $9800 
(Slide 41). As you can see, most states charge nominal amounts, including $0 in North Carolina. 
The long and short of the Business Planning Committee effort is this — MSSM is an outlier when 
it comes to its school funding model, and if we Want it to stay in the same location and offer the 
excellent education it is known for, the state needs to step up its funding. 
I attended MSSM in my junior and senior years of high school, seeking a rigorous education in 
math and science, at a price my family could afford (room and board was less expensive back 
then). I found the curricular options and rigor to be beyond my imagination. I worked harder than 
I had ever needed to before and gained real knowledge and a new conﬁdence in myself and what 
I could achieve. 
There’s more to life at MSSM than just academics. For me, this was the ﬁrst time I was 
surrounded by a group of students who I really connected With. No one made fun of me for 
wanting to dig deeper into a tough topic, instead, they’d often join in. I competed in sports and 
played music in the band at the University of Maine Presque Isle. As members of the Key Club, 
my friends and I were reading mentors to young students in nearby schools. I was an ofﬁcer in 
the student senate and set up the school’s ﬁrst recycling program. I mention all of this to show 
the diversity of experiences one student can have at MSSM, beyond just the excellent academic 
opportunities.
3
When I graduated from MSSM, I left with the skills to learn tough subjects and a solid academic 
base that made my transition to college seamless. I made lifelong friends, who are contributing to 
this state and country in incredible ways. I cannot say where I would be today without having 
attended MSSM, but I am certain that it was an opportunity that changed my life signiﬁcantly 
and positively. 
I am grateful that the state had the vision to create such an institution of excellence. I know that it 
was life-changing for so many of my peers who came from small, rural schools that lacked large 
enough student bodies to support high-level courses available at MSSM. Now in its 29th year, 
the school needs our ﬁnancial support to continue to help Maine students reach their full 
potential. Investing in these students and the school is an investment in our state ’s future. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of my testimony. I would be happy to answer any 
questions.
4
