Tes$mony of Paul Santomenna Freeport, Maine In favor of LD 1458 “An Act to Increase Funding for the Maine School of Science and Mathema$cs” April 24, 2023  Senator Raﬀerty and the dis$nguished members of the Joint Standing CommiNee on Educa$on and Cultural Aﬀairs, thank you for the opportunity to submit wriNen tes$mony in favor of LD 1458.   As a parent of a recent Maine School of Science and Mathema$cs (MSSM) graduate, I’m very pleased to express my gra$tude for MSSM and advocate increased funding that will lead to more Mainers experiencing the beneﬁts the school has to oﬀer.  MSSM is an extraordinary place. It brings together highly qualiﬁed teachers (many with PhDs) with highly mo$vated students in a $ghtknit community dedicated to open inquiry and academic rigor. It is a haven for kids with great promise who may not be challenged in a tradi$onal pubic school. It is a place where teenagers transform into young adults equipped to become leaders in STEM ﬁelds and in their communi$es. It is, in short, a tremendous resource for Maine students.   One student who has beneﬁNed from MSSM is my own child, who got to know MSSM by aNending its summer camp for middle school students. They came back from Limestone invigorated and determined to aNend MSSM for high school. Their freshman year at MSSM was a struggle at $mes but they persevered, returning to Freeport that summer as a no$ceably more mature person. They con$nued to grow emo$onally, socially and intellectually each year at MSSM, thriving on the challenging classes, deeply knowledgeable and engaged teachers and compassionate community. Today, they’re doing exactly what they dreamed  – studying astrophysics at their ﬁrst-choice college, on their way to a promising and fascina$ng career. MSSM is absolutely central to the success my child is enjoying.  I’m tes$fying in favor of LD 1458 for a very simple reason: its passage will make the promise of MSSM available to more students and families. Thanks to the current level of ﬂat funding from the State, MSSM’s annual cost to parents is $9,800. That’s manageable for many middle class families, something I’m personally grateful for. It is not, however, manageable for working class families. Passage of LD 1458 would eliminate this cost, making MSSM accessible to the very students it could beneﬁt the most. Just imagine the impact a MSSM educa$on could have on a mo$vated student from a refugee family or an isolated rural seNlement. It could open up new worlds for that child. And, when hundreds of such kids gain access to MSSM over a period of years, the beneﬁts accrue to the State itself, helping develop the highly educated workforce Maine will need to thrive in the decades to come. We have an incredibly valuable asset in MSSM. Please help deliver that value to all Mainers. I urge you to support LD 1458. 
