 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  
 
L.D. 1458  
 
AN ACT TO INCREASE FUNDING FOR THE MAINE SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND MATH EMATICS  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendent s 
Association , neither for nor against L.D. 1458.  
 
There is no question the Maine School of Science and Mat hematics  has a good  reputation in the field in terms 
of the students and faculty it attracts. Our concern with this bill, and what led our associations to go neither 
for nor against, is the school is not and never intended to be a public school in the true sense of the word 
“public”.  
 
The school has an admissions process that includes review of academic achievement, and potential students 
are interviewed. Maine residents are not charged tuition, but there is a room -and-board fee.  
 
This bill would have that room -and-board fee wa ived for Maine students and would take that money from the 
General Purpose Aid for Local School s (GPA) account.  
 
We understand additional state funding is being put in to cover the costs in the short -term, but believe this is 
an inappropriate use of GPA  over the long -term. 
 
Many communities, with the tuition being paid by the state, foot the bill for the room and board for the 
student and family. This is what happens in communities where there is secondary school choice. And if not 
that option for distric ts that have a high school, could a room and board sliding scale scholarship fund be 
established to which families could apply should they need assistance with the room and board fees? Were the 
state to pay the full amount, a student attending the MSSM wo uld cost at least 1.5 times what the average 
tuition rate is across the state of Maine.  
 
GPA is and should continue to be used to support public schools that accept all students in their communities.  
That support is a shared responsibility between local pro perty taxpayers and the state. It sets a bad precedent 
and does not seem fair that local property taxpayers would be paying for something the vast majority of their 
community’s students will not be able to attend.  
