.—' ._5§=¢\ ‘ii’ 
Y4; "-.-.-3%? ‘-‘ 5. 
/an *11’2;-3;’?' 
,, 
,1 1'" ‘Lu. 1.,> 
l . ~ —~ ' 
*. .- 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 1458 
“An Act to Increase Funding for the Maine School of Science and Mathematics" 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
April 24, 2023 
Good morning Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Troy Jackson and I have the 
honor of serving as Senate President representing the good people of Aroostook County in the 
Maine Legislature. I'm here today to introduce LD 1458, "An Act to Increase Funding for the 
Maine School of Science and l\/lathematics." 
lt is a privilege to represent the Maine School of Science and Mathematics in Limestone. The 
school is an incredible resource to the students and families of our state. The institution 
provides students with a world-class public education in the middle of rural Aroostook County. 
Supporting this institution and all it has to offer should be a priority. This bill represents a 
concerted effort to make up for a flat funding model in place since 2017 that has made it 
challenging for the school to maintain the holistic programming that has garnered national 
recognition. 
While the quality of education for students attending MSSM remains top-notch, the school is 
struggling to offer competitive wages, as well as attract and retain support staff within existing 
budget resources. At a residential school where students are often far from home and away 
from their traditional support systems, having adequate mental health and other support 
professionals available is even more important. 
The struggle of ensuring Maine's schools are fully funded is not unique to MSSM. However, 
unlike other schools in the State, operational funding for MSSM comes from the Governor's 
budget, Department of Education, and the State Legislature as opposed to SAUs, charter 
schools, and higher education, which have predictable and increasing annual allocations. This 
means that the Legislature must take action to amend the situation. I know that Sam Critchlow, 
the school's Executive Director, is working hard on many fronts to do additional fundraising 
from alumni and families of the school to help close funding gaps. However, appropriately 
funding MSSM — a public school - remains the duty of the Legislature. This bill proposes both 
State House (207) 287-1500 * Cell (207) 436-0763 * Fax (207) 287-5862 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
SenaforlacksonI@gmail.c0m * Web Sire.‘ legislature.maine.g0v/senate
structural changes to the way we would fund MSSM, as well as one-time funding to alleviate 
some of the immediate challenges presented by the current flat-funding rate. 
l know that many of the people speaking after me will be able to speak more personally to the 
impact that l\/ISSM has had on them, as well as the work they are doing now and why the 
proposed legislation is important notjust to MSSM, but to our entire state. 
Thank you for your time this morning and lam happy to answer any questions you may have.
