Testimony of Warren H Ziegler, Ph.D. in favor of LD 1458 
Thank you for this opportunity to speak in favor of LD 1458, A bill to increase funding for the Maine 
School of Science and Mathematics. My name is Warren Ziegler, I am a researcher and Space 
Technologist at the University of Southern Maine. Our group at USM working in conjunction with the 
University of Maine has built the ﬁrst ever satellite from the State of Maine I\/IESAT-1, which will be 
launched into orbit later this summer. 
I have come to give my personal perspective on the value proposition of a STEM high school education. 
Supporting MSSM is an investment in the future that will pay tenfold to one-hundred-fold dividends. I 
am a graduate of a STEM high school, Brooklyn Technical High School. Brooklyn Tech is a STEM magnet 
school, the students must take a standardized test to get in, only about 8% of the students who apply are 
accepted. Tech graduates include Noble laureates, astronauts, CEOs, authors, Olympic and professional 
athletes, politicians, doctors, lawyers, ministers etc. The ﬁrst concrete proof of the Big Bang theory, the 
cosmic background radiation was discovered by Tech graduate Arno Penzias who was awarded the Nobel 
prize in Physics. If you have ever used a GPS, you can thank Richard Schwartz, a Tech graduate. Tech was 
not a finishing school for the children of wealthy parents, Tech students are all from the working class, 
sons and daughters of day laborers, waitresses, ﬁremen, police etc. My father's education only went as 
far as the eighth grade, and he worked on the Staten Island Ferry; my mom worked part time cleaning a 
dentist's ofﬁce after hours to help support the family. Attending Brooklyn Tech was a turning point in my 
life, I eventually earned a PH.D. in a branch of mathematical physics that allowed me to work for NASA 
on the ﬁrst mars lander and for Lockheed on the aerodynamics of the early stealth ﬁghter planes. 
Three weeks ago, I attended an open house and reunion at Tech. I was stunned by the quantity and 
quality of their labs and facilities. The labs and facilities were world-class, such that any university or 
fortune 500 company would be glad to have. At the reception after the open house, I sat down with the 
Principal, David Newman and asked him how he was able to equip the school with these advanced 
facilities. David told me that it was all due to alumni contributions, that over the years Tech alumni have 
contributed tens of millions of dollars to the school that allowed them to provide the students with the 
best possible laboratories and equipment. The teacher's salaries, building maintenance etc. are paid for 
with public money but the rest is all due to the generosity of Tech's many successful alumni. Through my 
eyes MSSM looks like a ﬂedgling Brooklyn Tech. If we nurture MSSM now we will reap dividends in the 
future. 
What we are asking for is what the venture capitalists would call seed money, l believe that by investing 
in and growing MSSM now we will be creating the highly educated leaders of tomorrow. I work with 
several Maine based high tech companies and start-ups, there is a critical need for good graduates in the 
STEM ﬁelds. As a State we can encourage young people to stay in Maine if we can provide a pipeline 
from high school to university to the work. 
I encouraged my daughterto go to MSSM because I saw it is a unique opportunity for her to learn from 
the best students and teachers. From personal experience, I can say that you will not ﬁnd harder 
working teachers, staff, or students than those at MSSM. For example, I know ofone extremely 
dedicated teacher who despite severe health and housing challenges has persisted in giving her all. My 
daughter admits that though this teacher is strict and uncompromising, she has never learned more. 
There are many competing and worthy demands for public money, but I can guarantee that MSSM will 
not waste a penny. I believe that requiring the parents to pay $10,000/ year for room and board isan
obstacle for many families. One wonders what might have happened if Brooklyn Tech had to chargea 
fee, perhaps there would be no GPS or it might have been developed later in Russia or China. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of LD 1458.
