To the Honorable Members of Maine’s Educational and Cultural Affairs Committee,  
 
It is with tremendous pride in the school that we serve that we as members  and officers of the Board of 
the Maine School of Science and Mathematics write in support of LD  1458 - An Act to Increase Funding 
for the Maine School of Science and Mathematics  (MSSM) . 
 
Our Board consists  of a diverse group of Maine professionals with specialties in mathematics, science, 
technology , education,  and more.  We include  both  an alumnus and current student of the school as well 
as parents of multiple current students and alumni .  We hail from various corner s of the State and most 
everywhere in between.  What we share  is a passion for the Maine School of Science and Mathematics 
(MSSM)  and our belief in the tremendous potential that this school offers the good citizens of the State 
of Maine.   
 
We dedicate our  time and energies to th e MSSM  Board because we have seen, heard, and in many cases 
experienced firsthand the incredible impact that this unique living and learning environment provides to 
Maine’s next generation – a generation that we endeavor to see thri ve in their educations and in their 
careers  without any feeling that they need to leave this great State if they hope to achieve their potential 
(now or in the future).  
 
We also share a deep concern that there are those, especially in the most rural areas of Maine,  who 
would excel in the MSSM  environment  if they only h eld belief that this unparalleled  experience was 
financially attainable for them and their families.  While MSSM tuition is free to Maine resident s, 
inflation has inevitably led to  rising room  and board costs which are assuredly a deterrent to those 
students who might most benefit from the nationally recognized academic and experiential education 
that the MSSM provides.  We need your help to ensure that  no Maine student is left behind due to su ch 
social determinants.  
 
We also share  deep concern that MSSM , having been flat -funded since fiscal year 2017,  has not been 
afforded the same year -over -year financial opportunitie s that other publicly funded schools have 
experienced.  While some might assu me flat funding  would allow the school to at least operate at the 
same high level, rising costs have necessarily resulted in program cuts, salary freezes, and even position 
eliminations.  The MSSM, its faculty and staff, and most importantly, the current a nd future student body 
need your support to ensure that the MSSM and the students and families impacted by the school can 
continue to thrive  as have those MSSM families and alumni who have gone before them .   
 
We serve the Maine School of Science and Mathe matics because we are passionate about the value it 
brings to the citizens and future of Maine.  We are asking you to partner with us by supporting 
appropriate funding for this incredible feather in Maine’s cap.  
 
Thank you in advance for  your support of LD  1458.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Yoosuf S. Siddiqui , Chair  
Easton, ME  
 Marian Reagan , Vice Chair  
Kennebunkport, ME  
 Peter K. Orne , Treasurer  
Camden, ME  
 
Timothy R. Beaulieu  
Hollis , ME  
 M. Trey Cox  
Portland , ME  
 Craig Cunningham  
Kennebunk , ME  
 
Stephanie Dolan  
Scarborough , ME  
 Dr. De bbie Eustis -Grandy  
Faculty Representativ e 
New  Sweden , ME  
 Trynitee Fallon  
Student Representative  
Berwick , ME  
 
David King  
Limestone , ME  
 Joel Pike  
Jay, ME  Dr. R aymond Rice  
Presque Isle, ME  
 
Paul N. Stancioff , Ph.D 
Chesterville , ME  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
