State of Maine       STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION  Testimony of Fern Desjardins, Chair of the Maine State Board of Education  Against: L.D. 1089  An Act Regarding the Authorization of Public Charter Schools   Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  Introduced by: Representative Brennan  Date: April 18, 2023  Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:  My name is Fern Desjardins, Chair of the Maine State Board of Education. I am joining you to speak Against L.D. 1089 An Act Regarding the Authorization of Public Charter Schools.  The Maine Charter School Commission (MCSC) consists of 7 members per Title 20-A MRSA §2405, sub-§8.  Three of the seven members must be members of the state board, appointed by the state board for 3-year terms.  I was one of the three members of the State Board of Education on the MCSC for just over four years, May 9, 2018 – June 30, 2022.   A review of Title 20-A MRSA Chapter 112 Public Charter Schools §2401-§2415 on pages 82-96 of the 2022-2023 edition of the statutes clearly indicates a great attention to details surrounding charter schools in Maine.  Starting with §2401, the fifteen sections cover items such as the definitions of terms used in Chapter 112; the authorization of public charter schools; role of the department, commissioner, and rules; public charter school eligibility and enrollment; and so on to sections §2413 on funding; §2414 on facilities; and lastly §2415 for miscellaneous.  From the request for proposals to oversight by the authorizer to charter terms and renewals, the statutes have a thorough process in place for the establishment and continued renewal or non-renewal of charter schools.   L.D. 1089 allows the Commissioner of Education to overrule a decision made by the MCSC if the commissioner determines that student health or academic well-being is at risk.  In other words, the Commissioner of Education may override any decision made by the MCSC.  If that is the intent of L.D. 1089, it is an unusual expectation that one individual would overrule a decision of a committee of seven members.  One would think it would be the other way around whereby a committee of seven members would overrule the decision of an individual.  Moreover, the role of the department, commissioner and the opportunity to adopt major substantive rules to implement Chapter 112 are covered in the statutes.  There was no omission on detailing the role of the Commissioner of Education.  What has gone wrong that the Commissioner would now be given carte blanche to overrule the MCSC? 
Is this bill aimed to provide an appeals process for decisions of the MCSC?  If that is the case, then let’s call it an appeals process, define it, and set the parameters.    If this bill was introduced because of decisions made by the MCSC that don’t support the many reasons identified in §2402 for the existence and need of charter schools, including to provide alternative learning environments for students who are not thriving in traditional school settings or to provide students, parents, community members and local entities with expanded opportunities for involvement in the pubic education system, perhaps a bill is not needed but a different process in the selection and training of the membership of the commission.    The State Board of Education supports the provisions in Chapter 112 of Title 20-A MRSA; therefore, we are Against L.D. 1089 An Act Regarding the Authorization of Public Charter Schools. Thank you for this opportunity to comment. I would be happy to answer questions the Committee may have.  The State Board will be available for work sessions on this bill. 
