Maine Education Association 
, Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cote NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
is 
Testimony 
In Support 
LD 1089: An Act Regarding the Authorization of Public Charter Schools 
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association 
Before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
March 30,2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other esteemed members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee,V 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA). The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems. We are also very proud 
to be the union for the teachers at the Baxter Academy Charter School in Portland and we hope other 
charter school teachers and educators will join the MEA. 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in support of LD 1089, An Act Regarding the 
Authorization of Public Charter Schools. 
Since its inception, the Maine Charter School Commission has been far too focused on advocating for 
charter schools rather than exercising their responsibility to oversee the charter schools in Maine. We 
would argue in some regards their advocacy efforts have clouded their ability to objectively review the 
performance of charters. 
Several times in the past Ihave appeared before this Committee and raised concerns about the academic 
performance of some of the charter schools. When charter schools were ﬁrst passed in Maine in 2011 
by this Committee, there were many arguments made by the proponents of charters that their design 
would allow them to “outperform ” public schools and they would offer innovative programs for 
students. A decade later, we ﬁnd this is only partly true. Charter schools like Baxter Academy are 
offering novel programs to students and demonstrating strong academic outcomes. The test scores for 
the Baxter Academy, for example, regularly are on par or above average when compared to nearby 
public schools. And the school’s STEM focus serves as a magnet for certain students. On the other 
hand, we have repeatedly raised concerns about the poor performance of other charters. I will refrain 
from rehashing these arguments today. I am hesitant to point out certain struggling charter schools butI 
can share past copies of testimony with any interested members of the Committee. Yet every time these 
concerns were raised in the past, members of the Charter Commission would regularly appear, claim 
there is a “misunderstanding ” of the data, and continue to advocate for charters. Some days, it felt like 
the Commission would argue for charters at all costs. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622~5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
i 
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
_.:/ 
Much has changed in the past year or more. With new members of the Charter Commission, the 
commissioners seem more dedicated to helping charter schools overcome their challenges. They are 
more effectively identifying concerns and holding schools accountable when they fail to demonstrate 
progress in key areas, including student absenteeism. Instead of cheerleaders of charter schools, we are 
clearly seeing the Commission act as the neutral and objective evaluator for charters. 
LD 1089 is a preventative measure. It would allow the Commissioner of Education to overrule a 
decision of the Commission if the Commissioner “determines that student health or academic well-being 
is at risk.” This is an extremely high bar. I doubt it will ever be used. But it places one more check ona 
Commission that struggled to exercise its functions over the previous many years. I can think of two 
examples in the past decade where this law may have been helpful. 
Recently, one charter school stmggled with capital expenses, and proposed to have classes in yurts. 
Some Commissioners questioned the safety of such structures, and whether they were suitable as 
classrooms. In such a case, the Commissioner may have been consulted if she disagreed with the 
Commission ’s ﬁnding. Clearly, one is right to question whether a yurt is a suitable arrangement to serve 
as a classroom. 
In another situation, the Charter Commission continued expanding grade levels for a struggling charter 
school. Despite signiﬁcant challenges with absenteeism, academic performance, basic governance and 
ﬁnances, ethics among other concerns, the Charter Commission continued to authorize an expansion of 
this charter into more grade levels. 
In both cases, proving that “student health or academic well-being is at risk” would be a challenge. But 
with one more layer of oversight over the Commission, it may cause the Commission to show greater 
care when approving charter schools and while evaluating their performance and decisions. 
Again, much has changed in the past year. We applaud those voices on the Charter Commission who 
are focused on results and accountability for charter schools and remedies for those that are struggling. 
But the Commission is comprised of 7 political appointees. As Govemors come and go, so will the 
types of appointees tapped to serve. While we hope all Governors will appoint commissioners dedicated 
to improving charters and helping develop more innovation in charter schools, we are rightfully 
concerned that future appointees could return to the “charters at all costs” approach. We worry some 
will seek service on the Charter Commission to advocate for charters, rather than provide the oversight 
required. LD 1089 is one small check to prevent that from happening. 
Thank you for your time and your service to the people of Maine. I will do my best to answer any 
questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 05330 I134‘? Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622»5866 I 207~888~207U fax I www.maineea.org
