Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Support  
LD 1089: An Act Regarding the Authorization of Public Charter Schools   
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Education and Cultura l Affairs Committee  
March 30, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other esteemed members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee,   
 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly ev ery public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems. We are also very proud 
to be the union for the teachers at the Baxter Academy Charter School in Portland and we hope other 
charter school teachers and educators will join the MEA.   
 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in support of LD 1089, An Act Regarding the 
Authorization of Public Charter Schools.  
 
Since its inception, the Maine Charter School Commission has been fa r too focused on advocating for 
charter schools rather than exercis ing their responsibility to oversee the charter schools in Maine.  We 
would argue in some regards their advocacy efforts have clouded their ability to objectively review the 
performance of charters.   
 
Several times  in the past  I have appeared before this Committee and raised concerns about the academic 
performance of some of the charter  schools .  When charter schools were first passed in Maine in 2011 
by this Committee, there were many argu ments made by the proponents of charters that their design 
would allow them  to “outperform” public schools and they would offer innovative programs for 
students.  A decade later, we find this is only partly true.  Charter schools like Baxter Academy are 
offering novel programs to students and demonstrating strong academic outcomes.  The test scores for 
the Baxter Academy, for example, regularly are on par or above average when compared to nearby 
public schools.  And the school ’s STEM focus serves as a magne t for certain students.  On the other 
hand, we have repeatedly raised concerns about the poor performance of other charters.  I will refrain 
from rehashing these arguments today . I am hesitant to point out certain struggling charter schools  but I 
can share  past copies of testimony with any interested member s of the Committee .  Yet every time these 
concerns were raised in the past, members of the Charter Commission would regularly appear, claim 
there is a “misunderstanding” of the data, and continue to advoc ate for charters.  Some days, it felt like 
the Commission would argue for charters at all costs.   
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Much has changed in the past year or more.  With new members of the Charter Commission, the 
commissioners seem more dedicated to helping charter schools ove rcome their challenges.  They are 
more effectively identifying concerns and holding schools accountable when they fail to demonstrate 
progress in key areas, including student absenteeism.  Instead of cheerleaders of charter schools, we are 
clearly seeing t he Commission act as the neutral and objective evaluator for charters.  
 
LD 1089 is a preventative measure.  It would allow the Commissioner of Education to overrule a 
decision of the Commission if the Commissioner “determines that student health or academ ic well -being 
is at risk.”  This is an extremely high bar .  I doubt it will ever be used.  But it places one more check on a 
Commission that struggled to exercise its functions over the previous many years.  I can think of two 
examples in the past decade where this law may have been helpful.   
 
Recently, one charter school struggled with capital expenses, and  proposed to have classes in yurts. 
Some Commissioners questioned the safety of such structures, and whether they were suitable as 
classroom s.  In such a case, the Commissioner  may have been consulted if she disagreed with the 
Commission’s finding. Clearly , one is right to question whether a yurt is a suitable arrangement to serve 
as a classroom.   
 
In another situation , the Charter Commission continued expanding grade levels for a struggling charter 
school.  Despite significant challenges with absenteeism,  academic performance, basic governance and 
finances, ethics among other concerns, the Charter Commission continued to authorize an expansion of 
this charter into more grade levels.   
 
In both cases, proving that “student health or academic well -being is a t risk” would be a challenge.  But 
with one more layer of oversight over the Commission, it may cause the Commission to show greater 
care when approving charter schools and while evaluating their performance and decisions.   
 
Again, much has changed in the  past year.  We applaud those voices on the Charter Commission who 
are focused on results and accountability for charter schools and remedies for those that are struggling.  
But the Commission is comprised of 7 political appointees.  As Governors come and go, so will the 
types of appointees tapped to serve.  While we hope all Governors will appoint commissioners dedicated 
to improving charters and helping develop more innovation in charter schools, we are rightfully 
concerned that future appointees could re turn to the “charters at all costs” approach.  We worry some 
will seek service on the Charter Commission to advocate for charters, rather than provide the oversight 
required.  LD 1089 is one small check to prevent that from happening.   
 
Thank you for your  time and your service to the people of Maine.  I will do my best to answer any 
questions you may have.   
 
