March 30, 2023 
To Members of the Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
RE: LD 1089, An Act Regarding the Authorization of Public Charter Schools 
Testifying In OPPOSITION to LD 1089 
Good Afternoon, Members of the Committee and of the public. My name is Judith Denton 
Jones, and I am a sociologist, education planner and researcher. I am here to testify in 
opposition to this latest devious attack on public chartered schools in Maine. After New 
Hampshire allowed these innovative public schools in 2002, the Maine Board of Education met 
and endorsed a similar program for Maine. In spite of demonstrated needs of Maine families 
and many interested Maine educators, it took until 2011 for enabling legislation and until 2012 
for the first voluntary programs to emerge. The opponents have made numerous attempts to 
weaken Maine's excellent law, to block resources, and to promote mis-information and myths 
about this model. 
The Maine enabling law, Chapter 112, already contains sufficient oversight provisions so that 
the Department of Education can monitor and hold charter school Authorizers accountable.* 
The schools are already required to submit detailed information about their activities, 
operations and student data to the Department of Education in addition to providing that data 
and more to their Authorizer. 
This vaguely-worded one-sentence bill would allow the DOE to overrule Authorizer decisions 
that were made according to the required legal processes. If the DOE were to unilaterally limit 
enrollment, for example, that would affect budgets, student services, possible expansion plans 
and replication possibilities proposed in response to waiting lists. This would be allowed even if 
no specific mistakes could be found in the authorization process or the operations ofa 
chartered program. 
As I testified against LD 604 in 2021,** these continuing attacks have serious repercussions, 
negatively affecting teachers ’ and educators ’ willingness to try new ways to meet their 
students ’ needs. They negatively affect parents’ willingness to support public education in 
Maine. They negatively affect attitudes of families thinking about moving to Maine. They keep 
educators from building better ways to reach their students in the difficult aftermath of the 
pandemic. Have you read the teachers ’ descriptions of student issues in their applications for 
the RREV grants? 
it is way past time for members of this Committee and the Legislature to turn aside from false 
accusations about public charter schools and DEFEAT this bill. Do NOT vote to carry it over to 
the second session so it can continue to threaten public education options in Maine. I reiterate 
these proposed bills to undermine public chartered schools in Maine are not without 
consequences, even if not enacted. They are a type of intimidation, and not a good model for 
our students. 
Recommendation: Vote NO on this bill. 
Judith Denton Jones, Ph.D. 
Hope, Maine, 207-542-5415, jdjones@tidewater.net
1 
2. Notes ---------- -— 
* The Charter School Law giving the DOE Commissioner or DOE this authority is in 
Sections 2403 1-7. Section 5 includes investigations and sanctions for concerns about 
principles and professional standards used by authorizers. This power is given to the 
DOE to investigate possible deficiencies in authorizer performance. Also, Sections 2410, 
2411, 2412-A include an audit and financial correction plan, if needed. It is clear that 
existing Maine law covers all contingencies. The MCSC over the years has developed 
policies and practices aligned with best practice and with focused attention on schools 
through the performance framework, strategic plan and subcommittees. 
** Over the years, deliberate mis-information has been allowed to stand 
without fact-checking by this Committee. The resistance of legislators to allow 
impartial discussion around issues of school options, innovative efforts in 
programs and governance and alternative approaches, now make people wary 
of proposing anything new or different. They are concerned that not only will 
little support be forthcoming from this Committee, but also that they will be 
attacked unreasonably. 
Superficial legislative proposals can undermine carefully developed partnerships 
in a single day. Implementation of effective practices can be interrupted and 
progress halted. This is no way to manage our statewide public education 
system. Many well-crafted efforts over the past 20 years have not been 
supported or sustained by this Committee. A few public chartered schools have 
survived and prospered due to the ability of families and teachers to engage with 
them, and because of strong monitoring from their non-political oversight and 
authorization board.
