,, 4, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
. AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Michael Brennan TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
49 Wellington Road 
Portland, ME 04103 
Phone: (207) 939-6462 
Michael.Brem1an@legislature.maine.gov 
April 18, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Michael Brennan Introducing 
LD 1089, An Act Regarding the Authorization of Public Charter Schools 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Good aftemoon, Senator Rafferty and esteemed colleagues of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee. My name is Michael Brennan, and I am proud to serve as House Chair of this Committee and 
sponsor of LD 1089, An Act Regarding the Authorization of Public Charter Schools. 
In 2011, Maine enacted legislation that allowed for the establishment of charter schools in the state. As 
part of the legislation, a Charter School Commission was created for the purpose of authorizing and 
overseeing up to ten charter schools. Over the ensuing years, ten charter schools had been approved by the 
Commission. Recently, one of the approved schools was decertiﬁed. 
In 2018, I was appointed to serve on the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. 
Almost immediately, the Committee was confronted with reports indicating that several of the charter 
schools were struggling with a number of issues including absenteeism, budgeting, curriculum, 
development and graduation rates. 
On several occasions, the Committee met with the staff and members to address those issues. The Board, 
which is comprised of gubernatorial and State Board of Education appointees, seemed to struggle 
implementing corrective action to remedy these pressing problems. 
Students who attend charter schools deserve the same level of accountability as other publicly-funded 
schools. This bill allows the Commissioner of Education to intervene when the health or academic 
wellbeing of charter school students is at risk. 
The Charter School Commission does have new staff and new Commission members. These changes 
have prompted actions to the Commission to mitigate some of the obvious problems. 
However, this bill will give us added assurance that charter schools will be held to high standards and the 
Commissioner may intervene if warranted. I do not expect the Commissioner to exercise this authority 
indiscriminately or on a regular basis.‘ 
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions. 
District 115: Part of Portland
Maine charter schools post mixed results but filla 
need for families 
19 pressherald.coml2021/06/01/maine-charter-schools-post-mixed-resuIts-but- ﬁll-a-need-for-families/ 
By Rachel Ohm June 1, 2021 
Eight years ago Penny Collins was looking for a kindergarten for her daughter, Lucy, 
and researching schools in Maine. She and her husband had already put their house up 
for sale and considered moving to another community — one with better schools - when 
they learned Lucy’s pre-K teacher would be pursuing an expansion as one of the first 
charter schools in the state. 
“l really hemmed and hawed about it because l thought, ‘lf we get in here, it’s just luck. 
ls it fair to everyone else we get to go here?"’ Collins said. “And it’s kind of an 
experiment because it hadn’t even started yet.” 
The Collinses decided to take their chances on the experiment and today Lucy,a 
seventh grader, and her sister Rose, a second grader, are thriving at the Fiddlehead 
School of Arts & Science in Gray. The girls are among more than 2,600 Maine students 
who attend charter schools 10 years after they were first authorized in Maine. 
The milestone is an important one because it’s the length of time the state originally set 
for when it would re-evaluate a 10-school cap on charter schools, which are public 
schools that operate independently of any school district and where parents choose to 
send their children. Lawmakers acted preemptively in 2019 to continue the cap and the 
Maine Charter School Commission the same year granted its last charter to the Ecology 
Learning Center in Unity. 
A lot has happened since 2011, when the idea of introducing charter schools in Maine 
prompted polarizing debate in the Legislature over whether the move would undermine 
traditional public schools. Legislative debates persist, including over a controversial bill 
this session that called for more charter school accountability. Some critics, however, 
have been pacified as tweaks to the law have been made and as Maine has kepta 
limited number of schools. 
Nichi Farnham was a Republican state senator at the time the charter school legislation, 
sponsored by then-Sen. Garrett Mason and supported by Gov. Paul LePage, came toa 
vote in 2011. “| had to oppose it because my superintendents were like, ‘No way,"’ 
Farnham said. She cited the initial funding mechanism, which allowed per-pupil dollars 
to shift from a student's home district to the charter school. 
That funding model changed in 2015 to spread the cost more evenly across the state, 
and Farnham now chairs the charter commission. “My only wish is more people knew 
about the schools and how they really work,” she said. “l think there's stilla 
misunderstanding about the fact they are public schools... There are some real 
challenges, but I think some kids have really found their place in education by being at 
one of those schools. ”
Charter schools are independently operated public schools that are required to teach by 
state standards like any other school, but vary widely in their specific approach. They 
often serve certain student populations, such as those who are at-risk or have special 
needs, or offer a specialized curriculum around themes such as hands-on learning, the 
performing arts or online instruction. 
The schools are free to attend and enrollment is open to any Maine student, although 
several schools have had to use lotteries when demand for seats outweighs the number 
available. The charter commission sets a performance framework for holding the 
schools accountable and is responsible for authorizing and renewing charters and 
requiring regular reporting. 
The commission recently named a new executive director, Jeremy Jones, who is 
establishing new goals for the schools as they turn the page from a new idea in Maine to 
fixtures in the education landscape. The state also released a first-of-its-kind report last 
year, just prior to the coronavirus pandemic, on the overall impact of charter schools on 
education in Maine. 
“Charter schools offer alternatives to Maine families," the report said. “Although it is 
early in the development of Maine charter schools, the evidence indicates a promising 
start to providing alternatives for students who have difficulty attending public school, 
need a flexible, self-directed educational approach or need virtual learning options. ” 
Overall enrollment in Maine’s charter schools makes up less than 2 percent of the 
state’s 172,500 public school students. But in many places around the country, charters 
have been controversial as critics have voiced concerns that the schools represent an 
attack on the traditional public school system and threaten funding and resources for 
traditional schools. According to the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, charter 
school growth accelerated rapidly between the 2005-06 school year and 2015-16, but 
has since slowed. 
William Mathis, a senior policy advisor at the National Education Policy Center, said that 
may be because charter schools in general have not posted better academic results 
than traditional schools and in some cases have raised concerns about segregation of 
students by race and socio-economic status. Most charter schools nationally are in 
urban areas and run by large organizations. “They don’t show any advantage over 
public schools when you take into account socio-economic status,” Mathis said. “They 
perform and teach about the same." 
The state report on charter schools released in February 2020 found lower outcomes 
than non-charter public schools in science and math achievement, as well as in four- 
year high school graduation rates and post-secondary enrollment. Five- and six-year 
graduation rates tended to be higher at the charter schools. 
But the report also cautioned against drawing direct comparisons between charter and 
traditional schools and said the charter schools tend to serve students who may have 
had difficulty in traditional school environments.
According to the report, the graduation rate at charter schools was 72 percent in 2018- 
2019 compared to 88 percent at non-charter schools. Additionally, 49 percent of charter 
school students went on to post-secondary education compared to 62 percent of non- 
charter students. 
“We will acknowledge it is lower,” said Jones, the charter commission ’s executive 
director. “The important thing to note is our schools are babies. They are still trying to 
figure out how to improve these things. Our schools are focused on it every day and it's 
something that at the commission level we’re constantly focused on as well.” 
Performance at individual schools has been mixed. Baxter Academy for Technology and 
Science, a grades 7-12 school in Portland focused on science, engineering and math, 
was ranked the fifth-best high school in Maine last month by U.S. News & World Report. 
The school has a graduation rate of 93 percent and its students routinely score above 
state averages on assessments. 
But the Maine Academy of Natural Sciences in Hinckley, the state’s ﬁrst charter school, 
has a four-year graduation rate of 64 percent. In 2018-19, only 29 percent of students 
scored at or above expectations in English on state assessments and only 16 percent 
scored at or above expectations in math. 
Matt Newberg, head of the Hinckley school, said the graduation rate and state test 
scores, which are based off the SAT for high school juniors, don’t tell the whole story of 
the school. 
Sixty-one percent of students at the school, which is focused on agriculture and forestry, 
are economically disadvantaged, compared to 41 percent statewide. Thirty-six percent 
have disabilities — compared to 18 percent statewide - which Newberg said has 
contributed to a higher five- and six-year graduation rate of 82 percent. 
“A lot of our students are coming from difficult circumstances," Newberg said. “Our 
students don't always have an easy time getting to school and some of them have to 
work. For some, not all, it certainly slows down the timeline and their progress towards 
graduation." 
Thalia Barden, who graduated from the Threshold program, a blended learning program 
at the academy that helps students get their degrees through a mix of in-person and at- 
home learning, said without the program she doesn't think she would have graduated. 
Barden, 19, was previously homeschooled and struggled to adapt to in-person school 
when she enrolled her freshman year. She returned to homeschooling before an advisor 
from the school reached out and encouraged her to enroll in Threshold, whose students 
include teen parents, students with anxiety and others who face barriers to being at 
school in-person full-time. 
“l was in a really lost phase where the end of high school was hurtling towards me andI 
didn't have a plan,” said Barden, who graduated in 2019. She now works as a nanny 
and is considering enrolling in community college after a teacher in Threshold
encouraged her to take her first college class while in the program. “lt was a really great 
experience that l didn’t have the confidence to do and she really helped me find a lot of 
confidence in my ability and my voice as a writer,” Barden said. 
At Fiddlehead, the school in Gray, Executive Director Jacinda Cotton-Castro said being 
able to offer choice and flexibility to families was what attracted her to pursue a charter 
for what she had initially started as a private pre-K program. “ln Maine, the options are 
challenging. If your child doesn’t fit in a traditional school, your options are private 
school or homeschooling. To have choice, to me, is great,” Cotton-Castro said. 
Fiddlehead, like many of Maine’s charter schools, emphasizes a hands-on approach to 
learning. The school is founded on the Reggio Emilia approach, which uses students ’ 
interests to drive curriculum. There are no tests or grades, although students do take 
state and national assessments. 
Early on in her academic career, Lucy Collins was on her own timeline for things like 
learning to read or mastering the days of the week. “The staff at Fiddlehead let Lucy 
develop her learning at her own pace and they encouraged us to be okay with it,” said 
her mother, Penny Collins, who also serves on the school’s board of directors. “Talk 
about an experiment. I was really holding my breath.” 
In sixth grade, Penny Collins said, Lucy’s confidence, her writing and her artistic skills 
exploded. “l think she’ll enter high school on pace with her peers and feeling really good 
about herself, ” Collins said. “l don’t think that would have been her experience ina 
traditional school setting. ” 
“l like it because we don’t only focus on classic education," said Lucy Collins, 13. “We 
do focus on that but we also do things like civil rights and stuff like that. We did some 
history from Native Americans ’ point of view and I agree that you get to know the 
teachers on a more personal level.” 
Still, charter schools have continued to draw the scrutiny of some lawmakers. “l think it's 
been decidedly mixed,” said Rep. Michael Brennan, D-Portland, co-chair of the 
Legislature ’s Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, when asked about the 
performance of charter schools to date. “Particularly with the virtual charter schools, 
we’ve had significant attendance problems as well as (concerns with) academic 
performance. ” 
Brennan is the sponsor of LD 604, a bill that sought more accountability for charter 
schools by requiring a separate line item in the state budget for charter school funding 
and by requiring charter schools to receive approval from the commissioner of education 
for facilities expansions. 
At a public hearing last month, Brennan said when he was re-elected to the Legislature 
in 2019 it was difficult to track down the amount of state spending on charter schools 
and how that amount has changed over the years. More than 80 people testified on the
bill before the education committee, which voted to replace it with a resolve directing the 
Department of Education to study charter school funding methods and reporting 
protocols. 
Many of those who testified were parents and students who voiced concern the bill 
would hurt existing charter schools. The legislative committees of the Maine School 
Boards Association and Maine School Management Association, however, testified in 
support of the bill. 
Steve Bailey, executive director of the associations, said funding for charter schools 
remains a concern among traditional school leaders. “As public schools, we should be 
the best choice in town and our schools should continue to strive for those levels of 
choices for students within our communities, ” Bailey said. “That is one of the challenges 
as well as one of the goals of typical public schools, is to provide those choices for 
students. We would far prefer to see the funding available for (general purpose aid) and 
have that money go to support the (traditional) public schools. ” 
Jones, the charter school commission ‘s executive director, has no plans right now to try 
and change the 10-school cap and has his own ideas for how to improve the schools. 
That includes improving the governing boards - which are appointed rather than elected 
like traditional school boards - so they can better hold the schools accountable. Other 
priorities include finding ways to better support the heads of charter schools so they can 
focus on education rather than the business side of things and promoting collaboration 
between charter and traditional public schools. 
At Fiddlehead, Cotton-Castro is interested in offering a certificate for teachers at 
traditional schools in the Reggio Emilia approach. She recently participated in a state 
program seeking to develop educator-driven ideas for innovation in schools through 
which she is hoping to secure grant funding for the certificate. 
“Many schools are doing different things in the state of Maine and it shouldn’t be an us 
versus them,” Cotton-Castro said. “We’re in it together for the children of Maine. We’re 
ready to share what we do as well as learn from others and what they’re doing.” 
© 2023
