Nichi Farnham -LD 1089 30 March, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, my name is Nichi Farnham. l live in Bangor and served in the Maine Senate, 125"‘ 
Legislature. In 2013, l was appointed to the State Board of Education and shortly after filleda 
State Board of Education/Charter School Commission seat until the State Board term ended in 
2018. In 2019, I filled an at-large position on the Charter School Commission until present. 
l appear today in opposition to LD 1089 and I want to provide an overview for you of how our 
Charter School system is working. 
In general, the Maine law, MRS Title 20-A, Chapter 112 has been thorough. It compares 
favorably to the laws in other states as staff and charter commission members have found 
when attending National conferences. Here are some key provisions of the Maine Charter 
school law: Charter schools have autonomy over key decisions, have a governing board whose 
chair signs the charter/contract with the Commission and is responsible for it being carried out. 
There is also a “head of school/school leader" who is operationally responsible for carrying out 
the charter school's contract. 
ln addition to the authorization and oversight of the Charter School Commission, public charter 
schools are still required to submit the Department of Education (DOE) data necessary to keep 
track of all students regardless of the school they attend. Their governing boards and school 
leaders tell us they are scrutinized by both the Commission and DOE. 
These schools are meant to stay public; a lottery is held to fill openings making sure all havea 
chance to attend; the funding of students uses the same per pupil formula as district public 
schools, (no raising of the mill rate option for more money); the founders of each charter school 
had to find and fund a building for the school and determine a plan for transportation and food 
programs. 
Maine public charter schools provide a program in education pre-k to 12, that may include 
students with special needs, at-risk English language learners, or students involved with the 
juvenile justice system. They also offer a specific academic approach or theme: vocational and 
technical training, natural resources and the environment, farming, fishing, forestry, foreign 
language and culture, visual and performing arts. Charter schools are serving a diverse set of 
student needs and interests across the state and the law is working. 
LD 1089 could have unintended consequences including the future autonomy of the 
Commission, impacts on legal contracts between schools and the Commission, and difficulty in 
recruiting future Commission members. 
Thank You, Nichi Farnham
