Testimony in Opposition to LD 1089:
“An Act Regarding
the Authorization of
Public Charter Schools”
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as
director of policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a
nonpartisan, non-profit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic
freedom in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 1089.
This bill would allow the Commissioner of the Department of Education (DOE) to
overrule a Maine Charter School Commission’s (MCSC) authorization of a new charter
school, if she determines that student health or academic well-being is at risk. As if there
are not enough hurdles to starting a charter school in Maine, this would be a way for
activist bureaucrats to wield even more power over them.
An aspiring charter school could go through the entire authorization process in
front of the commission, a process by which it is required to prove that it can provide for
the health and academic well-being of prospective students–a process in which DOE can
provide input as well. It can raise any alarms it sees at that time. After doing so, or even
never having done so, the head of the DOE could unilaterally squash a new charter
school just authorized by the MCSC.
To think that this, in any way, provides for better educational outcomes for Maine
students, or helps to ensure student health, is frankly laughable. This bill is an obvious
attempt to further handcuff charter schools in this state, both present and future. It is
profoundly out-of-touch to restrict opportunities for Maine children to find their best
educational option, especially in the wake of the immense mental health and academic
frustrations that students had to deal with for many years.
If students had more options than traditional district schools, maybe Maine
students' national assessment scores wouldn’t have dropped below the national average
for the first time in decades.
1
During the pandemic,
charter schools, and especially
virtual schools saw their waitlists balloon; clearly families desire other options.
Please deem LD 1089 “Ought Not To Pass” and reject these rank efforts to cripple
any educational opportunities for Maine students outside of the public system. Thank
you for your time and consideration.
1
h t t p s : / / n c e s . e d . g o v / n a t i o n s r e p o r t c a r d / s u b j e c t / p u b l i c a t i o n s / s t t 2 0 2 2 / p d f / 2 0 2 3 0 1 0 M E 4 . p d f
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

