Shelley Reed
Wayne
LD 1089
To: Education and Cultural Affairs Committee
Re: LD 1089 An act regarding the Authorization of Public Charter Schools
From: Shelley Reed
Date: March 30, 2023
Position: In opposition
To Honorable Chairs Senator Joseph Raffety and Representative Michael Brennan 
and Distinguished Committee Members I am speaking today as an individual who has
ten years of experience with Maine’s Charter School system.  As you know Title 
20-A: Education Chapter 112: Public Charter Schools Sections 2401 to 2415 became 
operational about ten years ago and spelled out specifically the role of the Maine 
Charter School Commission and in section 2403 the role of the Department of 
Education/Commissioner.
As the Authorizer, the Commission must adhere to section 2405 powers and duties to 
•solicit, invite, and evaluate applications.
•approve applications that meet identified educational needs;
•deny applications that do not meet identified educational needs;
•create a framework to guide the development of charter contracts;
•negotiate and execute sound charter contracts with each approved public charter 
school;
•monitor the performance and compliance of  public charter schools;
•and determine whether each charter contract merits renewal or revocation.
  All this must be done by” maintaining policies and practices which are consistent 
with recognized principles and professional standards for authorizing public charter 
schools” section 2405 : 3.
Section 2403: 5 Investigation and sanction of authorizers gives the department the 
ability to investigate, and as appropriate, institute sanctions in response to deficiencies
in authorizer performance or legal compliance…” the Commissioner may suspend a 
deficient authorizer’s authority to issue new charters or renew existing charters until 
the commissioner is satisfied that the deficiencies have been corrected.” That  section 
seems to be comprehensive.
Over these past ten years Maine Charter School Commission has done its due 
diligence in authorizing, contracting, monitoring, and renewing or revocation of 
Maine’s Charter Schools taking part in nationally recognized training for authorizers, 
developed a vigorous strategic plan and established sub committees to enable 
members to dig deep into school performance, finances, and executive functions. All 
members of the Commission are vetted and approved by the legislature.
Today Charter Schools continue to attract students and families looking for a different
learning environment option confident that these schools can provide opportunities 
for success. Is this bill made to treat Charter Schools different than other choice 
options by restrictions or number of students who may choose this option?
Thank you for your thoughtful attention.
