Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Honorable members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, 
I am Tori Kornﬁeld, a former member of this committee and now on the State Board of Education and 
the Chapter School Commission. l am here today as a member of the Charter School Commission to 
speak against LD 1089. 
l hear people saying that it is not fair to hold Charter Schools to a different standard than regular PublicW 
Schools. However, they are in fact. A Charter School's board signs a contract with the Charter School 
Commission and we stipulate the conditions of the contract. With the help of staff we make sure they 
live up to this contract. Depending on how they are doing, they can be put on an improvement plan or 
decommissioned. ln fact, we have two schools on improvement plans currently. Schools are offered a 
new contract every ﬁve years or not if they have not lived up to the contract ﬁnancially or academically. 
We have a new Executive Director and new members on the board. We also have a Performance 
Framework so the expectations are clear and each school knows whether they are meeting, exceeding 
or failing to meet all of the standards.- 
The Board is broken into subcommittees that keep track of each school's finances, performance and 
governance. The ﬁndings are shared with the whole boa rd monthly. All of this is fairly new: the director, 
the members, the subcommittees and the performance framework. Everyone is now working ha rd to 
not only give parents a choice but to give parents the choice of a quality school. At-least that is the goal 
we are working toward. Therefore, l would say, we are on this. These schools are by law under the 
purview of the charter school commission. And l would say that this new commission cares as much 
about academic rigor as it does SE L. -l 
By allowing the Commissioner of Education to overrule Charter Commission decisions, as is proposed in 
LD 1089, the Charter Commission's authority to hold schools accountable to their contractual 
obligations is put into question. Legal conﬂicts could ensue between school boards and the Charter 
Commission if the Commissioner of Education overrules a Charter Commission decision, as it may hinder 
the ability of Charter Commission Members to hold schools accountable to charter contract 
expectations. Clear lines of accountability between school boards and the Charter Commission are 
necessary for the academic, operational and ﬁnancial health of the charter schools.
