 
 
    
Helping communities thrive and p rosper in the Greater Portland a nd Lakes Region  
970 Baxter Blvd. , Suite 201      Portland , Maine, 04103       Tel. (207) 774 -9891        www.gpcog.org   
Testimony of the Greater Portland Council of Governments  
In Support of  
LD 1559 , An Act to Advance the State's Public Transit Systems by Reinvigorating the Public Transit Advisory 
Council and Increasing Funding  
April  25, 202 3 
 
Senator Chipman , Representative Williams , and Members of the Transportation Committee , my name is 
Andrew Clark , Transit Program Manager  at the Greater Portland Council of Governments (GPCOG) . I am here 
today to speak on behalf of GPCOG in support of a portion of LD 1559 , An Act to Advance the State's Public 
Transit Systems by Reinvigorating the Public Transit Advisory Council and Increasing Funding . 
 
GPCOG serves 25 municipal members  in Cumberl and County , from Sebago Lake to Casco Bay , as well as  Saco, 
Biddeford, Arundel , and Old Orchard Beach through the Portland Area Comprehensive Transportation System 
(PACTS). We deliver transportation, land use, sustainability, and economic development servi ces to our 
members and their communities.  
 
Our testimony today focuses on Section 12 of LD 1559 which provides a one -time General Fund appropriation 
of $25 million dollars to increase subsidies to bus transit agencies for operating and capital purposes, and an 
additional $13.6 million dollars to the Department of Transportation for bus transit operating costs  and the 
creation of two new positions at the Department to support transit planning assistance.  
 
As we testified to you on LD 259, in our work supporting  PACTS we see firsthand how disruptive the pandemic 
has been for our public transportation providers. Although federal relief funding (CARES and ARPA) helped 
transit agencies “weather the storm” of the pandemic, ridership has not returne d to pre -pandemic levels, 
which is particularly challenging for bus transit operators who serve vulnerable populations dependent on bus 
service for work, wellness, and life’s necessities.  
 
Continuing levels of  depressed ridership, coupled with rising cost s, could signal the beginning of a fiscal cliff 
which will disproportionately hurt vulnerable people and will also reduce our region’s future capacity to build 
well-located growth and development in tandem with robust transit services.  
 
The solution is to increase operating  funding  to $6.6 million per year to cover the immediate short -term need, 
and to also provide $25 million in  state subsidies  for bus transit agencies operating and capital funds . These 
state investments will ensure that agencies are not f orced  to reduce services at a time when we need them to 
do more than ever.  
 
These funds will also bring Maine’s investment in public transit closer in line with national averages and  help 
public transit agencies invest in well -located housing and sustaina ble transportation projects, advancing state 
housing and climate policies  like Maine Won’t Wait .  
 
At PACTS, we are ready to deploy new state funding in public transit. We have already engaged in a detailed 
public process to identify and prioritize future public transit investments, and worked hard to reach consensus 
among transit providers on how new funding can be used in the most fair, effective, and efficient ways 
possible.  
 
All we need is your support. For all these reasons we urge you to support the p assage of Section 12 in LD 1559 . 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our support, and please let me know if we can do anything to advance 
your work on this  important  legislation.  
