 
13 Pomerleau St.  Biddeford, ME 04005        www.boobtransit.org   Phone (207) 282 -5408 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 25 , 2023  
Written Testimony of Chad Heid  
The 131st Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
 
In Support  of LD 1559  
 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of t he Committee on Transportation, My 
name i s Chad Heid  and I am the Executive Director of Biddeford, Saco, Old Orchard Beach Transit 
(BSOOB Transit) .  We operate fixed and flex route services in and around the named municipalitie, 
along with providing transportation services in Scarborough, South Portland and Portland.  
 
Public transportation provides vital connections for Mainers in both urban and  rural areas, allowing 
them to access employment, medical appointments, grocery shopping  and other important services.  
With proper investment and funding support, public transportation services also  generate economic 
activit y and provide  a broader  recruitment base for employers.  In areas of ongoing development  and 
population growth, public transit can also serve to reduce the impacts of traffic congestion, and the 
costly infrastructure enhanc ements required with increasing vehicle miles travelled.  
 
Public transportation providers have opportunities to receive  Federal funding to support  50% of the 
costs to operate services, but these funding obligations require a 50% local match.  Given the 
increasing costs of labor, fuel,  and other essential activities, it  is vital that additional funds be defined  
to support existing transit services.  Furth er, as has been detailed in PACTS regional plan s: Connect 
2045, and Transit Together, the BSOOB Transit community merits transit service frequency and span 
enhancements that can only be achieved  through additional fiscal support.  The proposed $13.6 million 
defined in LD  1559 to su pport transit  operations would be a step in the right direction.  
 
This B ill also proposes additional M aineDOT staff to focus on public transportation planning and 
enhancing the statewide mobility efforts.  Given the dedicated work M aineDOT undertook to complete 
the “Family of Plans – Transit Plan” allocating additional resources to the further development  and 
implementation of these types of plans seems a natural next step.  
 
Lastly, this Bill  propos es adjustments to the form and function of the Public Tra nsit Advisory Council 
(PTAC), with a sp ecific set of objectives to achieve in the next calendar year.  As the Executive 
Director of a public transit agency, having a more engaged and deliberate  statewide council on transit 
would be quite beneficial in advancing initiatives.  
 
I urge you to support LD 1559 during this Special Session.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Chad Heid  
Executive Director  
BSOOB Transit  

