 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
Testimony in support of LD 1559 – “An Act to Advance the State's Public Transit Systems by 
Reinvigorating the Public Transit Advisory Council  and Increasing Funding"  
April 2 6, 2023  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation, my 
name is Courtney O’Donnell , Assistant City Manager of The City of Bangor, and I’m providing testimony on behalf 
of the Bangor City Council in support of LD 1559, An Act to Advance the State's Public Transit Systems by 
Reinvigorating the Public Transit Advisory Council and Increasi ng Funding. The City of Bangor  operate s fixed 
route and ADA paratransit services in  the communities of Bangor, Brewer, Hampden, Old Town, Orono, Veazie, 
and Hampden, along with providing transportation services for the University of Maine.  
Public transportation provides vital connections for Mainers in both urban and rural areas, allowi ng them to access 
employment, medical appointments, grocery shopping and other important services.  With proper investment and 
funding support, public transportation services also generate economic activity and provide a broader recruitment 
base for employ ers.  In areas of ongoing development and population growth, public transit can also serve to reduce 
the impacts of traffic congestion and the costly infrastructure enhancements required with increasing vehicle miles 
travelled.  
Public transportation provi ders have opportunitie s to receive f ederal funding to support 50% of the costs to operate 
services, but these funding obligations require a 50% local match.  Given the increasing costs of labor, fuel, and 
other essential activities, it is vital that additional funds be defined to support existing transit services.   The proposed 
$13.6 million defined in LD 1559 to support transit operations would be a step in the right direction.  
This Bill also proposes additional MaineDOT staff to focus on public transport ation planning and enhancing the 
statewide mobility efforts.  Given the dedicated work MaineDOT undertook to complete the “Family of Plans – 
Transit Plan ,” allocating additional resources to the further development and implementation of these types of plans 
seems a natural next step.  
Lastly, this b ill proposes adjustments to the form and function of the Public Transit Advisory Council (PTAC), with 
a specific set of objectives to achieve in the next calendar year.  As the Assistant City Manager,  I am involve d in 
our public transit system, and I strongly believe having a more engaged and deliberate statewide council on transit 
would be quite beneficial in advancing initiatives.  
For the reasons outlined above, and with the full support of the Bangor City Counci l, I urge you to pass LD 1559.  
Thank you for your consideration. Please do not hesitate to reach out with questions.  
 
Deborah Laurie, City Manager, debbie.laurie@bangormaine.gov  
Courtney O’Donnell, Assistant City Manager/ Director of Human Resources, 
courtney.odonnell@bangormaine.gov   
Richard Fournier, City Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov  
 
 
 
 
 
