 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1559-An Act to Advance the State’s Public Transit Systems by 
Reinvigorating the Public Transit Advisor Council and Increasing Funding  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
April  25, 2023 
 
Senator  Chipman , Representative  Williams  and members of the Committee  on Transportation , 
 
I am  Eamonn Dundon , the Director of Advocacy  of the Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce , 
representing 1,300 businesses that employ over 65,000 Mainers in our region. We are submitting this testimony  
to express our organization's strongest support for  LD 1559 . 
 
As I stated when I came before this committee a few weeks ago in opposition to man y of the passenger rail 
bills before you, our organization highly values a frequent, reliable, and sustainable public transportation system. 
In fact, public transportation is one of our top three policy priorities. I spend a lot of my time in our region 
working with municipal, agency, and non -profit partners through the Portland Area Comprehensive 
Transportation System (PACTS) to advance this goal.  While we do not see promise in massive state 
investments in expensive rail expansion projects, we do see a st ate imperative to step in and contribute to the 
operations and expansions of our passenger bus operators , as proposed in this legislation.  
 
The success of our state goals in the Maine Won’t Wait climate plan and the 10 -year Maine Economic Development 
Strategy depend on our ability to make bus service viable in many communities in our state . In Maine Won’t Wait , 
there is a deep commitment to reduc ing emissions from transportation. As this committee well knows, th is is 
a challenging goal to meet in a state as rural as Maine. It will be decades until Maine can eliminate transportation 
emissions in rural areas and for commercial, heavy -duty users . Thus,  the burden needs to be on our most urban 
areas to encourage  mode -shift among commuters towards low -to-no emission modes , including public 
transportation. Similarly, in the Maine Economic Development Strategy  we aim to add 75,000 people to the workforce 
by 2030. This will be accomplished primarily through the addition of the younger, more diverse population s 
that are driving our in -bound migration. These are populations that are uniquely primed to be users of transit, 
and this investment will catalyze their ability to participate in our workforce.  
 
In preparing testimony on this bill, we examined the public  transit investments at the state level among the 
closest cohort of peer states around the country , as reflected in the U.S. Department of Transportation’s 
National Transit Database (charts below) . These are primarily rural states, states with small popula tions like 
Maine, and/or our fellow New England states. The data are clear: Maine lags far  behind our closest neighbors 
in New England  and barely meets  the average among all peer states nationwide. Only 5.7% of all our public 
transit agency budgets in Main e are funded from state coffers, with the majority of dollars going to support the 
less than half a million  riders of the Maine State Ferry Service, and only $170,000 dollars going to support our 
largest bus operator in the state, Greater Portland METRO , which transports over 2 million riders annually.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Maine lags most peer states when it comes to state share of public transit funding:  
 
 
Breaking this down into groups of peer states, Maine lags all but one New England state when it 
comes to state share of public transit funding:  
 
 
 
 

 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Among the 10 most rural states, Maine is barley exceeding the average of 5.39% for state share of 
public transit funding among these peers:  
 
 
 
Finally, I want to highlight  the important planning initiatives in  this legislation that are worthy of advancement , 
even without the larger investments in operating assistance. The expansion and reinvigoration of the Public 
Transit Advisory Council is a long overdue measure to ensure that Maine DOT consults  a broad range  of voices 
when it comes to their work on public transit. I have the pleasure of serving a similar body in the PACTS 
Regional Transportation Advisory Council (RTAC) , and we brought  new voices to the transit planning process 
in our region that advance innov ative thinking to build out our regional services in a cost -effective, growth -
focused manner. We believe the PTAC can accomplish that same type of vision if the voices stipulated in this 
legislation are included in the process. This, along with the amendme nts to the Sensible Transportation Policy 
Act and the addition of two staff positions in Maine DOT focused on transit planning , are essential ingredients 
to improving the public transit infrastructure of our state.  
 
We thank you for your time and commitme nt to all Mainers, and we ask for your expeditious approval of this 
important legislation.  
  

