R Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street -1 Augusta, Maine 04330 ~ (207) 622-3101 ~* Fax: (207) 622-4343 ~ www,nrcm_org 
Testimony in Support of LD 1559, An Act to Advance the State's Public Transit Systems by 
Reinvigorating the Public Transit Advisory Council and Increasing Funding 
To the Committee on Transportation 
by Josh Caldwell, Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator 
April‘25, 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Committee on Transportation, 
my name is Josh Caldwell. I am the Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). NRCM has been working for more than 60 years 
to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment, on behalf of our 25,000 members and 
supporters. I’m here today to testify in support of LD 1559, An Act to Advance the State's Public 
Transit Systems by Reinvigorating the Public Transit Advisory Council and Increasing Funding. 
LD 1559 is a response to a chronically underfunded statewide transit system that is facing yet 
another setback as federal operating funds through the American Rescue Plan come to an end 
this year. This legislation provides the immediate operating support needed by transit agencies to 
better serve residents throughout the state and establishes a pathway toward a cleaner, more 
affordable, equitable, and accessible transit system for all Mainers. 
Maine’s bipartisan Climate Action Plan identiﬁes reducing emissions from the transportation 
sector as “Plan A,” citing that 54% of greenhouse gas emissions come from cars and trucks in 
Maine.‘ The Clean Transportation Roadmap, commissioned in 2021 to establish a pathway for 
reducing emissions from the transportation sector, identiﬁes transit expansion and transit- 
oriented development as key recommendations to reduce vehicle miles traveled and diversify 
Maine’s transportation system.2 
The 2021 Transit Cooperative Research Report found that riding a mile by bus in this country, 
on average, contributes 30% less to climate change than riding in a gas car alone. Further, robust 
transit infrastructure enables denser development and reduces car dependence, and these changes 
to our communities can reduce vehicle travel 5-12 times as much as the beneﬁts from directly 
replaced car trips.3 Sustained investment in our transit system is an essential component of our 
climate response, and this legislation represents the best opportunity to move forward this year. 
1 
ﬁttgs;[/wvvw.maine.go ‘¢;'clEmate;;.1i§l1[ 
Z https://www.maine.gov/future/initiatives/climate/cleantransportation 
3 https://nap.nationa|academies.org/catalog/26103/an-update-on-public-transportations —impacts-on-greenhouse-gas 
emissions
Through 2021, on average, 8% of Maine DOT’s budget went to multimodal investmentsf ‘ Those 
investments are further split between ferries, rail, ports, aviation, and transit, leaving a small 
proportion available for our transit system. New federal funding through the Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law and the Inﬂation Reduction Act is helping to boost immediate support for 
transit agencies, but that support must be leveraged by state investment in order to take full 
advantage of newly available funding opportunities. 
In addition to addressing the immediate operating needs voiced by transit operators throughout 
the state, this bill provides a foundation for a future of a statewide public transit network that 
features robust, reliable, and equitable service for Mainers regardless of their geographic 
location, income level, age, race, ethnicity, or ability level. By strengthening the Public Transit 
Advisory Council and establishing representation on that body from a broad cross section of 
Maine’s population, LD 15 5 9 will help ensure that our transit system will be responsive to the 
needs of all Mainers. Through this legislation, the renewed Council will improve statewide 
transit planning and coordination by studying the transportation needs throughout Maine and 
presenting appropriate solutions that meet those needs. Their work will be supported by 
appropriations in this bill that will ﬁrst allow for the continuation of existing operations for 
transit operators that are about to lose a signiﬁcant portion of federal funding at the end of the 
year, followed by an additional appropriation in FY24 to support the smart growth of our 
statewide transit system. 
This bill is the product of the concerted efforts of dozens of stakeholders brought together 
through the Build Maine + GrowSmart Maine Policy Action 2023 process. These stakeholders 
range from transit operators, environmental groups, youth groups, transit advocacy groups, 
municipal governments, community action groups, and more. It is one of the most concerted 
efforts I have seen to pull together knowledgeable voices from all over the state to build a better 
Maine through smart development. Our transportation system is central to that mission, and this 
bill represents a signiﬁcant opportunity to improve transit access for all users and begin building 
the climate-smart, equitable, connected transportation system of the future. 
For these reasons, we urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on this important transportation 
legislation. I welcome any questions you may have. 
4 https://legislature.maine.gov/biIls/getTestimonyD0c.asp?id=142583
