Maine Conservation Voters 
Inform. Vote. Protect. 
Testimony of Kelt Wilska, Energy Justice Manager, Maine Conservation Voters 
» 
Before the Transportation Committee 
In Support of LD 1559 
An Act to Advance the State’s Public Transit Systems by Reinvigorating the Public Transit 
t Advisory Council and Increasing Funding 
April 25, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished members of the 
Transportation Committee. My name is Kelt Wilska and I am the Energy Justice Manager at 
Maine Conservation Voters, a nonproﬁt organization dedicated to protecting Maine’s 
environment, democracy, and climate future. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in 
support of LD 1559, An Act to Advance the State's Public Transit Systems by Reinvigorating the 
Public Transit Advisory Council and Increasing Funding. This bill, a product of the GroWSmart 
Maine Policy Action 2023 process, reﬂects a broad consensus among the transportation policy 
community that bold action is needed to meet this moment in the ﬁght for an equitable climate 
future. 
Transportation is Maine’s largest emissions sector, accounting for 49% of the state’s annual 
greenhouse gas emissions in 2019. Our state has done a commendable job in outlining goals and 
strategies to reduce these emissions through Maine W0n’t Wait, the State’s four-year plan for 
climate action, and the Maine Clean Transportation Roadmap. While the goal of “putting 41,000 
light-duty electric vehicles on the road in Maine by 2025 and 219,000 by 2030”' is an important 
step towards emissions reductions, equally important is the goal of “reduc[ing] light-duty vehicle 
miles traveled over time, achieving 10% reductions by 2025 and 20% by 20303“ By reinvesting 
in our state’s public transportation system, LD 1559 will put Maine ﬁrmly on the path to meeting 
this goal. 
Among multiple critical funding provisions, this bill amends the Sensible Transportation Policy 
Act to reﬂect both a commitment to Maine’s climate goals and a vision of an expanded public 
transportation system commensurate with the current needs of our state’s residents. Public 
1 
“Maine Won't Wait: A Four-Year Plan for Climate Action" at 10, Maine Climate Council (Dec., 2020), 
https://www.maine.govlc|imateplan/sites/maine.gov.climateplan/files/inIine-fl|es!MaineWontWait_Decembe 
r2020_printable __12.1.20.pdf. 
2Id
transportation is the embodiment of an equitable transition to a clean and healthy future, 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions while also improving access to employment, vital services, 
and community resources for those who are unable to afford an electric car. LD1559 also 
improves access to the process of developing equitable transportation policy by expanding the 
representation of a strengthened Public Transit Advisory Council (PTAC) to include members of 
immigrant, labor, and youth communities. 
LD 1559 represents a bold and necessary step towards a future in which Maine’s citizens can 
enjoy safe and accessible public transportation to meet their daily needs while doing their part to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and mitigate the effects of climate change. Maine Conservation 
Voters urges you to vote “ought to pass.” Thank you for your time.
