g HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
- 
_,_;y;t§, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Margaret O,Neil TTY: Maine Relay 711 
21 Sheila Circle 
Saoo, ME 04072 
Phone: (207) 590-1679 
Margaret.ONeil@le2islature.maine.gov 
April 25, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Maggie O’Neilp-resenting 
LD 1559, An Act to Advance the State's Public Transit Systems by 
Reinvigorating the Public Transit Advisory Council and Increasing Funding 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Transportation Committee, I am 
Rep. Maggie O’Neil. I represent House District 129 in Saco. Thank you for the opportunity to 
present LD 1559, An Act to Advance the State's Public Transit Systems by Reinvigorating 
the Public Transit Advisory Council and Increasing Funding. 
Public transit has numerous and diverse beneﬁts for Maine communities, including promoting 
equity, reducing carbon emissions, and supporting a robust economy. 
Despite these beneﬁts, Maine has not prioritized investment in our public transit systems. A 2020 
scorecard on inﬁastructure by the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) gave Maine’s 
public transit a grade of D- , just short of failing.1 In its explanation, ASCE stated: 
“As Maine ’s population continues to age, and to improve sustainability into the future, 
transportation options will become increasingly important. However, the state only 
provides 86 cents annually per capita as an operational subsidy for transit services, 
much less than other New England states and 38th in the nation.” 
LD 61559 would make important investments in transit funding, improve Maine’s planning 
process, and afﬁrm public transit as a priority for policymakers in state government. 
Saco senior Cole Cochrane led the work on this bill with the participation of a diverse group of 
stakeholders. Cole is co-founder of Maine Youth Action and a youth member of the Climate 
1 
American Society of Civil Engineers, 2020 Maine Infrastructure Report Card. 
https1//in ﬁ'ast1-ucturereportcard.org/state-item/inainel 
District 129: Saco (part)
Council’s transportation working group. He engaged in an extensive stakeholder process, 
beginning last year. GrowSmart ’s Policy Action team worked to develop the bill. Stakeholders 
participating in Policy Action included the Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce, GPCOG, 
MMA, Sierra Club, NRCM, Maine Youth for Climate Justice, Maine Youth Action, State 
Chamber, Maine Transit Association, Greater Portland Metro, Biddeford-Saco-OOB (BSOOB) 
Transit, KVCAP, Town of Rumford, Maine Council on Aging, Bicycle Coalition, and Western 
Maine Transit. DOT also participated in conversations. 
I. Beneﬁts of a strong public transit system 
Well-designed, electriﬁed public transit is more equitable for commuters; it connects workers 
with good jobs; it reduces emissions, and it decreases environmental impacts associated with 
mining. 
a. Advances Equitable Access to Transportation 
Every member of our communities needs to be able to get to Work, to buy groceries and other 
necessities, and to access health care and other essential services. For many Maine families, the 
cost of owning and using a vehicle is a huge barrier to accessing needed transportation. For other 
Mainers, a private vehicle may not be a feasible option. In communities without transit options, 
community members are regularly unable to secure reliable and affordable transportation to their 
job or elsewhere. 
b. Connects Employers and J0b~Seekers 
For the same reasons, investment in public transit increases job opportunities. Workforce is 
consistently the biggest concern I hear from local employers. With robust public transit systems, 
more Mainers will be able to access good job opportunities, beneﬁting community members and 
our families, as well as local employers- . At a time when employers across the state andin 
virtually every sector are struggling to hire workers, providing expanded transportation options 
for potential employees would have enormous beneﬁts. 
c. Combats Climate Change and Reduces Environmental Impacts. 
Strengthening our public transit systems is essential to reducing Maine’s greenhouse gas 
emissions and combating climate change. Transportation is the single largest source of 
greenhouse gas emissions in our state. According to a 2021 report from the Margaret Chase 
Smith Policy Center at the University of Maine, the transportation sector is responsible for 53% 
of Maine’s total carbon dioxide emissions, making it an important target for emission 
District 129: Saco(pa1t)
reductions? Much of this is due to our dependence on private vehicles. In fact, roughly 78% of 
Mainers commute to and from their work alone.3 
The Mills administration and the Maine Climate Council have identiﬁed the reduction of 
transportation emissions as a core component of our state’s strategy to reduce emissions. Public 
transit produces signiﬁcantly fewer emissions than the individual use of private vehicles. Public 
transit use reduces carbon emissions by 45% when compared to driving alone.‘ For this reason, 
increasing public transportation investment was identiﬁed as a key goal in the Maine Won ’t Wait 
plan. Additionally, the Maine Clean Transportation Roadmap from the Govemor’s Energy 
Ofﬁce and Ofﬁce of Policy, Innovation, and the Future highlights the expansion of public transit 
in as a key way to reduce the total number of miles that Mainers travel in their vehicles.5 
In addition to climate beneﬁts, public transit reduces the enviromnental and health impacts of 
mining as we mobilize to electrify our transportation system.6 As lawmakers, our transportation 
policy decisions actively shape future lithium demand and, thus, the extent of future mining 
impacts. Robust public transit reduces our demand for lithium mining by reducing the total 
number of personal vehicles required to meet our transportation need _s.7 If we build better public 
transit and walkable communities in areas of Maine with higher population density, we will need 
fewer total personal EVs and, thus, less lithium mining. 
II. How LD 1559 improves transit in Maine 
LD 1559 would revitalize Maine’s public transit system through strategic investments and policy 
initiatives: 
2 “Effects of the Transportation and Climate Initiative Program in Maine: A Study of Rural and Urban Households, ” 
Margaret Chase Smith Policy Center (Aug. 2021), available at 
https ://mcspolicvcenter.u1naine.edu/2 02 1/08/1 l/new-report-on-transpoitation-and-climate-in-maine/. 
3 U.S. Department of Transportation, Bureau of Transportation Statistics: Maine Transportation by the Numbers 
(Jan. 2020). https://www.bts.d0t.gov/sites/bts.dot.gov/ ﬁles/states2020/Maine.pdf 
4 https1//transpoitationucla.edu/blog/5-environmental-bene ﬁts-sustainable-transportation 
5 
The Clean Transportation Roadmap—a speciﬁc action of Maine Won’t Wait—-identiﬁes the policies, programs, 
and regulatory changes needed to continue decarbonizing Maine’s transportation sector in coming years. Available 
at: 
Wwwmaine.gov/ ﬁiture/sites/maine.gov.future/ ﬁles/inline- 
ﬁles/Maine%2OClean%20Trausportation%20Road1nagpdf 
6 
Thea Riofrancos, et al., “Achieving Zero Emissions with More Mobility and Less Mining.” 
U.C. Davis (J an. 2023), available at https://www.climateandco1n1nunity. org/more-mobilit_v-less-mining. See also 
Sophie S. Parker, et al., Potential Lithium Extraction in the United States: Environmental, Economic, and Policy 
Implications (Aug. 2022), available at 
https://www.scienceforconseivation.org/assets/downloads/Lithium_Repo1t_FINAL.pdf 
7 See “The hidden environmental costs of transitioning to electric vehicles. ” NPR (J an. 29, 2023). 
District 129: Saco (part)
1. LD 1559 increases Maine’s investment in public transit. First, it preserves the current 
levels of transit in Maine by providing a one-time appropriation of $13.6 million. This 
funding is necessary to replace expired federal operating subsidies for transit. Second, the 
bill increases our investment in public transit via an additional one-time appropriation of 
$25 million to increase support for bus transit operating and capital funds. This 
investment will support our communities who often struggle to come up with local transit 
funding to match funding opportunities. For example, critical transit services such as 
KVCAP or BSOOB Transit struggle to ﬁnd the necessary funding for their services. 
Municipalities lack the resources to fully fund public transportation. With expiring 
federal funds, they will have to reduce services signiﬁcantly, restricting essential 
transportation to get to work, doctor appointments, and basic amenities. Throughout 
this process, I have heard from my own local transit provider and others across the state 
that a modest increase in state transit funding will enable our transit providers to access 
signiﬁcant federal funding. 
2. LD 1559 strengthens Maine’s transit planning and stakeholder participation via the 
Public Transit Advisory Council (PTAC). The PTAC is an existing statewide group 
charged with assessing current levels of transit services and recommending 
improvements. LD 1559 will broaden stakeholder participation in transit plamiing by 
adding voices representative of Workers, immigrant communities, and youth climate 
advocates, as well as an additional transit operator. The bill also requires the council to 
meet at least four times annually and make an annual report to the Legislature. Finally, it 
would adjust the responsibilities of the council to include preparing a statewide transit 
plan and setting actionable goals for expanding transit throughout the state. Future state 
transit plans will be facilitated by the PTAC in coordination with MaineDOT, ensuring 
that the process includes the input of a diverse group of stakeholders. It’s essential that 
long term planning like our state transit plan is led by stakeholders and aligns our goals 
with What the public needs to access affordable, reliable transportation. 
3. LD 1559 clariﬁes that public transportation is an important part of transportation policy 
in Maine. It amends Maine’s Sensible Transportation Policy Act, which recognizes the 
impact of transportation policy on Maine’s people and natural resources and helps to 
guide the Maine Department of Transportation ’s decision-making. The bill incorporates 
our commitments to expanded public transit and to curbing greenhouse gas emissions in 
order to meet our climate goals, ensuring these values are a priority as we plan for 
Maine’s transportation future. 
Many of the stakeholders who helped to develop LD 1559 are here today to speak to the beneﬁts 
of a robust public transit system from their various perspectives. They will share how these 
initiatives will markedly improve Mainers’ quality of life today While laying -the groundwork for 
a sustainable future. The common thread is that we have an opportunity to make climate-smart 
District l29: Saco (part)
investments that will help Mainers from diverse backgrounds and at all life stages so that they 
can fully engage with their communities. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
District 129: Saco (part)
