 
 
Testimony of Tom Reinauer, Vice President  – Maine Transit Association  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
 
In Support of LD 1559  - An Act to Advance the State’s Public Transit Systems by Reinvigorating the Public 
Transit  Advisory Council and Inc reasing Funding   
 
Public Hearing – Tuesday, April 2 5, 2023  
Good afternoon Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Committee on 
Transportation,  my name is Tom Reinauer and I am the Director of Transportation at York County 
Community Acti on Corporation .  We are located in Sanford , and provide a variety of public 
transportation services throughout York County.  I am speaking today as  Vice President of the Maine 
Transit Association, which includes  17 public transportation providers in the state .  The Association  
strongly support s LD 1559 . 
Public transportation provides vital connections for Mainers in both urban and rural  areas, allowing  
them  to access employment, medical appointments, grocery shopping and other important  services.  
Many of our riders do not have access to a vehicle  or are unable to drive,  and our services are often the 
only option for them.   With our aging population, these services are becoming increasingly more 
important for aging in place and meeting people’s  needs.  
The d emand for a ccess ing medical and related appointments has been increasing as well.  W e are seeing 
a growth in requests from residents who don’t qualify for MaineCare, but still need a ride to access care 
and have few options.  Businesses in our are a also rely on our W AVE jobs access service for their 
employees to get to work in Sanford, Wells and Biddeford.  
Public transportation providers  do receive Federal funding to help cover operating costs , but these 
funds typically require a 50% match.   The Federal economic recov ery funds, which were helpful during 
the pandemic are also coming to an end.  The additional state funding proposed in the Bill would go a 
long way to help transportation providers meet this match requirement , draw down sufficient Federal 
dollars  and help with  the rising costs of fuel, maintenance and labor.   MaineDOT is a great partner for 
transportation  providers and the MTA, but they understandably have a lot of demands on what is very 
limited funding for public transportation .  State funding for over -the-road transit services has remained 
the same for many years.  
The Bill also proposes changes to the Public Transit Advisory Council , or “PTAC”, which has only been 
meeting once a year.  As a former  long serving  member and chairperson of the PTAC, I can say  it was  
difficult to provide adequate guidance on public transportation policy when the Council  met so 
infrequently .  There was often turnover in m embership  year -to-year , and limited opportuni ties between 

meetings to adequately review material and provide feedback.  T he PTAC is a great resource that has so 
much more potential .  The  proposed updates  in the Bill would enhance its role in providing guidance on  
public transportation pol icy, working with Maine DOT more close ly and setting  goals  for statewide rural 
and urban services . 
Providing additional MaineDOT staff to focus on public transportation services and planning would also 
be a h uge help to the providers who do not have the staff capability and resource s, and may also not 
have access to regional planning staff through one of the regional planning agencies.  
We urge your support for LD 1559, and I’m happy to answer any questions  or provide additional 
information prior to the work session .  Thank you.  
Tom Reinauer , MTA Vice President  
Director of Transportation  
York County Community Action Corporation  
thomas.reinauer@yccac.org  
207.459.29 30 
