TESTIMONY OF MATT DUNLAP, CIA 
MAINE STATE AUDITOR 
IN OPPOSITION 
LD 514, Resolve, Directing the Office of the State Auditor to Report on Taxpayer Money 
F anding Maine Nonproﬁts 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government; my name is Matt Dunlap and I live in Old Town, 
and I have the high honor of serving as Maine’s State Auditor. 
I respectfully submit this testimony in opposition to this legislation. While we applaud the 
premise of the bill——to provide more information to the Legislature regarding state 
expenditu1'es ——we note that this information is broadly and thoroughly available through the 
Legislature ’s own offices, notably the Office of Fiscal and Program Review and through the 
work of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. Additionally, the 
State Controller publishes the state’s Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, which contains 
an extraordinary amount of detail across every revenue and expenditure line. 
It is also important to note that not all non-proﬁt corporations are conﬁgured the same way or for 
similar puiposes. Of Maine’s 111,456 registered domestic corporations, 23,816 are registered as 
non-proﬁts. A smaller percentage are registered as charitable organizations with the Internal 
Revenue Service, and a smaller percentage still are registered as tax-exempt organizations. This 
Resolve does not direct the Office of the State Auditor to engage in any way to perform an audit 
of the expenditures in question, which is contrary to the mission of the Ofﬁce. Rather, the 
Resolve directs the Office to conduct a ranking of disbursements to non-proﬁt corporations by 
amount received from state government. It is unclear from the Resolve what advantages sucha 
compilation would avail to the Legislature. 
The information found in such rankings may not be of great value. A local museum or historical 
society may obtain funding in the form of a pass-through grant from the National Archives and 
Records Administration by way Maine State Archives for cataloguing a collection of documents 
of say $500. That would certainly rank lower than funds received by of Medicaid funding 
passed through the Maine Department of Health and Human Services for one of our many 
hospitals —most of which are also registered as nonproﬁts; but to the clientele of that historical 
society would regard that small grant to be of tremendous signiﬁcance. A ranking of 
expenditures would probably fail to capture such an impact. 
No distinction is made in the Resolve neither between state or Federal funds, nor between grants 
or awards and contracts or procurements. That said, if a non-proﬁt corporation serves as a sub- 
recipient from a Federal award program to provide services to the public, those expenditures are 
subject to audits from our ofﬁce (major award programs are audited every year). The fmdings 
from those audits are available in the state’s Single Audit conducted by our ofﬁce on an annual 
basis.
If there are allegations of abuse of resources ——Which is not contemplated by the language of this 
Resolve, but nonetheless bears discussing ——our Office, under the law, may communicate 
otherwise conﬁdential information and coordinate with the Ofﬁce of Program Evaluation and 
Governmental Accountability and the Office of the Attorney General (5 MRSA § 244-E) to 
investigate questionable uses of state resources. 
With all due respect to the idea behind this Resolve, it is our assertion that the referenced 
information is already available, and that a hierarchical presentation such as that contemplated by 
this Resolve would yield little that would be actionable by the Legislature. 
Thank you for your attention to this important matter. I am available to answer any questions at 
the pleasure of the chair.
