1. 
tt E HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
t 
i; 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
~ 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Adam Lee TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
87 Westem Promenade 
Auburn, ME 04210 
Residence: (207) 312-4057 
Adam.Lee(Z13le2islature.maine.gov 
February 16, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Adam Lee presenting 
LD 53, An Act to Ensure Accountability for Workplace Harassment and Assault by 
Removing Intentional Acts and Omissions from Workers’ Compensation Exemptions 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee, my name is Adam Lee and I represent House District 89, which includes a portion 
the Auburn cormnunity. I am here before you today to present LD 53, An Act to Ensure of 
Accountability for Workplace Harassment and Assault by Removing Intentional Acts and 
Omissions from Workers’ Compensation Exemptions. 
Maine’s workers‘ compensation laws provide employers immunity from lawsuits when damages 
or injuries to an employee occur in the course of employment. This immunity applies to all 
employees, supervisors, officers and directors of the employer, making workers’ compensation 
laws the exclusive remedy for injured employees. 
In at least 40 states, intentional torts, such as assault, intentional inﬂiction of emotional distress, 
invasion of privacy and so on, are excluded from the scope of that immunity. Simply put, in 
those 40 states, if an employee is injured by the intentional act of another employee, supervisor, 
or the employer themselves, the employee may still pursue legal action against the individual 
who hanned them. This recognizes that the workers’ compensation “bargain” was never meant 
encompass intentional acts, particularly those such as emotional distress for which there is 
seldom an injury that is compensable by the receipt of workers’ compensation. This is to 
particularly acute in instances of workplace sexual harassment. The Ohio Supreme Court put it: 
If the workers’ compensation scheme were adjudged to be the exclusive remedy for 
claims based upon sexual harassment in the workplace, as appellee urges, victims of 
sexual harassment would often be left without a remedy. Generally, injured employees 
receive coverage only for economic losses resulting from their accidents ———medical bills, 
lost wages, and diminished eaming capacity. However, aside from expenses which they 
may incur for psychiatric care, victims of sexual harassment generally do not suffer 
District 89: Part of Auburn
economic loss. Their injuries are much less tangible and often are not susceptible toa 
neat compensatory formula. Thus, even if this court were to hold that psychiatric 
conditions resulting solely from emotional stress in the workplace are compensable under 
the workers’ compensation scheme, most victims would not obtain appropriate or 
sufﬁcient relief.‘ 
Numerous Maine courts have questioned the wisdom of Maine law’s failure to exclude 
intentional torts from the Workers’ Compensation immunity provisions. Nevertheless, they 
remain reluctant to create a judicial exception. The Maine Supreme Court said in Li v. CN 
Brown, 645 A.2d 606 (Me. 1994): 
[a]lthough narrow intentional tort exceptions to workers’ compensation coverage exist in 
a number of jurisdictions, those exceptions frequently have been created by statutory 
change or are based in language in the workers’ compensation. . .statutes. The creation of 
such an exemption in this state is best left to the legislature. 
It is, therefore, up to us in the Legislature to bring Maine’s law in harmony with that of 40 other 
states and the general reasoning of the Workers’ Compensation Act which was never intended to 
cover issues like intentional torts. Among the 40 states’ exemptions, there are myriad Ways to do 
it. I have drafted one with the Revisor’s Ofﬁce. It is consistent with our statutory language and 
borrows the broad language utilized by Louisiana. I chose this one but am partial to none, andI 
have included with this written testimony a copy of a 2016 survey of the status of exemptions in 
all 50 states. I invite the committee to review it and determine which of the 40 state models they 
prefer. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
1 
Kerans v. Porter Paint C0., 61 Ohio St. 3d 486 (Ohio 1991) (see also Robb v. Hyman, 861 F. Supp. 1094 (D. D.C. 
1994) 
District 89: Part of Auburn
