TESTIMONY OF ml“! “W! r|an Parke mA“5§q!f i; .. 
L.D. 53, “An Act to Ensure Accountability Aiiﬂtllﬂlﬂlt 
for Workplace Harassment and 
Assault by Removing Intentional Acts and mt}-12:42.2: 
Omissions from Workers‘ Compensation .. 
Exemptions ” 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee on 
Labor and Housing. My name is Brian Parke and I am the President and CEO of the Maine 
Motor Transport Association and a resident of Brunswick. The Association is comprised of 
more than 1,700 member companies, whose employees make up a large portion of the 
32,000 people who make their living in the trucking industry in Maine. 
l am also the Trust Administrator of our group self-insurance program, the MMTA Workers‘ 
Compensation Trust and l am here today to testify in opposition to LD 53. 
As you will likely hear from other opponents on this bill, the proposed changes to the statute 
will have far-reaching unintended consequences that go well beyond the title's stated 
purpose. Our understanding is that the sponsor’s intent is to narrowly focus on the impacts of 
workplace harassment where the exclusive remedy of workers‘ compensation preempts 
additional relief from resulting emotional distress injuries. 
And if the bill did just that, we might feel differently about it because it’s safe to say that the 
vast majority of Maine businesses are against workplace harassment and assault and we 
unequivocally support the enforcement of Maine’s laws protecting against such grievous 
behavior. 
But the broad nature of the changes proposed by this bill will create friction in the system by 
producing an ill-defined standard that will only encourage litigation. This is completely 
contrary to the grand bargain of workers’ compensation insurance which is to avoid civil 
litigation on both sides — effectively relieving employees of the burden of proving fault and 
preventing employers from asserting the common law defense of contributory negligence. l
can see why lawyers would want this, but it is bad for the system and it goes against the 
exclusive remedy’s promise of relative litigation certainty. 
Pursuing legislation to fix a specific and rare circumstance of workplace sexual harassment 
with the broad bill language as proposed does not strike me as good public policy. And for 
this reason, we respectfully ask that you oppose LD 53. 
Thank you for your consideration and for allowing me to testify. l would be happy to answer 
any questions the committee has now or at the Work Session.
