= 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 53 .A
. 
An Act to Ensure Accountability for Workplace Harassment and Assault 
by Removing Intentional Acts and Omissions from Workers’r 
.- Compensation Exemptions 
. Feb. 16, 2023 
- 
Presented by Elizabeth Brogan 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of 
the Labor and Housing Committee, my name is ElizabethBrogan andl 
am the Executive Director of theWorkers ’ Compensation Coordinating 
Council and Maine Council of Self-insurers. My testimony is in- 
opposition to LD 53. 
In 1916, Maine transitioned from a common law tort system—injured~ 
workers having to prove some fault on the part of their employer to 
receive an uncertain amount of compensation- ——to a comprehensive 
workers’ compensation system in whichdefined benefits to an injured 
worker were swift and assured. While the system has changed over the 
years, it remains a no-fault system in which an injured worker is_ 
compensated for lost-time and medical expenses, having to show only 
that the injury arose out of and in the course of employment (basically 
at work and because of work). Employers are required to insure against 
these losses, but do so knowing the remedy is exclusive and the costs 
predictable. " ’ ‘ ' 
-* 
This bill, if enacted, would substantially remove just one half of the so- 
called "grand bargain" of workers’ compensation, that part which 
protects employers from civil lawsuit when an injury happens at work 
and because of work. Losses would no longer be insurable or 
predictable, although employers would still remain strictly liable for 
work-related injuries in a no-fault system. The cost of doing business in 
Maine could become out of reach for many, as the cost of defending 
civil lawsuits would be added to the cost of workers’ compensation.
The proposed language in LD 53 is exceptionally broad, applying not 
just to intentional torts, such as an assault, but to all intentional acts or 
omissions. Failing to clean up a puddle of water is an omission. Turning 
on a machine is an intentional act. With such broad language, virtually 
any injury could subject an employer to both a workers’ compensation 
claim and civil suit. Given the title of this bill, I assume the sponsors 
intend a more limited effect. 
Victims of workplace harassment are not without remedy outside of 
the Workers’ Compensation Act. The Maine Human Rights Act provides 
for compensatory and punitive damages. Pain and suffering, mental 
anguish, loss of enjoyment of life are included in those compensatory 
damages. 
Victims of workplace assault are also not without remedy, but there isa 
threshold determination before a common law civil action can proceed. 
lf an assault is determined to be work—related, workers’ compensation 
is the exclusive remedy, with benefits provided regardless of an 
employer's fault; if it is determined not to be work-related, a victim can 
ﬁle civil suit for damages. 
While it is true that there are states which do make limited exception to 
workers’ compensation exclusivity, where harm is intended or known 
with some degree of certainty to result, the language of LD 53 goes well 
beyond this. Also, a single—issue compendium does not tell the whole 
story about another state's statute. Each workers’ compensation 
statute is very different across a wide range of benefits and restrictions. 
There are always nuances.- 
For these reasons, l urge the committee to vote ought not to pass on LD 
53. Thank you. .
