 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  (MMA)  
 
In Opposition to  
LD 53, An Act to Ensure Accountability for Workplace Harassment and Assault by Removing 
Intentional Acts and Omissions from Workers' Compensation Exemptions  
 
February 16, 2022  
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor & Housing 
Committe e. My name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in opposition to LD 53 on 
behalf of the 70 municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s 
Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills  of municipal 
interest.   
 Municipal  leaders want to be clear that they condemn harassment and assault in the 
workplace.  Local government employees and volunteers provide important and vital services to 
our communities and should be able to do so in an en vironment free from harassment .  It is for 
this reason, our managers, administrators,  and elected  official s have put into place the polic ies 
necessary to avoid th ose actions, and to remedy issues as they arise.   
 However, municipal officials oppose the me asure proposed in LD 53 .   
  While the title of the bill suggests that the exclusive remedy provision in existing law 
would be repealed only in cases of workplace harassment and assault, the language of the bill 
does not expressly state that outcome, thereby affording all employees covered under a workers’ 
compensation program two opportunities for adjudication  (e.g., workers’ compensation process 
and civil claim)  for any injury arising out of the course of employment .  This change tips the 
labor relations scales in favor of the employee and could potentially shift additional  costs to 
property taxpayers.  
Additionally, while the bill applies  the provision to an “i ntentional act or omission ,” it is 
not clear what that entails, as the proposal does not define the terms , thereby leaving it to the 
courts to decide what actions are subject to the provisions envisioned in LD 53.    
If the Legislature inten ds to afford a right to a civil remedy, then that change should be 
done cautiously , with attention to details and definitions describing the issue and the remedy 
precisely  applied to address the problem needing a solution.  Failure to do so, could put the 
municipalities  at risk of litigating the same issue, twice.   
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue. If you have any 
questions about our position, please contact me at kdufour@memun.org  or 592 -4038.   

