REGIONAL OFFICES 
84 HARLOW ST. 2ND FLOOR 
'5; 53- BANGOR, MAINE 04401 
gjjj TELI (207) 941-3070 
FAX; (207) 941-3075 ~.>-:~=¢1; ﬁ\ ‘ll 
AARON M. FREY PRESUMPSCOT ST., SUITE _ PORTLAND, MAINE 04103 
TEL: (207) 822-0260 
FAX: (207) 822-0259 
STATE or MAINE 
OEEIOEOE THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 14 ACCESS H‘G““’*‘Y~STE1 
CARIBOU, MAINE 04736 
L(J€SOE7F)(§2 C§6/;€i0t3lAlNE RELAY 711 6 STATE HOUSE STATION TEL: (207) 4963793 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0006 FAXI (207)496-3291 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1 78, An Act to Support Reentry and 
Reintegration into the Community 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members 
of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Aaron Frey, 
and I have the privilege of serving as Maine’s Attorney General- . AI am here, today, to speak in 
opposition to LD 178, An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community. 
First, Iwant to start with some background information about parole. Historically, parole 
was used in Maine to release convicted offenders from incarceration at a time when offenders 
received indeterminate sentences. Indeterminate sentences were sentences that were in the form 
of a range ofjail or prison time. For example, under this sentencing scheme, an individual 
convicted of a crime could receive a sentence of one to three years of incarceration. indeterminate 
sentences were uncertain and unpredictable. The approach minimized the role of judges in 
sentencing, invested the parole board with signiﬁcant authority on the "back end" of sentencing to 
determine the length of time actually served, and undermined public conﬁdence in a system where 
the sentence imposed could bear little relation to the sentence actually served. 
Given these issues and other concerns with this sentencing framework, parole was 
abolished in many states as part of a national movement towards "determinate" (or ﬁxed term) 
sentencing. In 1976, parole was abolished in Maine. See F ernala’ v. Maine State Parole Bd., 447 
A.2d 1236, 1238 (Me. 1982) (holding that "the Criminal Code abolished the institution of 
parole except as applied to prisoners sentenced prior to the Code's effective date" of May l, 1976). 
Currently, very few persons remain subject to parole, given that only those in the custody of the 
Department of Corrections pursuant to asentence imposed on a crime subject to the law in effect 
prior to May 1, 1976, remain eligible for parole. 
Determinate sentencing is an approach under which a judge imposes a sentence for a set or 
certain amount of jail or prison time. It has been labeled "truth in sentencing" because it leads to 
greater predictability in sentencing, strengthens the integrity of criminal sentencing, and helps to 
eliminate inconsistencies and uncertainty about how much time an individual will actually serve 
in jail or prison. Determinate sentencing also ensures that victims of crime and other stakeholders 
in the criminal justice system, including law enforcement, attorneys, the court, and the offender, 
have an accurate understanding about the length of a sentence. 
Second, I would like to address some concerns with this bill.
LD 178 would vastly expand eligibility for parole in Maine. Under LD l78, individuals 
who receive a life sentence are eligible for parole once they serve at least 20 years of that sentence. 
Additionally, all individuals whose sentences are at least one year would be eligible for parole 
once they serve not less than one—third of the unsuspended sentence or one~third of the most recent 
unsuspended sentence imposed by the court. This would mean that an individual sentenced toa 
year in prison would be eligible for parole after serving four months of that sentence, less any 
"good time" sentencing deductions. See l7-A M.R.S. §§ 2307 et seq. 
LD 178 also presents legal and constitutional issues to the extent the bill seeks to expand 
parole eligibility retroactively (to those who were sentenced before the effective date of the 
legislation or who are alleged to have committed a crime before the effective date). See Bossie v. 
State, 488 A.2d 477, 479-80 (Me. 1985) (striking down a sentencing statute as unconstitutional 
where the statute increased "good time“ deductions available to inmates committed to custody 
before its effective date). To the extent the bill authorizes the parole board to shorten, reduce, or 
discharge a convicted offender before the natural expiration of a criminal sentence, the bill 
overlaps with the Governor's clemency authority and thus implicates the separation of powers 
clause ofthe Maine Constitution. See Gilbert v. State, 505 A.2d 1326, 1328 (Me. 1986) (holding 
a parole law unconstitutional because it provided the parole board with discretionary authority to 
fully discharge a life sentence after the parolee successfully completed 10 years of parole). 
The Committee may wish to address some of the practical issues associated with 
implementing parole that are not addressed by the bill. These include: 
l. LD 178 provides that an individual seeking parole must be represented by counsel, 
but it does not address funding. Currently, individuals subject to parole have no 
statutory right to counsel before the board. 
2. If parole is denied, the bill requires that the parole board review the matter again no 
later than 30 months. In contrast, current rules for parole provide that the parole 
board may establish a date when the person can be reconsidered for parole 
depending on the speciﬁc circumstances of the matter before it. 
Finally, reestablishing parole will have a signiﬁcant impact on victims and surviving family 
members of homicide victims. Whenever an individual is eligible for parole, the parole board 
conducts a hearing where victims relive the trauma of the crime with limited certainty or ﬁnality 
in the proceeding. 
Additionally, parole proceedings often leave victims and surviving family members with 
uncertainty about when the offender will actually be released from incarceration. For over 30 
years, the Legislature has enshrined in the criminal process four commitments to crime victims: 
the right to prior notice of hearings and court events, the deﬁnitive right to be heard, the right to 
notice of the ﬁnal outcome, and truth in sentencing. This legislation does not live up to these four 
commitments. 
I am happy to answer any questions that you may have and will be available for the work 
session on this bill. 
lzl
