Good morning. Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and honorable 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety: my 
name is Adam Zuckerman and I am the lobbyist for the Maine People’s Alliance. Our 
32,000 members stretch from Kittery to Fort Kent.
MPA supports LD 178, an Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the 
Community. In theory, Maine’s criminal justice system has many goals. They include 
retribution, rehabilitation, and re-entry. All are important in their own right. However, our 
myopic focus on retribution at the cost of all else poisons our efforts at rehabilitation and 
re-entry. 
Parole incentivizes rehabilitation and improves re-entry. Almost a quarter of people in 
Maine prisons have sentences in excess of ten years. Even if people have proven that 
they are ready to go home, Maine is one of the only states without a process to review 
their sentences and transition them back to the community with supervision. Allowing 
rehabilitated Mainers to transition home to complete their sentences while working and 
caring for their families helps us all. Parole provides opportunities to contribute to the 
community and promotes rehabilitation. In contrast, lingering in prison after 
rehabilitation makes re-entry nearly impossible. 
LD 178 has broad bipartisan support because regardless of our political party, we can 
all agree that all Mainers deserve, hope, healing, and rehabilitation. Giving Mainers a 
second chance is not just the right thing to do–it is the smart thing to do. When we 
abolished parole in 1976 it did not make us any safer–it just made us poorer. We spend 
$76,000 a year for every person we incarcerate. That costs nine times more than 
supervising them on parole. For every hundred Mainers we grant parole, it would boost 
our economy by $14.7 million.1 
I urge you to vote to pass LD 178 and reinstate parole in Maine. Thank you.
1Colby Laboratory for Economic Studies. “Rethinking Parole in Maine: Considering Economic 
Contributions of Parolees in the Context of Recent Trends in Maine's Labor Force.” 27 November 2022. 
https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9484
