Adamel Rosario
Warren
LD 178
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Adamel Rosario, and I am writing in support of LD 178.
First and foremost, I would like to thank the committee for working tirelessly on this 
parole bill.
Let me start by saying God bless you all and with that thank you for even thinking 
about parole. I had and have time to think about what my family and friends, as well 
as my victim’s family and friends on what I put them through. The pain and hurt they 
must have endured for what I have done, and I take full responsibility for my serious 
crime that I committed against not only my victim but their family and friends, my 
family and friends, as well as my community. So, for a number of years I put myself 
through a lot of hurt and pain and so into my life came anger issues, domestic 
violence, as well as my substance use disorder problems, and most importantly God 
and Lord Jesus into my life and gave me a second chance, cleansing my soul and 
since then I have been helping others and not going the way I once went.
The people involved in your life do not deserve to be in a situation like being hurt or 
yourself at that. Yes I have changed my life around. I opened my eyes and my heart to
life itself and pursued to take full advantage of the education programs. My spelling 
needs a lot of help but it was a lot worse! But I won't give up in the name of Jesus. So 
if God would give me a second chance, I believe this Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, not to mention Senator Beebe-Center as well, hopefully in God's 
name, will also give me a second chance by passing the parole bill LD 178. So I can 
build trust from my victim, family, and loved ones, and hopefully the community. 
And my own family as well. These are my heartfelt goals if I'm granted parole. 
Thank you very much for taking the time to read this letter and thank you in advance for your 
attention. may God bless you all. 

