Testimony in Support of LD 178 “An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the
Community”
March 12, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and
Public Safety Committee,
My name is Adrienne Horne, I am a resident of Appleton, and I am writing to you to share my
support for LD 178 and the effort to re-establish parole in Maine.
I support this bill because I want to feel safer in my community, and I believe that restorative
support and rehabilitative services are what make us safer. As someone who has experienced
violence myself, seeing personal transformation makes me feel much safer than seeing
someone imprisoned with no incentive or hope for change. Data has shown that long sentences
are counterproductive since they do not act as a deterrent and cost money that could be going
towards services that can protect us and prevent harm. Other states, including our neighbors in
Vermont, have managed to reduce prison populations by 20% while maintaining a decline in
crime rates. I would like to see parole used as a tool to reduce high costs of incarceration and
reallocate some of the funds to victim, survivor, and reentry services.
As a Maine resident for most of my life, I also wish to see Maine itself grow and change and
reverse harms caused by the 1976 criminal code reforms. Not only has Maine been reported as
having one of the harshest sentencing practices of all states, it’s also noted as one of the four
worst states in the country in terms of pathways to release based on rehabilitation and the fifth
worst state in terms of having a racial disparity in the prison population. LD 178 is an opportunity
to follow the recommendations of the 2022 Commission to Examine Reestablishing Parole and
take a step towards improving our criminal justice system.
Thank you for considering my testimony and for all the work you do. I hope you join me in
support of LD 178.
Sincerely,
Adrienne Horne
adriennehorne@protonmail.com
Adrienne Horne
Appleton
LD 178
Testimony in Support of LD 178 “An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into 
the Community”
March 12, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice
and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Adrienne Horne, I am a resident of Appleton, and I am writing to you to share my 
support for LD 178 and the effort to re-establish parole in Maine.
I support this bill because I want to feel safer in my community, and I believe that restorative 
support and rehabilitative services are what make us safer. As someone who has 
experienced violence myself, seeing personal transformation makes me feel much safer than 
seeing someone imprisoned with no incentive or hope for change. Data has shown that long 
sentences are counterproductive since they do not act as a deterrent and cost money that 
could be going towards services that can protect us and prevent harm. Other states, including
our neighbors in Vermont, have managed to reduce prison populations by 20% while 
maintaining a decline in crime rates. I would like to see parole used as a tool to reduce high 
costs of incarceration and reallocate some of the funds to victim, survivor, and reentry 
services. 
As a Maine resident for most of my life, I also wish to see Maine itself grow and change and 
reverse harms caused by the 1976 criminal code reforms. Not only has Maine been reported 
as having one of the harshest sentencing practices of all states, it’s also noted as one of the 
four worst states in the country in terms of pathways to release based on rehabilitation and 
the fifth worst state in terms of having a racial disparity in the prison population. LD 178 is an 
opportunity to follow the recommendations of the 2022 Commission to Examine 
Reestablishing Parole and take a step towards improving our criminal justice system.
Thank you for considering my testimony and for all the work you do. I hope you join me in 
support of LD 178.
Sincerely,
Adrienne Horne
adriennehorne@protonmail.com
