Ajoung Malual
Warren
LD 178
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Ajoung Malual and I am writing in support of  LD 178.
Parole would mean a lot of things for a lot of people, but for me it wouldn't affect me 
due to my sentence which isn't long, but once again it would affect me because I have 
family members fighting hard to get paroled. I understand that parole is a privilege, 
not something guaranteed, but how long does a resident have to go without getting a 
write-up or how many classes or substance programs do they have to do just to prove 
that they changed? 
First of all, I would like to take full responsibility for the serious crime I committed 
against my victims, their family, their friends, my family and friends, and my 
community. I have been incarcerated for 4 years now and I have completed: use 
offender program, drug program, helping men recover, and I'm currently attending 
AA and NA. I'm also waiting to get back in college after graduating from Portland 
High School in Maine in 2015. After graduating, I attended Southern Maine 
Community College for a year. My goal is to get back in college while incarcerated. 
Since being incarcerated, I have learned how to cut hair and plan on going to hair 
school when I get released and work for my cousin who owns his own barbershop. 
If parole is granted and my family members get it, I intend to help them as much as I 
can. That includes helping them with transportation, substance abuse classes, helping 
them get a job or anything that can help them maintain a good and jail free life. I 
understand that some people don't want this parole to go through, but some people 
have to understand that we are all humans and people make mistakes. I know 
residents who have been discipline-free for 10 years and have done everything on 
their case plan. Does that mean that they can't get a second chance in life after going 
10 years in prison without an incident? 
And finally, to build trust from my Victim and their loved ones, the community, and my own 
family as well. These are my heartfelt goals if I'm granted parole. Thank you very much for 
taking the time to read this testimony. may God bless you and your loved ones.

