LD 178 - An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, my name is AI Cleveland and I am a resident of Portland. 
I urge you to support LD 178 and re-establish parole in Maine. 
I am here today because I believe that people can be changed by taking accountability 
for harm they cause. I want real public safety in Maine and I know that building 
accountable relationships is the way to get there. Life and long-term sentences, where 
incarcerated people are never able to reintegrate back into the community, are denying 
our state's ability to heal. Parole offers a chance for incarcerated Mainers to show their 
transformation to the people they harmed, their community, and their loved ones. Parole 
gives incarcerated people the ability to build the accountable relationships that we need 
to be safe. 
Taxpayers are paying for the inability of state leaders to create pathways for personal 
rehabilitation and transformation. Parole is far less expensive than the current cost of 
incarceration and sets people up to get the supports they need to thrive when back in 
the community. The saving costs can be spent on community services and move people 
away from the legal system. 
I have multiple friends serving decades long sentences. Their time incarcerated will take 
over the majority of their lives and will be removed from family, friends, and community. 
I’ve watched their spirits and dreams be crushed. I have watched them be failed by 
poverty, the housing crisis, and a poor healthcare system. I have watched them take 
every opportunity to be accountable but their actions are limited because of being 
locked up. 
Maine’s correctional system does very little to protect us from harm; it never gets to the 
root causes of why people end up inside. Re-enstating parole brings hope. It brings the 
possibility of true justice that cannot exist when someone is behind bars but through 
accountable relationships. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Al Cleveland 
Portland, ME 
alcleveland22@qmaiI.com
