Amy Larkin
Arundel
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Criminal
Justice and Public Safety Committee, my name is Amy Larkin, I am a resident of Arundel and I
am writing to you today to show my support for LD 178 and the effort to re-establish parole in
Maine.
One reason I support this bill is because parole gives second chances. I believe the evidence
shows we’re locking up folks who could be contributing to their communities. Having an
opportunity to participate in a supportive, restorative, and victim-sensitive parole system would
help communities heal rather than simply punish an individual. Parole would mean fewer
children have incarcerated parents and ensure that fewer people are damaged by the long-term
effects of imprisonment.
I’m a caregiver for my 100-year-old grandmother, so I also support this bill from that perspective.
With 20% of our prison residents in Maine over age 50, we’re keeping folks locked up who are
less likely to commit crimes as they age. Aging is a difficult process and I see it first hand every
day. I know the time, energy, and money necessary to deal with new medical problems that pop
up. Going through this process in prison must be a constant struggle. From a practical
standpoint, we’re also spending 3-9 times more to incarcerate an elderly person than a young
one. Why spend taxpayer dollars on increased medical costs within the prison system? Since
1984, Life Without Parole sentences have increased significantly, which means here in Maine
we’ll be spending more and more on geriatric care as time goes on under the current system.
How will we pay for that and why would we spend that money on continuing to keep folks locked
up who could be back in our communities?
I, like 91% of folks surveyed by the ACLU, believe our criminal justice system needs reform. We
have no proof that long sentences have a deterrent effect and from research we know that folks
granted parole are 36% less likely to return to prison than those released with zero supervision.
There are so many reasons to support parole in Maine, and the ones I’ve stated here are just a
few. Thank you for your work, your time, and your consideration. I hope I can count on your
support for LD 178.
Amy Larkin
Arundel
LD 178
Amy Larkin
Arundel
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, my name is Amy Larkin, I am a 
resident of Arundel and I am writing to you today to show my support for LD 178 and
the effort to re-establish parole in Maine. 
One reason I support this bill is because parole gives second chances. I believe the 
evidence shows we’re locking up folks who could be contributing to their 
communities. Having an opportunity to participate in a supportive, restorative, and 
victim-sensitive parole system would help communities heal rather than simply 
punish an individual. Parole would mean fewer children have incarcerated parents and
ensure that fewer people are damaged by the long-term effects of imprisonment. 
I’m a caregiver for my 100-year-old grandmother, so I also support this bill from that 
perspective. With 20% of our prison residents in Maine over age 50, we’re keeping 
folks locked up who are less likely to commit crimes as they age. Aging is a difficult 
process and I see it first hand every day. I know the time, energy, and money 
necessary to deal with new medical problems that pop up. Going through this process 
in prison must be a constant struggle. From a practical standpoint, we’re also 
spending 3-9 times more to incarcerate an elderly person than a young one. Why 
spend taxpayer dollars on increased medical costs within the prison system? Since 
1984, Life Without Parole sentences have increased significantly, which means here 
in Maine we’ll be spending more and more on geriatric care as time goes on under the
current system. How will we pay for that and why would we spend that money on 
continuing to keep folks locked up who could be back in our communities? 
I, like 91% of folks surveyed by the ACLU, believe our criminal justice system needs 
reform. We have no proof that long sentences have a deterrent effect and from 
research we know that folks granted parole are 36% less likely to return to prison than
those released with zero supervision. There are so many reasons to support parole in 
Maine, and the ones I’ve stated here are just a few. Thank you for your work, your 
time, and your consideration. I hope I can count on your support for LD 178.
