Andrea Itkin
Camden
LD 178
I have been volunteering at the Maine State Prison for the past 4 years, off and on due
to Covid restrictions. In that time I have met many residents - residents who are 
making good use of their time by going to school, training dogs, tending gardens and 
beehives, tending to the needs of dying residents, communicating with people 
interested in prison reform, practicing yoga and meditation, and learning to respect 
themselves and others. I believe that a parole system would not only help motivate the
incarcerated to take part in the programs offered, but help orient them back into 
society upon their release. Parole would give the newly released a set system of 
support, which at the moment is haphazard at best. 
I know that many of the crimes committed by the residents were horrific. There is no 
denying that. Certainly victims should have a say in whether the person who 
committed the crime should be released before their sentence is completed. But I also 
think that those affected by the crime should have a chance to hear what the 
incarcerated person has been doing or not doing with their time in prison before 
making their judgment. The key to parole working well will be an informed parole 
board well versed in restorative justice, and parole officers who can help their clients 
get on their feet, keep close track of their behavior, and refer them to services that 
they may need. 
I feel prison can be a useful tool to changing the trajectory of a person’s life and the life of the 
community if the right actions are taken - if rehabilitation is the goal, not punishment. Parole is
an important step in rehabilitation. It gives incarcerated individuals hope that if they work hard
to make positive changes in prison and become accountable for their actions, that they may 
be able to shorten their sentences and go step-by-step back into family and community life, 
instead of being suddenly dropped back into their community without a net after living away 
from society for far too many years. In other words, parole is about hope and second 
chances. Don’t we all want that?

