Antti Pentikainen
Think Peace Hub
LD 178
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee,
my name is Antti Pentikäinen. I serve currently as Research Professor at Jimmy and 
Rosalyn Carter School for Conflict Analysis and Resolution in George Mason 
University. I lead a center there studying how societies and individuals can heal from 
past harm and move beyond the divisions that hinder their safety, wellbeing and 
development. I also work for U.S. Institute of Peace and were Secretary for 
Leadership Group preparing legislation for National Truth, Racial Healing and 
Transformation Commission initiated by Congresswoman Barbara Lee. Besides that I 
support local truth telling and social healing processes through Think Peace Learning 
and Support Hub around United States, including Portland, Iowa City and Maine. 
In the past years I have also been training prosecutors, judges, legal mediators, DOJ 
Community Relations Service officials among others in the U.S. and overseas. 
Neuroscience and trauma awareness are providing us new insights what happens in 
human brain when treat or injury occur. Parole is not significant only for those who 
are incarcerated but opens potential possibility also for those who have been harmed 
to heal. Societies that are trapped in cycles of violence become defined by what has 
happened rather than what they may become.
At this moment you are at a mountain top. Without passing LD 178 and reintroducing
parole Maine is risking to be left behind from significant improvements in criminal 
justice systems studied and introduced elsewhere. Parole means a controlled 
opportunity for re-entry into the society that can be supported by multiple measures 
such as restorative justice. Restorative justice is a wonderful example where affected 
communities and support networks of the both the victim and perpetrator are invited 
into a voluntary process to identify necessary steps for safety, non recurrence and 
reparation. It is a process that guides to recognize also the emotional injury, which 
often remains unaddressed in traditional court proceedings, and take responsibility on 
non recurrence and repairing the harm on individuals and community. In restorative 
justice perpetrators don’t get a free ticket but are held accountable by their own 
community to do what has been agreed with the victim and their support networks. 
The work that I lead in the Carter School and in the Think Peace Hub are benefitting 
enormously from the contributions of Leo Hylton, currently serving 50-year sentence 
in Maine. Leo has been recently accepted into the PhD program at Carter School and 
we very much look forward to his research and contribution. Leo has already given us
and many around the country hope that transformation is possible and can lead into 
healing. Today I ask that you would not take away his hope, but by restoring parole 
you would expand transformation and healing in the state of Maine.
Sincerely yours, 
Antti Pentikäinen
Research Professor, Carter School 
Convener, Think Peace Learning and Support Hub 

