March 12, 2023
Dear Members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee (CJPS),
I write to ask that you reinstate parole in the state of Maine.
Before I met Steven Matthew Clark, currently an incarcerated person in the Maine State Prison
System,  I did not have much hope for the transformation of the United States (U.S.) criminal
justice and prison systems. I had read about the transformative and humane approach practiced
in other countries, such as Norway,  but I always felt the U.S. was decades away from taking
such steps. However, having met Steven, learned of his story, and seen firsthand the reform
work he is engaged in, I have changed my mind. I am hopeful, now more than ever, that
transformation is possible for both the individual and the correctional system, thanks to the work
of the Maine Prison System.
I met Steven in September 2022 during an online facilitation training program. We participated in
the same breakout room and supported each other around facilitation design. In the months
since then, Steven’s transformed life has testified to the redemptive power of a prison
environment that fosters and supports repentance and transformation.
Many will share that parole will enhance Maine’s economy. And they will share that offering an
opportunity for a second chance in the form of parole to those who have taken responsibility for
the harm they caused as they work toward repair is critical for rehabilitation, healthy families,
community integrity, and public safety. Research has supported the validity of these assertions.
I also believe reinstating parole will further establish Maine as a leader in criminal justice and
prison reform. Correctional programs here in the U.S. and abroad will run to Maine to learn from
your model.
Indeed, justice must be served to help make whole those who were injured by the harmful
actions of incarcerated people. At the same time, I ask the state of Maine to exercise mercy by
reinstating parole, as the Maine State Prison residents said: “The opportunity to be considered
for parole would allow us to demonstrate to society, and to those we harmed personally, our
ability to grow, change, offer healing, and become contributing members of society.”
I appreciate your consideration.
Sincerely,
April Thomas
CEO
PO Box 360497, Decatur , GA 30036  •
www .sdms360.com
• (404) 594-3399

