Testimony Submitted to Maine Legislature, Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, on 
LD 178, "An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the 
Community" 
Good morning, 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 178. I am Dr. Arthur Jones of 
Belfast. I am a retired Criminal Justice Professor. I am currently a volunteer with the 
Restorative Justice Project Maine Legislative Committee and a member of the Parole 
4 Maine citizen group. I am also on the Board of Visitors for Waldo and Knox County 
jails. I served on the Parole Study Commission and voted to reinstate parole in Maine 
My background includes a Ph.D. in criminal justice studies from the Union Institute 
University, Cincinnati, Ohio. I worked for 30 years in the criminal justice ﬁeld asa 
practitioner and held numerous executive-level positions. I was appointed by the 
Governor and served on the State Parole Board for twenty years in two different states, 
New Jersey and Rhode Island. I retired from public service in 2001 and became a full- 
time Criminal Justice Professor. My experience and expertise in the area of Corrections 
and Parole qualify me to make a strong recommendation on this bill. 
QLD 178 is based on the key fmdings and recommendations of the Parole Study 
Commissions ’ Report to: Reestablish p2l]‘0l€ ill Maine. 
v Parole Establishes Incentives for Rehabilitation and Improves Re- 
entry 
0 Parole is the best transition back into the community. The process promotes 
rehabilitation and provides opportunities to continue in the community 
0 Parole means fewer people are damaged by the long-term effects of 
imprisonment. 
¢ Parole Improves Public Safety 
0 Parole mandates supervision following release to the community 
0 Parole would not be granted to anyone who represents a risk to the community: 
All parolees must have a positive psychological and low-risk assessment. 
o Most victims /victim advocates support parole. 
0 They prefer treatment over extended sentences
They prefer release on parole supervision as opposed to maxing out with no 
supervision 
Parole Saves Money and Boosts The Economy 
It is 9 times more expensive to incarcerate someone than to supervise them on 
parole 
Experts estimate a S 14.7Million boost to Maine's economy for every 100 
people granted parole. 
The majority of states offer the possibility of parole. Only a small 
number of states have abolished or severely curtailed discretionary 
parole. 
Most of those states who abolished parole, including Maine and the federal 
government have instituted some form of community release program. 
Most Supervised Community Release programs, including the ( Maine SCCP) will 
not have any effect on long-term sentences and therefore should not be an 
alternative to parole. 
Empirical research documents lower recidivism rates among 
parolees compared with offenders released on probation and those 
who complete their sentences without supervision. ‘ Examples of 
empirical studies. 
In my experience, the prospect of parole provides a strong incentive 
for inmates to: 
avoid disciplinary problems, and enroll in rehabilitative and educational 
programs designed to prevent crime and reduce recidivism. 
This increases public safety, especially among inmates whose risk factors are 
correlated with high recidivism rates (e.g., inmates with chronic and persistent 
substance use and mental health challenges, inmates with poor employment 
records, and inmates who consistently engage in what researchers and mental 
health practitioners refer to as ”criminal thinking). 
Parole caseloads are generally smaller than probation caseloads, which increases 
the quality of supervision and contributes to public safety. 
There is overwhelming empirical evidence that parole supervision is significantly 
less expensive than incarceration. 
ome studies have yielded different results.
I conclude by strongly recommending the passage of LD 178 
Du. a4h.tI|.uJ ‘|. C. 9<m¢4 
18 Waldo Ave 
Belfast, Maine 04915 
207-323-5515 
Foxtrotl @r0adrunner.c0m
