                                                                                                March 11, 2023  
 
LD 178 – “An Act To Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community ”  
 
Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and  distinguished  members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety  Committee, my name is Bruce Noddin,  and I am the Executive Director of The Maine Prisoner Re -Entry 
Network or MPRN, a state -wide non -profit focused on providing peer support  and coordinat ed community 
resources for hundreds of individuals  returning to Maine communities from prison , jail, and treatment courts. I 
was also appointed to the Sta te Workforce Board  by Governor Mills and the  Maine Recovery Council by 
Senator Jackson , in 2022.  
 
I am writing in  support of  LD 178 - An Act To Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community .  
 
In recent years the Maine Department of Corrections (M DOC) has provided a wide variety of life changing 
training, hands on , and educational opportunities for resid ents within  MDOC facilities. Many of the men and 
women who have taken advantage of these tremendous  opportunities are back in our communities, making 
incredibly positive contribut ions to their towns, cities , and neighborhoods . Unfortunately, though, many  more  
are receiving life changing training , education, and hands on experience , but our Maine communities will never 
see the community changing benefits. Why? Because these folks will either never leave MDOC custody or wil l 
be too old to contribute.  
 
LD 178 seeks to change that trajectory. The rip pling impact of one returning citizen can change whole 
communities. In our work with MPRN we ’ve witnessed  firsthand , the change one person can make as a 
dedicated employee, family member, and contributing member of society. We ’ve seen the positive ripple effect 
this has on others who are in the criminal justice system  and on those whose  behaviors may lead to criminal 
involvemen t.  
 
As the co -founder of Rose ’s Room , a support group for family and lov ed ones of incarcerated individuals, and a 
father of son who is currently incarcerated, I need to bring up the word hope. Hope is the m otivator for the 
families of the incarcerated, for incarcerated individuals, and for communities who support them. Hope is the 
reason for getting up in the morning and doing the next right thing to advance your li fe. Imagine having no 
hope.  
 
LD 178 restore s the hope of families, individuals , and communities. Hope that we can accomplish great things. 
Hope that we can give back to our communities.  Hope that we can be reunited with our loved ones. Hope that 
we can break the cycle of incarcera tion and be of assistance to our fellow community members.  
 
Beyond all of the personal benefits , of LD 178 , are the practical benefits.  Well tr ained and educated folks will 
enhance our depleted workforce , families will have positive, engaged parents back in their lives, communities 
will benefit from the income potential a nd contributions to the local economy, and many will be role models to 
prove that the re are a lternatives to lifestyles that lead to incarceration. Lastly these folks will be paying ta xes 
and no longer be a drain  on state resources . I hope the committee will consider recommending that LD 178 , 
ought to pass.  
 
Thank you!  
 
Bruce Noddin, Executive Director , Maine Prisoner Re -Entry Network (MPRN)  

