Calvin Footman 
Warren
LD 178
Honorable Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Calvin Footman and I am a resident of Maine State Prison.
I am writing to you today to show my absolute support for LD 178 and the effort to 
re-establish parole in Maine.
Many people often speak about why parole was taken away or can always speak 
about why the state of Maine has moved forward. Everyone always talks about 
change and how  far along inmates have come during their time of incarceration, but 
how many people have actually said, “It's time to allow these same inmates a second 
chance and an opportunity to give back to the same Community they took from?” If 
nothing is, and everything is, constantly becoming, the only thing constant is change. 
Why not do just that and CHANGE?
Start giving people with lengthy sentences an opportunity to give back to the 
community, and to the world. It's our youth that we owe so much to, and who better to
give that advice than someone who has already lived the lifestyle and situation(s) on 
the very path that most youths will face? I take nothing from book knowledge, but 
there's more value from anyone who has lived the very situation, as opposed to an 
example written in a book. I take nothing from any counselor facilitating a drug or 
alcohol abuse course. Yet the ability to reach a recovering addict is easier handled 
from someone who has been on the same path. The only ones holding us back from 
making positive changes are the same people who speak about change but deny 
incarcerated people the second chance we've spent many years of our lives to correct 
and be better people.
Everything that could and can be done while incarcerated has and is being done by the
part of programming through MDOC by those incarcerated. All that is left to be done 
now is to reinstate parole. Please give us the second chance that even you would ask 
for if our roles were reversed.
Respectfully,
Calvin Footman  #170073
