MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Opposition to L.D. 178,  
An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community 
Submitted by Chief Charles Rumsey  
March 16, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the 
Chief of the Cumberland Police Department. I am submitting testimony on behalf 
of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association in Opposition to LD 178.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and personal 
relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in law 
enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police training 
and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for equality of law 
enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the prevention and detection 
of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics; and to promote the 
profession of law enforcement as an integral and dedicated force in today's society 
sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill would support an individual's reentry and reintegration into the 
community.  
We are opposed to LD 178 for two main reasons.  
First, the bill was a concept draft until it was made public close to the public 
hearing. Our Association works as a team to determine when and how we will 
weigh in on a bill.  We all make time for this because we know how important the 
legislative process, but we cannot make an educated decision and vote on bills in 
concept draft form.   
Second, after reviewing the language of the bill, we are concerned that the bill does 
not go far enough to protect victims.  We understand the proponents’ reasons for 
wanting to reestablish parole, but we feel that the current sentencing structures and 
good time laws already provide the relief that they seek.  The existing structures 
strike the balance between unnecessarily punitive sentences and victim/survivor 
peace of mind.   
For these reasons, we hope that you will vote in opposition to LD 178. And, on 
behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank you for your 
work on this Committee.  
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
