Testimony in Support of “LD 178: An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the
Community”
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and
Public Safety Committee,
My name is Claire Horne and I am a resident of Appleton, Maine. I have been a resident of
Maine for the past 25 years. Today, I am writing to you to voice my support for “LD 178: An Act
to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community.”
Parole is one avenue that can support reentry into our communities and help individuals to
access resources to support effective, long-term rehabilitation. Incarceration rips individuals
from their families and their community, creating many additional ripples of harm for those
connected to the incarcerated person. Incarceration causes trauma and myriad long-term
effects in people in prisons. The opportunity of parole can allow incarcerated parents to be with
their children, and allow incarcerated individuals to contribute to their communities. Supported
reentry, enabled by parole, is shown to be much more successful than unsupported release. LD
178 makes these opportunities possible for incarcerated Mainers and their communities.
Another opportunity parole provides is the chance for our state to address the despicable racial
disparities in the Maine justice system. There is a vast racial disparity in arrests and sentencing
in Maine. Statistics show that Maine is the fifth worst in the nation when it comes to racial
disparities in prisons, with a 9:1 ratio of black/white adult prison residents. This is twice the
national average. While I knew there was a disparity, I was appalled to learn these damning
numbers. Restoring parole could provide a way to redress these disparities in arrests and
sentencing.
Further, I believe everyone deserves a chance to be part of healing the wounds that are inflicted
by incarceration, to individuals, families, and entire communities. Crime survivors have reported
wanting rehabilitation over punishment for those who harmed them by a 2 to 1 margin. By
creating a victim-sensitive parole system, LD 178 supports communities in healing from harm.
Thank you for all your work on the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, and for
considering my testimony. I hope you will also support LD 178 and help begin the process to
reestablish parole in Maine.
Sincerely,
Claire Horne
Claire Horne
Appleton
LD 178
Testimony in Support of “LD 178: An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the
Community”
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice
and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Claire Horne and I am a resident of Appleton, Maine. I have been a 
resident of Maine for the past 25 years. Today, I am writing to you to voice my 
support for “LD 178: An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the 
Community.”
Parole is one avenue that can support reentry into our communities and help 
individuals to access resources to support effective, long-term rehabilitation. 
Incarceration rips individuals from their families and their community, creating many 
additional ripples of harm for those connected to the incarcerated person. 
Incarceration causes trauma and myriad long-term effects in people in prisons. The 
opportunity of parole can allow incarcerated parents to be with their children, and 
allow incarcerated individuals to contribute to their communities. Supported reentry, 
enabled by parole, is shown to be much more successful than unsupported release. LD
178 makes these opportunities possible for incarcerated Mainers and their 
communities. 
Another opportunity parole provides is the chance for our state to address the 
despicable racial disparities in the Maine justice system. There is a vast racial 
disparity in arrests and sentencing in Maine. Statistics show that Maine is the fifth 
worst in the nation when it comes to racial disparities in prisons, with a 9:1 ratio of 
black/white adult prison residents. This is twice the national average. While I knew 
there was a disparity, I was appalled to learn these damning numbers. Restoring 
parole could provide a way to redress these disparities in arrests and sentencing.
Further, I believe everyone deserves a chance to be part of healing the wounds that 
are inflicted by incarceration, to individuals, families, and entire communities. Crime 
survivors have reported wanting rehabilitation over punishment for those who harmed
them by a 2 to 1 margin. By creating a victim-sensitive parole system, LD 178 
supports communities in healing from harm.
Thank you for all your work on the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, 
and for considering my testimony. I hope you will also support LD 178 and help 
begin the process to reestablish parole in Maine.
Sincerely,
Claire Horne

