$ iierovezy 
. @ Acivwaczmy ‘ 
% Woieci 
Testimony in Favor of LD 178 
March 13th, 2023 
Good Morning Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Courtney Gary-Allen. I am the Organizing Director of the Maine Recovery 
Advocacy Project, a grassroots network of people in recovery, people who use drugs, and our 
allies. I am here today to testify in favor of LD 178: An Act to Support Reentry and 
Reintegration into the Community. 
Today you will probably hear from The Maine Department of Corrections about the 
numerous rehabilitative, educational, job skills, and recovery programs they have worked to 
implement in the prison system and I Want to begin by thanking them for that work. 
I believe that Commissioner Liberty cares for the people who he is responsible to oversee in 
the prison system. I believe that Governor Mills’ administration is committed to the 
rehabilitation of incarcerated people. And that is why it saddens me that both Governor Mills 
and the Commissioner are opposed to parole. 
Parole is an opportunity to build on this administration's admirable efforts by giving people 
who are incarcerated one more pathway to successful reentry into our communities. Parole is 
about believing in second chances, second chances that are not freely given but instead 
earned by the individual receiving them. Parole is about holding people accountable for their 
actions, while also providing them with a pathway back into our community. 
It’s about believing that the opportunities that we are building on the inside for folks- 
including access to education, treatment, and recovery support - can and will translate to 
productive citizenship, if we also give people the opportunity to do so. 
Today, I am asking each of you to believe in second chances, to believe in recovery, and to 
vote ought to pass on LD 178. I’m happy to answer any questions. 
Thank you, 
Courtney Gary-Allen 
£29“1'19???/@1'@@Q\ ’¢!"*Z}"QI@§?$1£E9I?»1 
(207) 593-6251
