My name is Dan Fortune and I support LD 178. 
I would like to start by thanking every per son who is here today ; whether it be the 
legislators who are hearing the testimonies, the friends  and famil ies of system 
impacted  people  who are testifying in person , the men and women who have 
come home and cannot  leave those they met  in prison  behind, or those who are 
attending virtually . Your time, efforts, thoughts, prayers, hopes, and dreams 
mean more than words can convey .  
To me the key to everything we are talking about today can be f ound in one word , 
REHABILITA TION.  When I google the word rehabilitation the definition  I find is, 
the action of restoring someone to  health or normal life through 
training and therapy after imprisonment, addiction, or illness.  When a 
person breaks the  social contract , commits a harm,  and is sentence d to prison 
rehabilitation is the ONLY way that t hey will re turn to society a better person than 
when they went i n, it is the only way that they can  attempt to repair any of the 
harm that the ir actions have caused . I know this because I am currently serving 
life sentences in Maine State Prison and rehabilitation is one of the few things 
that gives my life meaning.  
The first step of my journey to rehabilitation was admitting  to my self that  I was 
broken  in ways that I could n ot hide anymore , in ways that I d id not understand , 
and could not fix myself.  Then I had to accept  a version of me was going to die 
inside these prison walls, and the only control  I had was what version  it was going 
to be .  
Fast forward 15 y ears, I have received  my Associates , and bachelor’s  degrees , and 
I am currently enro lled in graduate school to get my M asters  degree  in Conflict 
Resolution. I am a Recovery Coach, a Peer Supp ort/mentor , and do many other 
things here at the prison.  I do not say th ese things  to brag because they are not 
things to brag about , they are simply things I do to make my co mmunity better.  
My true role is to help the people in my life, recognize, identify , and begin the 
process  of healing the trauma  in their lives. “Hurt people, hurt people ”. Either  in 
obvious ways that result in arrests and incarceration , or quieter less notable  ways 
that leave invisible scars and poison  on the in side.  
Every sin gle day I get up and wo rk to be the best possible versi on of myself so 
that I can help other people become the best possible versions of themselves.  I 
can never re pair the harm that my actions have cau sed. What  I can do, what I am 
doing, and w hat I will  continue to  do, is make sure that I spend my life helping 
restore others to health.  
That is what rehabilitation means to me .  
None of t he things I have done would have been possible if it were not for men 
and women who have seen things in myself that I did not, who have stuck by me,  
believed in me,  gave me opportunities,  loved me when I did not believe in or love 
myself. They have helped restore me.  
With humbleness I ask that you re store parole, the committee has given you all 
the facts behind why it makes sense logically, it is my hope that today you have 
heard testi mony that makes sense emotionally. Parole will offer every resident  in 
Maine’s D.O.C a ch ance  to buy into their rehabilitation from the fi rst day of their 
sentence . It would give them a tangible goal that must be  EARNED by becoming 
active in bettering themselves. Parole provides a pathway to turning prison from 
warehouses  of trauma into  places of rehabilitation  in which people ret urn to 
socie ty better than when they left.  
 
