Danielle Pomeroy 
Rockland maine 
LD 178
Hello, 
My name is Danielle Pomeroy and I am for the approval of parole in Maine. Not only will it 
help recidivism rates, and help to rehabilitate the incarcerated. My biggest reason is that I am 
a firm believer in second chances. My brother has had a long run in making stupid mistakes 
and eventually landed him in Maine state prison for 7 years. He’s doing ok now, he could be 
doing better. He’s been out for 5 years now. But 7 years before now, I had met my now 
husband. I wanted to write a prison reform paper, but my brother was protective and didn’t 
want me to write to just anybody. So he had me write someone who he could trust. Which 
was a man charged with murder. It was not expected from either of us, to keep writing each 
other. We became best friends real easily. A year and a half of letters and phone calls we 
start dating. March 7th we just had our 3 year wedding anniversary. When he was first 
incarcerated for what he had done, he was blacked out drunk and had temporary insanity and
had done something that was thought impossible for him to do. He was a 20 something who 
didn’t know the limit.  After the fact he thought not only the persons life, but his life was over. 
Before him and I had met though however he was working on goals to improve the prison 
such as bringing a garden to donate the veggies to local veterans. And later on got an 
education, a job, helped start up the American legion in msp as well as learn an instrument 
and bring back concerts. As husband and wife though him and I have had long term dreams. 
We got married, we’ve been trying to save up money for land, and we can build our own 
home. If prison goes through he has a family company to work for. A place to live, and 
reasons to never go back to prison or commit a felony again. We have our kids names picked
out. I’m not getting any younger, and with the death of my husbands dad, a lot of his family do
not have a lot of time left either, his grandmother being 91 this year, and an uncle that raised 
him has cancers and is living off of borrowed time. My husband is an amazing, hard working 
man that’s always strived to do what’s right and fix what he’s done wrong. We need parole to 
give others a second chance on life. I need parole to start my life, my future with my husband.
I’ve gotten to know many other long timers in the prison system who have commit crimes in 
there early years, and without parole, they’re more likely to die in there. With familys and 
loved ones on the outside all waiting endlessly for their men to come home. Waiting for the 
brothers, uncles, best friends, cousins, grandparents. Children’s fathers are in their right now 
needing a hug from their dad in the comfort of their own home, not for 2 minutes a week, 
month or even a year in a visit room. Thank you for your time, I hope you believe in second 
chances as well as I do. 
