Senator Pinny Beebe-Center,
Chair, Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee
Maine State Legislature
Dear Senator Beebe-Center:
I wholeheartedly support the reinstatement of parole in Maine through passage of LD 178, An
Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community.
There is an abundance of human
talent currently wasted in our prisons. Maine can parole those who have demonstrated positive
behavior change, reduce exceptionally harsh long sentences, and create a robust system of
reentry that will make our communities safer and stronger through the passage of LD 178.
For fifteen years I was responsible for administering the college program at the Maine
Department of Corrections for the University of Maine at Augusta. I experienced first hand the
power of education to transform offenders’ behavior and the trajectory of their lives. Many DOC
residents are talented, motivated and committed to success. UMA has awarded hundreds of
degrees and, within that grouping of students, the recidivism rate is less than 5%. With parole
as an incentive we can increase enrollment in the higher education program in our prisons and
positively impact an even larger segment of the DOC.
We all need to live lives that are focused on positive goals and future plans. These are basic
tenets of good mental health and productive living. R
ewarding good behavior with reduced
sentences will decrease incarceration costs for Maine without increasing crime.
With the passage of LD 178, resource allocation will shift from the costs of incarceration to the
costs of supporting reentry. Those who are released may rejoin their families, seek employment
and contribute to Maine’s serious workforce shortages. The $50,000 per year cost to incarcerate
an individual in Maine can be redirected to facilitate a supervised parole system and return men
and women to our communities sooner as productive contributing citizens. Let’s tap into that
enormous pool of talent that is sitting wasted in our prisons!
Under the leadership of Commissioner Randall Liberty, Maine is a national model for creating
correctional programming that is creative, cost effective and rehabilitative. Maine's next
innovative step must be to reintroduce parole to reward residents and support a healthy and
holistic process for them to return to society.
Thank you for your work and for considering my opinion.
Sincerely,
Deborah Meehan, Camden

