Del Hathaway
Warren
LD 178
Honorable Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Del Hathaway and I am a resident of Maine State Prison.
I am writing to you today to show my absolute support for LD 178 and the effort to 
re-establish parole in Maine.
Parole would be extremely important to me due to the fact that I've been away from 
my children without any contact for almost 8 years. They have had so many obstacles 
to overcome and countless events that have caused them to develop psychological 
issues. Both of my daughters struggle with addiction and obviously that presents a 
situation that is unfortunate for anyone.
I have learned so much about myself and made so many changes for the better, that I 
truly believe I would be an amazing dad and therefore be able to help my children 
immensely. I was on parole once in Massachusetts, and I completed it successfully. I 
do really well with guidance. I think I've grown past that stage in my life and am now 
100% capable of doing it on my own. But I'm sure it wouldn't hurt to have a little 
guidance in my life.
I have four years of probation upon release, so I would assume if I were to be released
on parole, I would be going to see my probation officer also. I would be absolutely 
fine, because I am committed to changing for the better. Another huge benefit would 
be my ability to help the community with skills I've attained while here in prison. I 
could offer myself for free to help train dogs at shelters so they could be adopted due 
to the fact that I'm a certified dog trainer with over 5,000 hours of experience.
I could Mentor Youth and be a recovery coach for recovering addicts also, because 
these are classes I've taken and have been certified. I'm also an amazing artist that has 
so much artistic skills to offer to my community. These are just a few key reasons I 
think parole would be a tremendous tool and great stepping stone for all of us here.
Please vote to reestablish parole and allow me to be a real father to my children again.
Make LD 178 law.
With deep respect,
Del Hathaway #110037
