Eduardo Gonzalez
Brooklyn, NY
LD 178
My name is Eduardo González.
I am the director for Truth-Seeking at Think Peace Learning and Support Hub, an 
organization dedicated to the concept of "transitional justice", that is, the concept that 
societal reconciliation after serious, structural injustice requires recognizing the 
victims' rights to truth, justice and reparation.
My relationship with Maine runs for over a decade, as I supported the process of 
creation and work of the Maine-Wabanaki State Child Welfare Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission. 
Over 2022, my organization, together with other groups hosted two remote courses on
transitional justice for about 40 participants. The first was directed at persons 
interested in truth and reconciliation commissions in different states; the second was 
focused on Maine.
In both courses, Leo Hylton, a person in the system of corrections in Maine, played an 
important role, first supporting the implementation of the course and later helping to 
conceptualize it and co-lead it. You can find the materials of the course, showing Leo's hard 
work in a Google Drive.
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1lshW24bfJr_yBSnZ5fwHjHA0tgvneG3w
The courses on transitional justice were our first professional interaction with our 
colleague Leo Hylton, who came to us to help us coordinate the logistics of a purely 
remote event. He demonstrated enormous ability, work ethic, and he was a joy to 
work with. It was impossible to run the course as usual, as a merely academic 
enterprise, and it became really a space of support and, as we would discover, healing.
Leo is incarcerated in Maine, serving a long sentence. He, however, was the 
serendipitous object of multiple acts of kindness once in prison, which helped him to 
overcome times of rage and confusion, and recenter himself in spirituality and 
healing. It is simply impossible to work with him, at distance, in the Spartan 
environment that the Zoom camera reveals and not feel humbled by the complexity of
the human experience.
Given the success of the spring Transitional Justice Course, we contacted participants 
who came from Maine, who were enthusiastic about the idea of another, 
Maine-specific course in the fall. We immediately asked Leo to help us organize it, in 
a capacity significantly more complex than the logistical support he had so far 
provided. In the months it took us to organize the second edition, using a few 
resources that were left free after the first course, we discovered the grace of 
opportunity. From what was foreseen as one course, this year we organized two. From
a general perspective on the nation, we were able to focus on the realities and 
challenges of one specific state, from the blissful ignorance of persons who walk free 
in life, we came in contact with incarcerated people, four of whom participated 
actively in the fall course.
The fall course has resulted in alliances with local organizations and the commitment 
of the participants to use the concepts they learned to support a truth-seeking process 
in Maine. Moreover, the participants decided, in the phase of course design, to include
the perspective of incarcerated persons and explore the subject of penal reform as an 
indispensable element of racial justice and healing in the US.
It is certainly different to participate in a course where the gallery of zoom 
participants went beyond the collection of middle class interiors we became so used to
seeing during the pandemic. Now, our gallery included four men whose background 
were the granite bricks of a cell. It helped us break down our own brick cells of 
prejudice, fear, racism and ignorance. It enriched in a practical sense, more than we 
could envision conceptually, our understanding of what transitional justice can 
achieve. In the 6 weeks we shared, the questions, the discussion, the grounding 
exercises were deeply transformative, because we knew that we shared a tortured 
humanity with those who our society treats as unredeemable.
In this year, we plan to reconvene the group of organizers of the fall Maine course to explore 
forms to apply the model to continue the initiatives in the state and also, perhaps, transfer an 
invitation to participate to other states. At any rate, this was a practical experience in which 
we challenged retributive justice models with a healing dimension.
