Dr. Ellen M. Taylor 
Appleton, ME.
I 
I support LD 178 because it s our moral responsibility to give people a second chance. I speak 
as a teacher. I've been working with men at the Maine State Prison for over twelve years in 
UMA's Prison Education Program. I've seen residents choose to transform their lives, often 
through education. Many are are incarcerated for crimes they committed when they were 
young, before their brains were fully formed. Many of these young men were addicted, many 
were abused. Family failed them, foster care failed them, schools failed them, juvi failed them, 
and the criminal justice system failed them. 
In sprite of all that, the men I know have reckoned with the crimes they committed, they ask for 
a second chance. They are not the same people they were when they committed their crimes. 
Now, they are hospice workers, dog trainers, yoga teachers, master gardeners, beekeepers, and 
scholars. They are kind, caring, empathic, and capable of giving so much more back to their 
communities outside the concertina wire of the Maine State Prison. 
I speak also as a survivor of a violent crime. I went into the prison with ample reservations 
about the population I would be working with. But, as a person who believes in social justice, I 
knew I had to do more than talk the talk. And since my very first class, I learned the power of 
moving beyond my own trauma and fear and embracing the possibilities of change, in myself 
and others. 
Forgiveness and redemption exists in every spiritual belief system in the world. It should be 
part of our criminal justice system as well. 
Thank you.
Driving with Lorca in Appleton, Maine 
Under the maple arches, pick-up trucks 
with empty beds and tinted windows 
slow down, past a mound of discarded 
shelving, a pair of hockey skates, plastic 
chairs with broken spines, and a sign: FREE. 
Only in America, we see 
this wasteland, farms of self-storage, 
plazas “Reduced for Quick Sale” 
Where a D0//ar General just broke ground. 
Oh, where is the village market? 
The mango man? The panadmkz, 
and paxte/eria? Where’s the man 
repairing soles with his sewing machine 
on the corner, his foot strumming 
the pedals, his hands ﬁngering the leather 
like reading a story of love. 
Where is the muchacha embroidering 
her camisa for her Sunday stroll after church? 
They’re in the Zona Franca 
making T-shirts for ]. C. Penny’s 
Going Out 0fBuJine.nr m/e; 
They’re selling their needle work to pay 
coyotes to bring them over the border; 
they’re hiding from immigration 
in ratty apartments with rusty 
faucets and moldy carpets. 
Ay, Federico, we’re not so far from your Spain, 
as we pass under the maple arches, 
driving tluough Appleton, Maine.
