Dear
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Ensha Saghir , a homemaker now and a resident of US. I have 
done my Masters in Computer Management.  
I am writing to you today to show my absolute support for LD 178 and the 
effort to re-establish parole in Maine.
I am voicing my support for LD 178 - An Act to Support Re-entry and 
Reintegration into the Community. This bill is very personal to me 
and the rest of my extended family as this gives us some hope for one 
of our family members who committed a serious crime more than 25 
years ago. 
I am writing to you with a sincere hope that I can draw your attention to 
the following:
It is my humble opinion that RE-STABLISHING parole in Maine will be a 
very good thing. It is important to note that LD 178 has significant 
safeguards to protect the public as well as recognized law enforcement 
and reformative purposes. I strongly believe that LD 178 will be 
POSITIVE for Maine, and neither the safety of society nor the 
legislative, penological or penal objectives could be compromised 
I recommend that LD 178 add the requirement: “An inmate who satisfies 
all criteria for parole eligibility could be paroled even though He or She 
was subject to an immigration and naturalization service detainer”. I 
believe that states like Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, 
Georgia, Kansas, Montana, Nebraska and new Jersey, to name a few, 
have provisions which allow the Parole Board to “Grant a parole to a 
federal immigration detainer in order that the offender may be deported 
to the country of citizenship” IDAHO, IDAPA 50.01.01.250 (07) (b) (i).
I will like to draw your kind attention to the case of NADIM HAQUE (my 
cousin), a citizen of India. He was convicted of a murder in 1996 and 
sentenced to 50 years of prison term in Maine penitentiary. He has 
already served over 25 years of his sentence. I know that the crime 
committed was very serious and the loss experienced by the family of 
the deceased cannot be described in words. I would still request to 
show him mercy and gift him a second chance.
Nadim Haque belongs to a simple middle-class family in India. I am 
pleading to give him a second chance because his family needs him 
now more than ever. His parents are getting older (around 80 years or 
more). His younger sister (living with parents) was battling with cancer 
for a long time, she got paralysed few years back and finally succumbed 
to her illness in December 2021 .This has given a big emotional blow to 
Nadim Haque’s parents. They have yet to recover from this tragedy. 
Nadim Haque’s presence with them (in India on parole under LD 178) 
will make life easier for them and repair, to some extent, the damages 
done by destiny/ circumstances.
Sometime back, his father, who is 80 + years old, was also diagnosed 
with DEMENTIA. His mother has been suffering from Arthritis, other old 
age diseases and from Covid19 (in recent past). The family is in 
complete distress. His family needs their son more than ever.
While in Maine Prison, Nadim Haque has been very active & concerned 
about the problems facing the prison. He has contributed to the Prison 
& outside community and tried to make qualitative improvement where 
ever possible. Some of his contributions are
▪Mentoring prisoners in education & vocational training
▪Peer educator ……
▪Substance use recovery Coach
LD178 has given hope to us. Kindly show MERCY upon Nadim Haque, 
FORGIVE him and GIFT him a second chance so that he is paroled and 
deported to India and take care of his suffering family before it is too 
late.
Thank you for your work and for considering my opinion. I hope I can count on 
your support for LD 178.
Kind Regards,
Ensha Saghir
