Ephriam Bennett
Warren
LD 178
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Ephriam K. Bennett and I'm writing this letter in response to LD178, a 
bill to bring back parole to Maine. But I must be truthful, I have mixed emotions 
about this bill being passed! Let me explain why. On February 8, 2009, I committed a 
brutal home invasion that nearly ended an innocent man's life.
The callous and inhumane way I beat and nearly stabbed my victim to death was the 
lowest moment of my life because I was not raised by my parents to commit crimes 
against humanity. I received 27 years, and rightly so!
Two months into my prison sentence, I started a Bible study and mentorship group 
taking full responsibility and accountability for the crime I committed. As I am sitting
here writing this letter asking myself what will parole mean to me if granted to me, 
well my answer is that for me, personally it would not mean anything, where I am 
nearing the end of my sentence. Within a year, I will be eligible for the Supervised 
Community Confinement Program (SCCP). But it would mean everything to me 
because of the young men God has given me the privilege to meet and mentor, some 
for nearly their entire prison sentence and my entire 14 years of incarceration.
Men like Brandon Brown who I met as a young scared 21-year-old in Cumberland 
County Jail who was facing a charge of attempted murder. Now released from prison 
and working as a college professor. Someone I mentored his entire incarceration. 
Then there is Leo Hylton, Daniel Fortune, Damien Archer, Theodore Harris, Jeff 
Taylor, Abdi Awad, Julian Soto, Nathan Goodwin, Eric Byrd, Brad Chesnel, and 
countless others who God has given me the privilege to mentor.
These men have not only taken full responsibility and accountability for the crimes 
they committed against their victims and their families, as well as the communities 
they came from, by taking self-help programs to combat substance abuse, anger, 
spousal abuse, mental health, gang violence, and many other self-help classes just to 
name a few with many of those I've mentioned having either graduated from college 
or working towards graduating.
But I cannot say the same for a good 92% of the residents at the Maine State Prison who are 
only excited about parole because to them, they are only looking at it as a “get out of jail free 
card,” and not doing the self-help work needed to prove true moral character and true 
redemption like the men mentioned, and that's the conflict I have about parole! 

