March 12, 2023 
Dear Honorable Senator Beebe-Center, Honorable Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members 
of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, 
My name is Erica King, and lam a resident of Portland. My career has focused on improving safety and 
wellbeing within ourjustice system in Maine and nationally. My testimony today is informed by friends 
and family working within the current system, and by my work with currently and formerly incarcerated 
people who make amends for their wrongs and contribute to the greater good of society every day. 
Across the aisles and across the lines, we all agree on one thing: this system needs changing. LD178 is 
one low risk change Maine can make, consistent with the 34 other states who already operate a parole 
system. lam writing to you today to show my support for LD 178 and the effort to re-establish parole in 
Maine to bring us into statutory alignment with the rest of the country. 
I support this bill because I believe in the accountability and rehabilitation goals of the current system. 
Parole is one statutory mechanism most states already have to deliverjustice. Why wouldn't we want 
those provisions available in our Maine statute? I support this bill because virtually all Mainers I talk to 
believe parole already exists in Maine. For years, Maine justice leaders have been trying to create partial 
fixes and incremental workarounds for Maine's lack of a parole system. One commendable example is 
Maine DOC's supervised community confinement program, which offers promising local evidence of the 
promise of community supervision. Parole could deliver the expanded cost savings Maine taxpayers 
deserve by taking community supervision to scale. Given shortages in the current correctional 
workforce and the high costs of incarcerations, many aging, long term residents could safely be 
supervised in community with better fiscal stewardship of current taxpayer resources. 
I support this bill because I believe in fairness and equality. We hope this bill offers correction for prior, 
known and well documented discrepancies and racially unjust sentences. I support this bill because 
victims and crime survivors deserve better outcomes from a system that is long on taxpayer expenses 
and short on delivering on the promise of rehabilitation. Maine's parole system would restrict anyone 
truly dangerous from receiving it. Parole is not a ‘get out ofjail free card’ for those who have not 
earned the opportunity and could provide more support to victims and survivors than the current 
system allows. In a system with multiple on ramps, parole simply provides one legal mechanism of an 
offramp for those who choose to take a rehabilitative path. 
I support this bill because parole would increase our public safety and lower criminal justice costs. Our 
current system is burdensome to taxpayers. Taxpayers cannot afford the willful ignorance of a purely 
retributive system that is tough on crime, but not smart. I support this bill because the arguments 
against having parole in Maine are grounded in fear in a moment where Maine needs the courage that 
justice requires. I believe in this legislative body to make the historic and important policy decision to 
create a discretionary parole system in Maine, through your support of LD 178. 
With gratitude for your public service, 
Erica King, Portland, Maine
