Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Faraha Akhtar and I am a resident of Toronto, Canada. I have 
been a software engineer since 2012 after I graduated with Electronics and 
Telecommunications Engineering from Bhubaneswar (India) I am an Indian 
citizen. 
I am writing to you today to show my complete support for LD 178 and the 
effort to re-establish parole in Maine.
I am voicing my support for LD 178 - An Act to Support Re-entry and 
Reintegration into the Community. This bill is very personal to me 
and the rest of my extended family as this gives us some hope for one 
of our beloved family members who committed a serious crime more 
than 25 years ago.
I am writing to you sincerely hoping that I can draw your attention to the 
following:
It is my humble opinion that RE-STABLISHING parole in Maine will be a 
very good step in the right direction. It is important to note that LD 178 
has significant safeguards to protect the public as well as recognized 
law enforcement and reformative purposes. I strongly believe that LD 
178 will be POSITIVE for Maine, and neither the safety of society nor 
the legislative, penological or penal objectives could be compromised 
I recommend that LD 178 add the requirement: “An inmate who satisfies 
all criteria for parole eligibility could be paroled even though He or She 
was subject to an immigration and naturalization service detainer”. I 
believe that states like Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, 
Georgia, Kansas, Montana, Nebraska and New Jersey, to name a few, 
have provisions which allow the Parole Board to “Grant a parole to a 
federal immigration detainer in order that the offender may be deported 
to the country of citizenship” IDAHO, IDAPA 50.01.01.250 (07) (b) (i).
I would like to draw your kind attention to the case of NADIM HAQUE 
(my cousin), a citizen of India, who was convicted of a murder in 1996 
and sentenced to 50 years of prison term in Maine penitentiary. He has 
already served over 25 years of his sentence. I know that the crime 
committed was very serious and the loss experienced by the family of 
the deceased cannot be described in words. I would still request to 
show him mercy and gift him a second chance.
Nadim Haque belongs to a simple middle-class family in India. I am 
pleading to give him a second chance because his family needs him 
now more than ever. His parents are getting older (more than 80 years 
old). His younger sister (who was living with their parents) was battling 
with cancer for a long time, she got paralysed few years back and finally 
succumbed to her illness last December. This has given a big emotional 
blow to Nadim Haque’s parents. They have yet to recover from this 
tragedy. Nadim Haque’s presence with them (in India on parole under 
LD 178) will make life easier for them and repair, to some extent, the 
damages done by destiny / circumstances.
Sometime back, his father, who is 80 + years old, was also diagnosed 
with DEMENTIA. His mother has been suffering from Arthritis, other old 
age diseases and from Covid19 (in recent past). The family is in 
complete distress. His family needs their son more than ever.
While in Maine Prison, Nadim Haque has been very active & concerned 
about the problems facing the prison. He has contributed to the Prison 
& outside community and tried to make qualitative improvement where 
ever possible. Some of his contributions are
Mentoring prisoners in education & vocational training
Peer educator
Substance use recovery Coach
LD178 has given hope to us. Kindly show MERCY upon Nadim Haque, 
FORGIVE him and GIFT him a second chance so that he is granted 
parole and deported to India and take care of his suffering family before 
it is too late.
Thank you for your work and for considering my opinion. I hope I can count on 
your support for LD 178.
Kind Regards,
Faraha Akhtar
