Garin Samuelsen
Love University
LD 178
03/07/2023
Dear Commission Chairs and Members of the Commission,
I deeply appreciate all your work to re-establish parole in Maine. Over a year ago, a couple of 
colleagues of mine and myself began to dialogue with an individual incarcerated in the Maine 
prison system.  He has been in the system for over twelve years now, since he was 18 years 
old.  Early in his sentence, he met someone who taught him about restorative practice. 
Because of starting restorative justice practice, this resident has taken his time in prison to 
look both at his past and present, to re-evaluate his life, heal from his traumas, take 
ownership for his crime, and is now doing restorative justice work within the prison system. 
He has come to see a deeper aspect of himself and, simply stated, is an extraordinary human
being.  He has more integrity than most of the people I know. I visited him this past February 
and realized that I had a true friend.  This results from many hours spent with him over the 
past year culminating in our visit.  He is someone that is living each day with integrity, 
kindness, and intelligence.  
Parole gives residents a glimmer of hope and something to work towards.  Parole also gives 
the State, community members, and victims of crimes an opportunity to see the work that the 
prisons are doing to heal and educate residents. Parole illustrates that residents can be 
successful members of society and restore justice for the injustice they committed.  
I understand the fear that is there. However, if we could take a step back and understand that
most of these residents have back stories, many have lived lives full of trauma and 
impoverishment, and their issues are complex.  This does not make the crime they committed
okay, but it gives a much greater understanding of what led the particular person to commit a 
crime.  I think about community.  What would happen if a loved one or a friend was 
struggling?  
My hope is that we would want to help each resident do the necessary work to restore justice,
heal from their traumas and find peace within themselves.  I understand that doing so would 
take a community…. And that is the type of world in which I want to live in.  
By re-establishing parole, my hope is that Maine is on the road to seeing community this way.
My work as a therapist and teacher has led me to understand that human beings are innately 
good and that no one starts out as a criminal. Many factors impact us as human beings.  We 
live in a highly dysfunctional culture with a hierarchical system in place.  Many people are 
oppressed in our society, which can create trauma and a lack of resources that impact an 
individual's growth. In all cases, there is a possibility for healing and letting go of the 
psychologically dysfunctional conditioning.   
Parole illustrates that we are a community that values human beings and sees that everyone 
has an opportunity to change and heal.  
If love drove our decisions instead of fear, re-instituting parole in Maine would be necessary. 
What if you put yourself in the shoes of a resident?  If you had a similar background, could 
you have committed that crime or a similar one?  Would you want to be punished for a 
lifetime based on a crime committed years ago?  What would happen if you changed, began 
to heal, and illustrated that you were not a threat to society?  What would the right action be? 
Please take this into consideration when deciding on re-establishing parole in Maine. 
Again, thank you for taking the time to look at this issue.  
With much compassion,
 
Garin Samuelsen, M.A. M.S. 
