Gordon Perry
Warren
LD 178
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Gordon Perry #30067. I’m a resident of the Maine State Prison in Warren
and I’m writing to you today so I can support LD 178 - An Act To Support Reentry 
and Reintegration into the Community. 
I feel like I have my own unique story that may be of some value to you and the 
decisions you make regarding parole. I will try not to bore you with the likely normal 
speech from these testimonials on paper and in person you normally receive like on 
the lack of recidivism after so many years incarcerated or once you reach a certain age
or the cost benefits to parole. There are a ton of facts you hear and know already; 
therefore, I'd like to tell you my story and where I've been and where I am now. 
The reason being is I’m someone no one ever thought could succeed in here or out there, but
7+ years disciplinary report free as well as, a even longer time frame in which nothing of 
significance regarding my behavior might just prove I've beaten all the odds, and if I can 
succeed, then anyone could possibly succeed if given the right opportunities to do so and 
with the new age prison reform practices, Maine has been leading the charge in showing 
countless success stories of varying degrees. There is hope for residents’ success upon 
release. If this process had taken shape 15 years ago, my record would be even better but 
there was a ton of corruption in the past and I did years in segregation for doing absolutely 
nothing wrong, for example during a random pod shake down, I was living with another 
resident and the officer found a piece of a cable cord in our vent which was harmless. Yeah 
right, not in those days. I did two years in segregation for an escape tool or a dangerous 
weapon and they actually got away with that, believe it or not! But that being said, those days 
are over, and people like you help make decisions that help make practices like abuse of 
power much more difficult by focusing on rehabilitation so people can get ready for the streets
and to better themselves. 
If you would like to see who is writing this, you can simply look on the MDOC website for the 
prison and see my picture as they talk about the change in segregation policy. The picture 
was taken by PBS Frontline when they did the documentary on solitary confinement. I am 
leaning on the door with my arm on the window and head resting on my arm.
I’m currently serving a natural life sentence with no possibility of parole out of N.H. 
and have come to Maine through the interstate compact program back in 1997 and it 
hasn’t always been a smooth ride for me here at M.S.P. I’ve actually done several 
years in segregation on and off again over the years, struggling along the way at 
times, but sometimes even getting wrongfully placed in segregation for up to two 
years at a time like I mentioned earlier. But that was the times of past when 
segregation was a place to hide someone out for all kinds of reasons with very little 
structure as far as a rhyme or reason for the prison’s decisions on this type of 
punishment – or as I describe as torture. I must say I learned very little during that 
time of my life. I only started to hate the people that were making all the decisions 
creating a very angry person inside of myself, luckily I by the grace of God fought 
through all the bad times and now I have been doing the new way of prison life here 
at MSP like enrolling in the college program here for multiple semesters. I have also 
been training service dogs for disabled vets for the past year and change. I have also 
done many programs as well, but what I really think my true passion in life is would 
have to be helping others. I have done lots of mentoring here over the years and 
people tend to hear my story, see my change and believe they can do the same.
I'm not doing this letter for myself, and although I may not have a chance at parole, I see 
countless other individuals that have started off in similar circumstances as my own and they 
could be a huge asset to the community in so many different areas that you will be able to 
utilize in the community to make Maine a better place to live and that’s just the facts. As most 
of you already realize I'm sure, and after all the preaching I do about trying to help people on 
a daily basis trying to do my role as a changed individual I would not be doing all I can had I 
not sent you my feelings.
I appreciate your time and effort regarding parole. Now it's time to make your state better by 
getting parole, I hope, for everyone's sake.
Thank you 
Gordon Perry #30067
