I-Ialle Carroll - LD178 Testimony 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members ofthe Criminal lustice and Public 
Safety Committee... 
My name is Halle Carroll and I am here today in support ofLD 178 and the effort to re-establish 
parole in Maine. I am a resident 0fWaterville, where I am a senior at Colby College. 
As an anthropology major focusing on justice and liberation, I have gotten the chance in the last few 
years to learn in depth about carcerality in America, particularly the underlying systems of racism 
and inequality that lie at the root of the prison industrial complex. 
Among the many takeaways I have gleaned from this learning, I want to share the two that feel most 
relevant to this conversation today. Firstly, that incarceration is NOT a one size fits all response to 
harm that happens in our communities. And secondly, that the demand to keep individuals isolated 
from a community they’ve hurt reﬂects a misunderstanding of crime, healing, and justice. 
One man who is responsible for guiding me through this learning process has been my friend and 
teacher, Leo Hylton, who has been incarcerated for over a decade at Maine State Prison. Through my 
connection to Leo and his work with the Restorative Practice Steering Committee at MSP, I have 
made several trips to the prison and have gotten to meet and engage with a number of residents and 
staff there. Through this experience I have been lucky to get to know "the incarcerated" personally, 
in their kindness and complexity, which I know so many people aren't able to do. 
From the bottom of my heart, I want to see these people have the chance to continue their healing 
processes beyond the confines ofa cell and to become part of our community. 
Maine needs parole — 
to save money, to better community, to heal, and frankly, to acknowledge our 
mistake of abolishing parole in the first place: a mistake which has made no improvement to our 
safety. Let’s take this chance to bring back parole and embrace a path forward that enables everyone 
to get the support they need. 
Thank you for your work and for considering my opinion. I hope I can count on your support for LD 
178.
