52 WATER STREET
HALLOWELL, ME 04347
(800) 464-5767
LEGISLATIVE CONTACT
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community 
Programs
(207) 622-5767  □ HannahL@namimaine.org POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA
www.namimaine.org/advocacyPOSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT
LD178, An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of LD 178, An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community.  Almost 50 years after 
Maine ended a long-standing parole process for those incarcerated, we are supporting the resumption 
of a thoughtfully considered graduated system allowing for the recognition of rehabilitation efforts 
made by incarcerated residents. The banning of the parole programs across the country and the 
subsequent increase in harsher sentencing practices resulted in a surge in prison populations and a 
reduction in rehabilitative programs. Inmates were frequently released directly into the community with 
limited preparation and post discharge support.
We recognize that people who become incarcerated have a much higher rate of  experienced trauma, 
mental illness or severe and persistent mental illness (SMI) that has not been addressed through 
treatment supporting recovery.  In many ways, jails and prisons have taken the place of the mental 
hospitals and institutions of the 1950s and 60s. The wave of deinstitutionalization across America in the 
1970s and 80s came with a promise to create a system of community care to support those with SMI 
living in our communities.  The envisioned community care system included a robust mobile crisis 
response, Assertive Community Treatment teams applied with fidelity to a national model, and a 
spectrum of outpatient services. The system of care was never fully funded and built and resulted in our 
jails and prisons becoming a primary site for managing and treating mental health needs.  While Maine 
DOC has made significant strides in improving care for inmates with mental health and substance use 
disorders, incarceration remains a less than acceptable substitute for community care.
Parole offers eligible men and women an opportunity to be released from incarceration to community 
supervision and can help align the goals of punishment to include a focus on cultivating rehabilitation. 
Parole determinations focus on rehabilitative progress beginning on or after the earliest release 
eligibility date set by this legislation or the sentencing judge. When released to parole, conditions are 
imposed that generally include reporting to a parole officer, staying at the same address, submitting to 
urinalysis and blood tests, and obeying all state and local laws. Those who fail to comply with the 
conditions of release face the consequence of returning to prison to finish their sentence, or in some 
cases, serve a new sentence. This is a significant incentive to maintain good behavior.
NAMI Maine appreciates any strides toward a more humane and rehabilitative system in corrections 
and supports this legislation as the next logical step.
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI 
Maine) is the state’s largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional 
affiliates, the agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. 
NAMI Maine engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental health 
system through collaboration and education.
