March 132023 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and rriernhers of they Qdminal 
Justice and Public Safety‘C-ommittee, 
My name is Holly Reid and l am a resident of Bath Maine. tam -an ordained minister 
and ».-ll 
am .a registered. nurse.: 
.t»am~.testitying .today~-in~support~of1LD t?8~An Act to 
Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community. 
in one of my roles as ordained minister l-have the-privilege ofigoing-intothe Maine State 
Prison and supporting a group of incarcerated men who are trained as hospice 
volunteers. All of the-men volunteer. because they want to-"give something backbut 
some of the men volunteer because they have very long sentences and they expect that 
they will die in prison and they want -to make sure that hospice is there when they die. 
Each of the men l work with in the hospice program have worked hard to transform their 
life -to become -.a person wtio is ibeeutiiuliy :different than -the person -who committed that 
crime that landed them in ‘prison. This rehabilitated person shouldn’ -t be subiect to die in 
prison but should be released in a supervised manner so that they may continue 
contribute constructively to society. 
One of the things Pl P-have teamed from working withthe men in the hospice program is 
that there_ar.e,two drivingtaotors that helppeople to change. Qne .is a person who cares 
about them. Reinstating parole in Maine allows to people to he morecioseiy involved 
with people who -care deeply for them. The second drivinglfactor for-change is hope. 
Parole gives people hope and that hope can be a poweriui motivator for change- 
l am here because-.in my faith -tradition we believe in things iiise mercy. -compassion. and 
that people can and do change. i heiieve that when people do change thatthey should 
be rewarded. Parole is not a get out oi jaii "free card. But it does mean that people who 
have demonstrated changed lives get rewarded for the hard work of personal growth 
and transformation. 
Finally, I testify before you today as a tax payer. l understand that there are victim 
advocacy groups that may have concerns about people getting out on paroie. ButI 
know it is .pos.sible to set up asystem that protects victims and rewards good behavior. 
This is how l want the State of Maine to spend my money. 
Thank you for hearing my testimony in support of LD 178. 
Sincerely, 
Holly Reid MDiv,RN
