Inmate #68584
Warren
LD 178
Honorable Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Inmate #68584 and I am an incarcerated resident at the Maine State 
Prison. I am writing to you today to show my absolute support for LD 178 and the 
effort to re-establish parole in Maine.
Parole makes good sense.
Parole makes good sense for Maine. Maine has always been known for its good sense.
It's considered a trait of Maine and Mainers. Repeal of parole at one time may have 
made sense for Maine, but for our current State and communities, it no longer does. 
Parole now again makes good sense all around for Maine; for its communities, 
businesses, families, and individuals - all around good sense.
Parole makes good legal sense. Clearly, the current plan does not work, nor reduce 
recidivism. Parole can be structured to do just that by engaging community systems of
oversight that are not present with the current system of sentencing and release. 
Parole is an extension of punishment and rehabilitation that allows hope.
Parole makes good community sense. It permits an earned return to community - a 
way back to family and friends, with justice decisions of compassion, based in the 
reality of how a convicted person has worked to earn release while respecting victims 
of each individual case. Parole allows decision making about the specific factors of 
how, when, where, and what a prisoner's re-entry will encompass, and how it could be
lost. The re-entry can thereby reinforce a community privilege - early re-entry. 
Clearly, not everyone will be nor should be eligible for parole. In all cases, victims 
can and should be respected and included. However, many of Maine's incarcerated 
have shown through their hard work and a rehabilitation pathway that parole makes 
good community sense.
Parole makes good financial sense. It saves Maine money at many levels. Parole 
reduces State cost for Corrections and allows an expanded use of taxpayer resources. 
The DOC estimates it costs $76,000 per year to house an inmate for a single year - far
in excess of the average Maine household earnings. Imagine the number of returned 
people $76,000 would permit while having oversight, treatment, and a meaningful 
return to society. Often, a non-paroled return after a lengthy sentence requires even 
more taxpayer resources without the returning inmate being able to be employed. 
People can return younger, be work ready, as well as increase public safety, family 
and community stability ,and benefit.
Parole will allow each individual to return to employment, paying their way and 
return to communities on an individual basis as a taxpayer.  Parolees will return to 
communities with layers of oversight as they restore themselves to being a productive 
contributor to their community. When it has been ordered, parole will enable persons 
to make financial restitution earlier than they would have previously. It will allow the 
convicted to literally pay for crime by a return to the community with oversight 
sooner than a non-parole Mainer, thereby making restitution sooner, paying child 
support sooner, fines sooner. Remembering that the vast majority of convicted will 
return to society, a parole structure could and should permit adequate pre-return 
education, planning, support and oversight, and this will permit savings… As it is 
often said… “do the math.” Parole makes good financial sense.
Parole makes good justice sense. Parole does not negate atonement, nor negate justice
for a committed crime, nor will it re-victimize if the chosen parole process permits a 
proper pathway to earn a return. An appropriate structure of parole would allow for 
redemption with restorative justice.
Parole makes good sense for families. Fathers and husbands, mothers and wives, 
daughters, sons, and step and foster families can begin real healing with restoration. 
Parental responsibility will not be a distant memory. It will allow a dynamic, engaged,
and supervised return. Real recovery begins with a present person. Parole makes good
recovery sense.
With my deepest respect and my most sincere plea, as a man of Maine, a former 
homeowner, as a father, as an educated professional and a formerly employed person 
in the top 1% of Maine earners, I beg you to pass this bill.
Let me and the other incarcerated citizens of Maine again earn our return - please vote
to pass Bill LD 178.
Return parole to Maine. It makes good sense.
Inmate DOC #68584

