13 March 2022
Members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Jacob Wourms and I'm a Campaign & Research Manager with
Campaign Zero
, a nationwide
research and advocacy non-profit, and I'm writing to ask you to please support LD 178 and parole
restoration throughout the state of Maine.
Parole is bipartisan common sense. Regardless of your politics, there's a reason for you to support
parole:
1.
Human Restoration / Belief in Second Chances
a.
Parole affirms our collective belief in the restoration and renewal of all things and that
people are more than the worst moment of their life. The vast majority of people
incarcerated in Maine want to make amends for their wrongdoing and return to their
families. We should provide a mechanism for that second chance to be a possibility.
b.
Parole provides an incentive to rehabilitate. Without it, incarcerated Mainers simply have
to “run out the clock” of their sentence and have no motivation to take classes, hold jobs,
etc. Parole encourages rehabilitation because the sooner each person is restored to
health, the sooner they have the chance to return home.
2.
Public Safety
a.
Studies show that people granted parole are
36 percent
less likely
to return to prison
compared to those who maxed out their sentence and were released with zero
supervision. This fact intuitively makes sense – parole prioritizes re-entry plans and
support as rehabilitated people return to society. It’s far better for all of us when we help
support people as they re-enter a society that they haven’t been in for a long period of
time.
b.
It’s important to remember that crime is a young man’s game. Overwhelmingly, crime is
something we age out of - it most commonly occurs ages 18-25. Nobody’s risk is zero
(not me writing this letter nor anyone reading it) but these risk levels decrease drastically
as we age. There are far too many aging prisoners in Maine who will not return to a life of
crime and simply want to return to their families and friends.
3.
Taxpayer Savings / Economic Benefits
a.
It’s incredibly expensive to incarcerate. In Maine, it costs on average $78,000 to
incarcerate one person for one year. Studies show that it’s
9 times more expensive
to
incarcerate someone than to grant parole and place the person under community
supervision.
b.
Additionally, if a person is released on parole, they’re able to return to work and add a
source of income to their household. The economic benefits are significant – more
workers for Maine’s economy, fewer kids growing up in poverty, and more families
together, providing stable homes for future generations to dream and explore.
Maine wouldn’t be the first state to restore parole (Mississippi, 2008). Parole restoration has been done
before, it makes sense, and it’s sound policy. We urge you to support LD 178 and look forward to future
working sessions, deliberation in the House and Senate, and ultimately Governor Mills’ signature.
With you in the work for Maine as it should be,
Jacob Wourms


