l 
Testimony in support of LD-178 
Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community 
Presented by Jeffrey Evangelos, Member of the Parole Study Commission. Presented to 
the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee on Monday, March 13, 2023. 
Good morning Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and other 
distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. I am 
Jeffrey Evangelos from Friendship and I most recently served as a member of the Parole 
Study Commission this past autumn. 
Some of you may be unaware that parole in Maine was abolished in 1976. It was 
replaced with determinate sentencing and the discretionary powers of the Chief 
Executive to grant Executive Clemency. Maine was the ﬁrst state in the Union to abolish 
parole; 15 states followed suit in the 1970s. 34 states still use a Parole Board process, 
including all other New England States and New York State. This bill will make Maine 
the 35th State to adopt Parole. 
What was the result of the adoption of the May 1976 Criminal Code which 
abolished Parole? The number of incarcerated men and women...and teens, has shot up 
400%. These people include those with serious mental illness and drug addiction 
illnesses. In a Feb I3, 2020, New York Times article entitled “It Didn't Work” , states are 
now beginning to re-examine the decision to abolish Parole. “We thought we were 
ﬁghting crime and it didn't work” said Virginia State Senator David Marsden. “People 
are now more likely to believe that people deserve a second chance.” And that is what 
this bill is about, a second chance. As the saying goes, ‘It's not just the mistake you 
made, it's what you do afterwards that counts.’ While Maine’s prison system conducts 
remarkable education and other programming, in truth, without Parole, the system also 
kills hope. 
Parole demands a process of accountability and redemption as the part of the 
incarcerated individuals petition before the Parole Board. Victims of crime are part of 
the process and their voices are heard in front of the Parole Board. Some victims will 
understandably ﬁght the Parole process, while others around the country encounter the 
petitioner and through restorative justice, enable forgiveness. These are difficult 
discussions, and the Parole Board takes all these matters into consideration when 
evaluating a petitioner. 
But we must come to terms with an obvious fact. Are we running the Department 
of Incarceration and Punishment or are we operating a real Corrections and
J 
improvement system, a system that allows a person to reenter society as a productive 
individual? 
On that score, Maine stands dead last in the country. The University of Minnesota 
Robina Institute of Justice rated Maine as the harshest sentencing state in the country. 
Combined with no Parole, the Prison Policy Initiative gave Maine an F- for its prison 
release system. In addition, the Pew Research Trust ranked Maine 49th out of 50 states 
for its prison release system, with a whopping 63.4% of its prison residents being 
released unprepared for life on the outside without supervision or a support system. This 
is the primary factor in Maine's high recidivism rate. 
Parole changes that dynamic. A successful petitioner serves out the remainder of 
their prison sentence under the direct supervision of the probation and parole 
department. A serious violation of the of the terms of your prison release lands you back 
in prison to serve out the remainder of your sentence. And let's be clear about something, 
according to the Maine Supreme ruling, Gilbert vs State of Maine, February 28"‘ , 1986, 
Parole was ruled constitutional. Parole is not a Pardon, it's a continuation of your 
sentence under the supervision of the Dept of Corrections. If your petition is denied, you 
must wait up to 30 months to reapply. 
After I ﬁled the parole bill two years ago, I received about 100 letters ﬁom our 
prisons, people demonstrating redemption and accountability, asking for forgiveness and 
a second chance. These are difficult letters to read. Think our current system hasn't 
failed? A letter I received from the Windham Women's Prison said this: “The women 
here have mostly pristine behavior records; Attend many classes, hold many jobs, and 
positions of privilege. The staff look to these residents for guidance and information. We 
are trusted and respected. All of these women had lives, families, careers, college 
educations. Most had never been in trouble before this one-time event in their lives and 
feel deep remorse. Why should they not be given a second chance at life‘? For me 
however, I ask you to bring back the death penalty. My sentence is more cruel than 
death. What beneﬁts society to keep me alive?” 
I hope you will allow the Parole process to go forward with an ought to pass. Thank you. 
I'll be happy to answer your questions.
