3/9/2023
Testimony in SUPPORT of Bill 178
Dear members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee:
I am Jeffrey Russ Gorman, DOC #46863. I am now 43 years old. I have been in the Maine State 
Prison for the past twenty-two years. I was 21 back in 2001. I told my two-year-old little daughter, 
“I love you baby” as I’m getting ready to go out with some friends to have fun.  I bumped into 
this guy that had acid, It was cheap and a bunch of us decided to trip that night. I ended up 
meeting someone that night and I started to trip hard and lose control of my mind. I remember 
bits and pieces of the nightmare; I shot and killed my victim. I remember driving back to the party 
house and laying on a sofa as my mind played tricks on me. The hours pass and the trip starts to 
fade away, but I’m left with this feeling that something bad really happened.  I got into my car 
and drove to the place this happened.  I start walking peeking around the bend of the trees. I see 
the nightmare is real. I started to panic and didn’t know what to do. I was now someone 
considered evil. I felt evil. I told my mother and left the state. I was quickly arrested.
I have spent the first 10 years of my 60-year sentence wasting away doing nothing, always with 
the thoughts of “I’m evil and not meant for this world.” I wanted to end my life so many times. I 
still struggle with wanting this to end. I started doing programs and after 19 years of no contact 
with my daughter, finally, my baby is back in my life. I now have a reason to live. I want to be a 
good father. I’ve begged God for forgiveness, and I wrote the family of my victim over 10 years 
ago begging for forgiveness, I never knew if they received it even though I gave it to a caseworker. 
I have changed since my crime; I am no longer this broken, evil young man. I never meant to hurt 
anyone. I have grown, and I am a good person.  
I can be a good father, son, and brother. I can be a great member of society as well.  I just need 
a second chance. Parole could give me a second chance to prove I’m a good man and would never 
hurt anyone else, ever, in my life.
I have done so many programs. I am now in college, and I plan on getting my master’s degree. I 
am also a service dog trainer. I have trained or helped train 4 different dogs that have ended up 
with a wounded war veteran. We take 3-month-old puppies and train them daily for seventeen 
months to do basic commands from sitting to the most complex commands, such as opening 
doors. These dogs end up with the men and women that have fought for this country and have 
been wounded doing so. I feel such self-worth and happiness doing this for people who need it.  
I just received the first puppy that is mine from start to finish. His name is Rocky. He is a yellow 
lab that came to me at twenty-eight pounds, he is now thirty-seven point-four pounds of pure 
love. This has changed me so much; it has filled my heart with love and compassion. I wish I could 
go back and change the past, but I can’t. All I can do is be a good man and show who I really am 
to the world.
 This state hasn’t had parole since 1976. It’s time for a change. I would happily wear an ankle 
bracelet and GPS for the rest of my life. I won’t mess this opportunity up ever. I just want to have 
3/9/2023
some years left with my mother and my daughter; I have a lot to prove. I can be a productive part 
of society for the rest of my life. Parole would give hope where there is only darkness. People 
with hope can become great people. We aren’t all evil people to be kept in a box forever. I did 
something so evil twenty-two years ago. I’m so sorry for that. With this legislation, I have the 
chance to be the father I want to be and show the world I’m a good person. I owe it to her to be 
a good father and show her I’m a good person. I have a lot to prove. Please bring hope back to 
many families. Please don’t let my past keep you from bringing parole back. I have a lot of good 
to do.
Respectfully,
Jeffrey Russ Gorman
Maine State Prison
