Jena Kitchen
Think Peace Learning & Support Hub
LD 178
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice
and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Jena Kitchen and I am a resident of Henrico County, Virginia. I work for Think 
Peace Learning & Support Hub and am a current graduate student at George Mason 
University's Carter School for Peace & Conflict Resolution, focusing on trauma-responsive 
leadership. While I am not from Maine, I have become friends with Leo Hylton, a currently 
incarcerated person in Maine State Prison. We have shared many classes together and also 
work together at Think Peace Learning & Support Hub. I had the opportunity to visit him in 
person at Maine State Prison in summer 2022.
I am writing to you today to show my absolute support for LD 178 and the effort to 
re-establish parole in Maine.
I support this bill because of Leo Hylton. He is an exemplary citizen who has 
overcome tremendous obstacles and a traumatic history to become a vibrant mentor, 
social activist, kind leader, and trauma healing advocate. His efforts to reform our 
criminal justice systems from within, advocating for a restorative justice approach 
where prisoners are treated as fellow human beings, held accountable, while also 
journeying toward holistic healing has shown me a new vision of what is possible for 
reforming our criminal justice system. Through Leo, we have heard stories of other 
prisoners who, like him, have overcome immense barriers - often set in place by the 
criminal justice system itself - to lean into healing and hope for a new community 
where justice truly is given to all. 
Re-establishing parole gives appropriate and warranted incentives toward prosocial 
behaviors, giving positive reinforcement for healthy choices. Trauma can never be 
healed in isolation. Safe, supportive community is one of the core central tenets for 
trauma healing and to break the cycle of violence that these prisoners can often be 
part of themselves. Harming others can be a source of trauma for the 
victim-survivor(s) yet harming others also causes trauma to the perpetrator-offender 
as well. Parole gives the opportunity for supportive community members to come 
alongside incarcerated people and instill a sense of hope and a renewed vision of what
their future could be.
I urge you to support LD 178 as I do.
Sincerely,
Jena Kitchen
