MAINE ASSOCIATION or CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS 
P.O. Box 17642 
2022-2023 
Ol"l"|CERS 
f’rt@.\'itJ'ei1r 
.>'\mbci' L. Tucizcr 
Pn*.virhw! — l:'lt*<'t 
.larcmy Pfilil 
1711' I’ .I't'.s1'n't'!rI 
Maillicw D. Morgan 
Tl‘(’¢l.\'Ill ’¢’I‘ 
Walter I-I l\-lcKc-c 
.S' ¢'¢':'t'!tt1j&' 
Sam]: E-. Bnuicii 
2022-2023 
DIRI-ICTO RS 
Dylan R. Boyd 
Andrew litlwaids 
Downs llamlcn 
Scott F. llcss 
Jznm;-s Mason 
lliirris Z\-‘lzuison 
Joseph Mt-koiiis 
Siact-3; D. Ncunmnn 
Neil pl'L‘|l(iL‘l'gil$l 
[.lli\'L ‘ S. Riuux 
Ailum P. Shurinnn 
Aclunl Swuiisiiil 
Rohurl T. Vuii llurn 
F.Xl-I(.'l.l “l‘l VIC DI R F.C'l‘OR 
Tina HCllll‘ll.‘I' Neulcsui Portland, l\/[E 04112-8642 
(207) 523-9869 
mainemacdl@gmail.com 
March l0, 2023 
Senator Anne Beebe-Center, Chair 
Representative Suzanne Salisbury 
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety 
100 State House Station Room 436 
Augusta, ME 04330 
RE: LD 178 An Act to to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the 
Community 
Dear Senator" Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee: 
MACDL supports LD 178. 
Parole has many beneﬁts: it reduces prison populations, it gives inmates hope, it 
encourages growth and development, it promotes good behavior, it offers 
supervision and support of released inmates, and it provides a safer correctional 
experience for inmates and staff. 
A fundamental principle in sentencing is the individualization of sentences. Maine 
law requires judges to look at the individual nature and characteristics ofa 
defendant when handing down a sentence. Judges do their best with limited 
information. But defendants are like all people in that they have the capacity to 
change and to grow. Judges are tasked with the near impossible goal of 
determining what length of sentence is necessary for rehabilitation; they are in 
essence asked to look into the future. 
Parole will do a far better job of individualizing sentences and of determining the 
proper length a sentence needs to be for rehabilitation than our current system. 
This is because parole boards will have access to years and sometimes decades 
worth of information. They will either be able to see growth and development or 
they won’t. In other words, the amount of guesswork and prediction will be greatly 
reduced and they will be able to make decisions based on facts.
MACDL is excited and optimistic about the potential return of parole. We would 
request to be part of any work session on parole and we would welcome the 
opportunity to work with all stakeholders and legislators on this very important 
issue. 
Sincerely, 
/s/ 
Jeremy Pratt 
President-Elect, MACDL
