My name is Joanna Stokinger, and I am a former domestic violence victim advocate
with the Maine Department of Corrections and most recently a victim advocate with the
Maine Attorney General’s office in the homicide unit for the last nearly 5 years until
June of last year. I am also a co-leader for the Maine Chapter of Parents of  Murdered
Children and a board member of that organization.  I am also a surviving family
member of a homicide victim.
I do not represent any of the organizations that I have worked for in the past. I am
simply providing testimony as someone that has spent years advocating for victims of
crime. I hold a Bachelor's Degree in Criminal Justice and a Master’s Degree in
Criminology. I have had a career in criminal justice for 20 years. While living and
working in Alaska I worked for Alaska‘s Public Defender Agency for 8 years.  I worked
with and advocated for criminal defendants, many charged with sex offenses and
murder.  I am not blind or unsympathetic to the rights of inmates. Human and civil
rights should be afforded to all-  including those who are incarcerated.  I do not believe
parole to be a human right.
I am fully opposed to
Maine Reinstating Parole.
Those deeply affected by parole are the families, friends, and survivors of victims of
crime.  Victims of crime need certainty that when their case is tried and a sentence is
given that they won’t have to worry every few years that their offender could get out of
prison on parole. The Maine corrections system already has several measures in place
such as supervised community control, early release, and good time that inmates are
afforded that reduces their sentences and allows for supervision and release.  Speaking
as someone who has had many conversations with families of homicide victims both
personally and professionally, Victims and survivors of crime can’t forget the horrific
things that were done to them or their loved ones.  The act of a parole system and the
hearings traumatizes victims and survivors of crime over and over again.
It’s not fair to victims to add this other level of trauma and uncertainty to their plate.
Maine has not had a parole system for nearly 50 years. After working with victims in
Alaska, Florida, and Maine I can honestly say being able to tell victims of crime that
there’s no parole in Maine gives them a huge feeling of peace and certainty. Please
consider victims and survivors in your decision.
Joanna Stokinger
Winslow, Maine
