John NLN
Warren
LD 178
Honorable Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is John and I’m an incarcerated resident at the Maine State Prison. I’ve been
incarcerated for over 15 years now and have over 35 years left to serve. I am writing 
to you today to show my absolute support for LD 178 and the effort to re-establish 
parole in Maine.
When I was arrested, I was 20 years old. I had no idea of what living a healthy and 
responsible life was at that age. At 20, I was young, irresponsible, impulsive, and I 
was actively hiding the faults of an inadequate young man behind an identity built 
from the distorted beliefs of what a man is supposed to be. At that age, I thought 
being the life of the party was the most important thing. I was careless towards my 
education and many opportunities that I was gifted with; and so, I squandered my life.
The reason I describe the mindset of a 20-year-old boy is because I’ve grown up. 
First, I have a much greater appreciation for the hurt and destruction I caused. I 
understand the recklessness of my thinking and actions. I want to prove that I am not 
the same man I was in that age of ignorance. 
With that said, I can’t take back my actions. I can’t erase the pain or the loss, but I can
grow. I can show that I’ve overcome my faults, my carelessness, my recklessness, my
irresponsibility. That is the message I want to send today, that I, and many other 
incarcerated residents, are able to grow beyond the worst choice we ever made, and 
that through hard work we are able to change. I can make a difference in the lives of 
others, for myself, for my family, and for those who I’ve hurt. I wish to be an example
of redemption.
It is my hope that parole can be the incentive for incarcerated residents to work on growing 
beyond the limitations of their past. And for those like me who were arrested when they were 
young, it is a chance to not only get their life back, but to prove that they are a changed 
person and not defined by the worst choice they ever made. Parole can be more than just an 
opportunity for freedom; it can be an opportunity for applied growth and atonement. It can 
validate a person’s chance of living a successful life beyond prison by measuring the 
individual’s growth while in prison. I believe parole can offer the incentive that not only 
reinforces the individual’s success, but it can also reinforce the successful reform of the 
Maine department of corrections as a whole.

