John Vincent
New Haven, VT
LD 178
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice
and Public Safety Committee,
     My name is John Vincent. Through ongoing initiatives at Colby College I have 
had the honor to attend a number of on-line meetings  to directly engage with  
incarcerated residents at the Maine State Prison.  I am a retired Prince George’s 
County, Maryland police officer  and a former resident of Maine, now residing in 
New Haven, Vermont. 
I write you today in support of  LD 178 and the effort to re-establish parole in Maine.
I believe parole to be such an integral part of our current justice system, one that 
recognizes and rewards people who do the internal work of transforming their lives to
realize that they are much more than just their past behavior that got them into their 
present circumstance.
I believe in that power of transformation. When people are able to heal and to 
recognize their own humanity this legislation would then give them the hope in 
returning  to their families and communities and restoring their place in society 
instead of continuing  a prolonged separation.
I believe there is a  comparison to be made between the unique opportunity afforded 
the Maine legislature at this moment in enacting LD 178, and the philosophy of the 
Maine Department of Corrections and their new Model of Corrections, and its stated 
goal  “to rebuild and transform lives “ with “principles of normalization and 
humanization, with emphasis on destigmatization, respect, and modernization,” while 
it “continues to emphasize the importance of sound community transition practices 
and safe Maine communities.”
I believe that re-establishing parole will further demonstrate Maine’s commitment to recognize
the  shared humanity of all its residents by normalizing as accepted practices (to quote again 
from the Maine Model of Corrections):  “residents working collaboratively to model 
problem-solving, community building, and healthy interactions with others.”
 
I believe everyone will benefit with the re-allocation of resources away from some of the 
current practices of law enforcement, courts and custody to more humane  and modern 
methods within a system of justice, of which parole is a very important consideration.
Thank you for your work and for considering my opinion.  I hope you will support 
LD 178.
Sincerely,
John Vincent
New Haven, Vermont

