The Episcopal Church in Maine
Loring House
143 State Street
Portland, ME 04101-3701
207-772-1953   www.episcopalmaine.org
March 13, 2023
Senator Pinny H. Beebe-Center, Chair
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety
State House, Room 436
Augusta, Maine 04333
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Criminal Justice 
Committee, my name is John Hennessy and I represent the Episcopal Diocese of Maine. Today, I 
am offering testimony in support of LD 178 – An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration to 
the Community.  
Successful re-entry into society is one of the most challenging parts of rehabilitation and an 
area where The Episcopal Church has voiced particular concern. When re-entering their 
communities, former offenders find themselves needing to reconnect with family and friends, 
find employment and housing while having a criminal record, and adjust to life outside of 
prison. Not everyone is able to make the readjustment successfully, and numerous entities, 
including government, NGOs, and religious organizations, are investing in strategies to provide 
services to help offenders and to prevent recidivism.
A number of faith-based groups are involved in supporting prisoner re-entry by offering 
programs and resources to those who are still incarcerated. Within The Episcopal Church, 
the Diocese of Florida has scaled their work in response to the growth of prisons and helped 
create the ecumenical Kairos Prison Ministry program which has spread across the Church. In 
addition to fulfilling our obligation to care and minister to people in all places, prison ministries 
help engage and support people in their rehabilitation and ease the challenges of re-entry.
Currently, there are three ways that prisoners can leave prison and re-enter their communities. 
The first consists of formal government supervision in the form of probation or parole. In 2016, 
there were 4.5 million Americans living under supervised probation or parole. The second 
consists of individuals voluntarily seeking admittance to government or community-based 
programs that prepare them for re-entry and provide them with support services when they 
return to their communities. Finally, other offenders are released without any form of 
government supervision or transition support.
Successful re-entry is often contingent on a number of factors, both before and after the 
offender is released from prison. Programming within prisons helps those who are incarcerated 
to adjust when they leave, in particular addressing substance abuse or mental health concerns, 
as well as building and developing skills. Upon re-entry, an individual’s success requires some 
basic supports such as employment, a home, transition of physical and mental healthcare, and 
having the skills or education necessary to advance in life. One way to help those formerly 
incarcerated find jobs is to ban the box on job applications asking if the applicant has spent 
time in prison.
Some notable re-entry programs have drastically lowered the recidivism rate of the offenders 
who graduate from them and have helped them create a new life.
The Hope for Prisoners program, based out of Las Vegas, is an 18-month long curriculum 
that provides prevocational programs, assistance in job placement, and extensive 
mentoring. This program’s mentoring is especially important, as many mentors are 
active duty Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department officers. During a University of 
Las Vegas 18-month study, 64% of program participants found stable employment and 
only 6% were re-incarcerated.
The Prison Entrepreneurship Program starts while in prison where offenders can receive 
a mini-MBA, focusing on character, leadership, and business. Once released, 
participants are provided transitional housing, employment assistance, counseling, and 
other support services. This program has had over 2,300 graduates who have founded 
over 360 small businesses. Remarkably, 100% of the program’s graduates are employed 
within 90 days of their release from prison, and the recidivism rate is 7% over three 
years.
The Harlem Re-entry Initiative, started by the J.C. Flowers Foundation, supports and 
partners with local community organizations assisting parolees in Manhattan. The 
initiative now supports two organizations, Circle of Support and Network in the 
Community, with partners like the Interfaith Center in New York to provide parolees 
with the necessary support to successfully re-enter society. Volunteers accompany 
parolees home from prison, provide job-readiness training and other life coaching, 
organize community gatherings and family support groups, and connect parolees and 
their families to community services.  
The Episcopal Church has long advocated for both church and government support for prisoner 
re-entry programs. In 1994, parishes were encouraged to establish relationships with offenders 
and to support them after their release from prison until they could become self-sufficient in 
society.  This mission was expanded in a 2012 resolution, which stated that The Episcopal 
Church is firmly committed to a system that provides prisoners with assistance before and after 
their time in prison, including programs that provide job training and education.
In May 2007, the Executive Council approved Support for Prisoner Re-entry Programs, calling on 
Episcopalians to contact their Members of Congress and other elected officials to support re-
entry programs for incarcerated and recently released people. Raising awareness on this issue, 
The Episcopal Public Policy Network advocated for the Second Chance Act of 2007, signed into 
law by President George W. Bush in 2008. This Act was designed to improve existing programs 
to reduce recidivism rates, create new and innovative programs meant to improve offender re-
entry services, promote drug treatment and mentoring of offenders, and conduct research on 
re-entry.
Expanding effective re-entry programs across the country would have a dramatic effect on the 
people working to build new lives and their communities. Providing support and employment 
to these individuals greatly assists their transition into their community and affirms our faith 
that no person is beyond redemption and renewal.
Thank you for your attention to this important step to update supportive reentry parole by 
passing LD 178. 
