Maine State Prison 
March 13, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee. 
My name is Jonathan Chevrier MDOG# 67945, I am a resident In the Maine State Prison 
(Warren) and was sentenced to 13 years in 2015 for Aggravated Assault. Prior to my incarceration I 
sewed 10 years in the U.S. Army deploying to Iraq and the greater Middle East. When I came home 
from my last deployment, I was a lost & broken soul. There was no reintegration offered to soldiers 
returning to civilian life. Returning to civilian life was very difficult trying to relate with others left me 
feeling uncomfortable. I found myself secluded in my apartment avoiding any type of social 
interaction. Fortunately, I had friends help get me on my feet. I started commercial ﬁshing again 
Lobstering in the summer months and Scalloping in the winter. It had been such a long time sinceI 
had been out on the water. Heading out through the Bay of Fundy passing West Quoddy I-lead to the 
fishing grounds, such a beautiful sight brought me peace. Unfortunately, it was short lived. It's well 
known that fishing is extremely taxing on the body I began having severe lower back pain. At first,I 
treated the pain as typical due to the fact that it comes with the job and drank Vodka to dull the 
aggravation. This soon transitioned to taking Oxycodone & Oxycontin. My job as a fisherman no 
longer supported my family it supported my drug habit. With the fishing season short I soon found 
myself with no job, no money saved as I always had done in the past to get my family through until it 
was time to prep traps, set them and haul in the first catch. My mind was elsewhere the only thing 
that mattered was getting a fix. I used poor excuses such as "I'm in pain" to use but it had gone way 
past that soon turned to Heroin. I begged, stole and barrowed from anyone become delusional, 
Impulsive and selﬁsh to the point that I drove away everyone including my fiancé and 15-month-old 
daughter. 
Four months later l did the unthinkable. I hurt my best friend, the mother of my child and an innocent 
.men- !!\sa§..acresteé.en9| ta_ls_¢.!1.$9..iaiIfa.¢;i.n.e_Att§mnted Ml-l.(.d££.C ._l!it‘E§\§.$Q!ll§!il\jLI8..l never. would have 
thought possible. I broke the sacred oath to protect them from all enemies foreign and domestic. I 
had become that enemy, the thought of suicide soon crossed my mind. I arrived here at the Maine 
State Prison a broken shell, only pieces of the man I once was existed. 
The first few years of my sentence were nothing short of a downward spiral. I masked denial with 
substance abuse, lashed out against many with violence and disrespected staff with no remorse. After 
21 months in segregation and continuous talks with Peer-Facilitators I began to put in the work.I 
utilized their teachings, dedication and desire to help others. Most importantly their compassion to 
help fellow residents such as myself. These men believed in me and helped me find the courage to 
once again believe in myself. I initiated contact with the Veterans Administration in 2016 and was 
lator diagnosed with: Combat PTSD with Substance Abuse (Heroin/Alcohol), Radiculopathy l.&R lower 
extremity, Severe Spinal Stenosis with Herniation of the L-2/L-3 vertebrae. Resulting in 100% service 
connection, Permanent and total disability. After being awarded this entitlement I took the necessary
steps to ensure that my children receive the proper apportionments allotting them financial support 
throughout my incarceration. . 
It has been 9 long years since I committed those horrible crimes and hurt the people most precious to 
me. I am so very sorry for what I did. I have taken responsibility for my actions and continue to take 
classes to better myself and grow an in individual. Currently I reside in the Veterans Pod here at MSP 
where I train service dogs for fellow disabled veterans. I have been sober for 19 months, completed 
Z8 Peer-Facilitated courses ranging from Anger mgmt., Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Substance 
Abuse, Family Violence, Inside/Out Dads & Veteran Peer Support. I recently completed the Maine 
Apprenticeship Program under which I will receive certification as an animal trainer/Service Dogs. I'm 
currently enrolled in the NCCER program and will be starting Welding 1 certification in the spring. I 
have been inspired and so positively affected by the work of the Peer-Facilitators in this prison thatI 
have submitted an application to DHHS for certification as an (Intentional Peer Support Specialist) so 
thatl can help men and women before they make as life altering decision leading to incarceration. I 
am pleased to tell you that my application was accepted and I begin training in April 2023. 
I would like to thank the following Residents: 
. Leo Hvton . Steve Clark . Ryan Hopkins 
. Daniel Fortune .John Turner . Matthew Davis 
. Jeffrey Legasse . Brad Chesnel . Earl Bieler 
These are a few of the men responsible for my success and the success of so many others. Their hard 
work, ambition and dedication to rehabilitation of themselves and others reflects greatly on selfless 
service, integrity and self-transformation. The positive impact these men have had on my intellect has 
given me the courage to face my biggest fears, to believe in myself once again and to write this letter 
to you today. These men didn't know me, but they gave me a chance, invested their time and brought 
meaning back into my life. 
Representative Faulkingham I'm not asking you for mercy, I don't deserve it, but would be grateful for 
It none-the-less. What I am asking is for you and your continuance to view myself and the men behind 
these concrete walls as "Good men" that somewhere down the road lost their way. Every day I wake 
up and pray that I'll be given the opportunity to prove myself worthy of a second chance as a father, a 
proud son of a loving mother and if possible, forgiveness. 
Within this prison I have gained the necessary tools to be a successful, productive member in toclays 
society. The residents serving a 25 year or life sentence are the men making it possible for individuals 
like myself and many others to succeed. In order to help others change you must first change yourself. 
These men have done just that, I also believe that I to have "Changed" for the better. This is whyI 
believe Maine needs to bring back the Parole system. I invite you sir to come visit the Maine State 
prison so that you can witness first hand the magic happening here, its nothing short of as miracle. 
Thank you for your time and attention to this matter, happy holidays and God bless you sir. 
Respectfully Yours; //7 /W »" £1; 
K45 €? 64;,/ i,»-Kg,/ ‘ya 
//! §i>)<.C<*4"tt;¥-H ’ .§§r~>.<§\@1Z(f.~ .{§Z2n
