Julian Soto
Warren
LD 178
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee
My name is Julian Soto and I am writing in support of LD 178.
First and foremost, I would like to thank the Criminal justice and Public Safety 
Committee for their tireless work on behalf of LD 178. I have heard a lot about parole
potentially coming back, and I must admit that I questioned myself if I had done 
anything to warrant parole being granted to me, with the exception of completing 
one-third of my sentence.
Yes, I have taken various programs here at Maine State Prison, most notably the 
Houses of Healing. This program has been facilitated by Mr. Ephraim K Bennett for a
decade and upon taking his class, I started the process of truly understanding the 
significance of what my actions have meant to not only my victim, but also her family
and friends; also my community and my own family. Since taking that class in 2018, 
Mr. Ephriam K Bennett has spent day in and day out mentoring me to become a 
productive citizen. He encouraged me to work towards helping to rebuild the 
community that I once helped to destroy. Since being under his tutelage, I have gone 
on to college and a few other personal accomplishments, but that's all they truly are: 
personal accomplishments.
Mr. Ephriam K Bennett helped me to realize that these personal goals and 
achievements mean nothing if I don't have true remorse for what I did to my victim. 
As I let the above thought sink into my heart, I have begun to dig deep within my own
self to take complete and full responsibility for the world of pain and heartache that I 
forced my victim to endure. And that starts with acknowledging that no amount of 
degrees and certificates I stack and pile up can ever make up for what I did.
At this moment, all I can do is hold fast to my new relationship with God that has 
shown me how to value all human life. I can use this value of human life as a compass
to use to walk a life your life's Mission so to speak to allow myself to be changed. 
And, God willing, to help any other human being that I will eventually come across in
this path called life. With that being said, I can truthfully say that I do not deserve 
parole, but there are a select few that absolutely deserve a chance at parole, but that is 
only a few.
Thank you for this opportunity to share my testimony with you all. God bless. 

