June & Roy Smoot
Kennebunk
LD 178
Esteemed Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee Members:
As someone who experienced the ultimate loss of a brother who was killed by a person with a
handgun, it may seem odd for me and my wife to strongly support LD 178.  Yet, we deeply 
believe incarcerated men and women can and do change for the better, develop remorse for 
violent and nonviolent crimes they commit, and become able to safely return to our 
communities as valuable, contributing  citizens. 
 
Our state's MDOC offers numerous excellent rehabilitative, educational, job skills, and life 
skills programs through which incarcerated people are earning college degrees (AA, BA,MA, 
MS, PhD), gaining employable skills in industries, computer programming, youth 
development, agriculture, and other arenas, and learning life skills in emotional literacy, 
managing substance use disorder, and more. The lack of resentencing, parole, and 
commutation options means incarcerated people who have gained skills for successful and 
safe reentry are not allowed to return and contribute their skills to their communities prior to 
the conclusion of their sentences — if they even have a release date. Keeping people who 
are no threat to society but who, to the contrary, are able and willing to be contributing 
community members serves no financial, public safety, or rehabilitative purpose. Rather, the 
emphasis in our sentencing laws on punishment over rehabilitation and reentry hobbles 
MDOC's ability to fulfill its mission of “Making our communities safer by reducing harm 
through supportive intervention, empowering change and restoring lives.”  Bringing back 
parole is a vital first step for Maine.
Additional positive results of paroling inmates include over $13MM saved in our 
MDOC budget via reducing our incarcerated population, adding paroled people to our
work force, reducing stress on MDOC facilities and employees, and reversing 
Northwestern University Law Review research which states that Maine is one of the 
worst four states in the country with regard to pathways toward release based on 
rehabilitation as laid out inhuman rights law.  We  must do better for our state and 
rehabilitated inmates in Maine. 
Bring back parole in Maine.  LD 178 establishes a wise and thorough process for 
parole to be a safe and productive tool of our MDOC.  
We urge you to approve LD 178 with your "ought to pass" recommendation to our 
full legislature.  Thank you,
June & Roy Smoot
Kennebunk, ME
