Maine Hospice Council and Center for End of Life Care 
71/ﬁe/12 (ﬂange Jﬁi jzgne/25 
Testimony on Behalf of LD 178 
before 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
Presented by 
Kandyce Powell MSN 
Monday, March 13, 2023 
10:AM 
Good afternoon, Senator Anne Beebe-Center, Representative Suzanne Salisbury and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Kandyce Powell. I am a resident of 
Wiscasset as well as the Executive Director of the Maine Hospice Council. I am pleased to be with you 
today to speak in support of LD 178, “An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the 
Community ”. 
We can’t incarcerate our way to a healthy country. It hasn’t worked. The issue is a societal one and each 
one of us bears some responsibility. All of us have a role. I remember driving by the old prison in 
Thomaston years ago, saying to myself, “I wonder who lives there? 
In 1999, I found out. The Maine hospice Council proposed a hospice program at the Maine State Prison. 
For 18 years, we worked with DOC, prison administration and the men who were incarcerated to develop 
and nurture one of the most comprehensive hospice and palliative care programs in the country. 
The ground rules, when I began training the men to become hospice volunteers, was that of shared 
humanity. A program of respect, trust, altruistic care-giving, skill building, and collaborative problem- 
solving. The men in my classes were some of the most intelligent, talented, respectful and kind I have 
been privileged to work alongside, and I have been in healthcare for 50 years. The program gave them 
hope. It helped them tease out the very best of themselves. Watching the men at the bedside ofa 
seriously ill or dying patient would bring tears to your eyes. I was immensely proud of the tenderness 
they were not afraid to share. 
In the classroom, the depth of our conversations was amazing. Guests from the community who attended 
our classes were astounded. Most of the guests were health care professionals, interns, Doctoral students, 
medical students, psychiatrists, community hospice volunteers, Attorneys General, faculty from 
international universities, to list but a few. After the conferences, guests would leave saying, “I had no 
idea.” 
There is so much more to this story. Truthfully, some of the most profound workl have ever done. 
We can’t go back and ﬁx what they did or the decisions that led them to prison. They’ll live with that the 
rest of their lives. However, We can take time to get to know them, to listen to their stories in order to 
understand the context of their lives as well as the behaviors that led them to prison. We can also create 
policies and provide accessible resources so everyone has equal access to the help they need. 
One of the policies we can restore in Maine is parole. You’ve heard the history. Maine had parole, but it 
was abolished in 1976. Was it, or will it ever be a perfect system? No. Is that a reason not to restore it? 
The A/[aine Hospice Council is Cl 5 0] (0)3 non-proﬁt organization. All donations are tax~dea'z1cribIe. 
PO. Box 2239, Augusta, ME 04338-2239 ' (207) 62()~0()51 ' (800) 4:38-5963 ‘ Fax: (207) 622-1274 ' www. MaineHospiceCouncil.0rg
Maine Hospice Council and Center for End of Life Care 
7/I/ﬂare (ﬂange _7ﬁjj7€l2_f 
No. Maybe, the question should be, why haven’t we reintroduced parole? Some individuals, like myself, 
who have spent many years working with these men, believe, We could create a system of parole in Maine 
that might just become a shining example of re-entry, reintegration, rehabilitation and hope? 
Thank you for listening. 
With sincere appreciation, 
\\ 
QQ 
Kandyce Powell 
The Zvfaine Hospice Council is a 5 01 ( c)3 non-proﬁt organization. All donations are tax-deductible. 
RQ. Box 2239, Augusta, ME 04s338—2Z39 ' (207) 6260651 ° (800) 438-5963 ' Fax: (Z07) 622-1274 ' www. MaineHospiceCouncil.org
