March 1 3th, 2023  
 
State of Maine  
Criminal Justice and Public  Safety Committee (CJPS)  
 
To Whom It May Concern  
 
I am writing to testify before the committee asking to  kindly recons ider bring ing back the parole 
for the state of Maine.  I am a foreigner, with permanent residence in the United States and have 
lived in the United States for over  5 years now. I came to this country as a result of my work as a 
Human Resources Director, with the confidence I can raise my children and offer a better life for 
my family here than in my home country Venezue la. Two years and a half ago I was surprised to 
meet an inmate from the Maine Prison in my master's in science at Life University that was held 
primarily online, Mr. Steven  Matthew Clark. Since that very first day I was impressed by his 
introduction, he asked  the class not to judge him based on the worst mistake he made in his life. 
Mr. Steven  Clark  has been incarcerated for over 18 years now, and over that period he has taken 
full accountability for the crime he committed, and has worked very hard to transform his life  not 
only that, he has supported many people within the system and more recently he is leading an 
initiative bringing leaders, personalities, and organizations to foster a criminal justice 
transformation where restoration as opposed to punishment leads to a better society with less 
crime and suffer.  
I am writing respectfully to the committee to consider bringing back the parole because I am 
convinced someone like Mr. Steven Clark  spent enough time to reflect, and recover, he has 
helped so many people while incarcerated and can be even more helpful under parole in the 
future if an opportunity was given to him. I trust proper mechanisms would be in place to ensure, 
when, how, and who could be eligible to enjoy such privilege and equally there would be guardrails 
to ensure that anyone who breaks rules will return t o prison. I also know because of the work Mr. 
Clark leads  inspired me to learn about the system that the prison in Maine State at present is very 
progressive and offers many programs for inmates for them to develop and grow while in prison 
and so the parole will be very aligned to those efforts.  
Finally, coming from a third -world country in Latin America I really dream criminal justice in the 
United States could offer more dignity to its citizens even when they have failed and offer an 
opportunity for them to  pay a sentence in prison, with the possibility of parole or early release if 
they earn them based on merits, in due course. This country that today is my home is a first -world 
one and should be one of the best when it comes to best practices in criminal j ustice.  
Sincerely,  
 
Karina Delgado Rios  

