Karri Clohosey
Topsham, ME
Testimony in Favor of LD 178
An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community
Dear Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee and honorable members of 
the Maine State legislature. I submit this testimony in favor of LD 178. 
I write to you as a Maine resident with almost 30 years in the field of social 
services who has seen incarceration’s impact on those in custody, their 
families, and their communities. The ‘correctional’ system works best when 
incentives for corrective behavior exist. Most recently I have been working 
with individuals from the Maine State Prison and the Maine Correctional 
Center / Southern Maine Women’s Reentry Center who are engaged in prison 
education programs in pursuit of higher education. I have seen the power of 
hope and transformation when you invest in solutions to justice that go 
beyond the status quo, and when you believe in people.
There are so many incarcerated residents who are desperately seeking 
pathways to a second chance, a chance to do better. Programs and initiatives 
within jails and prisons just cannot meet these needs, and those that exist 
often do not always promote the accountability that they set out to. The 
mission statement of the Maine Department of Corrections states “Making our 
communities safer by reducing harm through supportive intervention, 
empowering change, and restoring lives.” Parole does all of this as well as 
incentivizing accountability for conduct. Hope promotes transformation.
I have also worked with forensic patients, the severe and persistent mentally 
ill, at Riverview Psychiatric Center, encountering some of the most challenging 
cases when it comes to decisions around public safety. I understand firsthand, 
the critical deliberation in decisions around community integration for those 
who have committed crimes. LD 178 mandates DOC supervision following 
release and provides careful protocol to protect the public from those who 
pose a threat through disqualification. LD 178 offers a pathway toward more 
effective and efficient rehabilitation and supported reentry into the 
community.
 At a time when there is a political movement to be “tough on crime,” public 
officials are called to enact legislation that promotes true safety and justice, 
not just policy decisions that promote this agenda at face value. We must 
move away from knee-jerk decisions that are based on punitive models which 
cost taxpayers more money in the end and do not effectively reach goals of 
safety and justice. Consider recidivism rates. Incarceration is not the answer 
to public safety, behavioral transformation, or lasting justice. Careful 
integration plans such as those enacted through parole incentivize positive 
behavior and promote healing and rehabilitation. For these reasons, I ask that 
you respectfully pass LD 178.
Sincerely,
Karri Clohosey
Topsham, ME
