Restorative Justice Project Maine, 39 A Spring Street, Belfast, Maine  04915
March 13, 2023
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee
My name is Kathy Durgin-Leighton, Executive Director of the Restorative Justice Project Maine and I 
urge you to vote in favor of passing LD 178, “An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the 
Community,” into law.  I am writing today on behalf of the Restorative Justice Project Maine whose 
Legislative Committee, made up of staff, members of the board of directors, and community members 
voted unanimously in support of reestablishing parole in the State of Maine. As its Executive Director, I 
am proud of Restorative Justice Project Maine’s support of a process that opens a pathway to hope and 
healing for both the victim and the offender.
I am also writing as a resident of Maine. I am so strongly in favor of Parole that I am willing to share my 
own personal painful story.  I am not stranger to violence. 
Until the age of eight, I lived with a violent father who was physically and verbally abusive. No 
one was left unscathed including my mother, us children, and the pets. My early years were of 
violence and terror until my mother was able to gather up the strength to remove him from the 
home. 
As a young mother preparing for work one morning, my neighbor broke into my home carrying a 
loaded shotgun in search of his estranged wife. He threatened my life and the life of my 
eighteen-month child. We hid in fear until he left. Thankfully, we survived physically unharmed. 
Despite the violence that I have experienced, I am a firm believer that locking someone up for long 
periods of time without hope, rehabilitation, or opportunity for healing is not the answer. The person 
who threatened my life suffered from mental illness. My father was an alcoholic and a victim of his own 
upbringing. Our response to crime by locking someone up, removing them from society, isolating, and 
punishing offers little for the person who was harmed or for the person who caused the harm. 
Restorative Justice Project Maine, 39 A Spring Street, Belfast, Maine  04915Parole provides a rehabilitative path toward reintegration into the community. Currently, when a person 
has served their time and is released, there are no safeguards for the community and no support to the 
person entering the community. The absence of parole offers no incentive for rehabilitation and 
perpetuates further harm.
If combined with restorative practices, parole offers opportunity for transformative change for the 
person who caused the harm, and real healing for the person who was harmed. These practices are 
intended to promote healing and, as such, the future safety and well-being of all affected individuals. 
I urge you to support LD 178 for the benefit of all citizens in the State of Maine. Thank you for your 
consideration. 
Kathy Durgin-Leighton
Executive Director
Restorative Justice Project Maine
kathy@rjpmidcoast.org
