Good Morning, and thank you Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and 
members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, for the opportunity to 
speak before you on a bill that I am very passionate about seeing passed: LD I78, 
an Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community. 
My name is Kelly Taylor, and I live in South Thomaston. I am a Social Studies 
teacher in Rockland and have been over 40 years having taught all subject areas in 
grades 7-12. So today, I want to speak to you from the point of view of a teacher 
whose students write Legislative Documents and hold committee hearings, and 
debate the pros and cons of their bills. And I ask: what makes a good bill‘? 
In the words of former President Obama: “A good compromise, a good piece 
of legislation, is like a good sentence. Or a good piece of music. 
Everybody can recognize it. They say, ‘Huh. lt works. It makes sense.“ 
Reestablishing Parole in Maine DOES make sense! In a government system where 
both the Preambles to the U.S. and Maine Constitution list as a primary goal of 
government to “establish Justice” not having an active Parole board does not make 
sense. A Parole Board is a check and balance against injustice and against one 
branch of govermnent, i.e., the executive branch having too much absolute power 
over such matters as reprieves, commutations, and pardons. A Parole Board would 
allow more voices to be heard, especially those voices who are the incarcerated 
members of our society and who want to do the right things. 
Twenty years ago a bright young 12 year old stepped foot in my classroom and we 
quickly bonded because he knew I cared. Now that resident of MSP has completed 
his Master’s Degree in Conﬂict Resolution and Analysis and has just been 
accepted into the Doctorate program at George Mason University. He writesa 
monthly column for the Bollard magazine, is a co-host on Justice Radio, isa 
visiting instructor at Colby College, and is a renowned Restorative Justice 
practitioner among many other things. This young man deserves Hope anda 
second chance to utilize his many skills and to repay his debt to society. 
In today’s world of Restorative Justice practices, incarcerated men and women are 
looking for ways that they can be restored, rehabilitated, and are eager to exercise 
what they have learned. Over the last 7 years, I have been a frequent visitor to 
events at the MSP. I have seen how many men are actively involved in making the
world they live in a better place through access to higher education, through 
Hospice volunteering, and through sharing their hopes and dreams for the future. 
In all of these visits, and in all of my day-to-day communications, I am truly 
inspired by these men and women who do not want to be remembered for the worst 
decision of their lives, but by how they can and are changed when given the 
opportunity and with hope, care, and love. We must restore humanity to the justice 
system, and LD 178 is a huge step in the right direction for Criminal Justice 
Reform. Parole would restore hope, not just to my former student and dear friend, 
but to the many incarcerated men and women who strive to be their best selves and 
to make Maine a better and safer place to live. 
In the words of Governor Mills in her 2“d Inaugural address, “I can report to you 
that, across this Maine, hope is very much alive. . .Indeed, there is hope for the 
future, and this is important because it is all we have really.” I truly hope that 
Gov. Mills believes in these words, because LD 178 would give Maine’s 
incarcerated men and women hope for the future when parole is restored to Maine. 
Therefore, I strongly urge members of this committee that LD 178 Ought to Pass 
and a Parole Board should be reestablished in the State of Maine. Thank you for 
all you do and for your support.
