 
 
Written Testimony from the Maine Credit Union League  
Neither For, Nor Against  LD 178 , An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into 
the Community  
March  13, 2023  
 
Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and Distinguished Members of the Joint  
Committee  on Criminal Justice and Public Safety , 
The Maine Credit Union League proudly  represen ts Maine’s 50 credit unions and more than 
725,000 members  statewide. Please accept our written testimony neither for  nor agai nst LD 
178; An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community.   
Having a foundation in financial literacy and having the right tools is c ritical  to helping formerly 
incarcerated individuals reintegrate into their communities upon releas e. As the committee 
considers this concept draft and the question of how to support reentry and reintegration into 
the community for formerly incarcerated individuals, we hope you will include financial skills 
and products as part of that support.  
The Yor k Chapter of Credit Unions began facilitating Financial Fitness Fairs at the Maine 
Correctional Center in 2014. For those incarcerated at the Maine Correctional Center, the fairs 
model spending choices and potential career paths and equip incarcerated indi viduals with 
financial knowledge needed to succeed upon release. All the participants are scheduled to re -
enter society within a year. For many at the prison, the fairs serve as an opportunity to ask 
industry professionals questions that can help them impr ove their financial situation. 
Information about budgeting and credit is incredibly valuable, and the takeaways can give the 
soon -to-be-released inmates the confidence that they can have a successful, stable financial 
future  when they re -enter society.  
Prior to the pandemic beginning in March of 2020, a Financial Fitness Fair was held at the 
Maine Correctional Center each spring and fall, with roughly 100 inmates participating in each 
event. Approximately 1,200 inmates have participated since the first fair at the prison in 2014. 
Work is underway for credit union volunteers to return to the prison and begin hosting the fairs 
once again.  
We’ve heard from the Department of Corrections and former inmates alike about the need for 
financial services for those currently incarcerated as well as those who are released or soon -to-
be released. Incarcerated individuals are often released with a chec k for their work while 
 
cc: Clerk Benjamin Berry, State House Room 127  incarcerated but have no recourse to those funds due to a lack of identification or bank 
account.  
As a response to this need, the League is  working to make sure financial services are more 
easily accessible to this population. We’re  working with our 50 member credit unions to make 
sure that staff have the proper training to address  barriers to financial solvency and account 
opening. Staff are being trained in how to verify identity for those who may not have a current 
government iden tification or whose identity has been compromised. Some credit unions also 
offer specific services and products for those who were recently released and are looking to 
rebuild their financial health.  
But there’s still more to be done. We know that ensurin g people have access to financial 
services, like credit for car loans, is key to reducing recidivism and building healthy 
communities. It’s our hope to be able to  offer accounts to individuals who are currently 
incarcerated, since we’ve heard that building savings habits and credit opportunities while 
incarcer ated are some of the best ways to help smooth  the reentry process into the community 
post -release.  As this committee considers how to help this population, we offer our support 
and expertise on ensuring access to financi al services  so that a bank account is an asset upon 
release, and not another barrier to reintegration.  
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony  on this important topic. If the League can be 
of any assistance during the deliberations of this bill or  others similar, please do not hesitate to 
contact us.  
 
Krista Simonis  
Director of Governmental Affairs  
