																																Testimony	of	Lani	Graham,	MD,	MPH		IN	SUPPORT	OF	LD	178		An	Act	to	Support	Reentry	and	Reintegration	into	the	Community		Presented	by	Senator	Beebe-Center	of	Knox	   Before	the	Criminal	Justice	and	Public	Safety	Committee,	March	13,	2023		Senator	Beebe-Center,	Representative	Salisbury	and	Members	of	the	Criminal	Justice	and	Public	Safety	Committee,	my	name	is	Lani	Graham	I	am	a	former	Chief	Public	health	Officer	for	Maine.		I	live	in	Freeport.				I	could	not	be	with	you	in	person	because	I	am	down	with	Covid	and	still	quite	sick.		I	start	by	saying	that	I	have	never	been	in	prison,	never	been	arrested,	and	as	far	as	I	know	no	member	of	my	family	has	ever	been	in	prison	or	arrested.		We	are	lucky	family.			I	could	spend	the	rest	of	my	time	describing	the	many	forms	of	our	good	luck,	some	of	which	may	coincide	with	the	ways	your	own	families	are	lucky.			But	there	is	no	time	for	that.					But	I	do	want	to	mention	that	I	have	been	the	victim	of	two	violent	criminal	attacks	which	resulted	in	numerous	interviews	with	police.		My	attackers	were	never	caught.			I	wanted	them	caught	to	save	others	from	my	experience,	but	also	with	the	hope	of	reform.			I	wanted	accountability,	but	also	hope	for	change.		Due	to	the	tremendous	good	luck	I	have	had	in	my	own	life,	terrible	mistakes	I	have	made,	which	could	have	ended	tragically,	possibly	with	the	death	of	another	person,	have	ended	without	incident.			Surely	that	has	happened	to	some	of	you.			You	drive	when	you	shouldn’t,	you	allow	yourself	to	be	distracted	behind	the	wheel	of	a	car,	or	you	leave	a	loaded	gun	unattended.			I	ask	you	to	consider	if	you	have	ever	had	such	experience	and	what	you	would	want	for	yourself	or	your	own	family,	were	such	a	mistake	to	have	ended	badly.			
Having	had	the	option	of	listening	to	the	testimony,	the	objections	seem	to	flow	along	two	lines—the	rights	of	victims	with	particular	mention	of	“truth	in	sentencing”	and	the	concept	that	Maine’s	current	system	of	supervised	community	release	is	sufficient.		It	seems	like	the	first	reason,	the	rights	of	victims,	can	be	worked	through	with	some	of	the	victims	at	the	table.		But	of	course,	you	cannot	satisfy	all	victims.		Some	victims	want	every	ounce	of	punishment	that	the	state	will	allow,	and	others	take	a	different	view,	as	I	did.		Some	are	traumatized	by	every	thought	of	the	crimes	committed,	and	others	find	relief	in	forgiveness.			It	will	be	impossible	to	find	the	perfect	balance,	but	perhaps	a	mix	of	victims	at	the	table	can	help.					I	have	spent	a	little	time	looking	at	the	“Truth	in	Sentencing”	laws	around	the	country	and	found	that	there	are	states	that	have	both	“Truth	in	Sentencing	laws”	and	parole.				Keeping	to	small	states,	comparable	to	Maine,	North	Dakota	and	Maine	have	both	reached	85%	of	truth	in	sentencing,	but	North	Dakota	has	Parole	and	Maine	does	not.1		Regarding	the	second	argument,	the	current	pathways	are	sufficient.			In	2018,	Vermont,	a	relatively	liberal	state,	and	Wyoming,	a	relatively	conservative	state,	both	had	hundreds	of	inmates	on	parole	in	contrast	to	Maine’s	less	than	100.2		LD	178	has	good	practical	reasons	to	support	it,	but	it	also	offers	Maine	the	chance	to	take	a	step	toward	a	more	humane	and	restorative	system	that	offers	better	chances	for	redemption.			I	hope	you	will	support	this	bill	unanimously	ought	to	pass.		  1https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/tssp.pdf   2 https://www.prisonpolicy.org/profiles/ 
