 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 178 (NFNA)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 178, An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community  
 
DA: March 13, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony neither for nor against LD 178  (Concept Draft) . 
 
 CLAC considered  LD 178 at its March 3, 2023 meeting, given the bill’s  recently  scheduled 
March 13 hearing date.   However, t he text of the LD was not available to CLAC as of March 3 .  
Accordingly, CLAC cannot provide feedback regarding the specifics of a parole  program , which we 
understand to be  the intent of the bill.   CLAC welcomes the opportunity to review the bill’s 
language , should that be requested .  
 
 CLAC notes  that the existing program of Supervised Community Confinement  currently 
offers opportunities for early release into the community during a DOC resident’s court -imposed 
period of incarceration.   34-A M.R.S. § 3036 -A.  This program was recently expanded by  the 
Legislat ure, P.L. 2021, c. 376, and information received from DOC Commissioner Liberty indicates 
that DOC has capacity within this existing program for eligible residents.   Jails also offer 
community confinement programs administered by the Sheriffs.   30-A M.R.S. §1659 -A.  Any 
proposal for parole  should be reviewed in light of the purposes of sentenc ing, 17 -A M.R.S. § 1501; 
Victims ’ Rights, 17 -A M.R.S. , Chapter 75; and these existing programs , the p opulations they 
currently serve, whether  the needs of current residents are being met by the existing programs, and 
the resources required to adapt or change  these programs .     
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
