Leo Hylton
Warren
LD 178
Honorable Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Leo Hylton, I am a resident of Maine State Prison in Warren, and I have 
been incarcerated for almost 15 of my 32 years of life.
I am writing to you today to show my absolute support for LD 178 and the effort to 
re-establish parole in Maine.
As a 16 year-old boy, I had grand dreams of becoming a psychologist for boys in the 
foster system. I was hoping to be for them what I never had: someone to be able to 
look them in the eyes and say truthfully, “I've been there. I have been hurt, scarred, 
and traumatized in ways that defy words. I have been there, and I will be with you. 
For as long as you need me.”
I wanted to be a mechanism of healing derived from a young life of pain.
Then, nearly as soon as I became an adult myself, this dream died with me. Thinking I
had everything under control, I broke into a home, and nearly killed two people. 
Before opening that door, I was a big, bad, scary grown man. I was so arrogant in my 
assurance that I could scare an older man into opening his safe without violence, that 
my young mind could not conceive of the idea that I controlled absolutely nothing.
Instead, the alarm went off, my mind broke, and I nearly killed two people. This is the
reality that I live with every day. This is the harm that I cannot undo, the harm that I 
strive everyday to counterbalance.
And yet I know the scale does not exist. No matter what I do, what I have done cannot
be undone. And within the current criminal legal system, I have no avenue of 
restoration or repair available. To directly seek forgiveness and repair is to break the 
law and ask for the other 40 years hanging over my head to be added to the 50 that 
I'm currently serving.
My hope and prayer is that parole will open the door for me to pursue this reparative 
action. With the help of fellow prisoners, staff members, and administrators who have
defied the system, I have been able to heal, grow, and work to educate myself. I have 
attained my GED, associate’s, bachelor's, and master's degrees in spite of a system 
that initially told me my life was over. I have been accepted into a PhD program and 
intend to start in the fall, which includes serving as an associate director of a center 
for reconciliation.
My life's focus is creating avenues of meaningful accountability that support healing, 
repair, restoration, and transformation. From the confines of my cell, my ability to 
serve my community in this way is stifled.
My humble plea is that you would each vote unwaveringly in support of LD178. 
Please, create this restorative, supportive, and truly victim sensitive parole system that
has been painstakingly designed in accordance with the expert testimony delivered 
over the course of the Commission to Examine Reestablishing Parole last fall. This 
one bill addresses three of the Commission's six recommendations. The commission 
has asked you to re-establish parole by a strong majority. I reiterate that request with 
my whole heart.
With deep gratitude and respect,
Leo Hylton

