Linda Small
6 Orchard Road
Standish, Maine 04084
March 7, 2023
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee
100 State House Station
Augusta, Maine 04333
Dear Committee,
I write in favor of LD 178 - An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration to the Community. 
Public safety is my priority. As a formerly incarcerated individual and member of society, I 
witnessed the release of individuals ill-prepared for a successful transition. Parole offers an 
incentive to do the necessary inner work of transformation through education, reflection, and 
accountability. 
How does parole support the Maine Department of Corrections’ mission of public safety and 
rehabilitation? Corrections’ duty is to protect society by releasing people better than when they 
arrived in the system. True individual rehabilitation does not come from mandatory classes on a 
case plan. Active rehabilitation lives in the heart and the soul of a person who feels hope, dignity, 
and an opportunity to replace harmful habits with community-based restorative practices. Under 
the LD 178 bill, these personal improvements and readiness are assessed by experts.
I am not in favor nor does the bill afford wholesale release of incarcerated women and men. Nor 
is it an early-release program. LD 178 creates opportunities for women and men who 
demonstrate release readiness through dedication and the challenging work of self-improvement 
to affect positive transformational change. If recognized, their internal shift to community 
involvement, collective care, and the common good fosters family reunification, stronger 
communities, and a productive and healthy society. 
As a taxpayer, I desire to shift the money saved by releasing qualified women and men under LD 
178 to community-based restorative justice programs, after-school activities, and public 
education in the service of all Maine citizens. Releasing 170 people on parole in the first year 
would save $7 million in the cost of running prisons in the first year alone.
For the sake of our state, communities, and families, I ask the Committee members to vote in 
favor of LD178 An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration to the Community.
Sincerely,
Linda Small
Linda Small
