Lori Swain
Cape Elizabeth
LD 178
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice
and Public Safety Committee. My name is Lori Swain and I live in Cape Elizabeth. I 
am writing today in favor of LD 178, An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration 
into the Community.
I believe in rehabilitation, transformation, and that people can change.  Sometimes we
incarcerate someone for the worst thing they did in their life and stop there.  There are
men and women in our prisons and jails with long sentences who have made amends 
for their mistakes and turned their lives around.  The current problem is that these 
people remain in prison because we don’t have a system for them to be released when
they are ready.  We continue to pay thousands of dollars institutionalizing people who
could and should be out in society making a positive difference.
I believe Steve Clark is a perfect example of someone who is ready to be a productive
and important member of our society.  I met Steve about 7 years ago.  He’s been 
incarcerated at the Maine State Prison for about 18 years now.  He was young when 
he was arrested.  He and his friend made a tragic mistake one night while under the 
influence, which ended with the death of his friend.  Steve has regretted that night 
ever since.  He’s since asked for forgiveness and made amends for what happened 
that night.  The mother of his friend has forgiven him and even visits Steve in prison.  
She sees the good man that Steve is and advocates for his release.
Steve is a bright and compassionate man who thinks of others before himself.  He’s 
dedicated his life to helping the men in the prison who are suffering the most, 
including my son whose lifelong mental health illness landed him in solitary 
confinement for about 5 years instead of getting the treatment we asked for and he 
desperately needed.  Steve was his peer mentor and never gave up on him.  He even 
offered to give up his honor cell to be in a cell next to my son when he was attempting
suicide and felt hopeless.  The prison didn’t allow him to do that.
Steve has volunteered with AA and the hospice program and has spent his time 
furthering his education so he can continue to help others.  He earned an associate 
degree, two bachelor degrees, and a graduate degree in psychology with a 4.0 GPA.  
He is now a PhD candidate and will start those classes in the summer.  He trains 
others and runs groups to support the men in the prison.  He also supports men who 
have been released from prison and connects them to resources “on the outside” in the
hopes they will be successful.  I’ve texted and talked to Steve while he cried because 
he wasn’t allowed to meet with the men who needed his help many times.  He hurts 
for those who are hurting and truly cares about others.  He’s helped others that the 
prison gave up on, even when it meant retaliation from some of the staff and 
administration.  Steve feels that he could help these men so much better if he were in 
society.  Steve is a good man who deserves a second chance.  I proudly consider him 
a member of our family and love him like a son.
Steve currently works with a program called The Awakening.  He’s been offered jobs outside 
the prison to help others but he’s not allowed to accept those jobs.  He struggles to pay for his
college education and would love to be out and working so he could support himself, further 
his ability to help others, and help his mother financially after she cashed in her retirement so 
he could take college classes while incarcerated.  Steve has a purpose and a valuable life 
outside of prison, but he has no way to get there without the passing of LD 178.  Please 
consider Steve and the many other men and women like him when deciding how to vote.

