SENATOR ANNE BEEBE-CENTER 
THE COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
LD 178: An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community 
I 
IN SUPPORT 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Madison Burk' e,'a _ lifelong resident of‘Lo've1l, Maine, here today 
to testify in favor of LD 178: An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community. 
When I was seven years old, I was pulled out of my second-grade classroom and escorted down 
to the school ofﬁce, where my life would change forever. I was quickly shufﬂed home with 
hushed voicesand no. .explana_tion,_g1"eeted by two police ofﬁcers. They sat me downin our living 
room, luaughingfn as they asked me if my father had ever hurt me. ‘My dad best. friend, and 
I_c"o _uld_n’t understand what was happening. _I choked QL1'(111y' 6,lI1_SW €1' _S' to tl1eir_qu_est_ions in tears _ 
aiid,"withoutl __ as aichiaiicefto 'say'fgoodbye, my father wasitalieniawayi§Icouldi1 ’t even see 
him leave. For m'ore.than six months, I Wasn’t allowed to speak with him. I watched as Father’s 
Day came and Went, and all my peers talked about the fun outings they went on with their dads. 
All I could think about was that I had no idea when or if I would ever see my father again. 
I wrote to him every day in a small notebook that I carried with me. He couldn’t read what-I 
wrote, so I would sometimes write back to myself as him, wanting nothing more than to hear his 
voice. My father being ripped out of my family was one of the worst things to ever happen to 
me, and I still feel the pain of it today. Although my father only spent a year away from home, 
that single year felt endless, and it tore my family apart. My story is not unique, however.’ 
According to data from the Maine Children ’s Alliance collected from 201 l to 2012, 8%of
Maine children reported at least one parent’s incarceration during their childhood. This equates 
to approximately 20,000 Maine children who have experienced parental incarceration. Many of 
these children experience much longer periods of time without their parent than I did, which only 
serves to increase -the negative effects they face. My support of this bill isanot simply about how 
parole could have brought my family together sooner, but about how this bill could reunite 
countless Maine families. Extensive research tells us that children who face parental 
incaroé.1'a.tion have worse outcomes than those who do notand are . also .mor¢' ..1iko.ly.to be ., 
incarcerated themselves in the future. Therefore, not only would the reestablishment of parole 
save money on individuals who have already been sentenced but hasthe potential toprovide ‘' 
further savings by preventing future incarcerations. Parole is estimated to save $76,000 per 
incarcerated_individual,0 per year. If a person has proveni themself to be"’ rehabilitat'ed,',it wastes 
money to continue to hold them in custody. Parole is not only an ethical win forthestate of 
Maine, but a ﬁnancial one. Therefore, I implore you to vote in support of LD. 17 8,_Thank you. 
T u H V H T H 0 
- .-”:Madison Burke
