295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers
       Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive 
Director
Testimony in Support of LD 178 - An Act To Support Reentry and 
Reintegration into the Community
Sponsored by Senator Beebe-Center
3.13.2023
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, 
and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety. I am Malory Shaughnessy, a 
Westbrook resident, and the Executive Director of the Alliance for 
Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide 
association representing the majority of Maine’s safety net 
community-based mental health and substance use treatment 
providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound 
policies and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the 
quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of 
LD 178, “An Act To Support Reentry and Reintegration into the 
Community.” As members of this committee, you are well aware 
that the proposed Department of Corrections budget for this 
biennium is close to $500 million dollars. You also know that the 
Maine Department of Corrections offers numerous rehabilitative, 
educational, job skills, and life skills programs through which 
incarcerated people are earning college degrees (AA, BA, MA, 
MS, PhD), gaining employable skills in Industries, computer 
programming, youth development, agriculture, and other arenas, 
and learning life skills in emotional literacy, managing substance 
use disorder, and more. 
We are investing in “correcting” our community members. We 
do this programming because we understand that over 90% of 
the people we incarcerate will return to our communities. If we 
believe in the mission of the DOC, “Making our communities 
safer by reducing harm through supportive intervention, 
empowering change and restoring lives,” shouldn’t the 
completion of corrections be judged by evidence of rehabilitation 
instead of the tolling of years?~ Officers ~
Dave McCluskey, President
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1st Vice-President
Day One
Bob Descoteaux, 2nd Vice-
President
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health
Kara Hay, Secretary
Penquis CAP Inc.
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer
Aroostook Mental Health Center
Eric Meyer, Past President
Spurwink
 
~ Board Members ~
Adcare Educational Institute
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare
Assistance Plus
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center
Common Ties
Community Caring Collaborative
Community Health & Counseling
COR Health
Crisis & Counseling Centers
Crossroads Maine
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry
Kennebec Behavioral Health
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization
Maine Behavioral Healthcare
Milestone Recovery
NFI North, Inc.
Northern Light/Acadia
Portland Recovery Community 
Center
Pathways of Maine
Rumford Group Homes
Brighter Heights Maine
Sunrise Opportunities
Sweetser
TriCounty Mental Health Services
Wellspring, Inc.
Wings for Children & Families
Woodfords Family Services

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org The lack of resentencing, parole, and commutation options means incarcerated 
people who have gained the skills for successful and safe reentry are not allowed 
to return and contribute those skills to their communities prior to the conclusion 
of their sentences. Keeping people who are no threat to society but who, to the 
contrary, are able and willing to be contributing community members serves no 
financial, public safety, or rehabilitative purpose. Rather, the emphasis in our 
sentencing laws on punishment over rehabilitation and reentry hobbles the ability 
of MDOC to fulfill its mission of “Making our communities safer by reducing harm 
through supportive intervention, empowering change, and restoring lives.”
Parole is far less expensive than incarceration and will reduce the exorbitant 
amount of taxpayer money currently spent to incarcerate already rehabilitated 
prisoners (estimated $76,000 per prisoner per year). Further, since over 80% of 
incarcerated Mainers are struggling with mental health issues, shouldn’t we be 
transitioning our limited budget dollars from corrections towards investing in 
meeting those needs in our communities and providing services to help keep 
people out of our jails and prisons? I urge you to support the mission of restoring 
lives and vote ought to pass on LD 178.
