Alliance 
MM NE
I 
“ Officers "' 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
I 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"“ Vice- 
President 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
Kara Hay, Secretary‘ 
Penquis CAP Inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"’ Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational Institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
Anidroscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health & Counseling 
, COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
. Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
‘ Rumford Group Homes 
I Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
TriCounty Mental Health Services 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services 
i Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's communiqy behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 178 - An Act To Support Reentry and 
Reintegration into the Community 
Sponsored by Senator Beebe-Center 
3.13.2023 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and 
esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety. I am Malory Shaughnessy, a Westbrook resident, and the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. 
The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine's 
safety net community-based mental health and substance use treatment 
providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies 
and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 178, ”An 
Act To Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community." As 
members ofthis committee, you are well aware that the proposed 
Department of Corrections budget for this biennium is close to $500 million 
dollars. You also know that the Maine Department of Corrections offers 
numerous rehabilitative, educational, job skills, and life skills programs 
through which incarcerated people are earning college degrees (AA, BA, MA, 
MS, PhD), gaining employable skills in Industries, computer programming, 
youth development, agriculture, and other arenas, and learning life skills in 
emotional literacy, managing substance use disorder, and more. 
We are investing in "correcting" our community members. We do this 
programming because we understand that over 90% of the people we 
incarcerate will return to our communities. If we believe in the mission of 
the DOC, ”Making our communities safer by reducing harm through 
supportive intervention, empowering change and restoring lives," shouldn't 
the completion of corrections be judged by evidence of rehabilitation 
instead of the tolling of years? 
The lack of resentencing, parole, and commutation options means 
incarcerated people who have gained the skills for successful and safe 
reentry are not allowed to return and contribute those skills to their 
communities prior to the conclusion of their sentences. Keeping people who 
are no threat to society but who, to the contrary, are able and willing to be 
contributing community members serves no financial, public safety, or 
rehabilitative purpose. Rather, the emphasis in our sentencing laws on 
punishment over rehabilitation and reentry hobbies the ability of MDOC to 
fulfill its mission of ”Making our communities safer by reducing harm 
through supportive intervention, empowering change, and restoring |ives." 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.org
| 
Parole is far less expensive than incarceration and will reduce the exorbitant amount of 
taxpayer money currently spent to incarcerate already rehabilitated prisoners (estimated 
$76,000 per prisoner per year). Further, since over 80% of incarcerated Mainers are struggling 
with mental health issues, shouldn't we be transitioning our limited budget dollars from‘ 
corrections towards investing in meeting those needs in our communities and providing 
services to help keep people out of ourjalls and prisons? l urge you to support the mission of 
restoring lives and vote ought to pass on LD 178.
v
I 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 “' Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theA|lianceMaine.org
