Good morning, Senator Bibby- Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
My name is Mark Dion, I am a resident of Portland, and l am here today to speak in favor of 
passage for LD178: 
An Act to Support Re-entry and Reintegration into the Community. 
As one post release client put to me: "When does the punishment stop?” 
My answer: ”It doesn’t” . 
As a defense attorney l sincerely appreciate the work of this Committee in designing an 
administrative path for an incarcerated individual to rejoin the community from which she, he 
or they have been disenfranchised from. Clearly the intent behind this LD promises a notable 
reform of our current correctional policies and practice. 
lfl may be permitted to speculate forjust a moment, I would wager that the public 
debate on this LD both under this Dome and back in our respective communities will be 
vigorous and focus largely on our individual and collective understanding of what we mean 
when we talk about just punishment. Determining the fair contours of a just penalty for any 
crime is not so easy a task as one would assume. We flirt with the idea of rehabilitation but ina 
large degree we exercise a consistent commitment to the promises of punitive retribution. 
lt will not only be the due process mechanics outlined in this Bill that will be up for 
debate but the implicit moral perspective that underpins a decision to release an incarcerated 
felon contrary to the judicially imposed terms of a lawful sentence. This moral question of what 
justice "might be” exists in constant tension with the legal rationale for punishment where we 
sanction not only the act of a crime but the "entirety" of the guilty person's humanity as well. 
Just take careful notice of what occurs with the imposition of a felony conviction. We 
sentence someone for a crime but a release from incarceration is not a release from conviction. 
Despite any evidence of presumed individual rehabilitation, the status of conviction continues 
to punish the person with a permanent state of civic exclusion upon their return to the free 
world. So much for the implicit promise of earned re-integration. 
Paraphrasing the client conversation, l mentioned at the onset of my testimony, 
punishment does not end its grip on a convicted person very easily if at all. 
- 
A quick aside. I cannot discuss parole without some mention of the conduct that 
prompts this discussion in the first place. 
Legislatures are so very fond of felonies. They rarely if ever meet one that does not 
appeal to them. Legislators act on an idea that defendants engage in an ad hoc cost benefit 
analysis of their anticipated behavior in their decision to commit a crime. In my experience that 
is a rare case indeed.
1
instead, I have to report that most of my clients victimize others and themselves on an 
altar of ill designed, ill-conceived and largely impulsive behavior often distorted by the effects 
of poly substance use.... that’s why many if not all of them end up in the system. Under those 
conditions, they have little ability or awareness to contribute to the advanced calculation of the 
social consequences of their crime. 
The social consequences of a felony conviction have an irreparable adverse impact ona 
felon’s access to employment and housing. You can't make it if you can't get a job or havea 
landlord willing to rent despite your felony status. 
Will the promise of parole help us tell a different story? I hope so. 
l do support the idea of parole, but l live in the real world of convicted felons. 
Please consider that this LD applies 3096 words to describe parole primarily asa 
function of administrative law. The word justice, other than when coupled to the idea of 
"restorative "is painfully absent. lf the adoption of this proposal is to be a transformative shift 
in our questions surrounding the moral legitimacy of extended and in some cases terminal 
incarceration, then we need to be intentional in defining our expectations forjustice in the 
administration ofa parole system. 
I urge the Committee to adopt a Section #4 under §5822 Parole by Board that would 
clearly express the overarching justice principle that should govern the work and agency of the 
Board. The allocution of such a moral principle would allow you to express your collective 
understanding ofthe purpose for incarceration and the role parole should play in our criminal 
justice system. 
Telling us why this policy must exist, as a matter ofjustice, and the outcome expected 
from its application will inform incarcerated individuals, stakeholders, community members and 
legal practitioners as to the moral purpose driving this initiative into law. 
l defend my clients not only by responding to the expressed elements of a criminal 
statute, but I also argue howjustice would want that law applied. One day someone’s petition 
for the safe harbor of parole will only be realized if they can advance an argument predicated 
on the expression of moral principle that the Legislature took great care to incorporate into 
their construction of this statute. 
"Metaphors in law are to be narrowly watched, for starting as devices to liberate 
thought, they end often by enslaving it." 1 Supreme Court Justice Benjamin N. Cardozo 
l think Card0zo's comment is helpful in assessing the legal metaphor expressed in the 
criteria for parole eligibility in §5823, 1.C 
1 
Berkey v. Third Ave. Ry. Co., 155 N.E. 58, 61 (N.Y. 1926) (Cardozo, J)
2
What exactly is meant when we say, "not incompatible with the welfare of society”? 
Isn't the question of societal incompatibility the starting point for incarceration to begin with? 
How then is that standard to be satisfied? A yes or no response seems inadequate. 
What offer of proof would sustain an applicant's petition when governed by this overly broad 
language? ls the understanding ofthat standard reserved to the subjective thinking of the 
future members of the Parole Board or does the Legislature have a responsibility to add the 
flesh of objectivity to those statutory bones?_ 
The other two eligibility standards do appropriate to themselves some semblance of 
objectivity by relying on accessible sentencing calculations and reports from third parties to 
influence their final decision. At least tangible numbers, reports, and risk instruments can be 
refuted, accepted or modified in arriving at a finding on the question of parole suitability. Less 
is the case for reliable predictability when one considers thediverse perceptions at play in the 
determination of the present status of society's welfare. Can a metaphor be a controlling 
variable in fashioning a judgement on a petitioner's application for community release? 
Can a Board's denial for parole status turn on a social condition that we, in this room 
today, would be hard pressed to define in a manner where consensus in that understanding 
could be achieved? l hope not. 
For parole to be successful a corresponding investment in increasing access to jobs, 
housing, social services, and voluntary, community-based substance use disorder treatment 
and mental health out-patient services will do much to sustain the parolee's succgsful 
placement in the community and by extension improve the condition of public safety for all of 
us. 
Let me close with this final thought: 
Parole, beyond the legal and bureaucratic, is a public affirmation of hope. 
You can strip a human being of everything 
but if hope exists 
then the promise of individual dignity does not perish 
but willfully survives one more day. 
Thank you for your attention.
