Parole commission comments: 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today. My name is Mark Brown, 
and I am here today to testify IN FAVOR OF IOINING ALL THE OTHER 
NEW ENGLAND STATES, BY BRINGING A FORMAL SYSTEM OF PAROLE 
back to the state of Maine. 
I am the father of a son, who starting at the age of 21, spent 13 
consecutive years inside Maine prisons. His name is Brandon Brown. 
Brandon transformed his life and himself while he was incarcerated ——he 
embraced education as his redeemer. He engaged in more 
transformative programs than I could even list. Our conversations over 
the years showed me his growth, but also showed his sense of despair, 
that others did not participate in these same opportunities. WHY? Why 
was this? The answer is simple. It's because there is literally no incentive 
to do so. 
Brandon earned nothing more for his efforts while incarcerated than the 
men who chose not to engage in any of the opportunities offered. His 
accomplishments while incarcerated include an associate and bachelor's 
degrees with a 4.0 GPA. Brandon was also the very first incarcerated 
offender in the history of our state to complete and earn a Master’s 
degree from George Mason University and also being accepted into their 
a PhD program. For his remarkable and historical accomplishments, he 
received no reduction of his sentence. He was also denied a commutation 
by our Governor, even though his victim supported the commutation. 
Take a moment and think about that... His victim supported his early 
release from prison, yet the Governor still denied the commutation. I still 
struggle to understand the logic behind that decision. 
Brandon has recently taught multiple classes at both Colby College and 
the University of Maine. He also works at Long Creek Iuvenile Facility for 
the Restorative Iustice Institute of Maine, guiding young people through 
restorative processes to help keep them out of the system.
How much better would our society be if we had a system that actually 
created opportunities like the ones Brandon has seized? What would 
other men and women being released, be capable of, if they had the 
incentive to engage the way my son did? It's truly time to move on from 
the archaic and failing ways of constant punishment and confinement. 
We need to move towards a restorative justice, that practices the 
possibilities and realities of helping people change, improving lives and 
improving the communities we live in. 
Recidivism is rarely discussed at length in the media or politically, and 
when it is mentioned, the statistics seem to always be ambiguous. I 
believe it is time to step up, to take responsibility for the continued 
failure of our prison system here in Maine and work diligently to fix it. 
Parole is not the only answer, but it is a necessary one. 
We all know there are some very bad people in prisons. That is a fact. But 
believe me when I say, not everyone who goes to prison is bad. Most men 
and women sentenced to prison need a chance to believe in themselves, 
to find some community, and experience support, to achieve their 
potential and better selves. 
We need a prison system that encourages and rewards growth. Asa 
society we should require our prisons to incentivize change because it’s 
in the best interest of our communities, and of public safety. We cannot, 
and you, as the gatekeepers of society and those responsible for passing 
laws that protect us, should not, accept a system that does not encourage 
and incentivize people who make mistakes. Give them a chance to 
transform their lives so they can reenter society as positive and hard- 
working members. We must, collectively believe in the power of 
transformation and redemption, but belief alone is not, and will never be 
enough. We need ACTION. 
Please support this effort to bring parole back to our state. THANK YOU 
again for the opportunity to speak today.
