 
Martha Bentley  
West Gardiner, ME  
Public Testimony in support of LD  178 
 
Hello  – My name is Martha Bentley and I am writing today in support of LD 178 – An Act To 
Support Reentry and Reintegrat ion into the Community. Maine is currently spending an 
inord inate amount of financial and human resources on keeping people incarcerated. We 
simply cannot afford to continue doing so.  
 
With LD 178 - An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community  - Maine can 
reestablish a mindful pathway to earned, discretionary release that offers dignified second 
chance opportunities, increas es to  the workforce , and expan sion of  the tax base . It provides the 
needed  guardrails to public safety by combining incentivized rehabilitation with frequent risk 
assessment and reentry oversight .  
 
In 2020 -21, I served as Directo r of Economic Development  Coordination for the Maine 
Department of Economic and Community Development. My job there was to oversee the 
impleme ntation of the 10 -Year Strategic Plan that calls for 75,000 new workers by 2030. These 
workers must come from every whe re and we cannot afford to overlook those who are 
currently incarcerated as a key worker demographic. Maine uses  the tagline “Welcome Home ” 
and this should also apply to retu rning citizens who have been rehabilitated and already 
punished for their crimes.  Parole offers us the opportunity to do so.  
 
According to Prison Polic y Initiative, Maine has an  incarceration rate of 328 per 100,000 people, 
locking up  a higher percentage of its population than almost any  democracy on earth.  This is 
not the Maine I believe i n. I believe in a Maine  that offers second chances, dignity, personal 
transformation, and healing . I also beli eve in a Maine where logical and reali stic solutions to 
problems can be offered and embraced. Maine has a huge aging population and workforce 
problem, and locking away  workers who co uld be in service to the economy makes no sense.  
 
People  granted parole are 36 percent less likely  to return to prison compared to those  released 
with zero supervision.  With this statistic, coupled with the need for more workers to be 
available in Maine, parole makes good policy and business sense.  
 
Those who earn parole do so via tak ing a hard  look  at themselves , seeking forgiveness for their 
actions, and commit ting to doing  better. We need to be a State that allows this to happen  via 
reinstating a p arole system . 
 
 
 
