 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  
 
 
March 13, 2023   
 
Senator Pinny H. Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety  
State House , Room 436  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: LD 178, An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety:  
 
My name is Mary Bonauto and I am the Senior Director of Civil Rights at GLBTQ Legal 
Advocates & Defe nders  (GLAD) , a litigation and policy organization addressing issues affecting the 
LGBTQ people across communities.  Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of 
LD 1 78 on behalf of GLAD, Equality Maine , OUT Maine, and Portland Ou tright . 
LD 1 78 is a bill r esulting from a Resolve in the 2d session of the 130th Legislature creating a 
study commission on parole .  The commission engaged in a wide -ranging, months -long examination of 
the criminal justice system, particularly with respect to parole before its elim ination in 1975, as well as 
sentencing practices , mechanisms for early release from a defined sentence , the wide range of interests at 
stake, and the impact on Maine, individuals and our communities from not having a sensible parole 
system.1  We thank the Commission for its outstanding examination and collaboration on this long 
overdue matter .  
Our organizations share the Commission’s view that people can grow and change, can learn to 
take accountability for their actions, and can develop ways to repair the harm they have caused. We 
endorse the recommendation to re -establish parole, along with creating new pathways to early release  and 
updating other ones . 
As established in this bill, rather than release individuals only (or primarily) when thei r sentences 
are completed, this bill ensures a rehabilitative pathway to community integration  for individuals assessed 
as low -risk, who then have a chance to work , regain  their family connections , and support their 
communities and Maine’s overall resilien cy. LD 178’s premise is sound: f or those who have grown and 
addressed their underlying issues, pursued a path of accountability and rectif ying harms, and no longer 
pose a threat to public safety , there must be an option for review of their incarceration an d whether they, 
their families and our society will be better served if they are completing their sentences in the 
community.   
We also appreciate the Commission’s clear -eyed view that there must be “clear criteria for 
eligibility, process transparency, an d increased support for victims.”   The public, and persons 
 
1 Resolve 2021, Chapter 126 (creating Commission); OPLA, “Report of the Commission to Examine 
Reestablishing Parole,” December 2022, available at:  https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9574 .    
2 
 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  incarcerated, both deserve that transparency and respect.  Those who have been harmed by crimes deserve 
more support.  Likewise, people who are incarcerated need to have hope for a future, both wh ile 
incarcerated and , should they qualify for parole, while under supervision as they continue serving out 
their sentences under supervision.  Parole can create incentives to do the hard work of personal 
transformation, maximiz ing rehabilitation , accountab ility and repair of harms .  This in turn, can reconnect 
individuals otherwise locked away to families , to our economy and to private and civic institutions.  
What we have said here applies broadly to all people incarcerated in Maine.  We also believe it 
was critical that the Commission examined the cold hard facts about length of sentences and populations 
of prisons and their report  of the “staggering” racial disparities of both  lengthy sentences and lengthy 
incarceration for nonwhite people vis-à-vis the general population in Maine.  This is a matter of basic 
justice.  We hope a newly constitute d expert Parole Board of  experts can swiftly prioritize those with life 
and virtual life sentences, where 12% of those so sentence d are Black while representing only 1% of the 
general population.   
We believe this bill is cross -cutting in its benefits.  We also recognize that LGBTQ+ youth are 
over-represented in the Juvenile Justice system nationally, that lesbian and bisexual women are over -
represented in prisons and jails, and that persons who are transgender and also Black are incarcerated at 
nearly 4x the rate of transgender White people  (and significantly more other Indigenous persons and other 
people of color. )2  Recognizing th at LGBTQ people’s experiences as “outlaws” for so long, and the 
above -referenced disparities for Black people, Black transgender people, and LGBTQ people generally, 
we hope that a new parole system will prioritize at all levels a system which is free from the reflexive 
discomfort, hostility or assumptions that often contribute to dispar ate treatment.  We urge clear and 
transparent standards for those individuals on parole, any expert panel, and all parole staff to ensure that 
bias play s no part in the revie w in granting parole or while people are serving their sentences in the 
community .3 
Thank you for your consideration of this important bill.  We urge the Committee to vote ought to 
pass on LD 178.  
 
Truly yours,  
Attorney Mary L. Bonauto  
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders  
Equality Maine  
OUT Maine  
Portland Ou tright                      
 
 
2  Alexi Jones, Visualizing the unequal treatment of LGBTQ people in the criminal justice system , Prison 
Policy Initiative (March 2, 2021), available at:  https://www.prisonpolicy.org/blog/2021/03/02/lgbtq/  
(charts at pp. 2, 4, 9);   
3  A nuanced exam ination of LGBT people in the  criminal  justice system is found at  Jordan Blair Woods, 
LGBT Identity and Crime , available at:  https://williamsinstitute.law. ucla.edu/wp -content/uploads/LGBT -
Identity -and-Crime.pdf  (originally printed in 105 Cal L. Rev. (2017).  
 
