Michael Harriman
Warren
LD 178
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Michael R Herriman and I am writing in support of  LD 178.
First and foremost, I would like to thank the committee for working tirelessly on the 
parole bill. Parole is something that should be earned. I would like to take this time to 
inform you of some of the things in programs that I have done since being 
incarcerated. 
Since the start of my stay, I have taken many programs such as Houses of Healing (13
times).  Every time I have taken it, I've learned something new about myself and the 
pain I held inside from the trauma I have been through. I can honestly work on and 
help myself get past so I can heal and become a better man and all the rules I have to 
hold in life as a free man. I knew that my childhood was hard, but I never knew I had 
these problems deep inside, pushed down to be forgotten. This pain had caused so 
many issues and self-worth problems such as my drug addiction, anger problems, 
personality issues, and self-esteem problems. After learning these things about 
myself, I reached out and began taking other programs offered in this prison (Maine 
State prison in Warren, Maine) such as anger management, long distance dads, 
program, and drug addiction program.
At the moment, I'm currently taking the program for trauma and so far - other than the
Houses of Healing program - this is helping me the most in showing me that the abuse
I went through as a child was not my fault. From the ages of three to seven, I was 
raped by my father and I constantly told my mother but her own drug addiction 
blinded her on believing me until one day she came home and found me crying naked 
with a broken beer bottle neck broken off into my “backside.” I have gone through a 
lot of physical and emotional abuse most of my life. I never knew how to deal with 
the pain of my life and finally I learned how I was here in prison. I was offered the 
proper healing courses in this prison and it gave me the time and space to allow 
myself the healing I denied myself all my life.
I have become a better and different man and I take full responsibility for the serious 
crime I committed against not only my victim (or victims), but also their family, 
friends, my family, and all the other people in the community that have been affected 
by the things I have done. I feel terrible about what I have done and I hope that my 
statement is sufficient enough to show change is possible. Real change: to change a 
person who has had a damaged childhood and found help and kindness and now waits
to finally show the world that I finally am a valuable member to society.
Thank you very much for taking the time out of your day to read this heartfelt testimony. may 
Allah bless you and your loved ones. 

