 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM  
 
FROM:  Michael Kebede  
TO: Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
DATE: March 2 1, 2023  
Re: LD 178 , An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community  
Issue: Whether the Maine constitution prohibits retroactive parole  
 
ISSUE PRESENTED  
 
Whether the Main e constitution prohibits the establishment of a parole system that would 
be retroactively applicable to  people who were sentenced to terms of imprisonment or who are 
alleged to have committed the crime underlying their conviction before the effective date of the new 
parole system .  
 
SHORT ANSWER  
 
Retroactive p arole was and remains constitutional in Maine. The constitution has been 
found to prohibit the  legislature from  grant ing the  power to reduce sentences, but  granting parole 
does not reduce sentences and  no court has found that the Maine constitution prohibits 
retroactive parole . Commutation of sentences is radically different from changing the manner in 
which sentences are served. If LD 178 allowed a parole b oard to commute sentences, then it 
would “present [] legal and constitutional issues.” But it does not. LD 178 presents no legal and 
constitutional issues. The Attorney General’s assertion to the contrary  is meritless .  
 
BACK GROUND  
 
The Attorney General of Maine has argued that  “LD 178 … presents legal and 
constitutional issues to the extent the bill seeks to expand parole eligibility retroactively .”1 The 
 
1 Testimony of Aaron Frey, Attorney General of Maine, in opposition to LD 178, at 2, available at  
mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=168258 .  
  
 
2 
 Attorney General’s argument is a carbon -copy of his  argument against  a prior attempt to 
establish parole, citing the same two 1980s co urt cases in support.2 Citing no specific part of LD 
178 that would be “present [] legal and constitutional  issues ,” the Attorney General instead 
resorts to the phrases “to the extent the bill seeks” and “[t]o the extent the bill authorizes ….” 
The Attorney General does not say that LD 178 , as written today,  “would be unconstitutional ” or 
“would viol ate the Maine constitution ’s separation of powers doctrine ” or would , in any other 
way, be unlawful.  How ever, by asserting “LD 178 … presents legal and constitutional issues ” in 
the context of his opposition to LD  178, and by citing two cases that struck down different t ypes 
of the parole statutes, the Attorney General implies that LD 178 might violate the Maine  
constitution . Accordingly, this memo will analyze whether  LD 178, including any provisions that 
would be retroactively applicable to  people  currently serving prison sentences , would v iolate the 
Maine constitution .  
 
A. The Maine Constitution Does Not Prohibit Retroactive Parole , But D oes Give The 
Governor The Exclusive Power To Commute Sentences.  
Stated simply, retroactive parole is constitutional in Maine. Retroactive parole  is 
constitutional regardless of the dates the prospective parolee was convicted, sentenced, or 
committed the conduct underlying their conviction . No case from the Law Court, the state’s 
highest tribunal , has held otherwise. The two leading court cases on parole in Maine, Gilbert v. 
State  and Bossie v. State , decided in 198 5 and 1986 respectively , both support the proposition  
that there is nothing unconstitutional about the practice or concept of retroactively applicable 
parole.  
The Attorney G eneral improperly cites Bossie  and Gilbert  to assert  that LD 178 “ presents 
legal and constitutional issues to the extent the bill seeks to expand parole eligibility 
retroactively .” The Attorney General’s misreading of both cases  seems to stem from a conflation 
of commuting  prison sentences with changing  the manner of serving prison sentences. The 
former – a parole board commuting  sentences – is unconstitutional. The latter  – a parole board 
changing  the manner of serving prison sentences – is not only constitutional, but also current 
practice under the Supervised Community Confinement Program (“SCCP”) . The SCCP program 
 
2 Testimony of Aaron M. Frey, Attorney General of Maine, in Opposition to LD 842, An Act to Re establish Parole, 
at 2, Apr. 22, 2021, available at www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=155131 .  
  
 
3 
 allows people to serve part of their prison sentence out side the prison walls, even if the 
prisoner’s conviction or the conduct underlying their conviction predates the SCCP statute’s 
passage .  
The facts of Bossie and Gilbert are both instructive. In Bossie,  three incarcerated men 
sued the state alleging that the Maine Department of Corrections miscalculated the amount of 
time that should be reduced from their sentences for serving “good time” under a law then in 
effect.3 The Court not only disagreed with th e men, but also struck down the law allowing for 
“good time” deductions from prison sentences because the law encroached  on the Governor’s 
exclusive power to commute sentences.4 Article five, part one, section eleven of the Maine 
Constitution states:  
 
The Governor shall have power to remit after conviction all forfeitures and penalties, and 
to grant reprieves, commutations and pardons, except in cases of impeachment, upon 
such conditions, and with such restrictions and limitations as may be deemed prope r, 
subject to such regulations as may be provided by law, relative to the manner of applying 
for pardons.  
 
This section grants the governor power to commute and pardon sentences. Article three, section 
two provides:  
 
No person or persons, belonging to one  of these departments, shall exercise any of the 
powers properly belonging to either of the others, except in the cases herein expressly 
directed or permitted.  
 
This section prevents one branch from interfering with a power explicitly granted to another 
branch . This is the section that enshrines the separation of powers principle in state constitutional 
law, and gives courts the basis to invalidate actions by one branch that encroach on powers 
explicitly granted to another branch. Citing these two sections of the constitution, the Law  Court 
invalidated the “good time” law, which would have allowed for reductions in sentences for those 
who faithfully observe the requirements of a prison sentence. Describing its own reasoning, the 
Court stated  that because “go od-time credits have the undeniable effect of reducing the length of 
sentences  . . . . [and] the power to reduce an offender’s sentence on the basis of his post -
 
3 Bossie v. State , 488 A.2d 477, 479 (Me. 1985) . 
4 See Me. Const. art. V, Pt. 1, sec. 11; art. III, sec. 2. 
  
 
4 
 conviction behavior is encompassed within the executive’s commutation power,” the statute 
permi tting good time credit was unconstitutional.5 
The seminal parole case in Maine is almost certainly Gilbert v. State , decided a year after 
Bossie.  In that case, a man who was serving a life sentence sued the state for, among other 
things, denying him parole.6 At trial, the judge had ruled that Gilbert , the plaintiff,  may 
“never . . . be granted parole, because application of the post -1951 parole st atute amendments to 
Gilbert. . . infringes upon the Governor ’s exclusive constitutional power to commute sentences 
after conviction.”7 On appeal, the Law Court ruled that “[b]ecause of the inherent differences 
between parole and commutation, a grant of pa role to Gilbert on the authority of amendments 
passed after his conviction would not amount to a commutation of his sentence in violation of the 
constitutional demands of separation of powers.”8  
Comparing the case before it to Bossie , the Gilbert Court stated:  
 
[L]egislative acts that “commute” sentences are those that shorten the length of time a 
previously convicted and sentenced inmate must serve. [ Bossie ,] 488 A.2d at 479 –80. 
Parole, however, does not shorten the length of a sentence. Instead, parole is a change in 
the manner in which a sentence is served in that the parolee remains under the custody of 
the institution from which he is released but executes the unexpired portion of his 
sentence outside of confinement. . . . Unlike a com mutation, the release on parole is 
conditional, and the parolee is subject both to the continuing supervision of his parole 
officer and to the threat of return to prison to serve out his sentence there if he violates a 
condition of parole.  
 
Gilbert , 505 A. 2d at 1328. In other words, parole is supervision by another name; parole is 
supervised release; parole is not total freedom, because it carries a risk of return to prison – a risk 
that has been tailored to the person on parole. The Gilbert  court further e xplained parole:  
 
Parole ... is a legislative program of rehabilitation and restoration of persons convicted of 
crime to useful membership in society. The purpose of the law is to offer the 
institutionalized convict the opportunity to make good on his own outside the prison 
walls but under the immediate supervision of the probation -parole officer to whom the 
parolee must report and whose guidance he may seek at all times. ... To the extent that the 
parolee must strictly observe all the conditions of his par ole and remain within the area of 
 
5 Bossie , 488 A.2d at 477.  
6 Gilbert v. State , 505 A.2d 1326, 1327 (Me. 1986) . 
7 Id. 
8 Id. 
  
 
5 
 permitted enlargement of the prison walls consistent with effective supervision, he is not 
a totally free man.9  
 
The court here describes parole as an “enlargement of the prison walls,” and not as a reduction of 
the pris oner’s sentence. Crucially, neither the Gilbert  nor the Bossie courts invalidated laws for 
being retroactive. Nothing in either case supports the notion that retroactive parole is 
unconstitutional. The only laws that are unconstitutional under t he analyses in both cases are 
laws that commute a sentence. LD 178 would not do that.  
 
CONCLUSION  
 
Retroactive p arole is constitutional in Maine. The constitution has been found to prohibit 
the legislature from  grant ing the  power to reduce sentences, but no court has found that the 
Maine constitution prohibits retroactive parole . Commutation of sentences is radically different 
from changing the manner in which sentences are served. If LD 178 allowed a parole board to 
commute sentences, then it would “present [] legal and constitutional issues.” But it does not. LD 
178 presents no legal and constitutional issues. The Attorney General’s assertion to the contrary  
is meritless .  
 
 
 
9 Id. (quoting Mottram v. State , 232 A.2d 809, 813 –14 (Me.1967) ). 
