Nicole  Kellett
Farmington, ME
LD 178
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice
and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Nicole Kellett and I am a resident of Farmington, Maine. I am a Professor
of Anthropology at the University of Maine Farmington and have worked with 
women who are incarcerated in various states across the country, namely Arizona and
New Mexico.  
I am writing to you today to show my absolute support for LD 178 and the effort to 
re-establish parole in Maine.
I support this bill because I have seen firsthand what a difference parole can make in 
the lives of those who are incarcerated, especially women. While there are many 
examples I could site, I am going to briefly describe the experiences of one woman 
who was recently released from a 25 year to life prison sentence at the Arizona State 
Prison, Tasha. She was 15 when sentenced to 25 years to life in prison for taking the 
life of a young woman. She went through tremendous growth in prison because of the
hope that one day she would be released and be able to try to repay society for her 
crime. During her parole hearing the board described her file as the fullest they had 
ever seen with over 100 earned certificates. Tasha was trained as a peer support 
specialist in prison and since released has worked with men and women throughout 
Phoenix supporting them through their own reentry experience. She has worked 
closely with a reentry center, New Freedom, helping them adapt their programming to
better suit the needs of their team members. It is with the memory of Tasha’s victim 
and her surviving relatives that keeps Tasha motivated to help others not commit the 
same mistake that she had. Without parole she would have not only lost all hope, but 
also would not be able to use her own experience and wisdom to support others in a 
positive path forward.
Thank you for your work and for considering my opinion. I hope I can count on your support 
for LD 178.

