March 13, 2023 
Senator Beebee-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee: 
My name is Nikole Powell, also known as inmate number 111992. I am a resident on the 
Supen/ised Community Confinement Program, also known as SCCP and I have been in 
recovery since June of 2019. I am also a mother, a student and a harm reductionist and I am 
here today representing the voices of so many other inmates who cannot be here. 
I stand before you today in support of LD 178 as a currently incarcerated woman, someone who 
has been thriving on the Supervised Community Confinement Program since May of 2022, and 
someone who believes that these programs work. 
I believe that everyone deserves a second chance. lf we truly believe that the Judicial System 
was created as a way for people who committed crimes to pay off their debt, learn to assimilate 
into society and rehabilitate, we need to offer parole as an option for people who are doing the 
hard work of making positive change in their lives. 
SCCP is a shining example of growth and change. However, for inmates with long sentences, or 
inmates with certain charges, they are either not eligible or SCCP isn't offered until the very end 
of their sentence. But, with a parole board built with members of the prison, there could be an 
objective process to review the progress of incarcerated individuals. And in return, those who 
are sitting behind bars could have the chance to share their accomplishments and the hard work 
they have done to better their own lives, and the lives of their families, friends, and the larger 
community. 
Since being released on this program, I have accomplished so many things l would not have 
achieved being locked up: l’ve managed a sober home, became certiﬁed in Peer Support 101 
and recovery coaching. l also worked with the Maine Recovery Advocacy Project to pass the 
Good Samaritan Law, helped organize a team to launch this parole legislation and brought 
REFORM Alliance onto our team. l enrolled in college and became certified in The Science of 
Substance Use Disorder, and now l have an amazing job at the Church of Safe injection asa 
peer navigator distributing harm reduction supplies and doing outreach in several counties. 
l have a positive working relationship with probation and police and have been asked to share 
my journey at various events. Most recently l was invited to tell my story to probation 
supen/isors and the Maine State Prison wardens. 
lf we believe that prison systems are truly designed to rehabilitate people, then we need the 
option of parole. I am a living example that the mistakes people make do not define them. l am 
a woman in recovery, a harm reductionist and a mother and l am here today representing so 
many voices of people who cannot be here and whose voices cannot be heard.
