Norman Kehling
HIIT Helping Incarcerated Individuals Transition
LD 178
Honorable Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee.
I strongly support LD 178 to re- establish parole in Maine.
Norman Kehling here, I am sixty four years old and I spent thirty of those years incarcerated, 
seven in segregation. I entered The Maine State Prison with a seventh grade education. Two 
weeks after I left I attended a ceremony at the University of Maine to pick up my BA. My 
lawyer was there with me, a man who had stayed by my side for more than twenty two years, 
providing his kindness, his care and his skills pro bono. 
I have been a free man for five years and during that time I founded HIIT -( Helping 
Incarcerated Individuals Transition) and I have have worked tirelessly to improve 
environments in Maine's prison and jails and to positively support, prepare and affect our 
communities that will be greeting women and men when they reenter. 
Several days before I left Maine State Prison men (longtimers) gathered with the intention of 
making sure that 'no matter what you are faced with Norman, no matter how difficult or lonely 
it gets, please remember you represent all of us. Do well, do your best because we're here, 
we're working hard every day and one day we will be out there with you. Don't make it harder 
with your actions.'
Not many days go by that I don't repeat those words to myself. Spoken by my mentors and 
teachers, many of them still incarcerated, waiting for their chances at a 'second chance'.
Why should these men and women be given a second chance?
You already know that reestablishing parole is sought by the general public and that it will 
ultimately save money for Maine. Statistics indicate that, when applied correctly, it will also 
make our communities healthier and safer.
 But really why?
Because it is our obligation as humans to know that change is possible and that redemption is
worth working for. It is our obligation to know that when our fellows have been rightfully 
judged for the worst thing they have ever done it is upon us to know that with hard work and 
focus those same people can change, can contribute a great deal to our communities and to 
their families and their children's lives, to society as a whole. It is our obligation not to throw 
them away, not to dispose of us, but to make a system that supports redemption and change.
Women and men can and should earn their chance at parole by addressing the actions and 
crimes that brought them to prison. Many are doing just that every hour of every day spent in 
prison. They are teaching, learning, mentoring, helping in hospice and to train dogs, working 
to get their bachelors and masters degrees and their doctorates. They are taking 
woodworking, welding, electrical courses and in some cases they are teaching college 
courses and establishing organizations for change. 
Reestablishing parole provides hope and therefore change in a place where change is most 
needed. 
Please vote in support of LD178 and add the requirement 'An inmate who satisfies all 
criteria for parole eligibility could be paroled even though He or She is subject to an 
immigration and naturalization service detainer' This provision will allow 
non-citizens, as well as citizens, to participate in the parole process.
Respectfully,
Norman Kehling
HIIT- Helping Incarcerated Individuals Transition
PO Box 1090
Belfast 
Maine 04915

