   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
1 
 
TESTIMONY OF  
 
RANDALL A. LIBERTY, COMMISSIONER  
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
 
In Opposition to  
 
LD 178 An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community   
 
Before the  
Criminal Justice Public Safety Committee  
March 13, 202 3 
 
 
Senator Beebe -Center and Representative Salisbury and other distinguished members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections 
providing testimony in opposition to LD 178.  
 
Governor Mills and I have  consistent ly expressed  the opinion  that reinstating parole is unnecessary as the 
Department of Corrections already has  in place  an early release opportunity for individuals who demonstrate 
rehabilitation and no risk to victims or c ommunity.  
 
If the end goal of those  supporting this bill is to provide early release  for rehabilitated residents , then the bill 
attempts to solve a problem that already has a solution . A solution that is codified  into law and functioning quite 
well.  
 
The Supervised Community Confinement Program  (SCCP) of the Maine Department of Corrections allows 
incarcerated adult clients to serve a remaining portion of their sentence while residing in the community , rather 
than an MDOC facility . Individuals in this program  are still under  the legal custody  of the department . This 
system of early release , which is managed  by existing staff within the  department and governed by statute , 
allows individuals  to live at home, or in residential  settings , take on employment, go to school, be with family, 
travel, and generally li ve like  anyone else not confined  to a prison setting.  
    
Much like parole , Supervised Community Confinement  provides rehabilitated residents with a means to 
successful reentry into the community before they’ve completed their sentence. Supervised Community 
Confinement has high levels of su ccessful completion ( 77% in 2022)  and low levels of violations ( less than  7). 
The model has been proven to work well .   
 
Parole on the other hand will need to be designed,  brand new, as this bill  attempt s to do , requir ing additional 
FTEs on the State’s rolls,  requiring numerous new laws and changes to existing laws,  requiring , potentially a 
new governmental agency,  come a s a new expense to taxpayers  and negatively impact victims, requir ing them  
to relive their victimization th rough continued participati on in parole hearings . 
 
Supervised Community Confinement on the other hand has establish  processes  and policies. There are  roughly 
1,650 adult s in Maine ’s prisons , and they  already understand  the process, they know  when and how t o qualify; 
   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
2 
 
when and how to apply;  and when and how the  application s are reviewed . Furthermore, SCCP does not come at 
an extra cost to taxpayers , as it’s part of the daily operations of the department, nor does it repeatedly subject 
victims to reoccurring parole hearings .  
 
The application system for Supervised Community Confinement  is simple and  is done in conjunction with the 
residents’ case manag er, asking the resident to identify and discuss the type of living situation they  plan to  have  
and what type of employment or support services they will engage. The application  allows the resident  space  to 
write about the various programming they’ve completed while incarcerated , to describe  how these programs 
and services  have helped them rehabilitate , and how these programs  have helped them prepare for success in the 
community .  
 
As a first step in reviewing the application facility unit team s gather to discuss  the plan the resident has brought 
forth , and to discuss the efforts and success the resident has had with rehabilitative programming. These unit 
teams consist of  a group of staff who spend years working with the individual, who have the most knowledge of 
their rehabilitation and behavior , and who typically run many  of the programs the residents engage with . This 
group consists of social workers, clinicians, teachers, program staff, and security .  
 
In LD 178 , a parole board  consisting  of people who have never met the individual , and have no personal 
knowledge of their rehabilitation , behavior, or safety risk , would be asked to make the decision on release . If the 
Legislature wants to ensure the voices of people who see first had a residents ’ change and propensity for 
success, as k the staff who stand alongside them for years, not a parole board . 
 
If the team of MDOC staff believe the resident  is rehabilitated in such a way that their plan can be  successfully 
implement ed and their risk to victims and the public is low , they move forward the application to another group 
of staff for another review . 
 
This next group  to review the application includes the facility warden, probation staff, and the department’s 
classification and victim services office. Their goal  is to review the plan for its practical application.   
 
This review requires MDOC staff to go into the community, visit the neighborhood  the individual is planning to 
live in, visit the residence , talk with the family , ensure that it is in fact a heathy environment, and that living 
there doesn’t put the public, or victims , or the individual in jeopardy  or out of compliance with conditions  
imposed. The MDOC staff visits the places and people listed on the application, they dig into the nuances, they 
verify  the details in the plan and make sure that the practical application of the plan will work. This step of the 
process is  different from what ’s proposed  in LD 1 78 which again, reverts  to a parole board  who have  no 
firsthand  knowledge  of the community the  person plans to reside, the family connections, the appropriateness  of 
the neighborhood  or employer , or the nuances associated with each individual case.  
 
Once all the reviews are done, typically within 90 days, the resident is notified of the final decision. If the 
application is approved, the individual  and case workers solidify all plans, including  things like  securing  a lease, 
finalizing employment, transferring academic  or vocational credits , setting u p behavioral health appointments, 
working with family reunification or DHHS,  among other things. If the application is not approved, the resident 
receives  a letter  explain ing the reasoning, and offering suggest ed changes to the p lan for resubmission .  
 
   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
3 
 
The review processes  the MDOC has in place for SCCP is comprehensive and already successfully  working , 
provid ing a mechanism for  nearly  200 residents since 2021 who have shown a level of rehabilitation  without 
negative impact to the victim or public  safety.  
 
I urge this committee to vote ONTP and in doing so you show support for the existing Supervised Community 
Confinement Program that ensure rehabilitated  residents  have an  opportunity  to reenter the community  prior to 
release .  
 
  
This concludes my testimony.  
 
I will answer any questions.  
 
Thank You,  
 
Randall A. Liberty, Commissioner  
Maine Department of  Corrections  
