  
  
MAINE COMMISSION ON   
DOMESTIC AND SEXUAL ABUSE   
Testimony of The Maine Commission on Domestic and Sexual Abuse [AMENDED]  
  
Submitted in OPPOSITION to L.D. 178    
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety    
 
Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety:  
 
The Commission is comprised of law enforcement, attorneys, advocates, survivors, a judicial 
advisory member, and representatives from withi n state government. The Commission is tasked 
with advising and assisting the executive, legislative and judicial branches of State Government 
on issues related to domestic and sexual abuse.   
 
The Maine Commission on Domestic and Sexual Abuse previously su bmitted testimony neither 
for nor against LD 178.   This testimony was provided without the benefit of the language that 
was before the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee.   Having considered the language 
that was the subject of the hearing on Marc h 13, 2023, the Commission on Domestic and Sexual 
Abuse amends its testimony to oppose LD 178 for the following reasons:    
  
The proposed bill would make parole available to persons with prison sentences of one year or 
more. There is no separate consideration of crimes involving domestic violence or sexual assault, 
except a passing reference. This approach is a disservice to vic tims and survivors of these 
crimes. It flies in the face of Maine’s longstanding policy of recognizing these crimes as having 
uniquely traumatizing impact on survivors and the community and warranting unique 
consideration. The Maine Legislature’s embrace o f this policy is reflected in statutes addressing 
criminal conduct against family or household members, firearms prohibitions, sentencing, 
victims’ rights, victim compensation, good time, family leave, tenants’ rights, law enforcement 
training, mandatory l aw enforcement policies, and protection from abuse  orders . This bill breaks 
that tradition.   
  
The Abuse Commission observes a lack of information regarding infrastructure for the parole 
board. Will this board be comprised of paid members or volunteers? Wi ll they be Maine 
citizens? It is of great concern that there is no seat designated as a victim/survivor representative 
on the parole board. Additionally, there is no requirement that parole board members either come 
to the board with some minimum level of training or expertise on serving or supporting victims, 
or that they receive any training on these issues once they are confirmed to the parole board. 

Given the broad decision -making power and duties assigned to the parole board, includ ing 
selecting risk a ssessment tools and developing and validating risk assessment scales,  we urge 
you to consider ways to incorporate Maine survivors’ voices and expertise into your process, 
including the wide variety of Maine victims’ experiences and case specific considerat ions, as 
well as ways to make this process as supportive and transparent for survivors of domestic and 
sexual violence as possible.  
  
Reinstating parole in Maine has been framed as a program supporting supervised community 
confinement and not a program of early release. The Abuse Commission observes that there is 
insufficient infrastructure across the state to support successful reentry into the community . 
Currently, many of the support services necessary for successful community confinement are 
operating a t capacity, with long wait lists and are unable  to provide safety planning or support 
for offenders or survivors.  To provide successful reentry support (housing, counseling, substance 
use treatment) for persons released on parole, community -based support m ust first be available. 
The Abuse Commission believes both offenders and survivors would benefit from strengthening 
supportive services for incarcerated individuals, many of whom may themselves be survivors of 
trauma.  The Abuse Commission believes that the se structural and process -based questions are 
just as important to consider as the philosophical questions when developing the framework for 
parole in Maine.     
  
The re -establishment of a parole structure in Maine requires both answering broad public pol icy 
questions as well as attending sufficiently to highly detailed statutory construction issues. The 
Commission is deeply concerned that a proposal putting forward such a monumental shift in 
Maine’s criminal justice response was considered by the Criminal  Justice and Public Safety 
Committee with language provided to interested parties less than a week prior to the public 
hearing and that proposals regarding the re -establishment of parole are being considered across 
two separate legislative policy committee s, requiring those bodies charged with advising the 
legislature, such as this Commission, to engage on the same issues in two separate forums. The 
Commission asks you to consider that policymakers owe a duty of transparency to , and would 
benefit from engag ing, victims of crime around policy development.  The Commission would be 
happy to provide more information or support in future work sessions.    
 
