2‘!-1’ 
‘ HQUSE GP REPRESENTATIVES 
{-9 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
Scott VVynn Cyrway MAINE RELAY 711 
-L63 Benton Road 
Albion. ME (H910 
SCOYl.C _\'!‘\\‘Cl}'((:£l €glSlL\lllI' €.l11ﬂll1¢.gO\ 
Cell: (Z(l7)-185-1308 
Testimony on 
L.D. 178, “An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community ” 
Presented by‘ 
Representative Scott Wynn Cyrway 
District 63 
Criminal ]ustice and Public Safety Committee 
Monday, March 13, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Ioint 
Standing Committee on Criminal justice and Public Safety: 
I am State Representative Scott Wynn Cyrway, and I proudly represent District 63, which includes the 
towns of Albion, Freedom, Unity Township, and a portion of Winslow. It is an honor to appear before you 
for the purpose of spealdng against of L.D. 1'78, “An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the 
Community, ” which seeks to reinstate parole to Maine prison sentences —— a bad idea. 
Felony criminal sentencing is a complex and very carefully-considered process conducted by a judicial 
officer. After a criminal conviction, where the defendant either pled guilty to the elements of the 
crime, was found by a jury in a trial (or a judge in the case of a bench trial), a sentencing hearing 
is scheduled, often months after a plea. In the intervening time and prior to a sentencing hearing, the 
sentencing judge receives a detailed report of the facts of the crime, any effect on victims, the subject's 
work history, family history, and criminal history lmown as a presentence report. At the sentencing 
hearing, the defendant's counsel, the defendant him or herself, the prosecution, and any victims of the 
crime has an opportunity to speak. The sentencing judge then provides a sentence that typically involves a 
set term of incarceration, a ﬁne, and a period of supervised release (probation). 
Nonetheless, it is not that simple. Felony sentences are often contain suspended portions, (eg: 72 
months, all but three years suspended) in which the defendant would serve 36 months and then have the 
remaining 44 months out of custody but as a probationary period in which if the defendant re-offends or 
does not comply within his or her conditions of release, can be returned to prison. On top of that, there is 
" 
good time" , which is time an inmate in prison spends engaging in work, education, and other 
programming and demonstrating consistent good behavior, and can be up to a third of the sentence. That 
" 
good time" is only counted toward the period of confinement not suspended, so in our example, the 
defendant would not have to serve 12 months out of the 36 months. Murder, sex offenses, and domestic 
violence sentences, however, earn "good tilne" at 5 days a month, or about one-sixth. 
. . .‘ 
. . . .S 
. . OI 
District 63 Albion, Freedom and \Vinsl0w and the unoi ganized territories of; Unity Township Vet’ P ease 
Primed on recycled paper
On top of “good time” , sentences can further be reduced by the Supervised Community Conﬁnement 
Program (SCCP). The Maine Departinent of Corrections (MDQC) SCCP is a community-based program 
that allows incarcerated adult clients to be transferred from a MDOC correctional institution to an 
approved residence in the community while ﬁnishing their sentence. Defendants eligible for the SCCP 
must meet sentence length criteria, which includes having a current release date of no more than 3O months 
after good time is taken into account, and if a resident has ﬁve years or less, the individual must have served 
half of the sentence after good time is taken into account. Ifthe sentence is more than ﬁve years, the 
individual must have served two-thirds of the sentence after “good time” is taken into account. For 
purposes of our example, with “good time” , our defendant could have served only 12 months on a six-year 
sentence and be eligible for the SCCP. 
All this is considered by the judges during sentencing, and is factored into their sentencing decision. 
Activation of parole, a system in which an independent parole board makes defendants eligible for even 
earlier release, independent of the sentencing intent of the judicial sentencing officer, is excessive. It 
disrespects and reduces the legitimacy of the sentencing judge's work, and the work of all the people 
involved in helping that judge come to his or her sentencing decision. In our existing system of carefully 
considered sentences, suspended sentences, probationary periods, good time, and community confinement, 
parole is completely unnecessary and reliant on the unpredictable whims of a parole board, adding 
additional unnecessary expense and complication. 
Parole in Maine was abolished many years ago, and was supplanted by a much more fair and 
evenly-managed process. The cost of iniplementing parole, including parole officers, cars, added 
equipment, as well as training, could be exorbitant. Furthermore, the reinstitution of parole may impact 
how courts decide what sentence to impose in the first place. Parole was dismantled due to cost, resources, 
and it being run poorly, not to mention the trauma it causes to the ViCtiIIlS during public hearings. 
Thank you for your consideration. I a.m happy to entertain any questions you may have at this t:ime.
