Parole in Maine                                                3-11-23
To whom it may concern:
    My name is Sharon K. I have a sentence of 48 years. I would 
like to see parole in Maine so a lot of us can get a second 
chance. I have been working and going to school, and I’m also 
a certified advocate. I have never been in trouble in my life. I 
also have three young children and I have been missing them 
growing up. 
    My story about why I’m in prison. I will not go into details 
so I will try to make it short. I did have 4 kids all together, but I 
lost my oldest daughter. I was with a man who would punch 
me, choke me to where I almost died and so many other 
things and he did certain things to my oldest daughter. I’m a 
survivor of domestic violence. But I lost my daughter to it. Day 
after day while in prison, I always think about my daughter. 
I’m also missing out being with my other kids and my family.  
   What would I do if and when I can get out on parole? Being 
a certified advocate, I want to help so many people before it is 
too late. I would also continue my education and hopefully 
work at a gym as I’ am a certified personal trainer. I know that 
I would also check in with whatever parole officer I would 
have. I’m a reliable individual. I do not sit around here and do 
nothing. I go to classes, I’m at work on time and I have been at 
the same job in prison for about 3 years now. I would like to 
have that second chance and prove that I can do what needs 
to be done while out on parole. Thank you for this 
opportunity. 
             Sincerely,
                Sharon (Maine Correctional Center resident)
      
Sharon Kennedy
MCC Windham,Maine
LD 178
Parole in Maine                                                3-11-23
To whom it may concern:
    My name is Sharon K. I have a sentence of 48 years. I would like to see parole in Maine so
a lot of us can get a second chance. I have been working and going to school, and I’m also a 
certified advocate. I have never been in trouble in my life. I also have three young children 
and I have been missing them growing up. 
    My story about why I’m in prison. I will not go into details so I will try to make it short. I did 
have 4 kids all together, but I lost my oldest daughter. I was with a man who would punch me,
choke me to where I almost died and so many other things and he did certain things to my 
oldest daughter. I’m a survivor of domestic violence. But I lost my daughter to it. Day after day
while in prison, I always think about my daughter. I’m also missing out being with my other 
kids and my family.  
   What would I do if and when I can get out on parole? Being a certified advocate, I want to 
help so many people before it is too late. I would also continue my education and hopefully 
work at a gym as I’ am a certified personal trainer. I know that I would also check in with 
whatever parole officer I would have. I’m a reliable individual. I do not sit around here and do 
nothing. I go to classes, I’m at work on time and I have been at the same job in prison for 
about 3 years now. I would like to have that second chance and prove that I can do what 
needs to be done while out on parole. Thank you for this opportunity. 
             Sincerely,
                Sharon (Maine Correctional Center resident)
      

