Parole Testimony
Honorable Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee,
I am writing to show my unwavering support for LD-178
My name is Shaun Libby and I have been incarcerated at the Maine State Prison since I was 18 
years old.  I am just a few weeks away from completing my 25th year of incarceration.  I got in 
my fair share of trouble in my youth, and, like most young people, I never addressed any of those 
issues.  This led me to make a series of horrible decisions that culminated in me committing a 
robbery and accidentally taking a man’s life during that robbery shortly after turning 18.  I did 
not mean for that to happen, nor did I want it to happen, but that does not change the outcome 
one bit. 
I was sentenced to 40 years in prison at 20 years old and felt like my life was over.  It was 
because of other older prisoners who pulled me in and encouraged me to focus on the positives 
and find meaning in my life that I did not go down the wrong path early in my sentence.  
Because of their encouragement, and the encouragement of my family, I have gone on to do 
many things that I can say I am extremely proud of.  I graduated with a Bachelor’s Degree from 
UMA in the Science of Mental Health and Human Services, I am currently enrolled in a Master’s 
Degree program in Youth Development at Michigan State University, I co-developed and co-
facilitate a mentor-style program where incarcerated and previously incarcerated individuals 
work with incarcerated youth, I am a certified Literacy Volunteer who has tutored many men and 
helped them achieve their GED/HiSET, I am a Certified Recovery Coach who has worked one-
on-one with men struggling with addiction, I am a peer mentor in the Intensive Mental Health 
Unit, I have trained 18 shelter dogs for adoption, I sit on a Restorative Justice Steering 
Committee with other residents and prison staff working collaboratively to bring Restorative 
Practices to the prison environment, I have co-developed and facilitated a Restorative Justice 
Basics course to other residents, I currently volunteer in an advisory role to the Restorative 
Justice Project of Maine,  I have facilitated a reentry course to residents preparing for release, 
and I was an Executive Board member of the prison branch of the NAACP for many years 
among other things.  
I think it is easy to look at my accomplishments and say that I could be considered an exception 
to the rule when it comes to what many people think about prisoners.  However, I would argue 
that I am far closer to the rule than to the exception.  You see, there are hundreds of prisoners 
throughout the Maine Department of Corrections who are enrolled in college, vocational 
programming, and other positive programming for the sole purpose of learning why they did 
what they did and to ensure that those behaviors do not happen again so that they may become 
productive members of society.  Another thing that so many men and women throughout MDOC 
facilities do on a daily basis is volunteer in a multitude of ways to help out their communities 
both inside and outside the prison walls.  This has been my experience throughout my 25 years 
of incarceration.  This is not a new phenomenon or because people are trying to look good just in 
case parole is reinstated.  So many people want to address the harm they have caused, and 
because our current system does not allow for them to do this directly to those they have harmed, 
they look for ways to better themselves and help others in order to show that they are indeed 
better than their worst mistakes. 
Harm is something that is a constant in the lives of the majority of people in prison, it has 
enveloped them and been an incessant companion through much of their lives.  There is a saying, 
hurt people hurt people.  Many people in prison have suffered unspeakable harm throughout their 
lives and have never been able to address it, and, because of that, many have inflicted harm on 
others.  Unfortunately, for so many of these individuals it took coming to prison to finally 
address the harm done to them, and LD-178 allows for those they have harmed to address the 
harm done to them.  There are mechanisms built into LD-178 that allows for victims to have far 
greater ability to speak their truth and address the individual that harmed them than ever before 
in the Maine Criminal Justice System.  
As I stated earlier, I took a man’s life during a robbery.  That man was a father, a husband, a son, 
a brother, an uncle, a cousin, a friend and so much more.  Every person that was impacted by my 
actions, and continues to be impacted by them, has every right to think that I deserve to rot in 
prison for what I did.  They may not think I deserve to be paroled or to ever see freedom again.  
However, under our current system, I will walk out of prison in the not-too-distant future with no 
input from them.  LD-178 centers the voices of those impacted by crime and would allow those 
for whom I have done irreparable harm to have input in the process, as they should.
Thank you for taking the time to read this and consider my words and the words of so many 
others whether in favor or in opposition to this important piece of legislation.  I implore you to 
vote in favor of LD-178         
