        
 
                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                             
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION  
SHIRA BURNS , EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  
                                                                                                               
LD 178 
“An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Communit y”  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
Public Hearing Date: March 13 , 2023  
Testimony in Opposition  of LD 178  
 
Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal J ustice and Public Safety . My name is Shira Burns and I represent th e Maine Prosecutors 
Association. I am here to testify in opposition of LD 178.   
 
The bill as drafted is not workable when applying to our existing laws and trying to integrate this 
new lan guage. The drafting errors go beyond merely technical issues and affect basic structure.  
 
The language states that this new statute would operate concurrently with Supervised Community 
Confinement Program that currently exists in our statute for early rele ase of offenders. However, in 
trying to apply this practically, there is no  logistical result that could be interpreted without asking a 
dozen or more follow up questions  that are not answered within this language.  
 
The language gives an offender the righ t to request a parole hearing , but no administrative 
procedure to rule out applications for lack of basic eligibility, like timeframes  not being met, 
without a hearing.  
 
The proposed process to appeal a denial of parole allows an appeal period of 90 days directly to the 
law court. This would be a great departure from all other processes in existing law regarding time 
for appeal and appeals directly to the law court. There is also no guidance on who would be 
representing the State before the Board and on ap peals to the law court.  
 
Violations of parole need to better align with our current statutory scheme regarding violations of 
conditions of release, violations of probation, and our general sentencing purposes.  
 
Membership of the board needs to include som e aspect of victim or victimology expertise, 
specifically in the realm of domestic violence, sexual assault, child sexual abuse and exploitation, 
elder abuse, general financial fraud and exploitation and knowledge about specific risks associated 
with those  crimes. However, all board members need mandatory ongoing training regarding 
domestic violence, sexual assault, and child abuse and sexual exploitation, something recently 
enacted for all judges in our state.  
      STATE OF MAINE
  
 
 
 144 SwedStreet    
Caribou, ME 04736 -2353  
207-498-2557  
FAX 207 -493-3493   _____  
   
 
27 Riverside Drive    
Presque Isle, ME  04769 -2730  
207-764-0504  
FAX 207 -764-2046  _____  
   
 
25 School Street    
Suite 210  
Houlton, ME  04730  KATHRYN SLATTERY  
DISTRICT I 
 
JACQUELINE SARTORIS  
DISTRICT II 
 
NEIL MCLEAN 
DISTRICT III 
 
MAEGHAN MALONEY  
DISTRICT IV 
 
R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY 
DISTRICT V 
 
NATASHA IRVING  
DISTRICT VI 
 
ROBERT GRANGER  
DISTRICT VII 
 
TODD R. COLLINS  
DISTRICT VIII  
 
 
 
This proposal needs to be looked at thro ugh the lens of  all victims who have different experiences, 
thoughts , and on -going needs. Once an offender has been found guilty of their crime, victim safety 
should be priority in any proposal. Victim safety looks a lot different for each individual . Any 
proposal needs to include victim rights , including notification of hearing, right to participate, and 
notification of outcome  in the statute . Violations leading to the revocation may directly involve the 
victim in the underlying case, no contact orders are frequently viol ated in domestic violence cases.  
 
Lastly, making this retrospective creates a truth in sentencing issue for many victims  that already 
have distrust in the criminal justice system .  
 
We urg e this committee to first decide what specific goals are trying to be accomplished, look at the 
Supervised Community Confinement Program that is available in Maine and see if the program as it exists, 
or any modification and/or expansion, will meet those goals. This would be the most efficient, cost 
effective, and least l ikely way to cause uninte ntional collateral consequences.  
 
For those reasons, the Maine Prosecutors Association opposed LD 178.  
 
Shira Burns  
Executive Director  
Maine Prosecutors Association  
Shira.burns@maineprosecutors.com  
 
 
