Testimony in Favor of LD 178 
March 13th, 2023 
Kwe’(greetings) Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and other honorable 
members of the Joint Standing Committee of Criminal Justice and public safety, 
My name is Steven Knockwood. l am the Deputy Organizing Director for the Maine 
Recovery Advocacy Project, a person who has lived life experience as an incarcerated 
member of the marginalized Indigenous community of Maine and a resident of Augusta. 
l am here today to testify in favor of LD 178: An Act to Support Reentry and 
Reintegration into the Community. 
I am Muin Clan, Mi'kMaq First Nation and a person in recovery from lntergenerational 
Trauma, Residential School Trauma and Physical and Cultural Genocide. I say this 
because it is important to understand how factors that are uncontrollable to an individual 
can influence a person's ability to make decisions that can alter their life forever. 
The Department of Corrections houses many indigenous individuals who are just like 
me. These individuals were born into a world in which lntra-Generational violence was 
normalized, Substance use rates are far above the general population, physical and 
sexual violence has been normalized. These individuals and many others deserve an 
avenue of recourse. 
From a Policy standpoint, we are at a critical point in the fight against the criminalization 
and incarceration of people who have Substance Use Disorder and Mental Illness. The 
solution to this harmful practice is a Public Health response to these issues. LD 178 is in 
my eyes a necessary step in this process. lt will reduce spending in the budget that 
could then be redirected towards the supports and services that are vital to success for 
all people dealing with these disorders and individuals reintegrating into our 
communities from incarceration. lt would reduce the harm we as a society have unjustly 
done to individuals like myself that are still serving long sentences that were imposed 
because of symptoms of an underlying disease.
Please join with me and support LD 178, bring an opportunity to reunite my brothers 
and sisters with their family and communities. Bring our vision of a public health 
response to substance use and co-occurring disorders one step closer to reality. 
Nitap(thank you) 
Steven Knockwood 
§t§'3_‘\!§:3n@{6C0V9Yll}~!_Ql_C €§c-Qiml 
(207) 735-4427
