Steven Spitzer
Jericho Circle
LD 178
I am testifying in support of LD 178. I have worked as a volunteer in federal, state and county 
correctional insitutions in Massachusetts, Wisconsin, California, New York and Maine since 
2001.  I have seen the  impact of criminal justice policies first-hand in prisons of all custody 
levels in different parts of the country (www.jerichocircle.org).  My work in Maine has been 
specifically at Maine State Prison in Warren over the last 10 years.
 
In this work, which is based on strengthening emotional literacy, accountability and integrity in
men's circles, I have encountered hundreds of men,  many of whom have committed violent 
crimes and served many years behind the walls who have demonstrated a capacity to 
reinvent themselves and become exemplary citizens. The work that Jericho Circle has done 
out of sight has made statistically, spiritually and individually significant differences for men 
who otherwise would have remained buried and bitter behind the walls.
  In states, where parole for those serving long or life sentences is possible, many of these 
men, in some cases on lifetime parole,  have returned to their communities and come to work 
with us as mentors and credible messengers.  In those roles they have helped interrupt the 
vicious cycle of trauma-initiated violence ("hurt people hurt people") by rebuilding their lives, 
modeling maturity and demonstrating a different kind of courage to young men who  have lost
faith in society and themselves.
  Parole is not a panacea for incarcerated men in every case, but if it is administered with 
justice and compassion, it offers an opportunity to recognize that those behind bars are still 
members of the human species and should not be measured solely by the worst things they 
have ever done. For the sake of the next generation of our children and the safety our 
communities please consider revising the law that puts those behind bars beyond humanity 
and hope. 
Steve Spitzer | Chief Inspiration Officer
steven.spitzer@jerichocircle.org
617-270-1066 | www.jerichocircle.org
"Healing Circles to Bring Down the Walls"
