Members of the Committee, 
My name is Thazra-Rosie Hylton and my baby brother, Leo Hylton, has been 
incarcerated at the Maine State Prison for the past 15 years. In the last decade & a half 
I have seen a lot of positive changes in MDOC; that gives me hope that my home state 
will keep the momentum going regarding this bill and restoring Parole. There are many 
people in Maine who will benefit from the right decisions being made after this 
committee hearing..I am most passionately concerned with one brilliant person whose 
growth and redemption are directly linked to that of our corrections department. 
Leo Hylton was ‘involved in a terrible crime 33 days after he turned 18. Nothing can 
changeor excuse the fact of that, but a person is made up of more than the worst 
moment in their young life. I have watched him grow from being a sweet and curious 
child, to a troubled adolescent, to a caged criminal..then watched him evolve into a man 
of faith who is an inspiration to every person he encounters. Leo is not a violent person 
or a threat to anyone; he has a calming energy and people always feel safe and cared 
for around him. My brother had to sun/ive several months in solitary confinement alone 
with his trauma and his thoughts before the prison started to evolve, and still he found 
his way back to God and started to heal. The biggest progress happened when he was 
able to start healing others through sharing his story, through countless hours spent 
volunteering in the MSP Hospice program, and by singing with his sweet strong voice 
that had been silenced for so long. He has never stopped his educational journey either- 
most recently earning his master’s degree in Restorative Justice and will start gaining 
his PhD this Fall. Leo shares his love of learning by teaching a class at Colby College 
via zoom and lets his voice shine through a monthly column he writes for the Mainer. 
And while he is doing all of this (and more) to better himself and the world around him, 
he also makes time to mentor his nieces and nephews and be there to emotionally 
support our family through life's ups and downs. I frequently envision how much more 
he could accomplish from this side of the prison gates. 
And while I'm so proud of all that he has become and hopeful about the future, I get 
scared thinking about the possibility of a dead end to this progress for.a|| of us. I get 
discouraged when I think about the portion of my taxes used towards the $76,000 it cost 
to keep Leo in prison last year and the portion of my heart that is locked in there with 
him. ljust miss him; the whole community misses his physical presence. He is longed 
for in a way that I cannot properly describe. 
Hope is all that we are asking for, and without bringing parole back to Maine, there is no 
hope for Leo and dozens of other men and women who have families like me that miss 
them in the same painful way. My mother would love nothing more than to have hope of 
hugging her baby boy as a free man, instead of being stuck with the fear of 35 more 
long years holding hands in the prison visiting room. To allow him to spend the rest of 
his sentence at home with our family, contributing to the community through teaching, 
mentorship, and counseling troubled youths seems like a more just and cost-effective 
option. Please look at the humanity of Maine’s incarcerated citizens and their families 
and give us a chance to be whole again.
