Theodore Harris
Warren
LD 178
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee
My name is Theodore Harris and I'm writing in support of the parole bill LD 178.
 First and foremost, I would like to thank the committee for working tirelessly on this 
parole bill. Parole would mean a lot of things to a lot of people, but as for me it would
be a chance for me to show my victim, their family, and loved ones, and my family, 
loved ones, and community how far I've come in my rehabilitation. I understand how 
that means much more than simply continuing my education and programming, 
although these play a small part.
 For the past six and a half years, I have successfully completed various programs and
I'm pursuing a college degree in biblical studies. Thus, along the way, I have become 
a certified recovery coach and received training on how to peer facilitate Dr. Robin 
Casarjian’s houses of healing program to other prisoners throughout Maine State 
Prison. This more important work was and continues to be done under the mentorship 
and life coaching of another rehabilitated MSP resident, a true friend of mine, by the 
name of Ephraim ‘E’ Bennett. Ephraim E. Bennett is well known throughout the 
entire Maine Department of Corrections for his impactful contributions inside and 
outside of these walls.
 If granted parole, I would go out into the greater communities of Maine, using the 
same tools I was given in my own personal process of change, and be instrumental in 
changing the lives of countless children, at risk youth / young adults, and others of 
any age. with permission from their parents, I would be of great help to anyone 
needing peer support, mentorship, and life coaching in the following areas but not 
limited to: 1. substance abuse, 2. sexual abuse, 3. domestic abuse, 4. advocacy, 5. 
preventing anyone from coming to places such as this, and 6. preventing gang 
membership, etc.
 These are some of my goals, and the journey toward these goals has already begun. Thank 
you for your time and attention. God bless and take care.

