Tony Locklear
Warren
LD 178
Honorable Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,
My name is Tony Locklear and I am a resident of Maine State Prison.
I am writing to you today to show my absolute support for LD 178 and the effort to 
re-establish parole in Maine.
Parole might be the most important part of prison for an inmate, resident, or convict. 
Has always been labeled here on the outside. Let's just look at the fact of prison. The 
longer a person is in, sure there is schooling, physical education, but the aspect of cell 
or life with another man mentally dismantles a man's character. To teach business 
class, shop classes, also teaching classes along with spiritual groups religion, 
gardening, dog training, mentorship classes.
This is why parole must be now. Look outside at kids, young men, young women are 
dying. Businesses are lacking workers to fill positions. All these classes that DOC 
stands by have and are being looked at as a joke. Some men never grew up or had 
time to get things together outside these walls until the last seven or eight years.
Maine State Prison could be and should be a beacon of hope, not depression. DOC 
should replace mental health workers with parole officers which would be more 
effective in the communities, families, businesses. The prison prides itself on helping 
residents to become members of society but never lets them be members of society. 
Members of the House and Senate, this is the outcome of helping your communities. 
This comes from a man doing two life sentences. Parole would be a change for young 
people now.
I have seen tours come through this prison with just the warden walking them. That 
should send a message to everyone in Augusta what time it is. If parole would be 
brought back, 99% of residents  are going home to their communities that you 
represent, representatives and senators. The families that support you to make 
decisions for them and their kids. Everyone that sits in those seats have all committed 
crimes. They may have been speeding tickets, driving while impaired after dinner, but
all of you have made a mistake. Parole is such an asset! What legacy will you in the 
state house leave behind? To bring back parole would send a message to all states that
this is the right move to benefit Maine.
There are farms that need help, cities, towns that could be a part of this parole. 
Everyone here at the prison has proven they are ready for these changes in their life. 
The easiest thing to do is to close a door. The hardest is to open more than you close. 
What part of history will DOC and Augusta be a part of?
There's room in every prison here that could be used as parole check-in points where 
residents would have to report on Friday nights or Saturday mornings to report and 
leave Sunday at 9:00 p.m. to go home to family for another week for the first 6 
months, then report locally for the remainder of their sentence. Thank you.
 Respectfully,
 Tony Locklear

