Thank you to the committee for hearing us today. 
Hello, my name is Vicki Dill, I live in West Gardiner. I was almost 10 
years old in September 1973 when my big sister Debbie was randomly 
and brutally murdered. Eighteen years later he was caught, tried, 
convicted, and sentenced to 25 to life with the eligibility of parole. 
l watched the recent hearing from home and someone in the Judiciary 
Committee asked if anyone had any experience with parole. l raise my 
hand. My family and l went to every parole hearing the inmate 
requested. Here is a glimpse of what we went through: Intimidation, 
fear, nervousness, sleepless, not eating, migraines and reliving Debbie's 
and our family's nightmare. Parole hearings were held at the Maine 
State Prison. We were escorted into the bowels of the building, 
amongst inmates in the cafeteria and walking, to a small, locked room, 
to meet with the Parole Board. There we would beg them not to let this 
inmate out on parole. Reliving Debbie's murder was painful each time. 
Someone else in the Judiciary meeting mentioned that inmates ”age 
out of being violent" . Let me just say this name: Albert Flick. You can 
look him up, but l will share with you this information about him. He 
was in prison for murdering his wife in 1979. For good behavior, he was 
released 9 years early. A Superior Court Justice was quoted saying: "At 
some point Mr. Flick is going to age out of his capacity to engage in 
this conduct," and that same judge said Albert Flick was too old to 
be dangerous. It is your obligation as part of your deliberations to 
research Albert Flick!
Upon his release, Flick continued assaulting women and being arrested. 
Flick was back in prison from 2014-2016 for probation violation. In 2018 
Flick stabbed a woman 11 times in broad daylight in Lewiston, in front 
of her twin boys. Albert Flick was 77 years old in 2018. 
Once a predator, always a predator. 
I will conclude with this: My family's nightmare of parole has come to 
an end. The inmate that murdered my sister in 1973 completed his life 
sentence. One year ago this month, he died in prison. 
Passage of parole WILL result in additional tragedies for Maine Citizens. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Vicki Dill 
51 Townhouse Road 
West Gardiner, ME 04345
