LD178 
Testimony of Vincent Clark
Resident of Westbrook Maine
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee,
My name is Vincent Clark, and I am here to testify in support of LD 178, an Act to Support 
Reentry and Reintegration by reinstating parole in Maine. My son, Steven Clark, has been 
incarcerated for 18 years and has shown a remarkable transformation during his time in prison. I 
have attended two of his three graduations. He has earned two Bachelor's degrees, an Associate's 
degree, a Master's degree, and is now pursuing a Ph.D. 
My son has worked to change his life and has got involved with everything he can at the prison. 
Steven has sent me his certifications from University of Maine. My son is certified Substance 
Abuse Technician and a certified Mental Health Technician.  He also sent me his meditation, 
yoga, and recovery coach certifications that I share with everyone. Steven has used his time to 
the best of his ability and it is now time to give him another chance at life. My son has 
accomplished all of this when parole was not even an option; he has done all of this because he 
has taken responsibility for the choices that put him in prison. Again, it is time to give Steven 
and other men like him at Maine State Prison another chance. 
I run a recovery/reentry house in Westbrook called the Transformation Project and I am active in 
the Maine Recovery Community. I have met close to a hundred men here in the 
Portland/Westbrook community at recovery meetings that my son has worked with at the Maine 
State Prison. Steven has done a significant job at bettering himself and at transforming his life 
around. Every week I meet someone new that my son has helped or worked with.
I have been to the prison for hospice events where I have met men like Leo Hylton, Brandon 
Brown, and Bobby Payzant who recently passed away. I was able to see the good work of Shaun 
Libby and meet several other good people at the college graduations at the prison. While 
Brandon is now out, Steven, Leo, Shaun and many others who are on the inside walking a similar 
path deserve another chance. These are good men who did a bad thing. Their pain and traumas 
created more pain and trauma. They should not be defined by their worst moment; we should see 
and honor the men they have become by allowing them to be released. Our communities need 
these men to help with many of the social issues that are plaguing us. 
My son’s actions in 2006 where that of a young man who was under the influence of alcohol and 
drugs. He is not that same person. 18 years has been enough time for him to transform his life 
which he has done. Serving any more time is only a waste of taxpayers’ dollars and a waste of 
my son’s life.   Parole would give him a chance at putting all of his education in use in society. 
As a father, I could not be more proud of my son's achievements despite his circumstances. 
However, it has been incredibly difficult for me and my family to see him behind bars for so 
many years. We have missed birthdays, holidays, and other significant life events that we would 
have shared together as a family. The emotional toll of having a loved one incarcerated is 
immense, and it is one that affects not only the person behind bars but also their families and 
loved ones.
I believe that reinstating parole in Maine would provide hope and opportunities for incarcerated 
individuals like my son to be reunited with their families and contribute to their communities. 
Research shows that parole can reduce recidivism rates, improve public safety, and save 
taxpayers' money by reducing the cost of incarceration (The Sentencing Project, 2019). 
Furthermore, parole can provide incentives for incarcerated individuals to engage in 
rehabilitation and education programs, leading to positive outcomes upon release. While Steven 
had the intrinsic motivation to go to school, parole would inspire many people to get involved 
with programming and rehabilitative programs. 
I pray you will see the heart of these men and see they are redeemable. I respectfully ask you to 
support LD 178 and give my son and the other men at the prison like Leo Hylton, Shaun Libby, 
and others a second chance at life outside of prison. Thank you for your time and consideration.
Sincerely,
Vincent Clark
