Virginia Keel
 121 High St
Auburn, ME 04210
(207)240-26-18
Vkeel730@yahoo.com
RE: LD 178 - An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration into the Community
Good morning, 
Personally, and professionally, I have experience dealing with parole in CT & NY due to family 
members participating in it. My brother-in-law was sentenced to 16 years for armed robbery, he 
served 6 years in prison and 10 years on special parole. Parole helped him be 
successful reintegrating into society by providing programs to get housing, employment, and 
education. I believe with the right systems of support parole can help individuals be successful 
re-entering society. 
Because of parole my brother-in-law was able to complete his sentence while being a positive 
community member, he maintained 2 jobs so he could financially support his family. His time in 
society saved taxpayers money by reducing the cost of a person incarcerated as well as removing 
1 adult and 3 children from state and federal programs like SNAP and section 8. More 
importantly, this family was able to be reunified allowing a young man and 2 young ladies have 
their mother and father active in their life.
As an HR professional I can tell you recruiting over the last 5 years has been difficult and 
continues to remain a struggle as there are less and less employable people in society. Allowing 
individuals, the opportunity to become paroled will add more employable people into their 
communities to work. These individuals can pay taxes and fill so many of those open position’s 
businesses are struggling to fill.
Recidivism happens far too often because when an individual is released the system leaves the 
individual to figure things out on their own with very little support or services. Parole can 
reduce recidivism but more importantly also reduce the trauma to children that is caused by 
incarceration. Studies show that when parents are incarcerated it affects not just the person 
incarcerated but their family but more importantly their children.
If you would like to learn more about parole from an HR level and/or speak with someone who 
has participated in parole, please feel free to let me know. I will be more than happy to set up a 
meeting with individuals who have successfully participated in parole in NY and CT.
Virginia Keel
Auburn
LD 178
Good morning, 
Personally, and professionally, I have experience dealing with parole in CT & NY due to 
family members participating in it. My brother-in-law was sentenced to 16 years for armed 
robbery, he served 6 years in prison and 10 years on special parole. Parole helped him be 
successful reintegrating into society by providing programs to get housing, employment, and 
education. I believe with the right systems of support parole can help individuals be 
successful re-entering society. 
Because of parole my brother-in-law was able to complete his sentence while being a 
positive community member, he maintained 2 jobs so he could financially support his 
family. His time in society saved taxpayers money by reducing the cost of a person 
incarcerated as well as removing 1 adult and 3 children from state and federal 
programs like SNAP and section 8. More importantly, this family was able to be 
reunified allowing a young man and 2 young ladies have their mother and father 
active in their life.
As an HR professional I can tell you recruiting over the last 5 years has been difficult 
and continues to remain a struggle as there are less and less employable people in 
society. Allowing individuals, the opportunity to become paroled will add more 
employable people into their communities to work. These individuals can pay taxes 
and fill so many of those open position’s businesses are struggling to fill.
Recidivism happens far too often because when an individual is released the system 
leaves the individual to figure things out on their own with very little support or 
services. Parole can reduce recidivism but more importantly also reduce the trauma to
children that is caused by incarceration. Studies show that when parents are 
incarcerated it affects not just the person incarcerated but their family but more 
importantly their children.
If you would like to learn more about parole from an HR level and/or speak with someone who
has participated in parole, please feel free to let me know. I will be more than happy to set up 
a meeting with individuals who have successfully participated in parole in NY and CT.

