 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 11, 2023  
 
Testimony in support of  LD 178: An Act to Support Reentry and Reintegration 
into the Community  
 
Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee,  
My name is Winifred Tate, I am a resident of Waterville, a professor and the 
director of the Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College.  
 
At the Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College, we are involved in researching 
the impact of drug policies in local communities, including  extended incarceration as a 
result of drug felony convictions . Maine ha s some of the most severe drug laws in the 
country. Mere possession of 2 grams of heroin can be charged as Class B trafficking, 
punishable by up to 10 years in pr ison and a $10,000, because of what is known as 
“permissible inference” -- the assumption that anyone with that this small amount must 
be selling, not just using. Any prior convictions converted the charge to a class A felony, 
up to 30 years in jail and a $50,000 fine. These felony drug convictions can lead for 
extended sentences of years for people with substance use disorder . Extended 
incarceration has negative impacts on both individuals who are incarcerated and the 
families and communities left behind. Parole is one way to reduce the human and 
financial cost and the harm caused to communities and families by  such extended 
sentences.  
Years of research show that criminal convictions and incarceration in prison 
create “significant negative effects on employ ment ,”1 and impedes the economic 
development of communities. Incarceration of a parent or caregiver can also 
significantly harm their children. One study showed that the incarceration of a parent or 
caregiver led to psychological distress and increased substance use among youth.2 “A 
caregiver’s absence from a child’s life can mean loss of income and instrumental 
support such as transportation or help with homework, and anxiety about the caregiver’s 
well-being. Caregiver incarceration has documented associations with negative 
 
1 Affidavit of Steven E. Barkan at ¶7(a), Gaul v. York Cnty.  (citing Bruce Western, 
Homeward: Life in the Year after Prison  (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2018); 
Devah Pager, Marked: Race, Crime, and Finding Work in an Era of Mass Incarceration  
(Chicag o: University of Chicago Press, 2009).  
2 Elizabeth I. Johnson et al., “Household Member Arrest and Adolescent Substance Use: 
The Mediating Roles of Parenting and Youth Psychological Distress,” Criminal Justice 
and Behavior  vol. 46(8) (2019), pp. 1088 -105. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outco mes including increased trauma symptoms, physical health problems, antisocial 
behavior, and youth incarceration.”3  
Law enforcement and incarceration do not create true safety, and in fact, create 
more trauma and harm.  The money currently spent on exten ded incarceration for drug 
felony crimes i s money that could be spent what we all need for safety and for thriving 
communities: stable housing, accessible mental health treatment and support, and 
opportunities for sustainable work. We must invest in commun ity programs that address 
trauma and poverty. Parole is one step toward creating this world.  
 
 
I urge you to pass LD 1 78. Thank you for your time.  
 
 
Winifred Tate  
Associate  Professor of Anthropology  and Director of the Maine Drug Policy Lab  
Colby College  
wltate@colby.edu  
207-859-4701  
 
 
 
Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College  
The Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College brings to gether policymakers, scholars 
and students, providing evidence -based analysis for addressing critical drug policy 
issues in our state and beyond, and conducts research on problematic drug use and 
access to treatment in Maine.  
 
 
3 James M. Conway et al., “Impact of Caregiver Arrest on Minor Children: Implications 
for Use of Family Impact Statements in U.S. Courts,” Justice Policy Journal  vol. 13(2) 
(2016), pp. 1 -17, p. 2.  
