
ALAN MINTHORN
ME SR INS LLC / NAIFA-ME
LD 1497
Amended remarks for LD 1354 & 1497 April 11, 2023
Committee Chairs and Members:
Both bills, however well intended, are thoroughly documented in Medicare and BOI 
guidance. 
The CMS-templated marketing materials for Medicare Supplement products clearly 
show whether Part B Excess Charges are paid by plans A-N. (See attached chart, next 
to bottom row, from CMS Medicare & You - Publication 10050 - mailed annually to 
every beneficiary. This is the 2022 edition; however, the chart is updated and 
published annually.) Further, Maine BOI, Medicare, and all carriers require a sales 
agent to provide the beneficiary with a printed copy of CMS Product 02110 – 
Choosing a Medigap Policy: A guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare. 
The same chart appears on Page 11 of the 2023 edition. Medicare Advantage products
already enjoy built-in protection from balanced billing. 
Next, Medicare Rules allow balanced billing of excess charges capped at 15% above 
the Medicare allowed rate on Original Medicare Claims. In my decade plus years of 
experience in the senior insurance sector, with a base of nearly 800 customers, I have 
yet to have a case of unexpected balance billing for Excess Charges.
Again, the agent involved failed to address balance billing or the individual failed to 
entertain that possibility. Most individuals retain approx. 30% of content delivered 
during a sales meeting. As a former "re-educator" for a senior insurance products 
company, people hear what they want more than what's being said, especially when 
premium difference can exceed $100/month. 
Respectfully, both bills Ought Not to Pass from Committee. It places extra burdens on
the Bureau, is already well documented in marketing materials, and an extremely rare 
occurrence. 
Any individual believing, they were harmed by this situation should be directed to 
legal counsel and file a claim against the agent's Errors and Omissions policy to cover
damages. Almost all agents in our industry provide educationally complete and CMS 
compliant sales presentations, approved sales materials, to prospective clients. The 
agent, their families, their business and any employees, livelihood depends on their 
commission income. 
Respectfully, 
Al Minthorn
Maine Senior Insurance, LLC

