l\/IHA Maine Hospital Association 
MAlNE'S LEADING 
VOICE FOR HEALTHCARE 
COMMENTS OF THE MAINE HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION 
In Opposition To 
LD 1354 -An Act to Protect Medicare Beneﬁciariesjrom Surprise Bills and to Inform Medicare 
' 
Beneﬁciaries About Medicare Part B Excess Charges 
LD 1497 - An Act to Strengthen Medicare by Preventing Providers from Adding Excess Charges 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Heath Care, Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee, my name is Jeffrey Austin and please accept these comments in opposition 
to these two bills. 
Policy Concerns. Generally speaking, we believe it is inappropriate for the state to interfere with 
the operation of the Medicare program. 
My understanding is that this legislation would prohibit providers from seeking reimbursement 
that is currently allowed under current Medicare reimbursement rules (Medicare Part B excess 
charges). 
It is particularly unfair because the state’s ability to interfere in Medicare would be only in one 
direction — the negative regulation of providers. States can’t increase Medicare reimbursement 
rates. States can’t broaden Medicare service coverage. States can’t regulate Medicare Advantage 
plans’ conduct — they largely escape the reach of the Bureau of Insurance. Your ability to intervene 
would really only be to providers ’ detriment; there is not much you can do to our beneﬁt. 
I am not aware of any hospitals using the pennitted authority to bill excess charges under Medicare 
Part B. However, we feel strongly that Maine should not intervene in the operation of the Medicare 
program in this fashion. 
Drafting Concerns. In addition to our policy concerns, we have several drafting concerns. 
l. Overbroad. If you look at LD 1354, line 17, I believe the issue is identiﬁed as Medicare 
Part B excess charges. That is a speciﬁc, deﬁned (and permitted) and understood practice. 
However, lines 29-30 are the operative prohibition section of the bill and they refer to all Medicare 
services, not just Part B excess charges.
Our question to the sponsors is to please clearly identify the practices that are being regulated by 
this bill. If it is beyond Medicare Part B excess charges, what is being prohibited and why? 
2. Misuse of the term “balance billing. ” We believe this term is inapplicable to what this 
legislation seeks to accomplish. LD 1354 deﬁnes balance billing as an amount in excess of the 
approved amount. I don’t believe that is the typical usage of that term. 
Balance billing, as we understand it, is either: (1) an amount in excess of an amount the provider 
agreed to accept as an in-network provider, or, (2) an amount in excess of an amount imposed by 
law on the provider. In other words, balance billing is what you said you would accept or the 
amount the law says you must accept. CMS sets Medicare reimbursement rates, not states. Since 
Medicare expressly allows Part B excess charges for certain out-of-network providers, this is not 
balance billing. 
Balance billing is already prohibited Lmder federal law for in-network providers. Out-of-network 
providers don’t have an agreed upon amount and so, generally speaking, balance billing does not 
apply to them. (State and federal laws that impose an amount on out-of-network providers in the 
“surprise ” billing context.) 
Bottom line, these bills are not dealing with “balance billing” in the traditional sense. Please don’t 
misapply this tenn to pennissible excess charges. _ 
The drafting of the two bills is different in important ways. 
3. LD 1497 uses a problematic undefmed term. LD 1497 attempts to deﬁne the prohibited 
amount as that amount in excess of “reasonable charges” (see page l, line 17). That term makes 
no sense with respect to Medicare. Compare this deﬁnition to that in LD 1354 (see page 1, line 
23) which deﬁnes the prohibited amount as the “Medicare-approved amount.” The Medicare- 
approved amount is clear and known; “reasonable charges” is not. Conceivably, LD 1497 could 
be could be interpreted as preventing us from collecting the required co-insurance in Medicare 
which is not in excess of the Medicare approved-amount. 
4. Who is Being Regulated? LD 1497 is placed into Title 22 and appears to apply to all 
“providers ” (see page 1, line 28); LD 1354, however, only applies to physicians as deﬁned in Title 
32. I don’t know the full scope of the Medicare Part B excess charge allowance rule. Medicare 
Part B itself covers more than physician charges. If the Part B excess charge allowance rule applies 
to all Part B services, why does LD 1354 apply only to doctors? 
Thank you for accepting our comments. 
Page2|2 
THEMHA. ORG {(207) 622-4794 [33 FULLER ROAD {' AUGUSTA, ME 04330
