 
1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
   
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.org 
April 11, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D.1497 An Act to Strengthen Medicare by Preventing 
Providers from Adding Excess Charges before the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
 
Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonprofit legal services 
organization and our mission is to provide free legal assistance to Maine’s 
older adults when their basic human needs are threatened. On behalf of 
Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer some comments in 
support LD 1497 and suggest changes in the language of the bill that may 
help avoid confusion among patients and providers.   
 
This bill as written prohibits a Medicare provider from balance billing a 
Medicare beneficiary. It defines balance bill beginning on line 20 as follows: 
“Balance bill means to charge to or collect from a Medicare beneficiary any 
amount in excess of the reasonable charge for a service, procedure or 
treatment paid to a provider under the Medicare program.” (emphasis 
added). It also contains the term “excess charges” in the heading found on 
line 30 which reads: “Reimbursement for excess charges”. (emphasis 
added). We believe that using those terms as written may be problematic. 
  
The Medicare program payment to a provider is called an “approved 
amount”. It’s paid to a provider who has agreed to “accept assignment” 
which means they have agreed to take whatever Medicare pays as full 
payment for services rendered. Using the term “reasonable charge” would 
not be accurate and we suggest using “Medicare approved amount” instead.  
 
 
2 
 The Medicare program also pays a slightly less “approved amount” for the 
same service to Medicare providers who do not “accept assignment”. 
However, the Medicare rules permit these providers to bill the patient up to 
15% more than the approved amount. The 15% cap is called a “limiting 
charge” and the amount itself is called an “excess charge”. We suggest 
adding the words “limiting charge” following the “Medicare approved 
amount” term.     
 
Our suggestions if adopted would look like the following:  
 
§1718-H. Balance billing of Medicare beneficiaries prohibited 
18 1. Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
19 following terms have the following meanings. 
20 A. "Balance bill" means to charge to or collect from a Medicare beneficiary any 
21 amount in excess of the reasonable charge Medicare approved amount or limiting charge for a 
service, procedure or treatment paid to 
22 a provider under the Medicare program. 
 
30 3. Reimbursement for excess prohibited charges. If a provider receives payment from a  
 
A final comment. While the posting of a summary of this bill as required in 
the Notice section will alert some patients about the billing prohibitions it 
might be worthwhile to consider adding to the notice language that informs 
patient about the 15% limiting charge if the provider does not accept 
assignment. This may help avoid a “surprise billing”. 
 
Thank you for giving us the opportunity to share our thoughts with you. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
