 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 539
S.P. 227 In Senate, February 24, 2021
An Act  To Require  Law  Enforcement  Agencies  To Do  a Thorough 
Background Check of Applicant Officers and To Require the 
Release of  Records, Including Sealed Records,  to the Requesting 
Agency
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on February 22, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  
on Criminal Justice and  Public  Safety pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MIRAMANT of Knox.
Cosponsored by Representative EVANGELOS of Friendship and
Representatives: DOUDERA  of Camden, PLUECKER of Warren, RECKITT of South 
Portland.

Page 1 - 130LR0765(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  25 MRSA ยง2804-G, sub-ยง2 is enacted to read:
32.  Background check; waiver.  A law enforcement agency shall require from every 
4 candidate for employment as a law enforcement officer with that agency who has previous 
5 law enforcement experience a written waiver from the candidate authorizing every law 
6 enforcement agency that previously employed the candidate to disclose the candidate's 
7 employment records to the hiring law enforcement agency and releasing the hiring and the 
8 disclosing law enforcement agency from any liability related to the disclosure or use of the 
9 employment records.  A previous employer is immune from any confidentiality or 
10 nondisclosure law, policy or contractual requirement for providing information to a hiring 
11 law enforcement agency under this section.  The hiring law enforcement agency shall 
12 perform a thorough review of the employment records of a candidate disclosed pursuant to 
13 this subsection prior to hiring the candidate or making any offer of employment.  If a 
14 candidate refuses to provide a written waiver required by this subsection, the hiring law 
15 enforcement agency may not hire or make an offer of employment to the candidate.  For 
16 purposes of this subsection, "employment records" means any files or information related 
17 to conduct or job performance including performance reviews, administrative files, 
18 grievances, previous personnel applications, personnel-related claims, disciplinary actions, 
19 complaints, early warnings, commendations and any internal review files and includes 
20 sealed records, but does not include data or any other information of the candidate's 
21 employment not related to conduct or performance, including medical records, pay and 
22 benefit information or other similar data or information.
23SUMMARY
24 This bill requires a candidate for employment as a law enforcement officer who has 
25 previous law enforcement experience to provide the hiring law enforcement agency a 
26 written waiver authorizing prior law enforcement employers to release all performance-
27 related employment records on the candidate, including sealed records but not including 
28 medical, pay and other nonperformance data, and releasing the hiring and disclosing law 
29 enforcement agencies of liability related to the disclosure or use of the employment records.  
30 A previous employer is immune from any confidentiality or nondisclosure law, policy or 
31 contractual requirement for providing information to a hiring law enforcement agency.  
32 This bill requires a hiring law enforcement agency to conduct a background check on the 
33 employment records prior to hiring the candidate and forbids a law enforcement agency 
34 from hiring a candidate who refuses to provide the written waiver.24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
