 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 558
H.P. 403 House of  Representatives, February 24, 2021
Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry To  Study Alternative Cropping Systems for Farmers 
Affected by Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination
Received by the Clerk of the House on February 22, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  pursuant to Joint  Rule 308.2 and ordered printed  
pursuant to Joint Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PLUECKER of Warren.
Cosponsored by Senator MAXMIN of  Lincoln and
Representatives: GRAMLICH  of Old Orchard Beach, LANDRY of Farmington,  McCREA of 
Fort Fairfield, O'NEIL of Saco, OSHER of Orono, WHITE  of Waterville,  Senator: DILL of 
Penobscot.

Page 1 - 130LR0978(01)1Sec. 1.  Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry; alternative 
2cropping systems.  Resolved:  That the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
3 Forestry, in consultation with the University of Maine, shall study alternative cropping 
4 systems that are more cost-effective than soil and water remediation systems for farmers 
5 whose land has been contaminated by perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances and 
6 whose business development has been limited.  The study must include an assessment of 
7 how contaminated land can be used for food and energy production in ways that create 
8 products that are safe and uncontaminated.  As part of its study, the department may 
9 consider studying the production of tomatoes, peppers, eggplants and cucumbers in 
10 greenhouses, how pH and salinity of irrigation water affect perfluoroalkyl and 
11 polyfluoroalkyl substances uptake in plants, how meat production using contaminated hay 
12 but uncontaminated water affects the food product and dual-use solar photovoltaic panel 
13 installation with production of meat and poultry from pastured animals.  The department 
14 shall submit a report of the study's findings, which must include proposals for funding 
15 opportunities to help farmers develop alternative business opportunities, to the Joint 
16 Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry by February 1, 2022. 
17SUMMARY
18 This resolve directs the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, in 
19 consultation with the University of Maine, to study alternative cropping systems that are 
20 more cost-effective than soil and water remediation systems for farmers whose land has 
21 been contaminated by perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances and whose business 
22 development has been limited.18
19
20
21
22
