 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST  SPECIAL  SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 1624
H.P. 1208 House of  Representatives,  April 27, 2021
Resolve, To  Create  a Stakeholder  Group  To Identify the  Needs  of 
Long-term Care Family  Caregivers
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CRAVEN of Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BROOKS  of Lewiston, CLOUTIER  of Lewiston,  
MADIGAN of Waterville, PERRY of  Calais, Senator: LIBBY of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 130LR1249(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, family caregivers are critical to the health of individuals receiving long-
4 term care assistance; and
5Whereas, this resolve requires the long-term care ombudsman program within the 
6 Department of Health and Human Services to convene a stakeholder group to consider and 
7 make recommendations for the implementation of an assessment measure for the needs of 
8 family caregivers in the State; and
9Whereas, this assessment must be initiated before the 90-day period expires in order 
10 that the work may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 
11 legislative session; and
12Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
13 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
14 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
15 therefore, be it
16Sec. 1.  Long-term care ombudsman program to establish stakeholder 
17group.  Resolved:  That the long-term care ombudsman program, established pursuant 
18 to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 22, section 5106, subsection 11-C and referred to in 
19 this resolve as "the long-term care ombudsman," shall establish a stakeholder group to 
20 consider and make recommendations for the implementation of an assessment measure for 
21 the needs of family caregivers.
22Sec. 2.  Stakeholder group membership.  Resolved:  That the long-term care 
23 ombudsman shall invite the participation of representatives of the Department of Health 
24 and Human Services, the area agencies on aging, service coordination agencies for 
25 recipients of home care services, Legal Services for the Elderly, Disability Rights Maine 
26 and the agency designated by the State to provide statewide assessments as required by the 
27 federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, as well as family caregivers and any 
28 other interested parties, in the stakeholder group established in section 1.
29Sec. 3.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the stakeholder group established in section 1 shall 
30 consider and make recommendations for the implementation of an assessment measure of 
31 the needs of family caregivers.  The stakeholder group shall consider all relevant data 
32 including data currently collected by the Department of Health and Human Services or 
33 stakeholders relating to the needs of family caregivers and family members of individuals 
34 receiving long-term care services at home for referrals for support services and resources, 
35 apparent gaps in resources and information regarding family caregiver assessment services 
36 and resources provided in other states.  The stakeholder group shall also develop a plan to 
37 implement improved referrals to services for family caregivers.
38Sec. 4.  Report.  Resolved:  That the long-term care ombudsman shall submit a 
39 report with its findings and recommendations pursuant to section 3, along with any 
40 recommended legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
41 no later than January 2, 2022.  The committee is authorized to submit legislation to the 
42 Second Regular Session of the 130th Legislature related to the report.
Page 2 - 130LR1249(01)1Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
2 takes effect when approved.
3SUMMARY
4 This resolve requires the long-term care ombudsman program to establish a stakeholder 
5 group to consider and make recommendations for the implementation of an assessment 
6 measure for the needs of family caregivers providing long-term care services to family 
7 members, to establish a plan to improve referrals to services and to submit a report to the 
8 Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services no later than January 2, 2022.4
5
6
7
8
