 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 952
S.P. 304 In Senate,  March  9, 2021
An Act  To Limit Liability Regarding Donations  of Menstrual  
Products
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary  suggested and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BREEN of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative TEPLER of Topsham and
Senators: BRENNER of Cumberland,  CARNEY of Cumberland, DAUGHTRY  of 
Cumberland, KEIM of  Oxford, MOORE of Washington, SANBORN  of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 130LR1950(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  14 MRSA ยง173 is enacted to read:
3ยง173.  Immunity for menstrual product donations
41.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
5 following terms have the following meanings.
6 A.  "Apparently usable" means, with respect to a product, that the product meets all 
7 quality and labeling standards imposed by federal, state and local laws and regulations 
8 even if the product may not be readily marketable. 
9 B.  "Menstrual product" means a sanitary napkin, tampon, liner, cup, underwear or any 
10 similar item used by an individual with respect to menstruation.  
112.  Immunity for donor.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a good faith 
12 donor of menstrual products that are apparently usable at the time they are donated to a 
13 bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization for free distribution is immune from civil or 
14 criminal liability arising from injury or death due to the condition of the menstrual products, 
15 unless the injury or death is a direct result of the gross negligence, recklessness or 
16 intentional misconduct of the donor.
173.  Immunity of distributor.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a bona fide 
18 charitable or nonprofit organization and any employee or volunteer of that organization 
19 who in good faith receive and distributes menstrual products that are apparently usable at 
20 the time they are distributed are immune from civil or criminal liability arising from an 
21 injury or death due to the condition of the menstrual products, unless the injury or death is 
22 a direct result of the gross negligence, recklessness or intentional misconduct of the 
23 organization employee or volunteer.
244.  Application.  This section applies to all good faith donations of menstrual products 
25 that are not readily marketable due to appearance, grade, surplus or other conditions, but 
26 nothing in this section restricts the authority of any appropriate agency to regulate or bar 
27 the use of those menstrual products for use.
285.  Immunity of facilities.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, a 
29 hospital or other health care facility licensed by the Department of Health and Human 
30 Services that, in good faith and in accordance with guidelines established by the recipient 
31 organization, donates menstrual products that are apparently usable at the time they are 
32 donated to a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization for free distribution is immune 
33 from civil or criminal liability arising from injury, illness or death due to the condition of 
34 the menstrual products, unless the injury, illness or death is a direct result of intentional 
35 misconduct of the donor.  Nothing in this subsection prevents a licensed hospital or health 
36 care facility from receiving the immunity provided in subsection 2 if the donor qualifies 
37 for immunity under the terms of that subsection.
38SUMMARY
39 This bill provides immunity from civil and criminal liability arising from an injury or 
40 death for good faith donors, including hospitals and other health care facilities, of menstrual 
41 products that are donated to bona fide charitable and nonprofit organizations.  It also 39
40
41
Page 2 - 130LR1950(01)42 provides the same immunity to the charitable and nonprofit organizations that distribute 
43 those donations.1
2
