 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST  SPECIAL  SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 1613
H.P. 1202 House of  Representatives,  April 27, 2021
Resolve, Directing the Department of Economic and Community Development, the Department of  Labor  and the Department of 
Transportation To Develop Partnerships with Businesses, Unions and Educational Programs and  Institutions To Provide Training 
and Transportation for Workers
Reference to the Committee on Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MADIGAN of Waterville.

Page 1 - 130LR1201(01)1Sec. 1.  Department of Economic and Community Development, 
2Department of Labor and Department of Transportation to develop 
3partnerships with businesses, unions and educational programs and 
4institutions to provide training and transportation for workers.  Resolved:  
5 That the Department of Economic and Community Development, the Department of Labor 
6 and the Department of Transportation shall collaborate to develop partnerships with 
7 businesses, unions and educational programs and institutions to provide a hub where 
8 workers can access transportation to training programs, apprenticeships and jobs and 
9 receive information about open positions and training opportunities.  As part of this 
10 collaboration, the departments shall:
11 1. Focus on areas with no viable public transportation;
12 2. Consider creating a fund for young people in job training programs, including 
13 technical education at secondary schools, for driver education, with participation based 
14 upon a means test and including youth in foster care; and 
15 3. Coordinate with businesses, unions, educational programs and institutions, training 
16 programs, employers and community organizations to improve dissemination of 
17 information about available job opportunities and resources for training and transportation.
18Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That, by January 1, 2023, the Department of Economic 
19 and Community Development, the Department of Labor and the Department of 
20 Transportation shall provide a report on the progress made to carry out this resolve to the 
21 joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over innovation, 
22 development, economic advancement and business matters, the joint standing committee 
23 of the Legislature having jurisdiction over labor and housing matters and the joint standing 
24 committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over transportation matters, which each 
25 may report out legislation to the First Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.
26SUMMARY
27 This resolve directs the Department of Economic and Community Development, the 
28 Department of Labor and the Department of Transportation to collaborate to develop 
29 partnerships with businesses, unions and educational programs and institutions to provide 
30 a hub for workers to get transportation to training programs, apprenticeships and jobs and 
31 receive information about open positions and training opportunities.27
28
29
30
31
