 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 985
S.P. 315 In Senate,  March  9, 2021
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Require  Legislative Approval  of Any  State of Emergency  
Lasting Longer Than 60 Days
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator STEWART of Aroostook.
Cosponsored by Representative DILLINGHAM of Oxford and
Senators: GUERIN of Penobscot, TIMBERLAKE  of Androscoggin, Representative:  STETKIS 
of Canaan.

Page 1 - 130LR0329(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Article IV, Pt. Third, ยง24 is enacted to read:
5Section 24.  Legislative approval of state of emergency.   A state of emergency 
6 proclaimed by the Governor may not continue for longer than 60 days unless approved by 
7 the Legislature every 60 days.
8Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
9Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
10 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
11 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
12 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
13 resolution by voting upon the following question:
14 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to provide that a state 
15 of emergency proclaimed by the Governor may not continue for longer 
16 than 60 days unless approved by the Legislature every 60 days?"
17 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
18 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
19 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
20 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
21 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
22 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
23 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
24 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
25Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
26 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
27 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
28SUMMARY
29 This resolution proposes a constitutional amendment that provides that a state of 
30 emergency proclaimed by the Governor may not continue for longer than 60 days unless 
31 approved by the Legislature every 60 days.29
30
31
