 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 90
H.P. 56 House of  Representatives, January 13, 2021
An Act  To Amend the Removal Process  Applicable to  the Position of 
State Supervisor of  the Forest Protection Unit of  the Bureau of 
Forestry
Submitted by the Department of  Agriculture,  Conservation and Forestry pursuant to Joint  
Rule 204.
Received by the Clerk of the House on January 11, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  pursuant to Joint  Rule 308.2 and ordered printed  
pursuant to Joint Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SKOLFIELD of Weld.

Page 1 - 130LR0155(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  12 MRSA §8901, sub-§1, ¶B is enacted to read:
3 B.  The state supervisor of the forest protection unit of the Bureau of Forestry, as Chief 
4 Forest Ranger, must be qualified by training and experience in wildfire protection and 
5 law enforcement.  In the event that the Chief Forest Ranger is not reappointed, the 
6 Chief Forest Ranger has the right to be restored to the position from which the Chief 
7 Forest Ranger was promoted or to a position equivalent in salary grade, without 
8 impairment of personnel status or the loss of seniority, retirement or other rights to 
9 which uninterrupted service in the previous position would have entitled the former 
10 Chief Forest Ranger.  If service as Chief Forest Ranger is terminated for cause, the 
11 right to be restored to that previous or an equivalent position must be determined by 
12 the State Civil Service Appeals Board.
13SUMMARY
14 This bill clarifies that in the event that the Chief Forest Ranger is not reappointed, the 
15 Chief Forest Ranger has the right to be restored to the position from which the Chief Forest 
16 Ranger was promoted or to a position equivalent in salary grade, without impairment of 
17 personnel status or the loss of seniority, retirement or other rights to which uninterrupted 
18 service in the previous position would have entitled the former Chief Forest Ranger.
