 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST  SPECIAL  SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 1616
H.P. 1205 House of  Representatives,  April 27, 2021
An Act  To Ensure That  Municipalities  and Multimunicipal Regions 
of Every Size and  Capacity Have  Guidance  on Climate Adaptation  
and Resilience Strategies for Policy,  Implementation  and Investment 
Decision Support
Reference to the Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources suggested  and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BLUME of York.
Cosponsored by Senator BRENNER of Cumberland and
Representatives: BAILEY  of Gorham, DOUDERA of Camden, PERRY of Calais, Senator: 
MAXMIN of Lincoln.

Page 1 - 130LR1617(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4 This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5 This bill proposes to implement the recommendations of the Community Resilience 
6 Planning, Public Health, and Emergency Management Working Group of the Maine 
7 Climate Council in order to provide municipalities and multimunicipal regions of every 
8 size and capacity with guidance on climate adaptation and resilience strategies for policy, 
9 implementation and investment decision support.
10 The bill seeks to:
11 1.  Require municipalities to incorporate climate vulnerability and resilience plans into 
12 their comprehensive plans or make separate climate vulnerability and resilience plans.  
13 These plans would be updated at least every 5 years;
14 2.  Require the Governor's Office of Policy Innovation and the Future to develop a 
15 guidance document to assist municipalities in their review of comprehensive plans and 
16 development of separate climate vulnerability and resilience plans and ensure that each 
17 element of a comprehensive plan or separate climate vulnerability and resilience plan 
18 considers climate adaptation and resilience planning when appropriate;
19 3.  Amend the laws governing planning and land use regulation to include among the 
20 state goals providing overall direction and consistency to the planning and regulatory 
21 actions of all state and municipal agencies affecting natural resource management, land use 
22 and development the goal of planning for climate change adaptation and resilience; and
23 4.  Strengthen the ability of regional planning organizations to provide tools to 
24 municipalities and multimunicipal regions to develop climate adaptation and resilience 
25 strategies.4
