 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 550
H.P. 395 House of  Representatives, February 24, 2021
Resolve, Directing the State Board of Education To Adopt Rules  
Prohibiting Teachers in  Public Schools from Engaging in Political, 
Ideological or  Religious Advocacy in the Classroom
Received by the Clerk of the House on February 22, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Education and  Cultural Affairs pursuant to Joint Rule  308.2 and ordered printed  pursuant to  
Joint Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CARMICHAEL of Greenbush.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  DOLLOFF of Milton Township, DUCHARME of Madison, 
GRIFFIN of  Levant,  MASON of Lisbon, POIRIER of Skowhegan.

Page 1 - 130LR0883(01)1Preamble.  Whereas, the purpose of public education in America is to produce 
2 knowledgeable and competent adults able to participate as informed citizens in the 
3 democratic process; and
4Whereas, education in a democracy is best served by teaching students how to think, 
5 not telling them what to think; and
6Whereas, our country is divided over many issues affecting its citizens; and
7Whereas, it has been established through surveys that a majority of kindergarten to 
8 grade 12 teachers discuss controversial issues in their classrooms; and
9Whereas, it has been established that some teacher training institutions, teacher 
10 licensing agencies, state education departments and professional teacher organizations 
11 have condoned and even encouraged this behavior under the guise of "teaching for social 
12 justice" and other sectarian doctrines; and
13Whereas, time spent on political or ideological indoctrination takes time away from 
14 instruction in the academic subjects taught by public educational institutions including the 
15 foundational subjects of mathematics, science, English, history and civics and prevents 
16 students from receiving the best possible public education as funded by the taxpayers of 
17 the State; and
18Whereas, parents and taxpayers have a right to expect that taxpayer resources will be 
19 spent on education, not political or ideological indoctrination; now, therefore, be it
20Sec. 1.  State Board of Education to adopt rules prohibiting teachers in 
21public schools from engaging in political, ideological or religious advocacy in 
22the classroom.  Resolved: That the State Board of Education shall adopt rules 
23 prohibiting teachers in public schools from engaging in political, ideological or religious 
24 advocacy in the classroom.  Rules adopted under this resolve must be clear and provide 
25 enforcement mechanisms for appropriate and professional ethical behavior by teachers 
26 licensed in the State in tax-supported schools to prohibit teachers from using the classroom 
27 to engage in political, ideological or religious advocacy.
28Sec. 2.  Rules criteria.  Resolved: That the rules adopted under section 1 must 
29 prohibit a teacher in a public school during class time or while otherwise operating within 
30 the scope of employment as a teacher from doing the following:
31 1.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any candidate or nominee for public office or 
32 any elected or appointed official regardless of whether the official is a member of the local, 
33 state or federal government;
34 2.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any pending, proposed or enacted legislation or 
35 regulation regardless of whether the legislation or regulation is pending or proposed or has 
36 been enacted at the local, state or federal level;
37 3.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any pending, proposed or decided court case or 
38 judicial action regardless of whether the court case or judicial action is at the local, state or 
39 federal level;
40 4.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any pending, proposed or executed executive 
41 action by an executive or executive branch agency at the local, state or federal level;
Page 2 - 130LR0883(01)1 5.  Introducing any controversial subject matter that is not germane to the topic of the 
2 course being taught;
3 6.  Endorsing, supporting or engaging in any activity that hampers or impedes the 
4 lawful access of a military recruiter to the school campus;
5 7.  Endorsing, supporting or engaging in any activity that hampers or impedes the 
6 actions of local, state or federal law enforcement;
7 8.  Advocating in a partisan manner for any side of a controversial issue; the rules must 
8 require a teacher to provide students with materials supporting both sides of a controversial 
9 issue being addressed and to present both sides in a fair-minded, nonpartisan manner. For 
10 purposes of this paragraph, "controversial issue" means an issue that is a point made in an 
11 electoral party platform at the local, state or federal level; or
12 9.  Segregating students according to race or singling out one racial group of students 
13 as responsible for the suffering or inequities experienced by another racial group of 
14 students.
15Sec. 3.  Violations; notice; training.  Resolved: That rules adopted under section 
16 1 must contain clear guidelines for enforcement and provide penalties for violations up to 
17 and including termination.  The State Board of Education shall provide written notice to all 
18 affected teachers, parents and students of their respective rights and responsibilities under 
19 the rules and shall provide at least 3 hours of annual continuing teacher education to 
20 affected teachers to instruct the teachers in the teacher responsibilities required by the rules.
21Sec. 4.  Voluntary adoption of educator's code of ethics.  Resolved: That the 
22 Department of Education request all state professional teacher organizations and unions to 
23 voluntarily adopt an educator's code of ethics and professional responsibility that 
24 incorporates the rules adopted under section 1 and that specifically prohibits teachers in 
25 kindergarten to grade 12 instruction from using the classroom for political indoctrination.
26Sec. 5.  Major substantive rules.  Resolved: That rules adopted under section 1 
27 are major substantive rules as defined by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, 
28 subchapter 2-A.
29SUMMARY
30 This resolve directs the State Board of Education to adopt major substantive rules 
31 prohibiting teachers in public schools from engaging in political, religious or ideological 
32 advocacy in the classroom or from introducing any controversial subject matter that is not 
33 germane to the topic of the course being taught, with penalties for violations up to and 
34 including termination of the teacher.  This resolve requires the State Board of Education to 
35 provide written notice of the rules to all affected teachers, parents and students and for 
36 teachers to receive annually at least 3 hours of continuing teacher education to instruct the 
37 teachers on the rules.  Finally, this resolve directs the Department of Education to request 
38 professional teacher organizations and unions to voluntarily adopt an educator's code of 
39 ethics and professional responsibility that incorporates the rules and that specifically 
40 prohibits teachers in kindergarten to grade 12 instruction from using the classroom for 
41 political indoctrination.30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
