 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 461
H.P. 337 House of  Representatives, February 16, 2021
An Act  To Allow the Reduction of a MaineCare Lien
Received by the Clerk of the House on February 11, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Health and Human Services  pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and  ordered printed pursuant  to Joint 
Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CARDONE of Bangor.

Page 1 - 130LR1220(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA §14, sub-§1, as amended by PL 2007, c. 381, §1, is further 
3 amended by amending the 2nd blocked paragraph to read:
4 The commissioner's right to recover the cost of benefits provided constitutes a statutory 
5 lien on the proceeds of an award or settlement from a 3rd party if recovery for MaineCare 
6 costs was or could have been included in the recipient's claim for damages from the 3rd 
7 party to the extent of the recovery for medical expenses.  The commissioner is entitled to 
8 recover the cost of the benefits actually paid out when the commissioner has determined 
9 that collection will be cost-effective to the extent that there are proceeds available for such 
10 recovery after the deduction of reasonable attorney's fees and litigation costs from the gross 
11 award or settlement  from that portion of the award or settlement attributable to past medical 
12 expenses paid by MaineCare after the pro rata deduction of reasonable attorney's fees and 
13 litigation costs.  In determining whether collection will be cost-effective, the commissioner 
14 shall consider all factors that diminish potential recovery by the department, The portion 
15 of the award or settlement attributable to past medical expenses paid by MaineCare must 
16 be apportioned taking into consideration the full value of the recipient’s claim and the 
17 fraction by which it has been reduced due to factors including but not limited to questions 
18 of liability and comparative negligence or other legal defenses, exigencies of trial that 
19 reduce a settlement or award in order to resolve the recipient's claim and limits on the 
20 amount of applicable insurance coverage that reduce the claim to the amount recoverable 
21 by the recipient.  The department's statutory lien may not be reduced to reflect an 
22 assessment of a pro rata share of the recipient's attorney's fees or litigation costs.  If an 
23 award is established by a court judgment, and the judgment allocates the portion of the 
24 award attributable to past medical expenses, that allocation is binding.  If the commissioner 
25 and a recipient are unable to agree on an allocation of the amount of recovery attributable 
26 to past medical expenses paid by MaineCare, either party may submit the matter to a court 
27 for a determination of the allocation.  The commissioner may, at the commissioner's 
28 discretion, compromise, or otherwise settle and execute a release of, any claim or waive 
29 any claim, in whole or in part, if the commissioner determines the collection will not be 
30 cost-effective or that the best possible outcome requires compromise, release or settlement.
31SUMMARY
32 This bill provides that MaineCare's lien applies to the portion of the award or settlement 
33 attributable to past medical expenses paid by MaineCare.  If the judgment of the court 
34 allocates the portion of the award attributable to past medical expenses, that allocation is 
35 binding.  Otherwise, if the commissioner and the recipient cannot agree on the allocation, 
36 either party may submit the matter to a court for the court to determine the allocation.  
