 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 864
H.P. 632 House of  Representatives, March 8, 2021
An Act  To Protect  Teachers' Privacy While Delivering Remote 
Instruction
Reference to the Committee on Education  and Cultural Affairs  suggested  and ordered  
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative DODGE of Belfast.
Cosponsored by Senator RAFFERTY of York and
Representatives: CROCKETT  of Portland, HEPLER of Woolwich, McCREIGHT of 
Harpswell, MILLETT of  Cape Elizabeth, ROBERTS  of South Berwick, SALISBURY of 
Westbrook, Senator: CURRY of Waldo.

Page 1 - 130LR1302(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง6804-A is enacted to read:
3ยง6804-A.  Remote instruction
41. Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, 
5 the following terms have the following meanings.
6 A.  "Remote instruction" means instruction provided using audio or video transmission 
7 of a teacher or of a classroom with a teacher and participating students.  "Remote 
8 instruction" includes real-time transmissions and recorded sessions.
9 B. "Unauthorized person" means any person who has not been authorized by a public 
10 or private school to participate in remote instruction.
112. Access; unauthorized persons prohibited.  An unauthorized person may not 
12 access, view, listen to, disrupt or participate in remote instruction.  This subsection does 
13 not prohibit incidental viewing of or listening to a session of remote instruction by a person 
14 in the same location as a student located outside the classroom who is participating in the 
15 remote instruction or by a parent or guardian of a student as necessary to assist a student in 
16 accessing remote instruction. A student may access the remote instruction only for the 
17 educational purpose intended by the teacher. 
183. Recording; prohibition. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary and 
19 except as authorized by a public or private school for the purposes of remote instruction, a 
20 person may not make an audio, video or digital recording, including taking a photograph, 
21 of a real-time transmission of remote instruction and may not photograph, record, copy, 
22 distribute or retransmit a recorded session of remote instruction or any part thereof without 
23 the express written consent of the public or private school.
244. Violation.  A person who violates this section commits a civil violation for which a 
25 fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500 may be adjudged.
26SUMMARY
27 This bill prohibits an unauthorized person from accessing, viewing, listening to, 
28 disrupting or otherwise participating in remote instruction for elementary or secondary 
29 school students and provides that a student may access the remote instruction only for the 
30 purpose intended by the instructor.
31 This bill also prohibits a person from making any audio, video or digital recording of 
32 a real-time transmission of remote instruction and prohibits a person from photographing, 
33 recording, copying, distributing or retransmitting a recorded session of remote instruction 
34 or any part thereof without the express written consent of the public or private school.
35 This bill provides that a violation of these provisions is a civil violation for which a 
36 fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500 may be adjudged.27
28
29
30
