 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 1178
H.P. 856 House of  Representatives, March 22, 2021
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Prohibit the Consideration  of a People's Veto at a 
Presidential Primary
Received by the Clerk of the House on March 18, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs  pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2  and ordered printed  pursuant to  Joint 
Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative COREY of Windham.
Cosponsored by Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland and
Representatives: CONNOR of Lewiston,  LIBBY of Auburn, WADSWORTH of Hiram, 
WARREN of Hallowell, WHITE  of Waterville,  Senators: CHIPMAN of Cumberland, 
LUCHINI of Hancock, ROSEN of Hancock.

Page 1 - 130LR0199(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง17, sub-ยง3 is amended to read:
53.  Referral to electors; proclamation by Governor.  As soon as it appears that 
6 the effect of any Act, bill, resolve, or resolution or part or parts thereof has been suspended 
7 by petition in manner aforesaid, the Governor by public proclamation shall give notice 
8 thereof and of the time when such measure is to be voted on by the people, which shall be 
9 at the next statewide or general election, whichever comes first, not less than 60 days after 
10 such proclamation except that such measure may not be voted on at a presidential primary 
11 election.  If the Governor fails to order such measure to be submitted to the people at the 
12 next statewide or general election except for a presidential primary election, the Secretary 
13 of State shall, by proclamation, order such measure to be submitted to the people at such 
14 an election and such order shall be sufficient to enable the people to vote.
15Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
16Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
17 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
18 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
19 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
20 resolution by voting upon the following question:
21 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to prohibit the 
22 consideration of a people's veto at a presidential primary election?"
23 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
24 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
25 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
26 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
27 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
28 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
29 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
30 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
31Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
32 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
33 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
34SUMMARY
35 This resolution proposes a constitutional amendment to prohibit the consideration of a 
36 people's veto at a presidential primary election.35
36
