 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 797
S.P. 67 In Senate,  March  5, 2021
An Act  To Create a Registry To Improve Access to Automated 
External Defibrillators
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator DESCHAMBAULT of York.

Page 1 - 130LR0305(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง88-C is enacted to read:
3ยง88-C.  Registry of automated external defibrillators
4 The director shall establish a registry of publicly accessible automated external 
5 defibrillators, as defined in Title 22, section 2150-C, that are located within the State for 
6 the purpose of assisting a person or a law enforcement officer, firefighter or emergency 
7 medical services person who calls for assistance in an emergency situation.
8 The director may accept grants, funds, equipment and services to establish, operate and 
9 maintain the registry of publicly accessible automated external defibrillators.  The 
10 department shall adopt rules regarding information collected for, maintained by and 
11 released by the registry.  Rules adopted pursuant to this paragraph are routine technical 
12 rules as defined by Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
13SUMMARY
14 This bill requires the Director of Maine Emergency Medical Services within the 
15 Department of Public Safety to establish a registry of publicly accessible automated 
16 external defibrillators located within the State for the purpose of assisting a person or a law 
17 enforcement officer, firefighter or emergency medical services person who calls for 
18 assistance in an emergency situation.  The bill authorizes the director to accept grants, 
19 funds, equipment and services to establish, operate and maintain the registry of publicly 
20 accessible automated external defibrillators and requires the Department of Public Safety 
21 to adopt routine technical rules regarding the registry.
