 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 374
S.P. 160 In Senate, February 10, 2021
An Act  To Allow Veterans,  Active  Duty Service Members and  Their 
Spouses To Apply for Temporary Occupational Licenses and  
Certifications
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on February 8, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  
on Innovation,  Development, Economic  Advancement and  Business  pursuant  to Joint Rule 
308.2 and ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CURRY  of Waldo.
Cosponsored by Representative ZEIGLER  of Montville  and
Senators: BRENNER of Cumberland,  CLAXTON of Androscoggin, LUCHINI of Hancock, 
RAFFERTY of York,  VITELLI of Sagadahoc, Representative:  BAILEY of Gorham.

Page 1 - 130LR1196(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  32 MRSA §59, 2nd ¶ is enacted to read:
3 If a veteran or active duty member of the United States Armed Forces or spouse of a 
4 veteran or active duty member of the United Stated Armed Forces holds a current, valid 
5 occupational or professional license or certification issued by a state or territory of the 
6 United States, that person may obtain a temporary license while completing any 
7 requirements for licensure or certification in Maine by an occupational or professional 
8 licensing board established in Title 5, section 12004-A.  The terms of this section apply 
9 notwithstanding any contrary provision contained in the statutes governing these licensing 
10 boards.
11SUMMARY
12 This bill allows veterans or active duty members of the United States Armed Forces or 
13 spouses of veterans or active duty members of the United Stated Armed Forces who hold 
14 occupational or professional licenses or certifications issued by other states or territories of 
15 United States to obtain a temporary license while completing any requirements for 
16 licensure or certification in Maine by an occupational or professional licensing board.
