 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2022
Legislative Document No. 1859
S.P. 645 In Senate, January 5, 2022
An Act To Build More Sustainable Ambulance Services in 
Communities
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CURRY of Waldo.
Cosponsored by Senators: CYRWAY of Kennebec, President JACKSON of Aroostook, 
LUCHINI of Hancock, MAXMIN of Lincoln, RAFFERTY of York, Representatives: 
MARTIN of Eagle Lake, MEYER of Eliot, PERRY of Calais.

Page 1 - 130LR2456(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  32 MRSA §88, sub-§2, ¶L is enacted to read:
3 L.  The board shall establish a public education program for the purpose of educating 
4 a community, or a group of communities, including public and civic leaders, on the 
5 current capacity and costs of emergency medical services in the State.  The program 
6 must provide members of the public and stakeholders detailed information regarding 
7 alternative strategies and options for meeting emergency medical services needs.
8SUMMARY
9 This bill directs the Emergency Medical Services' Board to establish a public education 
10 program for the purpose of educating a community, or a group of communities, including 
11 public and civic leaders, on the current capacity and costs of emergency medical services 
12 in the State.  The public education program is required to provide members of the public 
13 and stakeholders detailed information regarding alternative strategies and options for 
14 meeting emergency medical services needs.9
10
11
12
13
14
