 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST  SPECIAL  SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 1621
S.P. 514 In Senate, April 28, 2021
An Act  To Reform  Payments to Legislators by Political Action 
Committees
Reference to the Committee on Veterans  and Legal Affairs suggested  and ordered  printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator MAXMIN of Lincoln.
Cosponsored by Senators:  HICKMAN of Kennebec,  President JACKSON  of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 130LR0742(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง1054-B, as amended by PL 2019, c. 21, ยง1 and c. 563, ยง9, is 
3 repealed and the following enacted in its place:
4ยง1054-B.  Payments to Legislators by political action committees
51.  Political action committee requirements.  A political action committee is subject 
6 to the following requirements if a Legislator is a principal officer or treasurer of the political 
7 action committee or is one of the individuals primarily responsible for raising contributions 
8 or making decisions for the political action committee:
9 A.  The political action committee may not compensate the Legislator or an immediate 
10 family member of the Legislator for services provided to the political action committee.  
11 The political action committee may not make payments or distribute, loan, advance, 
12 deposit or gift money or anything of value to or compensate a business owned or 
13 operated by the Legislator or an immediate family member of the Legislator;
14 B.  The political action committee may pay for or reimburse the Legislator for travel 
15 expenses, including the cost of fuel for the use of the Legislator's vehicle, incurred in 
16 the proper performance of the duties of the Legislator and for conducting activities for 
17 the political action committee.  The political action committee may not pay for or 
18 reimburse the Legislator for costs of repairing or maintaining the Legislator's vehicle 
19 or for accessories that are not necessary for the proper performance of the vehicle;
20 C.  The political action committee may pay for or reimburse the Legislator for other 
21 expenses incurred in the proper performance of the duties of the Legislator, for 
22 purchases made on behalf of the political action committee and for travel expenses 
23 associated with volunteering for the political action committee;
24 D.  The political action committee may not pay for or reimburse the Legislator for any 
25 expenses that have been or will be reimbursed by the Legislature or any other source 
26 of payment or reimbursement; and
27 E.  The funds of the political action committee may not be commingled with the 
28 personal funds of the Legislator or any other person or the funds of a business owned 
29 or operated by the Legislator or any other person.
30 Allowable payments or reimbursements for expenses do not include payments from the 
31 political action committee that are determined by the commission to be for the purpose of 
32 personal financial enrichment of the Legislator or an immediate family member of the 
33 Legislator.
342.  Penalties.  A Legislator or political action committee that is found to be in violation 
35 of this section may be subject to a penalty of up to $500 or the amount of the impermissible 
36 payment or reimbursement, whichever is greater.
373.  Rules.  The commission may establish, by rule, record-keeping and reporting 
38 requirements and travel and vehicle reimbursement rates necessary to monitor compliance 
39 with this section.  Any rule established pursuant to this subsection is a routine technical 
40 rule as described in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
Page 2 - 130LR0742(01)1SUMMARY
2 This bill makes the following changes to the laws governing payments to a Legislator 
3 by a political action committee if the Legislator is a principal officer or treasurer of the 
4 political action committee or is one of the individuals primarily responsible for raising 
5 contributions or making decisions for the political action committee.
6 1.  It provides that the political action committee may not compensate an immediate 
7 family member of the Legislator for services provided to the political action committee or 
8 make payments or distribute, loan, advance, deposit or gift money or anything of value to 
9 or compensate a business owned or operated by an immediate family member of the 
10 Legislator.
11 2.  It provides that the cost of fuel for the use of a Legislator's vehicle is a type of travel 
12 expense for which a political action committee may pay for or reimburse the Legislator.  It 
13 prohibits a political action committee from paying for or reimbursing a Legislator for costs 
14 of repairing or maintaining the Legislator's vehicle or for accessories that are not necessary 
15 for the proper performance of the vehicle.
16 3.  It prohibits a political action committee from paying for or reimbursing a Legislator 
17 for any expenses that have been or will be reimbursed by the Legislature or any other source 
18 of payment or reimbursement.
19 4.  It provides that allowable payments or reimbursements for expenses do not include 
20 payments from a political action committee that are determined by the Commission on 
21 Governmental Ethics and Election Practices to be for the purpose of personal financial 
22 enrichment of an immediate family member of a Legislator.
23 5.  It provides that the funds of a political action committee may not be commingled 
24 with the personal funds of a Legislator or any other person or the funds of a business owned 
25 or operated by the Legislator or any other person.
26 6.  It provides that a Legislator or political action committee that is found to be in 
27 violation of the laws governing payments to Legislators by political action committees may 
28 be subject to a penalty of up to $500 or the amount of the impermissible payment or 
29 reimbursement, whichever is greater.
30 7.  It provides that the commission may establish, by routine technical rule, record-
31 keeping and reporting requirements and travel and vehicle reimbursement rates.2
3
4
5
