 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 753
H.P. 558 House of  Representatives, March 5, 2021
An Act  To Increase Transparency in  the Legislature by  Removing 
Certain Freedom  of Access Act  Exemptions
Reference to the Committee on State  and Local Government suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CONNOR of Lewiston.

Page 1 - 130LR1303(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  1 MRSA §402, sub-§3, ¶C, as amended by PL 1991, c. 773, §2, is further 
3 amended to read:
4 C.  Legislative papers and reports until signed and publicly distributed in accordance 
5 with legislative rules, and records, working papers, drafts and interoffice and 
6 intraoffice memoranda used or maintained by any Legislator, legislative agency or 
7 legislative employee to prepare proposed Senate or House papers or reports for 
8 consideration by the Legislature or any of its committees during the legislative session 
9 or sessions in which the papers or reports are prepared or considered or to which the 
10 paper or report is carried over;
11SUMMARY
12 The Freedom of Access Act currently provides that all records, working papers, drafts 
13 and interoffice and intraoffice memoranda used or maintained by any Legislator, legislative 
14 agency or legislative employee to prepare proposed Senate or House papers or reports for 
15 consideration by the Legislature or any of its committees are not considered public records 
16 during the legislative session or sessions in which the papers or reports are prepared or 
17 considered or to which the paper or report is carried over.  This bill removes that provision.
18 The bill retains the provision in current law that exempts from the definition of "public 
19 records" legislative papers and reports until signed and publicly distributed.
