 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 313
S.P. 140 In Senate, February 8, 2021
An Act  To Advance Career and  Technical Education Opportunities 
in Maine
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on February 4, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  
on Education and Cultural Affairs pursuant to Joint Rule  308.2 and ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator WOODSOME of York.
Cosponsored by Speaker  FECTEAU of Biddeford and
Senators: BLACK of  Franklin,  DAUGHTRY of  Cumberland, DIAMOND of Cumberland, 
LIBBY of  Androscoggin,  POULIOT of Kennebec,  Representatives: DUNPHY of Old Town, 
HARRINGTON of  Sanford, WHITE  of Waterville.

Page 1 - 130LR1128(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4 This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5 This bill proposes to create a process that allows all high school students, including 
6 freshmen and sophomores, to explore their interest in career and technical education.  
7 Beginning with a student's freshman year, hours in class will count toward the hourly 
8 requirement to enroll in career and technical education, which is currently 350 hours of 
9 class time.  By allowing so-called "drop-in" students to try out different skill areas, the bill 
10 will enable the State to create a realistic picture of student interest and the programs needed 
11 to meet those interests and to develop a comprehensive program to fulfill workforce needs.
12 The bill will authorize a thorough inventory of classes available across the State and 
13 an analysis of the need for more satellite programs and methods for meeting the goal of 
14 expanding satellite programs in high schools.  The bill will also create a career and technical 
15 education business roundtable, where interested employers would identify their workforce 
16 needs now and in the future, including required skill sets, ensuring that the State's career 
17 and technical education programs fit business needs and providing partners in on-the-job 
18 training. 
19 The bill will address existing barriers to expanding comprehensive career and technical 
20 education programs by developing a process to eliminate half-day career and technical 
21 education, which creates busing costs and interrupts instruction, and instead bring teachers 
22 to career and technical education students.  The bill will also address the relevance of 
23 science, technology, engineering and mathematics, or STEM, courses in the career and 
24 technical education setting. 
25 The bill will recommend changes to the career and technical education certification 
26 process to address the shortage of career and technical education teachers by 
27 acknowledging skills demonstrated in a trade or profession.  
28 Overall, the bill will help to create multiple pathways for students to learn and 
29 demonstrate their knowledge in the career and technical education setting while creating 
30 programs that address the State's critical workforce shortage.
