 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 L.D. 1944 
(Filing No. H-'i(17> 
AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Clerk of the House. 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
130TH LEGISLATURE 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "&4-" to H.P. 1449, L.D. 1944, "An Act To Provide 
the State Harness Racing Commission Greater Efficiency in Rules Enforcement" 
Amend the bill by inserting after the title and before the enacting clause the following: 
'Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and 
Whereas, the State Harness Racing Commission places great value on resolving 
violations quickly when a potential return of a race purse is called for, and a disqualified 
participant may retain a purse garnered unfairly while distribution to the rightful recipients 
may be delayed because of the adjudicatory process; and 
Whereas, this legislation authorizes the State Harness Racing Commission to enter 
into consent agreements to resolve violations of the laws and rules relating to harness racing 
in a more efficient and timely manner; and 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
therefore,' 
Amend the bill in section 1 in subsection 3 in the 3rd line (page 1, line 5 in L.D.) by 
striking out the following: "the alleged violator," 
Amend the bill by adding before the summary the following: 
'Emergency clause. In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
takes effect when approved.' 
Amend the bill by relettering or renumbering any nonconsecutive Part letter or section 
number to read consecutively. 
Page 1-130LR2577(02) 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
ROS 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 COMMITIEEAMENDMENT"A"toH.P. 1449,L.D.1944 
SUMMARY 
This amendment adds an emergency preamble and emergency clause to the bill. The 
bill provides that a consent agreement may be entered into only with the consent of the 
licensee, the alleged violator, the State Harness Racing Commission and the Department 
of the Attorney General. The amendment removes the alleged violator from the list of 
those whose consent is required for the execution of a consent agreement. 
FISCAL NOTE REQUIRED 
(See attached) 
Page 2 -130LR2577(02) 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 03/24/22 feae!. 
130th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 1944 LR2577(02) 
An Act To Provide the State Harness Racing Commission Greater Efficiency in Rules Enforcement 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment Yr' (r{-f CJt) 
Committee: Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Minor net cost impact -General Fund 
Minor revenue increase -General Fund 
'orrectional and Judicial Impact Statements 
This bill may increase the number of civil suits filed in the court system. The additional workload associated with the 
minimal number of new cases filed in the court system does not require additional funding at this time. The collection 
of additional filing fees may increase General Fund revenue by minor amounts. 
Fiscal Detail and Notes 
This bill provides that the State Harness Racing Commission may enter into consent agreements with the licensee's 
consent, the co1mnission and the Department of the Attorney General to resolve violations of the laws relating to 
harness racing. Allowing the use of consent agreements to resolve violations will reduce the number of adjudicatory 
hearings, resulting in minor savings. 
