 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2022
Legislative Document No. 1877
H.P. 1387 House of Representatives, January 5, 2022
An Act To Prohibit Prior Authorization Requirements and Step 
Therapy Protocols for Medications Addressing Serious Mental 
Illness for MaineCare Recipients
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203.
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MADIGAN of Waterville.
Cosponsored by Senator STEWART of Aroostook and
Representatives: CONNOR of Lewiston, COREY of Windham, Speaker FECTEAU of 
Biddeford, PERRY of Calais, TEPLER of Topsham, Senators: BREEN of Cumberland, 
CLAXTON of Androscoggin, President JACKSON of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 130LR2383(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, for residents of the State living with mental illness, life can be a complex 
4 and difficult journey, riddled with significant barriers and obstacles, and for those with 
5 serious mental illness, the right medications enable them to maintain stable, safe and full 
6 lives; and
7Whereas, the State benefits when neighbors and community members living with 
8 serious mental illness are able to access appropriate medical treatment; and
9Whereas, when access to medication is disrupted, individuals living with serious 
10 mental illness may face costly and devastating life consequences, including loss of homes, 
11 jobs and access to children, involuntary commitment, incarceration or loss of life due to 
12 suicide; and
13Whereas, this legislation is needed to immediately remove the requirements for prior 
14 authorization and step therapy for medications used to treat serious mental illness that 
15 create unnecessary and potentially devastating interruptions in patient care and burdensome 
16 bureaucracy for health care providers and that have the unintentional effect of more costly 
17 and catastrophic outcomes; and
18Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
19 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
20 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
21 therefore,
22Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
23Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3174-III is enacted to read:
24ยง3174-III.  Treatment of serious mental illness
251. Definitions.  For purposes of this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
26 following terms have the following meanings.  
27 A. "Serious mental illness" means a mental disorder listed in the edition of the 
28 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders published by the American 
29 Psychiatric Association that took effect October 1, 2021 that results in serious 
30 functional impairment that substantially interferes with or limits one or more major life 
31 activities.  
32 B.  "Step therapy protocol" means a protocol that establishes a specific sequence in 
33 which prescription drugs for a specified medical condition are medically necessary for 
34 a particular enrollee and are covered under a pharmacy or medical benefit by a carrier, 
35 including self-administered and physician-administered drugs.   
362.  Prior authorization or step therapy protocol.  The department may not require 
37 under the MaineCare program prior authorization or a step therapy protocol for prescription 
38 drugs used for the assessment or treatment of serious mental illness.
393.  Rules. The department may adopt rules to implement this section. Rules adopted 
40 pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, 
41 subchapter 2-A.
Page 2 - 130LR2383(01)1Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
2 takes effect when approved.
3SUMMARY
4 This bill prohibits prior authorization requirements and step therapy protocols under 
5 the MaineCare program for prescription drugs used to assess or treat serious mental illness.4
5
