 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 763
H.P. 568 House of  Representatives, March 5, 2021
An Act  To Allow State  Vehicles Assigned  to Maine Emergency 
Management Agency Employees To Be Used for Commuting
Submitted by the Department of  Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management pursuant 
to Joint  Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WARREN of Hallowell.

Page 1 - 130LR0178(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  5 MRSA §7-B, first ¶, as amended by PL 2019, c. 578, §2, is further 
3 amended to read:
4 A state-owned or state-leased vehicle may not be used by any employee to commute 
5 between home and work, except for those vehicles authorized and assigned to employees 
6 of the Baxter State Park Authority and of the Department of Defense, Veterans and 
7 Emergency Management, Military Bureau and Maine Emergency Management Agency as 
8 designated by the Commissioner of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management and 
9 to law enforcement officials within the following organizational units:  Bureau of State 
10 Police; Maine Drug Enforcement Agency; Office of the State Fire Marshal; the division 
11 within the Department of Public Safety designated by the Commissioner of Public Safety 
12 to enforce the law relating to the manufacture, importation, storage, transportation and sale 
13 of all liquor and to administer those laws relating to licensing and collection of taxes on 
14 malt liquor and wine; Bureau of Motor Vehicles; Bureau of Marine Patrol; the forest 
15 protection unit within the Bureau of Forestry; Bureau of Warden Service; Bureau of Parks 
16 and Lands; and the Office of Chief Medical Examiner, the investigation division and the 
17 Medicaid fraud control unit within the Office of the Attorney General.
18SUMMARY
19 This bill allows an employee of the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency 
20 Management, Maine Emergency Management Agency to use a state-owned or state-leased 
21 vehicle to commute between home and work if so designated by the Commissioner of 
22 Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management.
