Good Morning Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Elizabeth Gillen and I am a proud alumnus of the University of 
Maine, Orono, Class of 2020. 
I have written this testimony to share today in hopes of relaying the importance of LD 837 “An Act to Ensure 
College Credit Classes Taken in Secondary School Are Credited at the University Level. ” To tell my story,I 
have to go back to my senior year of high school in 2016. I eagerly signed up to take college-level, advanced 
algebra, through the University of Maine at Presque Isle. The curriculum from UMPI was taught at my High 
School by our algebra teacher in a concurrent enrollment course I was told that taking a college-level math 
course through a University of Maine System would put me ahead the next year, giving me credit equivalent to 
one required math course when I attended my ﬁrst year of college at UMaine. It was also an incredible source 
of preparation for the transition from High School Senior to college freshman. I studied hard, worked closely 
with my instructor, and passed the course, earning a B. 
From freshman to senior year at the University of Maine I had the most incredible life-changing experience, 
applying myself wherever and whenever I could from Student Senate, an internship with Senator Susan 
Collins, and sewing as the President of a campus club. I take great pride in graduating Cum Laude and 
becoming a lifetime member of the Lambda Pi Eta Honor Society. The University of Maine is truly the college 
of my heart. 
Unfortunately graduating in 2020, better known as the year of the pandemic, had its obstacles. Being a college 
senior and trying to ﬁgure out what your future has in store for you while everything around you is uncertain 
was one of the greatest hurdles of my life, so far. As I sat in my academic advisors ofﬁce in Dunn Hall 
planning my ﬁnal course load before graduation, we made a discovery that changed my path to the graduate 
stage at Alfond Arena. The class I had so eagerly taken back in 2016 was not credited as an equivalent math 
course at UMaine, meaning it was only accepted for 3 credits going towards the grand total of credits needed 
to graduate but did not meet the requirement to be one of two math classes needed towards my general 
education courses. I was told that since the University of Maine does not offer college algebra, they would not 
recognize it as a math credit towards my degree. In simplest terms, I took a college level math class through a 
University of Maine system school that was not recognized as a math course at the University of Maine. 
As tears ﬂooded into my eyes, I came to the realization I would not be graduating until I completed an 
additional math class. With my course load completely full from my senior thesis and other required classes 
for a college senior, it seemed as though there was no math class to help me receive the credit needed. 
Thankfully, a brilliant professor in my department offered a 400 level course that was tailored to Mass 
Communications majors like myself that counted as a math credit. Although her class was almost full, I was 
able to secure my spot and complete the course. To my misfortune, this meant I would have to move my 
language requirement course to the summer term to complete my degree pushing my graduation back. I also 
had to pay out of pocket for this ﬁnal course since one class is excluded from receiving any ﬁnancial aid. 
Although to some, pushing my graduation date back to August of 2020 may not seem a big deal, as the ﬁrst 
person in my immediate family to graduate from a 4-year university, this was a devastating blow to 4 years of 
hard work and a full course load each semester. I made it my personal goal to graduate with the classmates I 
had come to know and love but because of a lack of continuity in concurrent enrollment course acceptance 
among the University of Maine System Schools, I graduated late and paid for a an additional course Although 
there is nothing I can do now to change my unfortunate circumstance, I am hopeful my testimony can help 
prevent another student from a similar situation. 
I urge the members of the Education and Cultural Affairs committee to work with Representative Lyman to 
pass this legislation to ensure that each Maine student entering the University of Maine System schools 
receives the credits they have earned.
