Kevin Kinney 
40 Maple Ln 
Knox, ME 04986 
Testimony in support of LD 837 An Act to Ensure College Credit Classes Taken in 
Secondary School Are Credited at the University Level 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, members of the Education and Cultural Affairs committee, 
my name is Kevin Kinney from Knox, ME and I am writing testimony in support of LD 837 An Act to 
Ensure College Credit Classes Taken in Secondary School Are Credited at the University Level. 
Thank you Representative Lyman for bringing this bill forward. In high school, I had the opportunity to 
take a college calculus class that would cover the necessary content of both calculus one and two.I 
passed both courses in high school with flying colors. After being accepted into the University of MaineI 
reached out to the transfer course office in order to have the many college credits I received in high 
school be transferred to my degree program at the University. Once all the credits were reviewed I 
noticed that my two calculus courses were counted as math electives rather than the actual courses 
themselves. I then went to the math department at UMaine to have these classes further reviewed. 
UMaine's math department upon a second evaluation explained that my calculus courses as a whole 
had everything I needed as far as calculus knowledge for the two courses at my university. However, the 
two individual courses did not, saying that "The calculus one course has too much calculus two 
information in it and not enough calculus one in it and vise versa.” However, the Univerity is not allowed 
to review two courses as a whole so gegller of my courses were transferred. This has caused me to 
spend out of my own pocket about Si for two courses I had already taken successfully. Retaking 
these two courses has caused me to waste a lot of unnecessary time and effort since I had to take these 
courses for my major (Mechanical engineering). if these courses were transferred properly l would have 
been able to jump ahead in my program as well as saving myself a lot of money for which I have very 
little. If you pass this bill then many other students would save thousands of dollars and time and could 
come to college already ahead in their programs. 
Thank you for your time and I hope you all will consider voting for this bill, 
Sincerely, 
Kevin Kinney
