Hon. MaryAnne Kinney 
40 Maple Ln 
Knox, ME 04986 
Testimony in support of LD 837 An Act to Ensure College Credit Classes Taken in 
Secondary School Are Credited at the University Level 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
committee, my name is MaryAnne Kinney from Knox, ME and I am here to testify in support of 
LD 837 An Act to Ensure College Credit Classes Taken in Secondary School Are Credited at the 
University Level. 
First I want to thank Representative Lyman and the bi-partisan cosponsors for bringing this bill 
forward. It began as an idea I had when my son, Kevin, and his friend/classmate, Ricky, took 
Calculus I & II at their high school (Mt. View High School in Thorndike) during their 
sophomore and junior years there through Thomas College in Waterville. They both graduated 
with almost 4.0 GPAs in June 2021. Both students went on to study mechanical engineering at 
the University of Maine in Orono. Had they attended Thomas College they would have been all 
set but Thomas did not offer mechanical engineering. When they tried to sign up for Calculus III, 
the issues arose. UMaine would not accept the credits from Mt. View which had been offered 
through Thomas College. The reason my son Kevin received (unfortunately in person rather than 
in writing) was that the two courses did actually cover what was in the requirements for the two 
UMaine courses but individually there was too much Calculus II in the Calculus I class and too 
much Calculus I in the Calculus II class and therefore they were unwilling to accept the courses. 
This is not me picking on any of the institutions mentioned but rather an explanation of why the 
entire system is broken. We are offering free tuition to high school graduates at Maine’s 
community colleges, and at the federal level the President wants to forgive up to $20,000 in 
student loan debt to college students. The real problem stems from the student loan debt and is 
why, even when I was in high school, college credits were offered to high school students at no 
cost to the student. Both Kevin and Ricky had to retake Calculus I and Calculus II once they got 
to UMaine (at full price per credit). It affected their entire course of study moving forward 
because the classes they took in high school were needed for the next levels of classes they were 
both trying to take their ﬁrst semester. This needs to be addressed at the public high school level. 
I understand that this committee/department has little to no jurisdiction over private schools like 
Thomas College but you do have jurisdiction over Mt View High School! What I, and these 
students would like to see happen would be to ensure that the college courses offered in Maine’s 
public high schools will at the very least transfer to the UMaine system including the community 
colleges, USM, and Maine Maritime Academy. In the issue at Mt View with Thomas College the 
high school teacher of the courses wrote his own syllabus and Thomas College had little to no 
input into the order of the curriculum. Maine’s ﬂagship university has a requirement for these 
courses which they will accept and therefore they could easily make that information available to
Maine’s public high schools. Taxpayers are funding these courses in one way or another, let’s 
help ensure our college bound students don’t pay multiple times for courses they have passed! 
The way this bill came out of the revisor’s ofﬁce was not quite how I and my son had intended 
and we would be happy to work with this committee in ways to ensure future students do not 
have the same issue with retaking classes in college with appropriate amendments for whichl 
have attached general language. 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have, 
Hon. MaryAnne Kinney 
Proposed amendment language (for review and adjustment by the revisors ’ ofﬁce of 
course): 
Public high school credit at post secondary public state schools 
University of Maine system, University of Southem Maine, Maine’s community college system, 
and Maine Maritime Academy shall grant full credit to any student who successfully completes a 
course at any eligible institution under this chapter or who successfully completes a course for 
college credit while enrolled as a secondary school student. The course must apply to graduation 
requirements at the eligible institution in which it was taken or be transferable to another eligible 
institution on an equal basis with a course taken by any other student at the eligible institution. 
The post secondary public state schools shall create standards to be used by Maine’s public high 
schools 
/ta'
