Maine Community 
g College System 
TO: Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, Joint Standing Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs 
FROM: Dr. Mercedes Pour, Director of College Access and Secondary Partnerships 
RE: Testimony in opposition to LD 837 
DATE: March 22, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Mercedes Pour, Director of College 
Access & Secondary Partnerships at the Maine’s Community Colleges, and I am providing 
testimony in opposition to LD837 on behalf of the Maine Community College System. 
Importantly, we are not opposed to the primary ethos of this bill. We emphatically agree that 
colleges and universities participating in the state-funded Aspirations program should do 
everything they can to ensure that students understand how their early courses apply to a post- 
secondary program of study and how to determine if those courses will transfer beyond the 
offering institution. Additionally, colleges should not expect renumeration for pre-college level 
courses or courses designed speciﬁcally for the high school population. Early College is an 
incredible opportunity for Maine students to experience college while still supported by the high 
school or career and technical center. And we are fortunate in Maine that for all students— 
degree-seeking, visiting, or early college - there is already widespread cooperation and 
alignment for transfer within the general education core across the university and community 
college systems. 
That said, even if we do everything right - we inform the student and the family, we partner with 
the secondary schools, we design clear and transparent career pathways through early college - 
the reality is a student could still choose to go to a college that doesn’t require or even recognize 
that credit. Courses taken through early college, regardless of modality, are college courses. 
Every post-secondary institution is required by its regional accreditor (in our case NECHE), its 
third-party accreditors for programs such as nursing, and the Title IV rules of the Federal Higher 
Education Act to maintain the integrity of their programs. Each post-secondary program is 
unique and has distinct requirements. So it may be that a given course a student took in high 
school does not ﬁt into or meet the standards for the program that the student will eventually 
matriculate into, and, so therefore, the course may not transfer in as usable credit. 
As an example, an early college student who is in the HVAC program at their local CTE may be 
advised — correctly — to take technical mathematics, as that course is speciﬁcally designed to 
include the mathematics and applied context for that trade. That is the correct choice for the vast 
majority of students. However, if that student has a change of heart and decides to go study
criminal justice at the local four-year partner, it is likely that particular course will neither 
transfer nor meet the criminal justice program’s math requirement. This potential mismatch 
between earned credit and program requirements also occurs beyond early college. It can even 
happen inside a single institution; for instance, if a student changes their major drastically from 
accounting to biology. 
The reality is this non-transfer of eamed credit will probably happen to a very small minority of 
early college students and an even smaller number of credits. Though this is unfortunate, it is 
probably unavoidable. Indeed, limiting courses to those that would be most likely to transfer 
anywhere would cripple our ability to offer college courses at all, and particularly pathways to 
our CTE partners. As we speak, our colleges are working with their regional CTE partners to 
build pathways to actual post-secondary credentials through early college. For any students who 
are questioning their ability to go to college these opportunities can be transformative. 
Nevertheless, participating institutions at both the secondary and post-secondary level must work 
together to continually educate students, parents, and partners about the value and the reality of 
post-secondary course credits. 
Over the last 18 months, the Maine Community College System and the University of Maine 
System, together in partnership with the Maine Department of Education, have convened two 
separate stakeholder groups to examine early college in Maine. The most recent one doing so at 
the speciﬁc request of this committee for the LD 1880 Resolve of last session. We address this 
issue of course transferability and many other issues in both the Maine Early College Equity 
Report and the LD 1880 report. We strongly suggest that any revision to this chapter be informed 
by both of those documents and a holistic discussion about the intent and goals of the Aspirations 
program. 
Thank you for your continued support of Maine’s community colleges and our students.
