'>\
k 
“ :‘"~ ‘I 
va = '\ 
r*‘€.it,3}§iI,.. ‘ 
J firzrﬁ 
UlllVERSl'fY OF MAME SYSIEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System 
Presented by UMS Director of Government & Community Relations Samantha Warren 
Regarding LD 837, An Act to Ensure College Credit Classes Taken in 
Secondary School Are Credited at the University Level, March 22, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs: My name is Samantha Warren and l am the Director of 
Government Relations for the University of Maine System (UMS). 
As you know, Early College allows Maine students to earn credit through Maine’s public universities 
and community colleges while still in high school. These opportunities raise college aspirations, high 
school and postsecondary degree attainment, and college and career readiness — all while reducing 
student debt. While Early College beneﬁts all learners, it most improves outcomes for those who are 
traditionally underserved. For example, postsecondary graduation rates for students of color who 
participated in UMS Early College and then went on to enroll in a UMS university were 33 
percentage points higher than for their counterparts who did not experience Early College. 
Meanwhile, UMS graduation rates for rural students who had participated in Early College were 12 
percentage points higher than for their peers who had not. 
Unlike in many states, public Early College courses are free for Maine students (up to 12 credit hours 
per year). Using targeted State appropriation, the Maine Department of Education reimburses UMS 
for approximately half our credit hour cost, and our universities waive the remainder, and also course 
fees. Enrollment in UMS Early College courses has grown by 41.6% over the past five years, witha 
record 3,924 students from Maine high schools earning credit through our public universities last fall. 
We understand the intent of LD 837 is to require that Early College credit awarded by any 
postsecondary institution in the state, including private colleges, be countedtoward the graduation 
requirements of any UMS or Maine Community College System degree program. 
Currently, Early College credits earned by Maine high school students — whether through 
public or private institutions — do count toward the graduation requirements for UMS 
students. However, in some instances, these courses transfer exclusively as electives, rather than 
courses that satisfy a specific academic program’s degree requirements. 
To determine transferability of Early College credits, Maine’s public universities analyze transcripts 
and additional information, like syllabi, to determine equivalency of learning outcomes. While it is 
rare, a 200-level Organic Chemistry l course offered at one institution (even within UMS) may not be 
equivalent to a course with the same name at another in terms of quality, content and rigor. in those 
cases, the credits earned in high school may transfer and be counted toward the total credits 
required for graduation, but the student may have to take an Organic Chemistry I course at the 
institution through which they are seeking their degree. Additionally, there may be prerequisites that 
require a student to have achieved a certain grade (typically C or higher) to advance into higher-level 
program-specific courses, regardless of whether the lower-level college courses were taken while in 
high school or college. 
UMS is clear with Maine high schools, students and families considering our Early College offerings 
that only the receiving institution can confirm if and how a course will transfer. While we offer 
advising services to help students choose Early College courses intentionally that will best help them 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent- University of 
Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque Isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
advance their college and career aspirations, as long as they meet the statutory eligibility 
requirements and course prerequisites, we must provide them access by law. 
Ultimately, Maine’s public universities have — and must be able to continue to maintain — the 
authority and responsibility to set and uphold the academic standards necessary to confer 
door-opening UMS degrees to our students and meet our institution and program accreditors ’ 
standards for quality. 
We have also worked closely with MCCS to ensure transferability of courses between our two public 
systems and to develop intentional pathways for in-demand Maine careers like early childhood 
education, teaching and nursing that will provide high school students specific sequences of courses 
that both allow them to sample content from programs and majors that they are interested in and 
accrue credits that will meaningful impact their time and savings once they are actually in college. 
UMS and MCCS collaborative Early College programs are held up nationally as a model for both 
equity of student access and outcomes. If the Legislature wants to further strengthen public Early 
College in Maine, we have recently provided this Committee stakeholder-informed 
recommendations including increasing State appropriation — which continues to fall far short of 
need — and removing restrictive summer and semester credit hour caps while upholding annual 
limits. 
Thank you for your support of Maine’s public universities and our students. I welcome your 
questions. 
Page 2 of2
