, A HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Sheila A. Lyman 
14 Lyman Lane. 
Livermore Falls, ME 04254 
Residence: (207) 320-0588 
Sheila Lyman@legislature.maine. gov 
TESTIMONY IN FAVOR OF LD 837 
An Act to Ensure College Credit Classes Taken in Secondary School Are Credited At the 
University Level. 
Senator Rafferty, Rpresentative Brennan, and colleagues on the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee — 
My name is Sheila Lyman and I proudly represent the people of Jay, Livermore and 
Livermore Falls in the Maine House. Thank you for taking the time to listen to my 
testimony in favor of LD 837. The Honorable Mary Anne Kinney requested I submit this 
bill to advocate for high school students that demonstrate the incentive and effort to take 
and successfully complete college credited courses of study. You will be hearing 
testimony from Mrs. Kinney which will include possible language for an amendment, as 
well as a suggested language change for the bill’s title. 
I sincerely appreciate and respect all efforts by the University of Maine system and other 
secondary institutions in recognizing and credting such efforts made by many high school 
students. However, for different reasons, the acceptance of earned credits by the 
secondary institution is not always the end result for some high school student. 
At this time so many of our state leaders, educators, and citizens are advocating for 
supporting our students in obtaining a college education. It only makes sense to give 
earned credit for college approved courses. This is yet another way to aide our students 
who are motivated to challenge themselves academically. As an educator for my entire 
professional life, I was responsible for leading instuction and developing learning 
strategies for specﬁcic curriculum content on a daily basiss. I feel conﬁdenet that any 
approved college level courses meet the established content standards and expectations. 
Furthermore, the use of a variety of assessment and evaluation measures should provide 
ample evidence of successful attainment of course content. 
I understand there are a variety of perspectives that can be offered while considering this 
bill. I feel strongly that recogniztion for their work at this level from our state’s high 
school students should be honored by receiving the earned college credits. 
I sincerely appreciate your consideration of this bill. Promoting lifelong learning and 
encouraging students to challenge themselves academically justiﬁes and welcomes 
acknowledgement of their accomplislnnents with completion of college level courses 
while in high school. 
House District 76 Jay, Livermore (part), & Livermore Falls
