 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce Neither for Nor Against   
L.D. 837 An Act to Ensure College Credit Classes Taken in Secondary School Are Credited at 
the University Level 
Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner and I represent the Maine State 
Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association made up of both large and small 
businesses, here to provide you with my testimony neither for nor against LD 837.
The basis for this bill has high merits. Being able to accomplish postsecondary school 
credits while in secondary school is a great opportunity for many students to reduce costs, 
shorten the time they spend in postsecondary school, and begin careers earlier. The goal of this 
bill is aligned with priorities of the State Chamber and the business community. While we are 
supportive of the bill’s goal, we have concerns that transferring credits across eligible 
institutions may cause significant issues for our institutions when determining what course 
material has been covered and what knowledge the student has demonstrated they have obtained.
We support streamlining this process and giving secondary students as much opportunity 
as possible to gain credit for postsecondary courses. A potential avenue, to accomplish the goals 
of this bill and relieve any additional complications to our public institutions, is to have the 
Education Systems Coordinating Committee create a list of universally accepted classes across 
the system. With a published list for secondary school students to reference they will make better 
informed decisions about what classes are most appropriate. This list could also open additional 
opportunities that students were not aware of. Many Gen Ed courses and 100 level courses are 
transferable, but there are instances where a student leaving secondary education or transferring 
from one institution to another must retake a course. This is not only frustrating for the student 
but acts as a deterrent for others. It is good policy to do what we can to eliminate or reduce these 
occurrences to the best of our ability. We support the mission of this bill but want to ensure that 
fixing the problem is a workable solution for all involved.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.  
  
 
 
