 
 
 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 443  
An Act  to Prohibit Marriage of Any Person Under 18 Years of Age  
Committee  on Judiciary  
 
March 2 , 2023  
 
Alex Goyette, Senior Public Policy Associate  
 
Chair s Carney and Mooney  and Distinguished Committee Members:  
 
The Tahirih Justice Center (Tahirih) is a national legal advocacy and direct services 
organization, founded in 1997, that has assisted over 25,000 survivors of domestic 
violence, sexual assault, h uman trafficking, and other abuses.  
 
Tahirih has unique legal and policy expertise in forced and child marriage as U.S. 
problems. Through Tahirih’s Forced Marriage Initiative, launched in 2011, we have 
worked on several hundred cases involving women and g irls nationwide. Tahirih has also 
compiled extensive research  on child marriage in the United States , including a 50 -state 
statutory compilation, an in -depth report that compares and analyzes all states’ 
minimum marriage age laws and exceptions, a compilat ion of stories from survivors’ of 
child marriage in the United States, and a policy brief reflecting on progress made in the 
national movement to end child marriage since 2016.i     
 
We submit this testimony in strong support of LD 4 43. This important me asure would 
take the simple but critical step necessary to protect children, mostly girls, from the 
harms of child marriage .  
 
Current law provides little protection for minors  facing a forced marriage. Minors age 16 
and 17 can still marry with parental permission, a red flag for organizations like ou rs 
who often work w ith minors who are being f orced into mar riage by their own parents.  
 
The legislature  took an important st ep in 2020 by setting a firm minimum marriage age 
of 16, but while th is effort  to prevent worst -case s cenarios should be lauded the law has 
had no discer nible impact in actually preventing child marriages. The year  before th is 
law went into effect all minors married in Maine were over age 16 any way, and during 
the first year of implementation Maine actually saw more minors marr ied.ii  
 
 
2 
 While some argue that olde r minors may be capable of assum ing the re sponsibilit ies of marriage, the fa ct 
is that until age 18 a child re mains legally a child,  lacking the legal rights an d practical resources neede d to 
effectively resist an unwanted marriage or leave one that becomes abus ive.  
 
LD 443 would take a simple but powerful step to protect Maine ’s children  by making the legal minimum 
marriage age the same as the legal age of adulthood : 18.  
 
Maine is also at increasing  risk of becoming a destination for child marriage  as other states in New 
England take action t o end child marriage. Since Maine ’s previous reform both Massachusetts  and Rhode 
Island have ended child marriage with laws similar to LD 443, and both Vermont and Connecticut have 
legislation moving that would do the same in those states th is year. New Hampshire ’s 2018 re form fell 
short of end ing child marriage  but contains far more proce dural safeguards than Maine ’s. With mid -
Atlantic states also moving to end child marriage – New York, New Jersey, Penn sylvania and Delaware 
have also all done so  – Maine risks  becoming a regional destination for child exploitation  through 
marriage . 
 
The reform  will accomplish three critical commonsense objectives —preventing forced marriages of children; 
ensuring that both parties to a marriage are fully empowered to protect themselves from abuse; and 
preventing early marriages tha t put children at acute risk.    
 
Forced marriages can happen in America for many reasons. They can arise in families and communities where 
parents expect to control the marriage choices of their children, and where marrying young is the norm. Some 
individ uals are pushed to marry to prevent or address sex or pregnancy outside of marriage, or as a cover -up 
for rape or sexual abuse. Sometimes, an abusive dating partner will threaten or coerce an individual into 
marriage. In other cases, sexual predators can t arget, “groom,” and then pressure vulnerable girls to marry 
them, in order to further isolate and control them and to have round -the-clock access to them without fear of 
prosecution. Children can also be compelled to marry when poor, abusive, or neglectful  parents try to offload 
them on others. Some parents even seek to gain financially from such arrangements.  
 
While both adults and children can face forced marriages, children are especially susceptible to coercion, and 
particularly disempowered to advocat e for themselves because of their legal status as minors. Many “escape 
routes” that are wide open to adults are closed, or much more challenging to access, for minors.   
 
Without being able to exercise self -help options minors must rely on systems -help, bu t are often reluctant to 
do so because of mandatory reporting laws on child abuse.  They realize that disclosing abuse could set in 
motion serious consequences over which they would have no control, including that their parents could go to 
jail, or that the y and their siblings could be put into foster care.  
 
 
3 
 Even when minors do make a report, it may get them nowhere, or even make matters worse for them. In 
Tahirih’s experience across the country, child protective services typically fails to investigate forc ed marriage 
allegations, considering it outside their mandate, or does not take appropriate action. This can subject a girl to 
retaliation for reaching out, causing her to rescind her appeal for help and making it more difficult for 
advocates to work with her as perpetrator monitor s her more closely or may expedite the marriage.  
 
In addition to addressing these concerns about forced marriages, LD 443  will ensure that both parties to 
genuine marriages will be on equal legal footing with each other, rather than leaving a minor party at such a 
harsh disadvantage in the relationship.   
 
The bill will also spare girls from the domino effects of marrying und er age 18, which can dramatically 
heighten their vulnerability to abuse. Up to 80% of marriages involving someone under age 18 end in divorce, 
and teen mothers who marry and later divorce can be made worse -off long -term —more than twice as likely to 
live in  future poverty —than teen mothers who do not marry.  
 
Women who marry as teens are also more likely to have more children overall and to do so more quickly, to 
drop out of school, to have fewer work opportunities, and to wind up poor. They also experience more 
medical and mental health problems, both short - and long -term.iii All this can increase their dependence, and 
limit their options in the event of divorce or domestic violence.  
 
In sum, there are significant child -protection concerns inherent to every child marriage. Maine ’s current law 
on minimum marriage age does  not do enough to prevent these harms.  
 
There is a rapidly growing national movement to overhaul antiquated minimum marriage age laws that p ut 
children at risk. Since 2016, seven states have ended child marriage entirely: Delaware, New Jersey, New York, 
Pennsylvania, Minnesota, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts.   
 
Several other states also have pending bills that, like LD 443 , would ban all marriage under age 18. Maine  
should assert its place as a leader in this historic movement by taking swift action  now to advance this bill.   
 
We respectfully urge the Committee to support  LD 443  to end child marriage in Maine . 
 
 
 
 
 
i A full copy of Tahirih’s 50 -state report, along with other resources, is available at www.tahirih.org/childmarriagepolicy .  
 
ii Tahirih gathered  pre- and post -reform data from 16 states that limited, but did  not end, chi ld marriage since 2016  and 
summarized the findings in our report Comparing Compromises . Maine ’s reform was the only on e that did not show a decrease 
 
4 
  
in the number of children marrie d after reform was passe d, and in fact that number actual ly increased s lightly. The full report is 
available at https://www.tahirih.org/wp -content/uploads/2023/01/Comparing -Compromises -Final.pdf   
 
iii See specific statistics and sources cited in Tahirih Justice Center, “Child Marriage Poses Serious Risks to Children,” available  at 
www.tahirih.org/childmarriagepolicy .   
 
