Dear Representative O'Connell,    Thank you for taking the time to read my testimony.     I recently celebrated my fifteenth wedding anniversary. As I reflect on the last fifteen years, I am full of joy at the life that we have shared and look forward to the next fifteen years. We have built a life in a small rural Midwest town, are raising four wonderful children, and are part of a close community. We have been abundantly blessed and I am grateful every day.    This marriage is not my first marriage. I went through hell to get where I am today and would like to share some of my story with you.   At the age of 15 a 43-year-old alcoholic, unemployed, twice-divorced father of two began to prey on me. My mother called the police and pressed charges, he bailed out quickly and got to work to convince my mentally ill mother to let him marry me.    Before this man even made it to court, he convinced my mother that I was the aggressor, that I was troubled, and that only he could save me. He was determined to not only escape any legal consequences for his actions but to also obtain a child bride that he could control and violate without further consequences.    I was then drug to four different states over the course of several weeks. We were finally married just the two of us in a county courthouse. We arrived home with an eviction notice on the door of his trailer. The charges were dropped against him, and I began my sentence which lasted until I could escape several years later.   My education stopped in 8th grade, I had no control over my body, and I could not access a doctor.  I worked as much as I physically could in “under the radar” jobs and still went hungry and couldn’t purchase things like shampoo and toothpaste on a regular basis. By our second anniversary, I began contemplating if I had the will to keep fighting to survive or to end my life. Being a minor, I could not file for divorce or live on my own, death began to look like my only way out.    I couldn’t drive and was completely isolated. He would encourage me to drink alcohol and to use drugs to “chill out”. I knew that if I began using drugs, I would never make it out, and I refused over and over again.    
It took me decades to recover mentally, emotionally, and physically from this traumatic experience. I had to relearn how to be in a normal healthy relationship, to trust again, and to not be terrified all the time.    If I had been married at 16 or 17 the circumstances and consequences would have been the same, only a shorter period of time.    This is the reality of child marriage today. It is used to cover up abuse, traffic, children, and evil in general. The data grossly underrepresents child brides quietly suffering across our nation. We are isolated but we are not invisible, we are hiding in plain sight all around you.    My first marriage was not a marriage, child marriage and these sick excuses for abuse and volition make a mockery of the beauty that is marriage.  Please help us close this loophole so that not one single girl must live through the nightmare that I did.    I am asking today on behalf of myself, my fellow sisters who cannot speak up, and the older church ladies who tell me that even though they married young it’s not the same today. Please raise the minimum age to marry in Main to 18 years of age no exceptions.    Please accept my written testimony regarding LD443    In solidarity,  Genevieve Meyer, MBA   
