Grace Goodwin
Brewer
LD 443
Hello, my name is Grace Goodwin. I am 18 years old and I’m speaking to you today 
from my university dorm just outside of London, England where I am studying 
Politics, International Relations, and French. This is not the first time I’ve addressed 
this committee on the issue of child marriage. I delivered testimony on LD622 about 
this time two years ago. I was a junior at Brewer High School at the time, and that 
very week, I was also a delegate to the 65th Commission on the Status of Women, the
second largest U.N. conference every year, just after the general assembly. 
Working with the U.N. and other teenage feminists around the world sparked my 
interest in this project, after studying international law documents like the Convention
for the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). the Convention on 
the Rights of the Child, and the Beijing Platform for Action. All three of these 
documents outline the marriage of anyone who is not an adult as a human rights abuse
and a practice that must be put to rest. 
Teenagers who marry are 50 percent less likely to finish school, four times less likely 
to finish post-secondary education, 31 percent more likely to end up in poverty, and 
three times more likely to be physically abused and beaten by their spouse. Those 
who marry as minors also have a 23 percent higher risk of heart attack, cancer, 
diabetes, and stroke, and are subject to an increased risk to a host of psychiatric 
disorders. Furthermore, a strong link has been identified between child marriage and 
early pregnancy, which can lead to reproductive complications later in life.
I would like you to think of child marriage as not wearing a seatbelt. I’m sure most of 
us have loved ones with fond memories of riding around without needing to buckle 
up. However, as data emerged on the dangers of not wearing a seatbelt, and even 
though seatbelt wearing became common without legislation, policies were put into 
place to require seat belt wearing because as times change, so too must laws. Will 
wearing a seatbelt prevent serious injury every time there’s an accident? No. Will 
banning child marriage protect everyone from abuse? No. Would people sometimes 
probably be fine without wearing a seatbelt? Yeah, sometimes. Is every marriage 
involving a minor destined to be detrimental. Not necessarily. HOWEVER. It was 
worth it to the state of Maine in 1965 when the seatbelt requirement was enacted to 
take action–an action that some may have inconvenienced some but was ultimately 
worth the insurance that more people could be protected. LD443 serves the same 
purpose. We have the data on why child marriage is dangerous. So why is there 
controversy surrounding a law that’s biggest inconvenience is a year or two of waiting
to enter into a binding commitment that’s meant to be lifelong anyway?
There is superfluous precedent when it comes to the state’s responsibility to create 
legislation that protects children from making life-altering decisions. When it comes 
to letting children be children. The elimination of child marriage is an initiative that 
extends far beyond my hometown of Brewer, or Maine, or even the US. Global 
progress is being made on this issue, so please think carefully and ask yourself, is it 
worth anchoring our beautiful state to the past in the name of tradition. Law requires 
consideration of the bigger picture. Law requires consistency. That is what is being 
asked of you today. 
Thank you, Judiciary Committee, for your time and consideration this evening. I’d be happy to
address any questions or concerns at this time.

