TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF LD443: ENDING CHILD MARRIAGE
SUBMITTED TO THE MAINE COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY | March 2, 2023
Chair Carney, Chair Moonen and Distinguished Committee Members:
AHA Foundation wishes to be recorded in strong support of LD443. AHA Foundation thanksRepresentative O’Connell for his leadership on this bill, and the Committee for prioritizing a hearing onthis important legislation.
LD443 keeps the marriage age at 18 and eliminates a dangerous loophole in the law. While the currentmarriage age in Maine is 18, this loophole allows children ages 16 and 17 to be entered into marriagewith parental “consent”. This loophole became law in  2019-2020, when marriage for children 15 andyounger was eliminated by the legislature. The 2019-2020 law was a good first step, as previouslychildren of any age could be entered into marriage in Maine. However, 100 percent of the childrenmarried in Maine between 2017 - 2019 were 16 or 17 years old. Thus, the 2019- 2020 law failed toprotect 100 percent of the children it was supposed to protect.
The current loophole still seriously endangers minors in Maine. Children who have not yet reached theage of majority can easily be forced or coerced into marriage or trapped in an abusive marriage as, untilthey turn 18, they lack the legal rights of adulthood with which to protect themselves. 16- and17-year-olds face significant legal and practical barriers if they try to leave home, enter a domesticviolence shelter, retain an attorney, or file a legal action. Further, in our experience when a child is forcedto marry, the parents are typicaly the ones forcing the minor. There is no mechanism to ensure that therequired parental “consent” is not in fact parental coercion. Minors being coerced into marriage may fearfamilial violence should they refuse to comply, or they may be physically or emotionally manipulated intoaccepting an unwanted marriage.
Another danger in the law is that in Maine, minors are automatically emancipated upon marriage. Thislikely ends their parents’ financial obligation to them, regardless of the minors’ level of financialindependence. As minors may become financially dependent on their spouses, this can lead to teenhomelessness as 70-80% of teen marriages end in divorce.
AHA Foundation has worked with survivors facing forced and child marriage from across the U.S. andknows full well that these barriers are grounded in reality. The stories we have seen are supported bydata collected by the nonprofit Unchained At Last: 820 children were married in Maine between 2000and 2019. Just between 2017 and 2019, 30 children were married in Maine with 83 percent of them– 25girls –being wed to adult men.

Marriages before 18 have devastating and lifelong consequences for girls. Child marriage destroys girls’opportunities for health, education, economic freedom and increases their risk of domestic violence.Given these factors, one case of child marriage is one too many. Minors at risk must be protected by acomprehensive legal framework that guarantees their human rights. AHA Foundation urges you to voteYESon LD443 to close the existing loophole that failsto protect Maine’s minors and leaves themvulnerable to abuse and exploitation.
About AHA FoundationAHA Foundation is a 501(c)3 nonprofit founded by women’s rights activist Ayaan Hirsi Ali, and is theleading organization working to end honor violence that shames, hurts or kills thousands of women andgirls in the U.S. each year, and puts millions more at risk. We ensure that women and girls of all races,cultures, religions, beliefs and backgrounds who are facing honor violence have a way out, and thatsurvivors get the help they need to thrive.
Since 2010, the Foundation's programs include: 1) compiling data on these crimes, which are notcurrently tracked by U.S. law enforcement or government agencies, 2) publishing reports and articles andorganizing conferences about the continued oppression of women and girls in the U.S., 3) outreach andeducation to expand and strengthen state and national legislation for the protection of women and girls,4) training of law enforcement and service providers, and 5) connecting women and girls in crisis toappropriate services. AHA Foundation has trained over 3,400 frontline service providers on respondingto cases of gender based violence, honor violence and forced marriage, and partnered with Crisis TextLine to create America’s first honor violence and forced marriage helpline.

