Maine Health Care Association 
Testimony of Angela Cole Westhoff, President and CEO 
Maine Health Care Association 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services 
April 4, 2023 at 1:00 PM 
LD 824, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Review 
Reimbursement Rates for Nursing Facilities on Islands 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Angela Westhoff, and I serve as the 
President & CEO ofthe Maine Health Care Association. We represent approximately 200 
nursing homes, assisted living, and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non-Medical 
Institutions or PNMls) across the state. Our mission is to empower members to ensure the 
integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term care in Maine. 
I am here today to provide testimony neither for nor against LD 824, Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Health and Human Services to Review Reimbursement Rates for Nursing 
Facilities on Islands. 
As drafted, this resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services to review its 
reimbursement rates for nursing facilities located on islands in the State and to report its 
findings to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. 
The Principles of Reimbursement for Nursing Facilities (Chapter 101 MaineCare Benefits 
Manual, Chapter Ill, Section 67) outlines the requirements for ”Remote Island Facilities ” on 
pages 72-73. There are specific criteria with which a nursing facility must meet in order to 
qualify for reimbursement for actual allowable costs of services provided. The facility mustbe
located on an island; have less than 30 licensed nursing facility beds; not be physically located 
within a hospital; must not have any licensed residential care facility beds; and must maintain 
MaineCare utilization of 95% or greater. All of these five criteria must be met in order to qualify 
as a remote island nursing facility under the Title XIX program and to be reimbursed for actual 
allowable costs. 
The rate is set annually at the beginning of the facility's fiscal year based upon the latest 
audited cost report. Providers can seek a cost adjustment if they are experiencing cost 
increases in excess of the current interim rate. Any increases are subject to year-end audit and 
are adjusted to actual costs. 
We have no issue with the Department reviewing reimbursement rates for island nursing 
facilities and reporting back to this committee. It is important to note; however, that an 
extensive rate review of nursing home and residential care facilities is already underway. We 
believe that this rate study will demonstrate that significant investments are necessary to 
support and sustain access to long term care for Maine's most vulnerable citizens. Current 
reimbursement rates are not keeping pace with costs of providing care for the sector asa 
whole because reimbursement rates are subject to artificial caps. Remote island nursing homes 
are exempt from such caps and are reimbursed for all allowable costs—something that all 
nursing homes and residential care facilities would benefit from. 
Facilities located in remote island settings have added costs and difficulty with recruitment and 
retention of workers as well as unique housing and transportation needs that should be 
recognized. However, lwould be remiss ifl didn't point out that we have had many 
conversations in this committee room about the ongoing staffing crisis and significant increases 
in cost of providing care, including skyrocketing costs due to inflation and use of temporary 
agency staffing. This rapid rise in costs is shared across the entire sector. We have had 15 
facility closures in the last three years and likely more to come as a result of costs outpacing 
lagging reimbursement. Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments today.
2
