Holly Eaton
District 15
LD 824
Testimony of Representative Holly Eaton introducing
LD 824, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Review
Reimbursement Rates for Nursing Facilities on Islands, Before the Health and Human
Services Committee
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee. My name is Holly Eaton, and I represent House 
District 15, which includes the communities of Brooklin, Deer Isle, Frenchboro, 
Marshall Island, Southwest Harbor, Stonington, Swan’s Island, Tremont, Eagle Island
Township, Isle au Haut and Vinalhaven. I am here today to introduce LD 824, 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Review 
Reimbursement Rates for Nursing Facilities on Islands.
 
In October of 2021 the Island Nursing Home closed its doors, a huge loss to not only 
the entire island community but the Blue Hill Peninsula.  Opened in 1983 the Nursing
Home was originally a 50 bed nursing home.  During it’s tenure it served over 3000 
residents within the 7 peninsula towns, and the loss has been catastrophic. Like many 
other residential care facilities across the state the closure was not due to a lack of 
support but rather directly related to a lack of staffing that intensified in the wake of 
the covid pandemic.  
The need for this legislation came from discussions within my community. We want 
to work any and all angles possible to create a strong re-opening plan for the Island 
Nursing Home.  This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services to
review the reimbursement rates for nursing facilities located on islands and to report 
back to this committee their findings.
The Island Nursing Home is connected to the mainland by a causeway and bridge.  
However we are remote, it is very challenging to secure employees here, and housing,
and in order to successfully reopen we need to be able to attract employees at 
relatively aggressive rates of pay.  In order to do that we are asking for this resolve 
with the hope that our rate of pay would increase.
I also would like to draw your attention to the written testimony of Skip Greenlaw.  
He is a board member who was unable to be here today due to other commitments.  If 
the committee will allow I would be happy to read his testimony.
 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you 
have of me.
