  
Testimony of Jena Jones on Behalf of 
the Maine Council on Aging to the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
In Favor of LD 824 – Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Health and Human Services to 
Review Reimbursement Rates for Nursing Facilities 
on Islands 
 
Submitted on April 4, 2023 
 
Greetings, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. 
My name is Jena Jones, and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at the Maine Council on 
Aging (MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testifying in favor of LD 824. 
Maine is blessed with many vibrant communities, but few places across the state rival the 
cohesion and belonging attributed to our island and coastal communities. These are spaces rich 
in history and hospitality where neighbors help neighbors and multiple generations of 
community members have purpose and value. Life near the ocean seems to take a slower pace, 
happily off the beaten path.  
When the Island Nursing Home in Deer Isle closed in 2021, 60 residents of the facility were 
displaced from their communities, cut off from vital, often lifelong connections. Nursing facility 
residents normally require high levels of care and support, meaning a family member safely 
assuming care of the individual is not likely.  Worker shortages persist across Maine, and Island 
Nursing Home’s staffing challenges were the same as any other facility needing workers but 
finding none.  
However, worker shortages on islands bring different challenges than those on the mainland.  
First, there is a limited number of potential workers on any island, and it’s very hard to hire from 
the island community alone.  With increased housing prices everywhere, lower income workers 
tend to live inland, away from costly coastal communities.  Thus, a worker who works in 
Portland may live in Durham or Windham, and already have a considerable commute to 
Portland.   
Now consider that this same worker would have parking costs, ferry costs, and an extended 
commute to and from the island.  To attract that same worker, the island facility will have to 

cover these costs and pay more to get that worker to decide to commute daily to the island – 
including in winter weather.  
The resolution within LD 824 directs the Department to review reimbursement rates for nursing 
facilities on islands to ensure consistency in rates across facilities. Given the current state of 
Maine’s significant workforce shortages, it is imperative that all aspects of correcting these 
challenges are explored. Though these communities are rich in Maine culture, they are also more 
keenly susceptible to the types of workforce challenges we’re experiencing, and the 
consequences attached to them.  
The MCOA supports the efforts within LD 824 to review reimbursement rates for these facilities 
as it provides an additional measure toward our understanding of the current state of our care 
infrastructure and may provide potential solutions toward ensuring every Mainer that needs care 
receives it.  With that said, Maine is home to other remote/rural communities that experience 
many similar challenges to island communities.  The work done under this bill should explore 
further whether reimbursement rates should take these challenges into account.  For these 
reasons we urge you to support LD 824. 
Thank you.  
Jena Jones 
