  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 4 , 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 824 – Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Review 
Reimbursement Rates for Nursing Facilities on Islands  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information on  LD 824, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and 
Human Services to Review Reimbursement Rates for Nursing Facilities on Islands . This resolve 
directs the Department of Health and Human Services to review its reimbursement rates for 
nursing facilities located on islands in the State and to report its findings to the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services.  
 
The Department has reimbursement methodologies in place for remote island nursing facilities 
under MBM Ch. III Section 67. Rates are currently set via rate reform process and principles 
established last year in P.L. 2021, Ch. 639. The intent behind that law was to establish “… a rate -
setting system for the development and  maintenance of MaineCare payment models … to be 
consistent with efficiency, economy, and quality of care; that are adequate to support MaineCare 
member access to services; and that are equitable and data -driven.”  
 
The Department has recently launched a fu ll nursing/residential care facility rate study.  The study 
aims to accurately establish the cost of NFs/RCFs services in Maine to determine a pathway for 
moving cost settlement methodology to  reimbursement -based fully or partly  on prospective 
payments . The Department intends to  align payment to performance on specified measures to 
promote quality service provision, resident health outcomes, equity, and/or positive resident 
experience of care; and to ensure that reimbursement is adeq uate and equitable . This will include 
study and determination of different factors that may warrant differentiation of rates, including 
geography . 
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If you 
have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert , Director  
MaineCare Services  

