TESTIMONY OF SKIP GREENLAW REGARDING LD 824, RESOLVE, DIRECTING 
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVIKCES DEPARTMENT TO REVIEW REIMBURSEMENT 
RATES FOR NURSING FACILITIES ON ISLANDS 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Skip Greenlaw.  I live in Stonington and am Treasurer 
of the Island Nursing Home (INH) Board of Directors in Deer Isle. I apologize for not 
appearing with you today, but I did want to share some information with you. 
 As you know, our board is attempting to reopen INH with 32 residential care beds.  
During the process of making that decision, we came across some information that 
there was a HHS regulation which allowed for increased reimbursement for nursing 
facilities on islands.  The Department has told us that there are two nursing facilities on 
islands, which receive this increased reimbursement under this regulation-  Chebeague 
island In Casco Bay and Vinalhaven in Penobscot Bay.  However, in a conversation 
with the administrator of the Eastport Memorial Nursing Home, we discovered that that 
nursing facility it not subject to the caps contained in the principals of reimbursement.  It 
turns out that Eastport is an island connected to the mainland by a causeway.  Deer Isle 
is also connected to the mainland by a causeway and a bridge.   
The regulation, as I understand it, is operative if there are less than 30 nursing care 
beds and not part of a hospital.  In that sense INH does not qualify for special 
reimbursement because we will have only residential care beds.  However, the question 
we hope that HHS will address in their review of this regulation is the difficulty in 
employing and paying for staff in remote areas, like Maine islands and would it be 
appropriate to extend that reimbursement to all nursing homes located on islands. 
We hope that you might add an amendment to this resolve asking DHHS to hold two 
public hearings so that interested parties might participate in this discussion. 
Thank you for your attention.  If you have any questions, please contact me at 460-
1260. 
