 
 
Chair,  Innovation,  Development,  Economic  Advancement  and Business  Committee 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee  
State  House  (207)  287-1515  * Fax (207)  287-1585  * Toll Free  1-800-423-6900  * TTY 711 
Chip.Curry@legislature.maine.gov  * legislature.maine.gov/senate                                                                                              
 
Glenn  "Chip"  Curry  
Senator,  District  11 THE  MAINE  SENATE  
131st Legislature  3 State  House  Station 
Augusta,  Maine  04333  
 
 
Testimony of Senator Chip Curry introducing  
LD 366, “Resolve, to Promote Workforce Development by Direction the 
Department of Labor to Create a Financial Impact Calculator and a Workforce 
Impact Calculator”  
Before the Joint Standing Committee Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
March 28, 2023  
  
Representative Roberts and distinguished colleagues of the Joint Standing Committee Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business, I am S enator Chip Curry, and I represent the 26 rural, coastal, and island 
communities of Waldo County. Today, I am pleased to present LD 366, “Resolve, to Promote Workforce 
Development by Directing the Department of Labor to Create a Financial Impact Calculator  and a Workforce 
Impact Calculator.”  
 
The issue at hand is one we’re all familiar with at this point: the "benefits cliff” that creates a significant barrier 
to career advancement for many Mainers. People can fall victim to the benefits cliff when a seemi ngly minor 
increase in earnings can lead to a sudden, and often unexpected, decrease in family support benefits such as 
Mainecare, SNAP benefits, subsidized child care, and others. This all -too-common scenario creates a trap for 
individuals and families ma king it difficult, even irresponsible, for people to pursue new career opportunities, 
ultimately affecting their economic mobility and well -being.  
 
I want to share with you two stories that illustrate the impact of the benefits cliff and how it can trap p eople into 
poverty, reducing their options for increased engagement in the workforce.   I’ve been encouraging the 
educational pursuits of an incredibly bright woman for a number of years: She is a hard worker, an outstanding 
student in public policy, a moth er to a child with high health costs, and receives some family support benefits, 
including MaineCare for her child.    
 
Working here in Augusta, as you know, we become aware of various open positions, and I have often encouraged 
her to apply. Ultimately, s he shared with me that because the starting positions were often relatively low, taking 
a new position would be too risky for her family. The wages would be too little to meet their family's needs but 
just enough to cost them her child’s Mainecare benefit.   
 
A local retailer also shared with me her experience of seeking to promote a strong employee who declined the 
promotion and the subsequent modest raise because, by their calculation, the raise would result in an 
overwhelming reduction in benefits and fa mily resources. This situation both limits the employee's career 
development and costs the employer a really good manager.  
 
Those are just two stories that highlight the challenges faced by many Mainers when navigating the complex 
intersection of career o pportunities and public benefits. The cost of not knowing where the benefits cliffs can be 
detrimental to Maine families, leading to short -term financial hardships and long -term economic instability.  
 

 
 
Chair,  Innovation,  Development,  Economic  Advancement  and Business  Committee 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee  
State  House  (207)  287-1515  * Fax (207)  287-1585  * Toll Free  1-800-423-6900  * TTY 711 
Chip.Curry@legislature.maine.gov  * legislature.maine.gov/senate  I started this journey just trying to help my cons tituents figure out their real situation: Are they truly stuck 
between, on the one hand, making sure their family is safe and has access to health care and, on the other hand, 
pursuing career growth and long -term financial security?  
 
LD 366 aims to addres s this problem by providing increased transparency and resources to help Mainers make 
informed financial decisions as it relates to their career and public benefits. This bill would direct the Department 
of Labor to create two new resources: a Financial Im pact Calculator and a Workforce Impact Calculator.   
 
These tools would offer personalized estimates and simulations on the impact of career changes and labor -
focused policy changes in a user -friendly and easily accessible way on the Department’s website.  
 
The Financial Impact Calculator is designed to help individuals and families make informed decisions when 
deciding whether or not to accept a raise, promotion, or otherwise advance their career. The goal of this tool is 
to provide personalized estimates on the impact of participating in the workforce at different levels, factoring in 
elements such as education, management responsibility, and pay grade.  
 
Importantly, the calculator will allow users to identify the benefits cliffs in their specific circumstances. By 
offering a clear and comprehensive understanding of the potential implications of job changes on their public 
benefits, the Financial Impact Ca lculator will empower Mainers to make well -informed decisions without 
jeopardizing their family's well -being. In addition, the user -friendly interface of the calculator will ensure that 
the estimates provided are easily understandable without requiring spe cialized knowledge, making it easier to 
understand the potential impacts when making these critical financial decisions.  
 
The second tool, the Workforce Impact Calculator, will serve as a valuable resource for policymakers, analysts, 
advocates, and legisl ators to simulate the consequences of proposed changes to benefit programs and tax credits. 
By providing statewide and regional estimates on the impact of labor -focused policy changes, this tool will 
enable policymakers to visualize how adjustments to bene fits and income levels may affect various segments of 
the population.   
 
The Workforce Impact Calculator's ability to adjust calculations based on user -provided changes to benefit and 
income level parameters will allow for a more accurate and tailored anal ysis of the potential impact on different 
income groups. In essence, the Workforce Impact Calculator will help identify where the benefits cliffs are and 
provide valuable insights to create policies that mitigate their effects. By offering a comprehensive 
understanding of the larger community's needs, this tool will play a crucial role in formulating policies that 
promote economic growth and stability for Maine families.  
 
The creation and implementation of these tools, the Financial Impact Calculator and t he Workforce Impact 
Calculator, have the potential to significantly improve the lives of everyday Mainers and drive better -informed 
policy decisions here in Augusta.   
 
For individuals and families, these tools will empower them to make educated choices ab out career 
advancements without the fear of inadvertently jeopardizing their benefits, leading to increased economic 
mobility, financial stability, and overall better quality of life. The newfound confidence in pursuing new career 
opportunities will foster  a thriving workforce that encourages professional growth, ultimately benefiting 
employees, employers, and our state as a whole.   
 
As for policymakers, the ability to analyze and simulate the consequences of proposed policy changes will 
contribute to more  effective and targeted decision -making. This informed approach to policy design will address 
the needs of various income groups and minimize the effects of benefits cliffs, fostering more equity and 
prosperity in our communities.   
 
 
 
Chair,  Innovation,  Development,  Economic  Advancement  and Business  Committee 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee  
State  House  (207)  287-1515  * Fax (207)  287-1585  * Toll Free  1-800-423-6900  * TTY 711 
Chip.Curry@legislature.maine.gov  * legislature.maine.gov/senate  LD 366 starts us on th e path to addressing the benefits cliff problem by empowering individuals, families, and 
policymakers to make informed decisions related to career advancements, public benefits, and workforce 
development. By providing all Maine people, ourselves included, with the necessary tools and information, we 
can help ensure that Maine families and communities thrive.  
 
Thank you for your time, and I’m happy to answer any questions.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Chip Curry  
State Senator, District 11  
Representing the 26 rural, coastal, and island communities of Waldo County  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Chair,  Innovation,  Development,  Economic  Advancement  and Business  Committee 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee  
State  House  (207)  287-1515  * Fax (207)  287-1585  * Toll Free  1-800-423-6900  * TTY 711 
Chip.Curry@legislature.maine.gov  * legislature.maine.gov/senate   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed Amendment to LD 366 
(offered by Sen. Curry ) 
 
Committee: IDEA  
Date: 3-20-23 
 
LD 366 – An Act to Promote Workforce Development  
Amend the title of the bill to read as follows:  
Resolve, to Promote Workforce Development by Direction the Department of Labor to Create a 
Financial Impact Calculator and a Workforce Impact Calculator  
Amend the bill by striking out everything after the enacting clause and before the summary 
and inserting the following : 
Sec. 1.   Financial impact calculator . Resolved: That the Department of Labor shall 
create a financial impac t calculation tool, available for use on its publicly accessible website, that 
provides personalized estimates  on the impact of participation in the workforce at different 
levels , based on input provided by users. The tool must be able to compare an indivi dual’s 
current working circumstances with theoretical changes in circumstance including, but not 
limited to, changes in level of education, management responsibility, and paygrade and must be 
able to provide reference to  current and prospective  financial r esources  and support programs  
available for individuals and families that take the initiative to  pursue career advancement . The 
results provided to individuals using the tool must be clearly understandable without the need for 
specialized knowledge, such t hat individuals can utilize  the estimates provided to assist in 
decision making about their careers.   
In creating th e financial impact calculation  tool under this section , the department shall : 
A. Review similar resources provided by other states or organizations including, but not 
limited to, the Benefit Cliffs Calculator  provided by the National Center for Children 
in Poverty ; 
 
B. Ensure that the tool includes, but is not limited to, financial resourc es and support 
programs that are included in the Benefit Cliffs Calculator provided by the National 
Center for Children in Poverty;  and 
 
C. Consult with relevant agencies and organizations to ensure that the tool is designed in 
consideration of all factors th at may be relevant to estim ating the  impact o f 
participation in the workforce at different levels  for individuals and families, 
including, but not limited to, the following:  
 
(1) Department of Health and Human Services;  
 
(2) Department of Economic and Community De velopment;  
 
(3) Maine State Housing Authority;  
 
Proposed Amendment to LD 366 
(offered by Sen. Curry ) 
 
(4) Maine State Chamber of Commerce;  
 
(5) Maine Equal Justice; and  
 
(6) Maine Children’s Alliance.  
The department may contract with a private entity, that has expertise in creating financial 
impact calculation tools, to design and develop the financial impact calculation tool required 
under this section.  
Sec. 2. Workforce impact calculator. Resolved:  That the Department of Labor shall 
create a tool, available for use on its publicly accessible website, that provides state wide  and 
regional  estimates and simulations on the impact of labor focused policy changes made at the 
state level , based on the inputs provided by individual users.  The tool must be able to adjust its 
calculations based on user provided changes to benefit and income level parameters and provide 
impact calculations for individuals within different income levels  in addition to the calculations 
of statewide and regional impacts . 
In creating th e workforce impact calculation tool, the department shall review sim ilar 
resources already provided by other states and organizations including, but not limited to, the 
Family Resource Simulator  developed for the State of New Jersey and provided by the National 
Center for Children in Poverty , and the Family Resource Simula tor provided by the Kentucky 
Center for Statistics.  
The department may contract with a private entity, that has expertise in creating 
workforce impact calculation tools, to design and develop the workforce  impact calculation tool 
required under this sectio n. 
Sec. 3. Interim report . Resolved : That the Department of Labor shall  provide a report to 
the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business by March 1 , 2024 , on the department ’s progress in developing the calculation tools 
required under section 1 and section 2 . The Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business may introduce legislation for presentation 
to the Second Regular Session of the  131st Legislature based on  contents of  the report.  
SUMMARY  
This amendment  strikes and replaces the bill, which is a concept draft, and directs the department 
of labor to develop a financial impact calculation tool and workforce impact calculation tool, fo r 
use on its publicly accessible website.  
