ll 
MaineE ualjustice 126 Sewall Street q Moriah Geer 
Augusta, Maine 04330-6822 P | p |' S t- Policy Advocate and 
TTY/Voice: (207) 626-7058 X212 eop e 0 my om ‘ens Build HOPE Project Director 
Fax: (207) 621-8148 mgeer@mejp.org 
www.mejp.org 
Good afternoon Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Committee on 
innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business. My name is Moriah Geer, andI 
am a policy advocate at Maine Equal Justice. We are a nonproﬁt civil legal aid organization 
working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. Thank you 
for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 366 ”An Act to Promote Workforce 
Development." / 
We are excited about the idea for this tool and believe that it would be very beneﬁcial to the 
people of Maine who currently need to access the safety-net to be able to meet their basic 
needs. lt would also beneﬁt the development of future policies around the intersection 
between safety-net programs and workforce development. A beneﬁts calculator tool that will 
support people in navigating educational and career pathways and ensure they have a safety 
net to support them as they do so will help individual Mainers, and will also help policy makers 
create more rational policies that truly support people and ease workforce transitions. 
Additionally, we applaud work like this moving forward to better coordinate programs and work 
across state agencies. As you know, many agencies and institutions within state government 
share responsibility for building a workforce system to move families and our state forward. Yet 
these efforts are often fragmented, and don't work together in a complimentary and systematic 
manner to support an identiﬁed common goal. This kind of tool will help families better 
navigate these fragmented systems 
That health care, housing, food assistance, and more are workforce supports is highlighted by 
our state's 10 year Economic Development plan, which prioritizes the ﬁnancial, social, and 
physical well—being of Maine's workforce? The state's 10 year plan seeks to develop talent 
among people currently left out of the workforce; as well as build the infrastructure needed to 
attract and support workers to participate in the economy. These priorities were further 
highlighted in the report of the Governor's Economic Recovery Committee, which made the 
recommendation to improve and coordinate state and federal safety net programs to make 
them more accessible to i\/lainers? 
We understand that there may already be some work happening on such a tool at DHHS and in 
coordination with DOL. While we don't know all of the speciﬁcs of what would be in the tool 
that is currently being contemplated, we appreciate the opportunity put forth in this 
amendment that would allow Maine Equal Justice to put our years of work helping people 
navigate l\/|aine's safety net into use. We can help ensure that the resulting tool is something 
1 https://www.maine.gov/decd/sites/maine.gov.decd/fiIes/inline- ﬁles/DECD_120919_sm.pdf 
Zhttps://www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.gov.future/ ﬁles/inline- ﬁIes/Maine%20ERC%20Report_FlNAL_11242020.pdf
2 
that will truly be beneﬁcial to the individuals that we are all working to support. We would 
especially like to see that the tool that is developed is individualized so that a person can enter 
their own circumstances and see the result that various changes could have on their beneﬁts. 
This would allow them to see how various changes will impact them and enable them to make 
fully informed decisions. 
In my role at l\/laine Equal Justice, I have spent several years working directly with individuals 
who contact us looking for help navigating Maine's often complicated and confusing public 
beneﬁts system. Maine has made several changes to the safety-net over the years that are 
intended to reduce circumstances where an individual ’s support falls aways suddenly once they 
start working, i.e. the "cliff effect." We have a system in place that allows parents receiving TANF 
— which provides modest cash assistance to low-income families to afford basics - to work for 
up to 6 months while experiencing very little change to their TANF beneﬁt. We also havea 
system that allows many parents and most children to keep their MaineCare in place for a year 
or possibly even longer after they have experienced an increase in income. Unfortunately, these 
policy changes are not often clearly understood by the people who could beneﬁt from them and 
therefore aren't taken advantage of as often as they could be. 
I've had probably hundreds of conversations with people over the years where they want to 
take a job or to work more hours but they don't understand that the changes made to the 
safety-net will allow them to do so and still be better off. l'm happy to be able to go over their 
individual circumstances and encourage them to take the job or to show them how they can 
pursue education or training and still receive support. However, only a small number of the 
people receiving help from the safety-net eventually ﬁnd their way to us. The tool proposed by 
this legislation would allow anyone to access information on impact to programs and to input 
various scenarios to ﬁnd out what makes the most sense for them and their families. 
Just yesterday I spoke with a mom who is pursuing a nursing degree but doesn't know how she 
will be able to continue to work as many hours as she is currently working once her clinical 
hours start for school. She had no idea that she could receive support from TANF if she has to 
decrease her work hours due to education. instead, she was contemplating dropping the 
nursing program altogether. ln another recent example, I spoke with a parent who had been 
offered a paid summer internship in her ﬁeld of study that could eventually lead to permanent 
employment. She didn't want to pass up such an opportunity, but also needed to know that she 
could feed her children, keep a roof over their heads, and ensure that they have health care 
while she's doing that. These are both individuals who want to enter Maine's workforce and 
meet important workforce needs but who can't do so without ensuring that their family's needs 
will be met ﬁrst. This tool would be invaluable to these individuals and many more Mainers 
navigating family and workforce needs. 
ln closing, ljust want to reiterate how excited I am about this idea and encourage this 
committee to vote for this legislation. Maine Equal Justice can be available during the work 
session to answer any questions, and l'd be happy to answer any now if you have any. Thank 
you.
