Cheryl  Harkins 
South Portland 
LD 1878
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the 
committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, good day. My name is Cheryl 
Harkins. I am a homeless Advocate with Homeless Voices for Justice. I am on the 
boards of the Statewide Homeless Council and the Continuum of Care. Today I am 
speaking in support of LD 1878. I attend many meetings and a topic of great concern 
to every organization is the current state of mental health in our society.
     It is a sad situation when any child is sentenced to a prison term. The need for 
transition from Long Creek Services it's necessary in my opinion. I live in South 
Portland on the same street as Long Creek. I also have eyes and honestly I have in the 
past had to speak to superiors because of things heard and seen regarding proper 
procedure that ultimately resulted in an unsafe situation. I actually seeked a supervisor
out, explained the situation and it was immediately dealt with. People with specialized
qualifications are needed to deal with trauma, PTSD, learning disabilities and other 
important issues the child needs to learn to confront and put certain issues behind 
them so they may move forward with their lives in a more positive and healthy 
manner.
     As an advocate with Lived Experience I can only encourage the formation of a 
Committee. It is especially critical that you include multiple moved experience people
as well as independent physicians, psychologists and educators. There is a critical 
need to create and continue an open dialogue to create the most positive, productive, 
and encouraging programs. Long Creek development is currently housing under 50 
children. There should be a reasonable expense to do a study and search for proper 
employees who are competent to interact safely, teach and begin to steer the child on 
a path to success. The time for a transition period is now. Please vote ought to pass 
LD 1878. Thank you for the opportunity to share my views.
