Larry Dansinger
Bangor
LD 756
To members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee:
I am writing to the Committee to urge that you vote “Ought NOT to Pass” for both 
LD 756 and LD 799, bills to authorize funding of patrol officers for Penobscot 
County. I urge this vote primarily for two reasons. 
It is my understanding that funds for these patrol officers has already been raised from
towns in Penobscot County. State funding should not be used when local funding for 
local needs is available and is already being used. 
More importantly, a large majority (estimated nationally at 2/3 or more) of those 
arrested and jailed are dealing with either mental health problems or substance use 
disorder, or both, sometimes also poverty, and these are often the real reason why 
individuals are arrested and jailed. Yet, there is (almost)  no funding to address these 
problems. Funding should instead be prioritized to address these issues, so that a 
person is able to get treatment rather than being incarcerated in a jail. 
Otherwise, people are cycled into jail or prison, back out, and back in again, with no 
hope of addressing the real issues causing them to be charged with crimes. 
If public safety is more important than criminal justice (that’s what “criminal justice 
is for—to attempt to improve public safety), that is another reason why we need more 
funding of programs that address the root causes of many crimes—mental health, 
substance use disorder, and poverty. In many cases, individuals who are released from
jail or prison are more likely to be charged, and in some cases commit, crimes as a 
result of their time locked up. That is because there is little to no attempt by the 
criminal punishment system to provide anything beyond punishment. When there are 
stories of people bettering themselves while incarcerated, it is because of their own 
intiative.  The recidivism rate is well over 50% within the next five years after release,
in part, again, because there are few or no options for addressing the underlying 
reasons for any criminal activity. 
The Penobscot County sheriff, Troy Morton, acknowledges that there are individuals 
that need help that is not provided in the jail and belong elsewhere. Yet, there are few,
if any, options to jail in the county. What is needed instead are more facilities, outside
the jail and with no relationship to it, to treat people who want to get better but have 
no place to go for that. This can be concerning mental health, substance use disorder, 
or both. It can also save lives; those with an addiction are more likely to die in jail or 
soon after release. 
If insanity is defined as doing the same thing over and over again and expecting 
different results, than the legislature would be committing an extreme error by 
funding more officers, more arrests, and more expensive lockups in a jail that is 
already overcrowded. Locking more people up has not been shown to reduce crime. 
What is really needed, and I hope this committee will prioritize, is funding to deflect 
and divert those who could be arrested into programs outside the criminal punishment
system that help them to become more productive and less liable for future arrest. In 
many cases, those programs may be handled by other legislative committees, so the 
CJPS committee should oppose funding patrol officers under LD 756 and 799.
If Penobscot County already has funding for the patrol officers, but even if it does not 
or thinks it doesn’t, and the priority for public safety needs to be helping those with 
mental health or substance use disorder issues, then the legislature needs to make that 
message clear. Legislators should earmark these funds—$500,000 and $1.24 
million—where they are needed most: to address those with mental health and 
substance use disorder issues in Penobscot County. It should go on record urging the 
legislature to prioritize funding for those needs, not more patrol officers.
Larry Dansinger
21 Mount Desert Drive
Bangor, ME 04401
(207) 262-3706
larryd@myfairpoint.net
