 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
Ought Not to Pass - LD 756 
 
An Act to Provide Funding for Positions in the Penobscot County Sheriff's Office  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY  
 
March 13, 2023  
 
Senator Be ebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety,  greetings .  My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization  committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to oppose  LD 756 because it would 
expand a fundamentally flawed arm of state government .  
If enacted, this bill would establish an ongoing, annual appropriat ion of  $500,000 to fund 
five new patrol positions in the Penobscot County Sheriffs office. This new expense, and these 
new positions, are entirely unnecessary. Our state expenditures must re flect our values. Over the 
past few years, it has become inescapably clear that we have relied on the policing institutions in 
our country to solve challenges better suited to our healthcare, housing, and educational systems. 
The results have been disastro us for everyone, but especially for nonwhite Mainers, poor 
Mainers, and Mainers with disabilities. Our constitutional values of freedom from unreasonable 
state intrusions, of liberty and dignity, are not advanced by the criminalization of poverty or 
mental  health challenges. Adding new patrol  positions to the Penobscot County Sheriff’s office 
would be a continuation of failed systems .1 Given the opportunities that we have to invest in 
housing and health care, choosing instead to fund new patrol positions is a missed opportunity.  
We urge you to vote ought not to pass . 
 
1 See Callie Ferguson and Erin Rhoda, Penobscot County Jail guards sexually harassed their co -workers 
and kept their jobs , Apr. 1, 2019, BDN, available at 
https://www.bangordailyne ws.com/2019/04/01/mainefocus/penobscot -county -jail-guards -sexually -
harassed -their-coworkers -and-kept-their-jobs/ .  
