 Good afternoon, thank you for coming to talk about this important issue 
today. Before the puritan laws in Massachusetts banning many activities on 
Sunday, including hunting, we hunted for subsistence, to survive. The puritan law 
expanded to Maine when Massachusetts ruled here as its territory. When Maine 
gained its independence, it inherited the Sunday law with it. In the late 1800’s the 
temperance movement sought to civilize Maine hunters, they did this by passing 
Maine’s Sunday hunting law. 
 
 You see, up until then hunters in the Northern areas were harvesting Moose, 
Caribou and Deer and selling the meat and hides out of state. It was seen as 
somewhat barbaric. At the same time the Sunday hunting law was put in place, 
bag limits allowing hunters to harvest one moose, one caribou and two deer were 
also passed in the legislature.  
 
These bag limits have clear biological need, so to prevent over harvesting. We are 
very glad that iterations of these bag limits still exist and support a balance in our 
ecosystem to this day. However, the Sunday Hunting ban was put in place 
because the Temperance Movement felt that civilized men were in church on 
Sunday, not hunting.  
 
That aspect of the law pitted hunters harvesting for survival, and hunters 
harvesting for sport against each other. It is the same conversation we are having 
today. Wealthy landowners dictating statewide law that negatively effects 
working class and poor hunters from utilizing what is sometimes their only day off 
during hunting season. The times may have changed, but this dynamic has not.  
 
This bill strikes a fair balance between landowner relations and the need for 
hunters to be in the woods. Hunters provide assurances of safety by not using 
firearms, while hikers, landowners and non-hunting outdoor enthusiasts let them 
in the woods on Sunday. This bill also supports law enforcement, protecting 
Maine’s natural resources as well as encouraging the next generation of hunters 
to get into the woods. This bill will be similar to what the Passamaquoddy Tribe 
allows and is successful in monitoring and its conservational practices. Keeping 
the working class in mind and bringing them access to provide meat for their 
families I support this bill, and I hope my colleagues in the Legislature will make it 
law. Kmac woliwon Thank you for your time.  
 
