Beverly Cadigan
New Gloucester
LD 1241
Comments/Testimony on LD 626, LD 1166, and LD 1241, (and LD 672):
As a Maine woodland owner (97+ acres), I am opposed to Sunday hunting by any 
group under any conditions!
In 2022 the Maine Legislature directed the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife (MDIFW) to commission a survey of the general public, landowners, and 
hunters regarding Sunday hunting. That survey, conducted by a nationally recognized 
firm, produced a 135-page report at a cost of $71,000 plus $5000 to hire a facilitator 
to manage stakeholder discussions. The results of the survey unambiguously show 
that Mainers do not want Sunday hunting!
So, why is the Legislature NOT listening to the results of the survey that they asked 
for???
Specifically:
•LD 626 (and LD 672) would allow youth (under 16, no minimum age) to hunt on 
Sunday.  The 2022 survey asked this very question and a majority of hunters, the 
public, and landowners all opposed this idea.
•LD 1166 is an attempt to divide landowners and get some form of Sunday hunting 
in the books.  This idea was not part of the 2022 survey, but this same bill has failed 
several times in the past, including as recently as the last legislative session.
•LD 1241 is essentially the State selling the right to hunt on Sunday.  Sunday 
hunting with a bow or crossbow was part of the 2022 survey and a clear majority of 
hunters, the public and landowners opposed the idea. 
Although Sunday hunting in Maine has been reviewed and defeated 39 times in the 
past 45 years, once again “the camel” is trying to get his nose under the tent!!  
Passing any Sunday hunting bill is unacceptable…landowners deserve one day a 
week to fully enjoy their property. Unlike many other states Maine does not require 
hunters or non-hunting recreationalists to get landowner permission to access private 
land or to pay the landowner to use private land…they can access the land and use it 
for free!  This relationship has worked well for a long, long time.  It does not need 
fixing or modification.
Allowing Sunday hunting could and probably would jeopardize this traditional and 
quite functional relationship and with it public access to much private land. 
Thank you for your attention to this very important issue,
Beverly Cadigan
New Gloucester, Maine
bjtcme@securespeed.us
April 6, 2023

