Don Loprieno
Bristol
LD 1241
Sen. David LaFountain, Chair, Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee
Rep. Scott Landry, Chair, Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee   
 Members of the Committee
I ‘m writing in opposition to LD 1241, a bill like the two others being heard today that
seeks to lift the ban against Sunday hunting even though it’s been a Maine tradition 
for many years.. Posted below are several comments culled from a local newspaper by
landowners expressing their concerns about their safety and privacy.
“When I lived in rural central Maine it was not safe to be out in the woods for six 
days a week. Even on my posted land, hunters walked in it without my consent. One 
even built a tree house in one of my trees to shoot from. For god sake, give us 
Mainers at least a reasonably safe Sunday each week to get outdoors.”
“I have no problem with hunting or hunters. My family members are all into every 
kind of hunting. I do like that one day of the week that I can go on my land behind my
house without worrying about a hunter being present. So if they allow hunting on 
Sunday, I will post my land to prohibit hunting all together.”
“My entire family hunts, but I have posted every square inch of my woodlot and 
camp. Why? Because too many times I've been at my camp alone when idiots in 
trucks show up driving up and down my dirt driveway, despite the no trespassing 
signs and a gate. Because I know that they're crossing into no trespassing areas in 
search of their deer. Because I don't want to be killed on my own land like Karen 
Wood, only to have the hunter escape any consequences.”
“Sunday is the only day for peace and quiet in the woods for those of us who love it 
there to feel entirely safe. Make Sunday hunting legal and every person I know who 
owns significant acreage will post it all for these same reasons.”
“My family are members of Maine Woodland Owners (formerly known as SWOAM).
The membership, some of whom are hunters, oppose Sunday hunting. This is the one 
day a week during hunting season that we can safely walk our own land. Posting the 
land with "No Hunting" and " No Trespassing" signs will become the only way we 
can enjoy the freedom of our own property. "Keep Out!"
The above comments are typical and represent widely-held views supported by a 
2022 survey commissioned by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
which found that more than 2/3 of landowners oppose Sunday hunting and may post 
their property if it’s allowed.   That’s a good example of the law of unintended 
consequences that may result if LD 1241 and similar legislation are passed.  Do we 
really want less private land to hunt on?
