 
PO Box 5013  *  Augusta, ME 04330  *  (207) 745-2195 *  info@maiedairy.org  Maine    
Dairy      
Industry      
Association            
In Opposition to 
Monday April 10th 10:30am 
 
L.D. 626 An Act tp Preserve Maine’s Sporting Heritage and Enhance sporting Opportunities for Maine’s 
Youthby Allowing Maine’s Youth to hunt on Sunday 
 
L.D. 1166       An Act to allow Sunday Hunting by Landowners on Their own land 
 
L.D.1241        An Act to allow Sunday hunting with a Bow and Arrow or Crossbow 
 
 
 
 
 
Senator Lafountain,  Representative Landry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and 
Wildflife: 
 
Maine Dairy Industry Association (MDIA) is the agricultural trade group that represents all of the Maine cow dairy 
farms who are shipping milk for drinking or food production.  Most of our farm families also grow the hay, corn, 
alfalfa, and other cover crops that are used to feed their animals on the over 700,000 acres of fields and forests 
directly under their stewardship.    Most of these farm families have a long tradition of allowing public access on 
their farms’ land for hunting, fishing, hiking, snowmobiling, ATC riding, and other outdoor recreational activities. 
 
 
Our farms and the dairy businesses that support those farms provide over 4000 jobs in Maine.  That’s more than 
$150 million in payroll.  We contribute over half a billion dollars ($550,000,000) in annual economic activity – 
primarily, but not exclusively, in rural communities in all corners of the state.  And we contribute over $25 million 
in state and local taxes that pay for schools, roads, local government services, emergency responders and IF&W 
state wardens and biologists.     
 
MDIA supports Maine’s hunting tradition.  Our farmers are part of the large network of private landowners who 
have a history of allowing the public to use their land free of charge.  And whether they allow free access or 
require written permission – either way, our farmers feel a responsibility for those who are present on their land for 
any reason.   
 
Dairy farming is a 365-day-a-year activity.  Cows need to be milked every day, at least twice a day.  Dairy farmers 
do not get large amounts of “down time”.  When there are members of the public on farmlands – especially 
those who are not affiliated or familiar with the farms – the farmer is essentially “on call”.  They do not get 
any rest time.  Except for Sundays.  And now these bills are seeking to take their limited “day of rest” or time 
for alternative activities on the farm away from them.   
 
In reality, public access comes with a big cost for farmers.  People unfamiliar with agriculture or the specifics of 
certain agricultural enterprises can inadvertently cause damage to fields, feed piles or silos, and other natural areas 
by driving or trapsing through ecologically sensitive areas.  There is the cost clean-up involved with items 
abandoned/left behind/dumped on farmland – though the sporting community is not often the culprit of such 
egregious behavior.  There is the potential for liability if a member of the public travels through a hazardous area 

 
PO Box 5013  *  Augusta, ME 04330  *  (207) 745-2195 *  info@maiedairy.org (either due to natural terrain or because of the agricultural equipment or activity going on in that area).  This impacts 
insurance costs and exposes the farm to potential litigation.  If this were another state other than Maine, this alone 
might be a reason for farmers to restrict access.  Thankfully, Maine’s tradition of mutual respect between our 
residents mitigates this potential danger.  However, before and especially during the COVID pandemic, we have 
seen a significant increase in people moving to Maine from other states. And Maine is a sporting destination for our 
unspoiled nature and offers a great opportunity for hunters from around the world to come and recreate or hunt here.  
Not all of them understand the unique historic balance of responsibilities between Maine’s landowner community 
and the sportsmen who use their land.   
 
Bills to expand the hunting seasons to allow Sunday hunting have been around for decades.  Each year the proponent 
of the legislation find new and creative ways to carve out special exemptions for this expansion, like only in certain 
areas of the state, or only on certain types of land, or with special types of permission.  Instead of respecting and 
appreciating the opportunities that are being offered by farmers and other landowners on 6 out of every 7 
days, or 86% of every week, with each creative variation of Sunday hunting, the hunting community is 
pushing for greater control over the activities that will occur on someone else’s land.    These special 
circumstances are unenforceable – as IF&W wardens and law enforcement have testified in past hearings.  And the 
proponents of those special carve-outs are missing the point.  Private landowners in Maine make up a huge 
proportion of the land that is accessible and used for hunting now.  By continuing to push for hunting on 
Sundays, they are biting the hand that feeds their sporting industry.  And farmers are frustrated.   
 
MDIA urges you to vote Ought-Not-to-Pass on LD 626, 1166, and 1241 and allow Maine’s private landowners 
to continue to have 1 day a week when they can be in control of the activities on their own land.   
 
Thank you for your time today and I would be glad to provide additional information or answer any questions at the 
work session.   
 
Heath Miller  
Treasurer 
Maine Dairy Industry Association 
