Hunter .Iellison 
Moose Maine Kids 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. My name is Hunter Jellison, I live in southern Maine and I am 
here to testify in support of LD 1241. I know Sunday hunting is a frustrating issue for this 
committee. You hear these bills every year. I am mentored by a few of the proponents, and 
have seen how frustrated they are as well. I am new to taking part in government, so I just have 
to ask, why? Why is it that other states with the same land access laws have full Sunday 
hunting, and we cant have any? Why is it that I was recently taught that proper governance is 
about compromise, but on this issue there is none? It's confusing to me. In other states it works 
fine, nothing bad happens. It seems like to me this bill is a great compromise. It is supported by 
48% of the general public, 25% feel neutral toward it and only 27% of the state opposes it. That 
seems like the definition of a compromise to me. 
I support this compromise because I can tell you how absolutely difficult it is as a youth 
to get into the woods without Sunday hunting. I recently finished high school and it was very 
hard for me to find time to learn to hunt during the years when learning is all I am supposed to 
be doing. The one day that I had all day to be able to go out with a mentor , I was not allowed 
to- Sunday. As a youth, you are reliant on an adult to be able to take you in the woods. Often 
times with conflicting schedules, bad weather patterns, family responsibilities, Sundays are 
most often the only day of the week where the youth and adult's schedules line up. To deprive 
Mainer’s of the ability to hunt on Sunday is to deprive sons and daughters from learning from 
their parents, deprives parents from the ability to teach these sacred skills to their kids. And it 
can deprive the whole family from a freezer full of venison for the winter. 
This dynamic is so hard for families that even at a young age, I have started to give back 
and try to help kids get in the woods. I volunteer with Moose Maine Kids, we meet parents and 
kids where they are at in order to get them into the woods together. We provide the scouting, 
locations, equipment and experience. The one thing we cannot provide them is more time. You 
can though, you can end the unjust Sunday hunting ban and give parents and kids more time in 
the woods together.
