Jared Bornstein 
Executive Director, Maine Hunters United for Sunday Hunting 
Support for LD 1241 
Good Morning Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and esteemed members of 
the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am here to strongly support LD 1241, a bill that 
would allow bow and crossbow hunting on Sundays that polls 48% to 27%- a clear winner with 
the public. As you have heard, Maine is one of two states in the US that do not allow some form 
of Sunday hunting. After some research, I have realized that Maine and Massachusetts are 
some of the only municipalities in the world that do not have some form of Sunday hunting. We 
are an extreme anomaly. The environment here, the attitudes toward these bills and the 
reticence of the legislature to pass them had me feeling isolated and like I was the controversial 
aspect in this dynamic. But in reality, it is quite the opposite. In the macro view, the only 
controversial aspects of this longwinded discussion are the ban on Sunday hunting and those 
who avidly support it. 
So why do we have it? The ban advocates have long suggested that it is tradition and 
that there was some deal struck 6 generations ago where landowners allow hunters on their 
land and they get a Sunday hunting ban. I ask all of you, were you a party to this deal? I was 
not. My members, many of us are landowners, were not. Times have changed. Many 
landowners have done an about face on their end of the deal sparking the need to revisit the 
terms. 
Not to mention, the assertion that the Sunday hunting ban was some landowner beneﬁt 
Maine gave is categorically untrue. It was part ofthe original blue law, the first in the nation 
actually- stemming from way back in the Mayflower days and the pilgrims colonizing New 
England. Either way, it has become an unreciprocated landowner beneﬁt that Maine has ceded 
to businesses without regard for the hunting community since 1883. I say unreciprocated 
because that's the truth. In other states with similar land access laws they have Sunday hunting. 
I know you hear "Maine has special land access laws, that's why we don't have Sunday 
Hunting." But it is a complete fabrication that Maine is special. You do not have to look any 
further than our neighbor, New Hampshire who has full Sunday hunting as well as the same 
land access laws. 
The new terms to this deal that we are proposing are thoughtful, reasonable and just. 
Hunters are allowed to hunt with bow and crossbow on Sunday, pay a small fee that goes 
towards Land for Maines future, the warden service and outdoor education for youth. To those 
worried about hikers or walkers, please know that Monday through Saturday in October is 
regulated the same way Sundays would be under this bill. If you feel safe walking in the woods 
in October, you will on Sundays as well. I could not find a single instance of a non-hunter being 
injured by a bow or crossbow hunter. Lastly, l have made this commitment already- to combat 
the ”slippery slope" argument; if you pass this bill I will resign my post as executive director of 
MHUSH. I will commit to not personally lobbying for any additional Sunday hunting measures 
until this law has had time to marinate, which I firmly believe that it should have. Thank you,I 
would be glad to answer any questions the committee may have.
