TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 1241 
”An Act to Allow Sunday Hunting with a Bow and Arrow or Crossbow" 
Presented by Representative WARREN of Scarborough. 
Cosponsored by Senator BLACK of Franklin and Representatives: CLOUTIER of Lewiston, DANA of the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe, FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor, JAUCH of Topsham, MASON of Lisbon, ROEDER 
of Bangor, WHITE of Waterville, Senator: President JACKSON of Aroostook. 
DATE OF HEARING: April 10, 2023 
Good morning Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife Committee. I am Judy Camuso, Commissioner of the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in opposition to L.D. 1241. 
This bill allows a person who has an archery license to purchase a Sunday hunting permit for $31 to hunt 
with a bow and arrow or, if the person has a valid crossbow permit, a crossbow. This bill distributes the 
revenue from the sale of the Sunday hunting permit to benefit the Land for Maine's Future Fund and the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Bureau of Warden Service and for the support of youth 
hunter education and experiential programs. The bill also amends the laws to allow a person to be in 
possession of a bow and arrow or crossbow on a Sunday if that person possesses a valid Sunday hunting 
permit. 
While the focus of this bill would expand opportunity for youth deer hunters it allows hunting on 
Sunday. We would like to offer background information on recent work and the outcome of a survey on 
Sunday hunting in Maine for those here that were not a part of the discussion the last few years. 
During the first regular session of the 130"‘ Legislature (2021) two bills were introduced to the iFW 
Committee, LDs 1212 and 1033. LD 1212 proposed to allow Sunday hunting in the Northern portion of 
the state while LD 1033 proposed to allow Sunday hunting on private property with written permission 
of the landowner. The topic of Sunday hunting has been a heated social debate for years and in fact 
some type of Sunday hunting bill has been proposed nearly every Legislative session. 
The Department testified in opposition to both bills maintaining concern that some landowners may 
close their property to hunting and other recreational activities if any form of Sunday hunting were 
made legal. While the agency realizes there could be potential for economic growth and additional
opportunity to hunters, at the same time, we recognize that many landowners prefer to have Sunday as 
a day that they can enjoy their land and allow others an opportunity to recreate. 
The Department is sensitive to the concerns of private landowners. Maine is more than 90% privately 
owned, without the support and generosity of our private landowners, our outdoor recreational 
opportunities and the ability for the Department to manage wildlife populations would be severely 
limited. Our staff, particularly our Landowner Relations Program are committed and focused on the 
needs of landowners, and we are proud of the relationship we have built with many of the landowners 
in Maine. 
Instead of passing the bills as written, the Legislature passed LD 1033 as a Resolve and directed the 
Department to establish a stakeholder group with broad representation in interest and geographies to 
examine Sunday hunting in Maine. The group was also asked to develop and complete a survey relating 
to Sunday hunting, if the department received adequate outside funding to pay for the survey. It then 
directed the department to report the findings and recommendations of the stakeholder group to this 
Committee. The committee was authorized to report out a bill related to Sunday hunting during the 
130"‘ Legislative session. 
The stakeholder group was formed, a neutral person was hired to facilitate the 2 in-person meetings and 
4 ZOOM meetings that were held from early September through December 2021. Members of the 
public were able to listen in and provide comment at the end of the meetings Responsive Management, 
a private research firm was contracted to develop a survey with the stakeholder group. Group members 
provided direct feedback on the issues discussed and helped develop the questions for the survey. 
The survey was conducted by Responsive Management during late December 2021. The following 
statistics were notable outcomes of some of the survey questions: 
The key question in the survey, support for or opposition to allowing Sunday hunting in Maine, was 
asked early in the questionnaire before additional information was provided over the course of the 
survey. 
0 About a third of the general population (34%) support Sunday hunting, while a majority (54%) oppose. 
0 Over two thirds of hunters (69%) support, compared to 23% who oppose. 
1 A third of North/East and Central Region landowners (33% each) support Sunday hunting, while 62% 
and 61%, respectively, oppose. Opposition is very high among South Region landowners, with only 13% 
who support and most (81%) who oppose. 
Landowners were asked, if Sunday hunting were allowed, if they would be more likely to allow 
hunting access, more likely to restrict access, or more likely to allow the same level of access. Of 
particular interest are those who currently allow hunting access but would be more restrictive. 
0 Looking at the landowner sample, 44% of those in the sample who do not currently post their land say 
they would be more likely to restrict access to hunting on their land if Sunday hunting were allowed. 
The permit as described in this bill is considered license revenue under 50 CFR 80, and must be in the 
control of IFW and used only for administration of IFW. Transfer of revenue from these permits to Land 
for Maine's Future would be a diversion of license revenue.
Relevant federal citations are below. 
50 CFR § 80.10 Who is eligible to receive the benefits of the Acts? 
States acting through their fish and wildlife agencies are eligible for benefits of the Acts only if they pass 
and maintain legislation that: 
(a) Assents to the provisions of the Acts; 
(b) Ensures the conservation of fish and wildlife; and 
(c) Requires that revenue from hunting and fishing licenses be: 
(1) Controlled only by the State fish and wildlife agency; and 
(2) Used only for administration of the State fish and wildlife agency, which includes only the functions 
required to manage the agency and the fish- and wildlife-related resources for which the agency has 
authority under State law. 
§ 80.20 What does revenue from hunting and fishing licenses include? 
Hunting and fishing license revenue includes: 
(a) All proceeds from State-issued general or special hunting and fishing licenses, permits, stamps, tags, 
access and use fees, and other State charges to hunt or fish for recreational purposes. Revenue from 
licenses sold by vendors is net income to the State after deducting reasonable sales fees or similar 
amounts retained by vendors. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
