\p\\*\G P0,? 
of /‘Q .'c 
MAINE FARM BUREAU ' 0' 
Maine Farm Bureau Association 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
LD 672, 626, 166, 1241 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife: 
My name is Julie Am Smith and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Fann Bureau Association, 
the state’s largest farmer-run advocacy organization. We have represented the voice of all agriculture in 
Maine since 1951 and I am grateful to have the opportunity to serve as the voice of our farmers today. 
There are over 7000 farms in Maine that provide food, ATV trails, snowmobile trails, recreational, and 
agritourism opportunities for Mainers and visitors to our great state. As stewards of over 1.3 million 
acres of Maine’s open space land, farmers are protecting land from development and allowing wildlife 
to thrive. We have spent centuries supporting hunters and decades strongly opposing Sunday hunting. 
Our farmers, through our grassroots policy development process, voted to oppose Sunday hunting in any 
form and have reafﬁrmed that position annually for over 40 years. We have testiﬁed countless times 
before this committee with a clear and resounding message that farmers do not Want Sunday hunting. 
Maine’s “open land” tradition is unique to our state and has huge economic implications, especially for 
the state’s hunting industry. The opportunity for residents and visitors to use private land for recreation 
is not only economically signiﬁcant, but it is also culturally signiﬁcant. The proposed bills are likely the 
death knell for Maine’s “open land” tradition. Maine’s farmers have graciously shared their land with 
hunters, trappers, skiers, snowshoers, snowmobilers, ATV riders, horseback riders, hikers and any 
member of the public wishing to respectfully use our ﬁelds and forests. Sharing this land requires work, 
as it often means reminding users of boundaries and appropriate use of the land. Sometimes it requires 
repairing damage caused by a recreational user. Farmers have agreed to this additional work and the 
sharing of our land, but in return, we have asked for one day per week that would allow us to be in the 
back ﬁelds with our livestock without needing to be on guard. We ask for one day of rest without 
disruption. 
If the agreement between the farmers and the public were to change to allow for Sunday hunting in any 
form, the State of Maine would lose the 1.3 million acres of farmland that many hunters currently enjoy. 
The simple solution for farmers is to post their land and put a sign on the front door telling hunters not to 
ask for permission. Instead of gaining one additional day of hunting, hunters will lose all opportunity. 
As housing lots increase in our state, the use of farmland for hunting becomes more critical. To lose 
access to farmland would signiﬁcantly damage our hunting industry, our recreational industry, and our 
cultural heritage. 
Maine’s farmers respectfully ask you to oppose any bill that allows hunting on Sunday. Thank you for 
your time and service to the people of Maine. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
4 Gabriel Drive Suite 1, Augusta, Maine 04330 
(207)622-4111 // www.mainefarmbureau.com // info@mainefarmbureaucom
