To whom it may concern regarding Sunday hunting in Maine, 
RE Bill: LD 626, LD 672, LD 1166, LD 1241 
I am writing in regards to the attempt to force Sunday hunting in the state of Maine.  Attempts at this 
have been overwhelmingly turned down by Maine people repeatedly over time.  Maine has a long 
history of its lands being privately owned but generally open to the public for the most part, and it is left 
up to the landowners, at their own cost and effort, to post their lands if they do not want public access.   
More and more Maine lands are getting posted as time goes on, and for good reason, as the 
controversies and issues of public access continue to grow.  We are dealing with a degrading ethic in 
society where people no longer feel gratitude for being able to hunt others properties, but feel entitled 
to it.  There is no respect for private lands, areas are trashed, trails and roads rutted, and there is 
generally a lack of any regard for the landowner.   I see this sort of entitlement rhetoric every day where 
I live, and as a result, more posted signs go up, and I don’t blame them.  I strongly believe that if you 
attempt to push through Sunday hunting in Maine, you will be met with fierce opposition and it will lead 
to more and more land being posted, and quite frankly I hope so.  I am fed up with the constant 
attempts at pushing through Sunday hunting.  
Maine people should have a right during hunting season to have one day a week where they feel they 
can recreate on their own land, or on other open private lands, without the risk of being shot.  You are 
choosing to push for “rights” for one group of individuals over the “rights” of landowners and many 
many others.  You are choosing to provide one group of individuals to essentially have primary access to 
lands for their use 7 days a week while it would eliminate the safe use of that land for non-hunters and 
private land owners entirely during the hunting season.   
I am STRONGLY opposed to Sunday hunting, and I think you would be doing a great disservice the public 
access stronghold that Maine currently has.  I hope you are prepared for the backlash that will invariably 
happen should you force such a measure through.  You will not be doing anyone any favors forcing this 
through.  The hunting constituents may be a vocal group, but they are not the most numerous in the 
state, and if large property owners, who are the ones providing this access, wanted Sunday hunting, it 
would already be in place, but it is not, and for good reason.    
I sincerely hope that you will not permit Sunday hunting in Maine.  You would be making a mistake in 
doing so, and I hope you are prepared for the backlash if you do. 
Sincerely,  
Maggie F. Barr 
Amherst, Maine 
maggiefbarr@gmail.com 
Maggie Barr
Amherst
LD 1241
To whom it may concern regarding Sunday hunting in Maine,
RE Bill: LD 626, LD 672, LD 1166, LD 1241
I am writing in regards to the attempt to force Sunday hunting in the state of Maine.  
Attempts at this have been overwhelmingly turned down by Maine people repeatedly 
over time.  Maine has a long history of its lands being privately owned but generally 
open to the public for the most part, and it is left up to the landowners, at their own 
cost and effort, to post their lands if they do not want public access.  
More and more Maine lands are getting posted as time goes on, and for good reason, 
as the controversies and issues of public access continue to grow.  We are dealing 
with a degrading ethic in society where people no longer feel gratitude for being able 
to hunt others properties, but feel entitled to it.  There is no respect for private lands, 
areas are trashed, trails and roads rutted, and there is generally a lack of any regard for
the landowner.   I see this sort of entitlement rhetoric every day where I live, and as a 
result, more posted signs go up, and I don’t blame them.  I strongly believe that if you
attempt to push through Sunday hunting in Maine, you will be met with fierce 
opposition and it will lead to more and more land being posted, and quite frankly I 
hope so.  I am fed up with the constant attempts at pushing through Sunday hunting. 
Maine people should have a right during hunting season to have one day a week 
where they feel they can recreate on their own land, or on other open private lands, 
without the risk of being shot.  You are choosing to push for “rights” for one group of 
individuals over the “rights” of landowners and many many others.  You are choosing
to provide one group of individuals to essentially have primary access to lands for 
their use 7 days a week while it would eliminate the safe use of that land for 
non-hunters and private land owners entirely during the hunting season.  
I am STRONGLY opposed to Sunday hunting, and I think you would be doing a great
disservice the public access stronghold that Maine currently has.  I hope you are 
prepared for the backlash that will invariably happen should you force such a measure
through.  You will not be doing anyone any favors forcing this through.  The hunting 
constituents may be a vocal group, but they are not the most numerous in the state, 
and if large property owners, who are the ones providing this access, wanted Sunday 
hunting, it would already be in place, but it is not, and for good reason.   
I sincerely hope that you will not permit Sunday hunting in Maine.  You would be 
making a mistake in doing so, and I hope you are prepared for the backlash if you do.
Sincerely, 
Maggie F. Barr
Amherst, Maine
maggiefbarr@gmail.com

