Mike Ricci
Stacyville
LD 1241
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife Committee, my name is Mike Ricci.  I am a landowner in the town of 
Stacyville, Penobscot County, and I am in opposition to LD 1241.
My wife and I own and manage over 700 acres of land in Stacyville.   Currently, the 
vast majority of our ownership is open to the public for a variety of activities 
including hunting, all without requiring landowner permission.   We allow 
snowmobilers to use and maintain a groomed trail and in the past, have allowed an 
ATV trail to cross over our property.   Foragers access our property for mushrooms 
and berries.  We rent out two locations for bear baiting and have allowed trapping for 
furs.  We don't mind as long as people respectfully use our land throughout the year.  
Most of the year, we have no issues other than roadside littering from vehicles, 
however, the open season on deer poses, by far, the greatest amount of issues with 
trespassing both on foot and by vehicle.   Because of past issues with hunters, we 
have posted the area around our house for safety reasons.  Yet, just 3 years ago, we 
had a hunter walk underneath a "No Trespassing" sign just 400' from our house.  He 
then proceeded to hunt our posted property in close proximity of our house.  We were 
thankful that game wardens were able to track this individual down and issue him a 
summons.  If field roads aren't blocked, gated, and/or policed, many hunters feel that 
they have the right to drive vehicles across our property whenever they please.  In a 
wet fall, vehicles rutting up the soft soil can have a disastrous impact on our fields and
roads.   In spite of this, we continue to allow hunting on most of our land.
So what does this all have to do with Sunday hunting?  I hope that I have helped you 
to understand thus far, that we own a signficant amount of land that we allow the 
public to use quite liberally.  I hope that you understand that the vast majority of the 
problems are specifically from deer hunters.  I hope that you understand that we are 
not anti-hunters, we enjoy hunting our farms and woodlands too.  We just feel that 6 
days a week of having hunters driving past our house and land at 5-10 miles per hour, 
and sometimes stopping, from before sunrise and to just after sunset hoping to see a 
hapless deer standing in one our fields is enough .  We feel that 6 days a week of 
parking on and using our land is enough.  We demand that one day/week that we can 
relax and not have to deal with it.
Beyond what we feel personally, 
1)  Recent studies show that the public is not in favor of Sunday hunting either.  
2)  It would also seem, from the record number of deer harvested in 2022, that hunters
have an ample number of days to pursue their sport.  
3)  If this bill, or other Sunday hunting bills pass, you are forcing landowners that are 
not in favor to consider some changes.  Some may do nothing, while others may 
consider prohibiting access to hunters altogether.  Others may consider the 
formulation of hunting clubs or leases which will exclude those that can't afford it.  
Some may consider hunting by permission only and may or may not limit the number 
of hunters.  
4)  I know that if this bill, or other Sunday hunting bills are passed, we will be forced 
to post the entirety of our property-we are hoping that you will not pass this bill.  
Thank you for your time.
