District 94: Part of Lewiston 
 
  
 
Kristen Cloutier 
33 Charles St. 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
 Phone: (207) 807-1637 
Kristen.Cloutier @legislature.maine. gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 
 
April 10, 2023 
 
Testimony of Rep. Kristen Cloutier in support of 
LD 1241, An Act to Allow Sunday Hunting with a Bow and Arrow or Crossbow 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and esteemed members of the Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife Committee. I am submitting this testim on in support of LD 1241, “An Act to Allow 
Sunday Hunting with a Bow and Arrow or Crossbow .” I am a co-sponsor of this compromise bill 
brought forward by Rep. Warren of Scarborough.   For too long, Maine hunters have been denied th e right to hunt on Sunday, a right that the vast 
majority of the United States and the world gran t to their hunters. Main e and Massachusetts are 
some of the only places on earth that still prohibit all hunting on Sunday. Of all the explanations 
for this presented to me, the one I hear most often is that Maine has special land access laws that allow hunters on unposted property. The assertion is that because of this access, we do not allow 
Sunday hunting. You do not have to look far geographi cally to fact check this statement and find 
it incorrect. Our neighbor, New Hampshire, has very similar land access laws and also affords 
their hunters the ability to hunt on Sunday. The same is true for Vermont.   I am a Democrat.  I believe that we should be ma king the lives of working- class folks easier, not 
more difficult. If you need proof, look at our ag enda. It is focused on housing, food security, 
providing resources to those who are going without. Most of Main e’s hunters are working class, 
they are getting into the woods to harvest an anim al to make their budgets work just a little bit 
better. For some, that extra day means a better chance at harvesting a deer. A harvest which 
means that they will have 70 pounds of healthy, co st-effective protein for their families. Meat is 
extremely expensive to buy right now, and that 70 pounds of meat means they will have greater 
financial freedom to heat their homes, buy gas to  get to work, or pay their daycare bill.  
 Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1241.   Thank you for your consideration.  Sincerely,  
 
Rep. Kristen S. Cloutier 
Assistant House Majority Leader 

