Senator Lafountain, Representative Landry and esteemed members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife committee, my name is Tyler Brown and I am speaking today 
in opposition  to LD 1241. “An Act to Allow Sunday hunting with a Bow and Arrow or Crossbow” 
 
Though considered to be based with religious implications, Maine's prohibition of hunting 
on Sunday was enacted in 1883 as one of the earliest conservation laws, nearly two decades 
before the Lacey act of 1900 that ended market hunting. This was at a time when Maine was 
beginning to turn its focus to outdoor hunting and fishing tourism while recognizing the 
unsustainability of unregulated harvesting of wildlife. This law brought the first bag limits, season 
lengths and strengthened enforcement of hunting laws while prohibiting hunting on Sundays. 
 
As North America's Model for Wildlife Conservation evolved so too have the 
perspectives of Maine's law against Sunday hunting. Though there are sound intentions, this bill 
does not take into consideration several negative implications when opening Sundays for all 
hunting seasons. 
 
This first complication concerns migratory waterfowl, whose season lengths are federally 
set with a certain amount of days. Currently Sundays do not count against the number of days 
for Maine, allowing us to begin and end our season on waterfowl longer than that of our 
neighboring states. An example would be that ducks have an allotted season of (60) days for 
both Maine and New Hampshire's seasons. In the north zones of both states New Hampshire 
begins the season on October 2nd and runs to November 30th while Maine begins the season 
on September 26 and runs to December 3rd to account for (9) Sundays. In both states the 
amount of hunting days for snow geese are similar but when accounting for Sundays Maine's 
season is longer on the calendar by over two weeks. These extra weeks can be of great benefit 
to hunters should migrations be early or delayed and should weather be less than ideal, while 
providing opportunities for non-residents to hunt in Maine outside their states seasons.Though 
hunting waterfowl with archery equipment is possible, it isn't very practical yet this bill would 
shorten these seasons on the calendar regardless. 
 
Another complication with this bill is its fee structure that diverts a portion to the Land For 
Maine's Future fund, which is controlled by the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry. Under 50 CFR 80 of the federal Pittman Robertson Act, it is required that all funds 
gathered by states from hunting, fishing, trapping licenses, tag and permit fees must be 
deposited into an account controlled by the state's wildlife management agency. Diverting any 
portion of this fee to another agency would make Maine ineligible to receive Pittman Robertson 
grants resulting in millions of dollars lost to conservation efforts. 
 
While I appreciate the sponsors desire to open Sundays and boost funding for the 
Warden service, youth hunter programs and Land for Maine's future, charging more than the 
cost of a resident hunting license to hunt an extra day a week has some potentially damaging 
ramifications for both hunting opportunity and wildlife conservation efforts here in Maine. I ask 
that you vote “Ought not to pass” on LD1241 so we can continue working towards increasing 
hunting opportunity in Maine for all hunters while preserving the opportunities we currently enjoy 
for all. 
 
Thank you for considering my testimony and your service to our state. 
