A HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
-,»q- .1-:5; (207) 287-1440 
E‘ TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Barbara Bagshaw 
20 Plummet Road 
Windham, ME 04062 
Cell: (207) 679-7305 
Barbara Bagshaw@legislature.maine. gov 
TESTIMONY IN FAVOR OF LD 1841 
An Act to Establish the Hope and Inclusion Scholarship Program 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed colleagues on the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs - 
My name is Barbara Bagshaw and I proudly represent my neighbors in Windham. I 
stand before you to present my bill, LD 1841, An Act to Establish The Hope and 
Inclusion Scholarship Program. The Hope and Inclusion scholarship is an education 
savings account (ESA) program that will allow parents and families to use the state 
portion of their education fund to customize and individualized learning experience 
for their household with qualiﬁed students, in qualiﬁed schools. Education needs to 
bring hope and inclusion to all students and families. It is my hope that LD 1841 can 
do just that. 
Families with an ESA will have access to an account for each of their eligible students 
in their home. New Hampshire, West Virginia, Indiana, Arizona, Florida, North 
Carolina, and Tennessee have active educational savings accounts programs with 
success.
How to qualify for a hope and inclusion scholarship: 
- Students must be under 21 
' They must live in Maine 
~ The student has not completed a secondary education 
With the remarks that academics need to take a backseat in education in our state, this 
is widely concerning for a large portion of families. Parents concerns are being 
disregarded, both locally and at the state level. For many of those parents, there isa 
feeling that they have less and less of a voice in public education and see their rights 
as guardians being eroded. I have heard from more than one of my constituents that 
“this is taxation Without representation. ” 
These parents have concerns about SEL, obscene materials in the schools, and rising 
property taxes. In many cases, school boards around the state have chosen to keep the 
Wildly inappropriate materials after these months-long processes with biased review 
cormnittees. All students, no matter how they identify, need to feel safe and be 
protected. If government run schools are going to disregard the Wishes of numerous 
percentages of families, we need to fmd an equitable, inclusive solution. We need to 
bring hope to these families who feel like they have no hope at all. They need to have 
a voice and have a seat included at the table. 
Thank you, and I would 1 be happy to answer any questions.
