                                                                                                 
 
 
Comments on LD 1909  and LD 1910   
  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
of the  
Maine State Legislature   
 
 
International Bottled Water Association  
and 
Northeast Bottled Water Associatio n 
 
 
Chair s Brenner  and Gramlich , and members of the  Joint Standing Committee on Environment  and Natural 
Resources , the International Bottled Water Association (IBWA)1 and the No rtheast Bottled Water 
Association (NEBWA) 2 appreciate this opportunity to provide comments in support of LD 1910  and in 
opposition to LD 1909 , which  would make changes to the state’s beverage container  deposit program .   
 
IBWA and NEBWA  support sound and viable updates to the state’s beverage container deposit program 
that will improve access for consumers, adapt to the latest technology , and include best practices  from 
industry , which  continues work on these  issues nationwide . Bran d sorting of beverage containers is a 
system past its prime . When there were a limited number of beverage brands  and recycling via a deposit 
program was in its  infancy, this was considered the best way to handle operations. As bottle deposit 
programs have expanded , and as the number of brands has dramatically increased, this has led to 
significant costs for redemption centers and lack of efficiency.  
 
Currently, about 85% of container s sold and redeemed in Maine can be sorted into approximately 50 brand 
boxes . However, the remaining 15% account for over 600 brand s, according to the Department of 
Environmental Protection.  Sorting those brands individually is inefficient and unsustainable.  The bottled 
 
1 The International Bottled Water Association is the trade association representing all segments of the bottled water industry,  
including spring, artesian, mineral, sparkling, well, groundw ater and purified bottled waters. IBWA’s mission is to serve the 
members and the public, by championing bottled water as an important choice for healthy hydration and lifestyle, and 
promoting an environmentally responsible and sustainable industry. IBWA re presents bottled water bottlers, distributors and 
suppliers throughout the United States, including several small, medium and large size companies doing business in Maine . 
 
2 The Northeast Bottled Water Association is a non -profit trade association whose m embers are connected with the bottled 
water industry in some way. Member companies include those engaged in the bottling, packaging, delivery or distribution of 
bottled water as well as those engaged in equipment, supplies and services for the industry. Ge ographically, NEBWA members 
are from throughout the Northeast - New England, New York and New Jersey. NEBWA members are kept updated on the state 
legislatures, learn industry details through seminars taught by trained educators in the field, meet with othe rs who may be able 
to offer solutions to business problems and stay in contact with present and potential customers.  

IBWA and NEBWA Comments on  LD 1909  and LD 1910  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment  and Natural Reso urces  
May 18, 2023  
Page 2 
 
water industry has seen firsthand  how brand  sorting continues to cause issues with safety, fraud, and the 
ability for deposit programs to advance and change with the times , techno logy, and best practices.  
 
LD 1910 provides a new path to a better and more efficient system.  By creating a  cooperative between  
comming ling groups  operated by Maine distributors, sorting by brand would be eliminated . This 
modernized process will allow for sorting by material as opposed to brand thus providing for less overall 
sorting and making  the system cost-effective, timesaving, and effective.  
 
We agree with others  that there is one important amendment that IBWA and NEBWA would like to see in 
a final bill regarding the handling fee. With the recent passage of LD 134 , any addition to the handling fee, 
as is defined in LD 1910, should be del ayed , allowing  distributors time to establish the new commingling 
system . 
 
IBWA and NEBWA have concerns with LD 1909 because it would add programs and fees that would 
continue to burden a system that requires increased efficiencies instead of throwing money at a system that 
struggles with capable operation.  Language that addresses a technology fee and the removal of unclaimed 
deposits from the commingling groups  will lead to an overall cost increase  to distributors and consumers . 
Finally , it is vital that returned materials be delivered back to distributors in an effort to move to a more 
circular system. This material is necessary to manufacture new bottles, and this becomes increasingly 
important with the state’s recycled content mandate . 
 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments in support of LD 1 910 and oppos ition to LD 1909 . 
Please  do not hesitate to contact me with any related concerns or questions.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
James P. Toner, Jr.  
Director of Government Relations  
International Bottled Water Association  
 
