 
Good morning, my name is Jasper Walsh. I am the newest owner and partner of Maine 
Distributors. I have been with the company for 15 years and am proud of the work our team members 
do to deliver beverages and service our retail partners. In addition, we are tasked with the responsibility 
of pick-ups at redemption centers. We stand in opposition to LD 1909 and in support of LD 1910. 
Our company handles beverages of all types, whether it be domestic beer or Maine craft beer 
and wine or water, iced tea, or soda.  Our sales reps meet with customers to generate and order, 
warehouse team picks these orders case by case and loads them on the delivery trucks while most of us 
are sleeping.   
Our CDL drivers deliver the products to our retail customers in our communities the next day.  
An important component of our delivery team after deliveries are completed is to then visit redemption 
centers throughout our massive territory and collect all the empty containers. 
  They do this day in and day out whether it be hot and humid, raining or snowing and often the 
bags the cans are soaking wet. All empty glass bottles are hand stacked on pallets by our team and 
dragged from basements or out of storage containers.  OUR TEAM gets it done, and it’s very costly to do 
so.  If there are redemption centers here in this room today, they can tell you the job our team tackles. 
We know the redemption portion of our business very well.   
It takes multiple teams coordinating the effort to fulfill the beverage distribution and redemption 
responsibility. 
 
• In the delivery department, we pay for our driver’s wages, full benefits, workers comp 
insurance, truck maintenance, fuel, personnel protective equipment, and pick up equipment like 
pallet jacks and hand trucks.  Keep in mind, we have extra drivers on our payroll and extra 
delivery trucks on the road to comply with the bottle bill - we would otherwise not need if just 
delivering our products.   
 
 
 
 
• It is costly and time consuming to get to those areas and service those small redemption centers 
but that is part of our contract, and we get the job done.  After drivers finish their delivery 
route, then must begin their redemption route. Our delivery team will pick up at a minimum 3 
tractor trailer loads of empty containers on a slow day, and 8 to 10 depending on the season on 
a busy day.  A lot of this is done by hand, one bag of cans or pallet of glass bottles at a time, 
from the redemption center to our trucks.    
 
• The work is not done there, however.  Upon returning to our warehouse, they must then unload 
every single bag of cans, one by one, which is often a full tractor trailer load, dragging them off 
their trailer and onto a recycling trailer. I know this well, I am often at the loading docks assisting 
our driver in the tasks.  If you think about the geography of rural Maine, and if there is a 
redemption center in that territory, it is the drivers of Maine Distributors and our co-mingling 
group that retrieves those empty containers.  As we hope you might realize, that adds an 
enormous cost to our operations.  There are many cases where we must handle the same empty 
containers 3 times before it ends up at a processing plant.   
 
• The cost of maintaining this program doesn’t end with the delivery team either. We need 
additional warehouse staff to come in to assist in unloading the redemption bags from the truck.  
We would WELCOME you to come to our facility, you would see hundreds of bags empties being 
drug across our warehouse floor after our delivery drivers returned from what is already a long 
day.  We must employ extra warehouse staff just to help organize this process.  In addition to all 
the same costs we have for drivers, we incur similar costs for our warehouse employees 
including wages, insurance, benefits, pallet jacks and forklifts.  
 
Additionally, we also must allocate considerable space in our warehouses to facilitate the bottle 
bill.   We have rows of empty boxes we must deliver to the redemption centers for their empty 
bottles, space allocated for large bottle containers, over a dozen empty trailers parked in our 
yard so we can load all the empties we collect upon the drivers return to the warehouse.  We 
even need to hire a CDL driver just to move empty and full trailers around at our warehouse.    
 
• Further there are administrative costs as well. In addition to our administrative staff wages, 
benefits etc, there are dozens of hours per week we are required to spend utilizing specialized 
technology that coordinate pick up efforts with all of the redemption centers we service along 
with the administrative costs of invoicing and payment transfer to the redemption centers.  
 
I appreciate the opportunity to provide these details on the commingling operations for Maine 
Distributors. We would love to host you for a visit to see for yourself the excellent work that family-
owned beverage distributors across the state accomplish each day. 
 
