TOWN OF CUMBERLAND
ASSESSING DEPARTMENT
290 TUTTLE ROAD
CUMBERLAND, MAINE 04021
March 16, 2023
Maine Legislature
Taxation Committee
2 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: LD 89, “An act to Clarify Eligibility for Property tax Stabilization for Individuals 65 Years of Age or 
Older”
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation:
My name is John E. Brushwein, and as I am unable to appear before you in person this afternoon, I 
submit the following written comments. I am the Tax Assessor for the Town of Cumberland, which falls 
within the districts of Sen. Teresa Pierce and Rep. Steve Moriarty. I write in support of LD 89.
LD 290, “An Act to Stabilize Property Taxes for Individuals 65 Years of Age or Older Who Own a 
Homestead for at least 10 Years” was enacted May 8, 2022. The first application period was December 1, 
2022. After receiving over 700 applications, the review to determine eligibility revealed an unintended 
consequence of the law. The law states that the applicant must have owned a homestead in the State for at 
least 10 years. 
During application review, it was discovered in at least 4 applications that the name of the surviving 
spouse of the deceased owner of record had not been included in the original deeded conveyance of the 
homestead. The resulting conveyance to the surviving spouse through Probate resulted in “ownership” of 
less than 5 years even though the original deed to the homestead property had been recorded substantially 
longer than the 10 year period. In all of the instances, the spouses had been married at the time of the 
original deed. After consulting with Maine Revenue Services, the determination was made that the 
surviving spouse in these circumstances would not be eligible for stabilization due to the fact that they 
had not been an “owner” within the meaning of the statute for the minimum 10-year period.
It is doubtful, in my view, that the law was intended to exclude the surviving spouse of a long-term 
marriage from the benefits of stabilization. LD 89 is intended to correct this unforeseen circumstance, and 
I urge you to vote “Ought to Pass.”
Thank you for your consideration.
Respectfully,
John E. Brushwein
John E. Brushwein, CMA
Assessor
cc: Rep. Steve Moriarty
      Town Manager William R. Shane

