A "H Molne Municipal 
Association 
60 COMMUNITY DRIVE 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04330-9456 
(207) 62343428 
www.mamun.org 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association (MMA) 
In Opposition to 
LD 89, An Act to Clarify Eligibility for Property Tax Stabilization for Individuals 65 Years of 
Age or Older 
March 16, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in opposition to LD 89 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association ’s Legislative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest. 
While we appreciate the sentiment, the extension of the beneﬁts provided under the 
Property Tax Stabilization law envisioned in LD 89 will increase both the cost of the program as 
well as the burdens placed on assessors who are relied upon to administer the program. 
Municipal ofﬁcials do not have access to the records necessary to determine whether a surviving 
spouse meets the years of marriage provision of the bill, nor does the legislation require an 
individual requesting the beneﬁt to provide proof of eligibility. 
Furthermore, ss estimated by Maine Revenue Services, the cost of reimbursing 
municipalities for 100% of the lost property tax revenues in FY 2024 is $15 million, and will 
increase to $31 million in FY 2025. Over the course of two years, the cost of the program will 
more than double, putting sustainability of funding into question. If the program becomes too 
costly, municipal ofﬁcials fear that the Legislature will revert to the minimum established in 
Maine’s Constitution (Article IV, Part Third, Section 23), providing reimbursement for only 50% 
of the lost property tax revenue. In the absence of full reimbursement, councils and town 
meetings will be left to make difficult decisions regarding budgets and mil rates, which could 
result in shifting additional burdens to non-senior property owners, a reduction in services, or 
both increases in taxes and reductions in services. 
The expense of the current program is too large of a ﬁnancial burden as it is. Further 
increasing the program’s price tag is of great concern. 
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue. If you have any 
questions about our position, please contact me at kdufou1'@memun.org or 592-4038.
