March 16, 2023 
Maine Legislature 
Taxation Committee 
2 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Re: LDs 37, 529, 89 and 130 
Chairpersons Grohoski and Perry, and honorable members of the Taxation Committee: 
My name is Kerry Leichtman. I am a Certified Maine Assessor serving the jurisdictions of Camden, 
Rockport and Rockland. Thank you for the opportunity to address you on four bills today, all of which 
seek to amend or repeal and replace last year’s LD 290, An Act To Stabilize Property Taxes for 
Individuals 65 Years of Age or Older Who Own a Homestead for at Least 10 Years. This well-intentioned 
but ill-conceived Legislation has disrupted the operations of assessing departments throughout the state, it 
invites scams that require very little ingenuity, it is available to the needy and well-to-do alike, and is an 
affront to the fair and equitable sharing of the tax burden among the state’s citizens. 
It has also raised the hopes of the state’s senior and elderly population with the promise of true and 
necessary tax relief, when there is no doubt the program will do such severe ﬁnancial harm it can’t 
possibly be sustained. 
There is no promise in the bill that its stated 100% reimbursement to municipalities would be honored in 
the future, and when it isn’t mil rates will surely rise and along with it, local property taxes, the brunt of 
which will be borne by everyone younger than 65 years old. Maine will become inhospitable to the 
young. Who then will be our tax paying workforce? Maine’s population is already the oldest in the nation. 
When this bill has a had few years to do its real damage, those who can leave will be gone. 
Assessing offices throughout the state were overwhelmed with hundreds, and in some larger 
municipalities, well over a thousand applications; applications that required processing and thorough 
vetting which required hundreds of hours of manpower. Even though the Constitution ’s Article IX 
Section 21 clearly states that municipalities must be compensated for 90% of the costs associated in the 
implementation of Legislation, the bill contained no such compensation mechanism, though it did provide 
$315,242 to Maine Revenue to process and audit the work we were expected to do for free. 
The bill is an affront to the fair and equal sharing of the tax burden as stated in the Constitution where 
Article IX Section 8 very clearly states that, “All taxes upon real and personal estate, assessed by 
authority of this State, shall be apportioned and assessed equally according to the just value thereof. ” 
So with that preamble to setye as a backdrop, I offer comments on the four bills before you today. 
LD 37 eliminates the requirement to reﬁle an application every year and adds the requirement that a new 
application be ﬁled when a program participant establishes a new homestead in the state. If LD 290 is not 
repealed, this bill needs to be enacted. LD 529 is similar to LD 37. The only difference being that in 529 
the beneﬁciary of the stabilization bill is responsible for notifying the municipality of any changes in 
ownership of the estate. I agree with that as well. 
LD 89 wants to extend the eligibility to a surviving spouse if the applicant passes away. It requires that 
the couple be married ten-years before the spouse’s death ~ yet another paper chase for assessing ofﬁces. 
It says nothing about the surviving spouse’s age, so presumably a young widow or widower would be 
eligible as well. If the spouse moves to a new homestead, LD 89 also makes the municipality where
eligibility was ﬁrst established responsible to notify the new municipality of the person’s eligibility. LD 
290 bill is already hard enough to administer. This makes it more so and should not be enacted. 
LD 130 repeals LD 290 and replaces it with a $75,000 homestead exemption for seniors, if they have 
owned the homestead property for at least 10 years. I think a $75,000 homestead represents real property 
tax relief but it needs to be targeted to those who actually need the help, otherwise it too becomes a 
ﬁnancial burden to young Mainers. Means testing to an income level coupled with reimbursement to 
municipalities at 100% for the portion greater than the existing homestead exemption would provide 
targeted property relief at a level that might be affordable to the state. 
There is a ﬁfth bill, sponsored by Representative Terry, that had not been printed in time for today’s 
hearing that is similar to LD 130. I would like to see the best features of both bills combined if and when 
you hold a work session to discuss these bills. 
Thank you for allowing my testimony. 
Keri Leichtma ,CMA 
Asse or 
Camden, Rockpoit, Rockland
