TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 16, 2023 
LD 89 - An Act to Clariﬂ/ Eligibility for Property Tax Stabilization for Individuals 
65 Years of Age or Older 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to testify Neither For Nor Against 
LD 89 - An Act to Clarify Eligibility for Properly Tax Stabilization for Individuals 
65 Years of A ge or Older. 
LD 89 is one of the many bills submitted this year addressing the issues facing the 
State, municipalities, and property taxpayers under the Property Tax Stabilization 
Program. The primary issue addressed by this bill involves the possible sudden 
and sharp property tax increase on a spouse under the age of 65 whose deceased 
spouse’s age and residency qualiﬁed the homestead for enrollment in the program 
for many years. The extent of that property tax increase for the surviving spouse 
will of course depend on many factors — the number of years the homestead was in 
stabilization being of a key factor. The effect of such an increase — and the impact 
on the surviving spouse — will vary widely from situation to situation across the 
State and through the years. Changes to the program to address the timing of 
bringing the property tax to be assessed back in line with actual property value 
brings its own questions and challenges of fair and predictable treatment.
1
Furthermore, the broadening of the scope of the program proposed by this bill adds 
another layer of complexity to a program that is already complicated and 
challenging to administer for the municipalities and for Maine Revenue Services. 
In view of the issues raised by LD 89 and other bills this Session, consideration of 
any change expanding this already complex Property Tax Stabilization program 
should not be addressed — or enacted — in isolation from consideration of other 
changes in the program. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Co1nmittee ’s questions. I would be happy 
to respond to any questions you may have now.
2
