§"‘ ,_3 
_ 
, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
ti 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
207 287-1400 () 
Stephen Moriarty TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
12 Oak Street 
Cumberland, ME 04021 
Phone: (207) 829-5095 
Steve.Moria1ty@legislature.maine.gov 
March 16, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Stephen Moriarty presenting 
LD 89, An Act to Clarify Eligibility for Property Tax Stabilization for Individuals 65 Years of Age or 
Older 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
Steve Moriarty and I represent House District 110 and the communities of Cumberland, Chebeague Island and 
Long Island. I am here before you today to present LD 89, An Act to Clarify Eligibility for Property Tax 
Stabilization for Individuals 65 Years of Age or Older. 
Late in the 130th Legislature, LD 290, “An Act to Stabilize Property Taxes for Individuals 65 Years of Age or 
Older Who Own a Homestead for at least 10 Years,” was enacted and became law without the Governor ’s 
signature. To qualify for stabilization, the homestead and the occupier must be “eligible. ” If an applicant is 
successful, the future property tax responsibility is maintained at the current level. 
The law deﬁnes an “eligible homestead ” as a property occupied by a person who qualiﬁes for a homestead 
exemption for the property tax year in which an application for stabilization is made. 
The law deﬁnes an “eligible individual ” as a person who: is 65 years of age or older, is a permanent resident of 
Maine as deﬁned by statute, and who has owned the property in Maine for at least 10 years. 
Maine Revenue Services has interpreted the law to apply exclusively to the person designated as the owner on 
the deed to the property. 
In my community, instances have come to light in which long-term married persons, for various reasons, at 
some point in the past, have transferred deed ownership of the property to just one of the spouses. As a result, if 
the deed owner passes ﬁrst, the surviving spouse cannot apply for the stabilization beneﬁts. 
The bill before you seeks to eliminate the ambiguity created by LD 290 by providing that the surviving spouse 
of an eligible individual also qualiﬁes for stabilization if the parties been married for at least 10 years prior to 
the death of the deed owner. The bill is intended to extend the same stabilization beneﬁt to the surviving spouse 
of an eligible individual that a surviving joint tenant would enjoy. If the statute is amended, surviving spouses 
not identiﬁed on the deed would not be subject at an advanced age to the annual increases in property tax 
liability. 
District l 10: Cumberland, Chebeague island, Long Island
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions or provide you with any 
information you need in an upcoming work session. 
District I 10: Cumberiand, Chebeague Isiand, Long Island
