M/um; ASSOCIATION or RETiREEs 
;___,-1 
DATE: March 16, 2023 
TO: Senator Nicole Grohoski, Chair 
Representative Joe Perry, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Cormnittee on Taxation 
FROM: Thomas Record 
Vice President, Maine Association of Retirees 
SUBJECT: LD 89, An Act to Clarify Eligibility for Property Tax Stabilization for Individuals 65 Years 
of Age or Older 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee, I am Thomas Record and am Vice 
President of the Maine Association of Retirees (or MAR), a nonproﬁt organization comprised of public service 
retirees including state retirees, retired educators, and retirees from participating local districts. 
MAR supports LD 89 as being in the best interests of our members and thanks Representative Moriarty for 
bringing it forward. 
The Property Tax Stabilization Program was enacted during the l3Oth Legislature and is designed to protectt 
senior citizens who qualify for the Maine homestead exemption from property tax increases. During MAR’s 
regional member meetings in the fall of 2022, we learned that the program was extremely popular with our 
members as the majority had already signed up. 
As currently structured, eligibility for the Property Tax Stabilization Program eligibility is available, upon 
application, for persons who are permanent Maine residents, have qualiﬁed for the homestead exemption for at 
least ten years and who are 65 years old or older. In the case of married couples, only one of the property owners 
needs to be 65 or older. This bill protects an under-65 spouse from loss of program eligibility in the event the 
older spouse dies. 
MAR is ready to participate in work sessions on the bill or to provide whatever other assistance the Committee 
may require. 
CC Rep. Stephen Moriarty 
Leading the Way for Maine Retirees 
280 Maine Avenue, Farmingdale, ME 04344 William H. Laubenstein lll — President 
Telephone Number: (207) 582-1960 Diane M. Bailey ~ Executive Director 
1-800-535-6555 email: MAR@MaineRetirees.org 
(207) 707-1722 FAX wvvw,maineretirees.org
