Testim ony in Opposition to LD 149  
Kerry Leichtman, Assessor  for Camden, Rockport and Rock land 
February 7, 2023  
 
Thank y ou, members of th e Taxation Committee, for the opportunity to address yo u electronically  via 
the Testi mon y Submission  aspe ct of your websi te. 
I am testifying in oppos ition to LD 149. The bill seek s to allow property  held in an irrevocable trust to b e 
eligible for the Homestead Exempt ion.  
All of  the personal exemptions  – homestead,  veteran and bli nd – have a prohibition ag ainst irrevocable 
trust s. It is for good reason. A property  held in an irrevocable trust  is controlled  by the trustees, not the 
grantor . Yet it is the gra ntor who a pplies for the homestead based on their residency , for the veteran ’s 
exemp tion base d on the grantor ’s military service, for the blind exemption based on the grantor ’s sight 
restr ictions . But it is the tru stees who are the “benefic ial owners ” of the trust ’s assets , not the grantor . 
The grantor cannot also be a trustee . 
LD 149 would allo w an out -of-state trustee , people who do not even live a t the pr operty,  to receive the 
homestead  exemption. The homeste ad exempt ion is sup posed to b enefit the property o wner if it is the ir 
permanent residen ce.  
The property  owner can enter in to an irrevocable trust, thereby receiving the protection from creditors 
and avoidance of estate taxes, and be a homestead exemption recipient. They must first grant  
them selves a life esta te, the common rules of which  state they are respon sible , among other  thing s, to 
pay the taxes. Then they can put the pr operty into an irrevocable trust. The Homestead Exemption will 
benefi t the m, not the  trust. The e xemption would b e removed upon  their death or if the property was 
sold or tran sferred. 
This according to Investopedia:  
“Irrevocable trusts cannot be modified, amended, or terminated without the 
permission of the grantor's  beneficiary  or by the order of a court.  The exact rules 
can vary by state. The grantor, having effectively transferred all ownership of 
assets into the trust, legally removes all of their  rights of ownership to the assets 
and the trust .   
In other wo rds, the y no longer own the pr operty.  
Respectfully , 
 
Kerry Leichtman, CMA  
