TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 2/7/23 
LD J 49 - An Act to Amend the Deﬁnition of "Homestead" Under the Homestead 
Property Tax Exemption Laws 
LD I 6 7 - An Act Regarding Eligibility for the Maine Resident Homestead Property 
Tax Exemption 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to testify Against LD I49 - An Act 
to Amend the Deﬁnition of "Homestead" Under the Homestead Properly Tax 
Exemption Laws and Against LD I 6 7 - An Act Regarding Eligibility for the Maine 
Resident Homestead Property Tax Exemption. I am providing combined testimony 
because both bills expand homestead property tax exemption eligibility for 
homeowners who arranged their affairs away from direct ownership of their 
homestead to achieve other purposes, for example estate tax considerations and 
healthcare beneﬁts. Bringing those decisions into the homestead property tax 
program, however, departs from the longstanding basic principle of direct home 
ownership under the homestead exemption program, adds complexity to the 
homestead program, and raises inconsistencies with other property tax beneﬁt 
programs. 
Turning to the specifics of the two bills, LD 149 strikes the word “revocable ” from 
the phrase “revocable living trust” in the homestead exemption deﬁnition of 
“homestead ” - thereby extending the program to irrevocable trusts. Generally,
1
income and estate tax law recognize propeity held in revocable trusts established 
by the homeowners for their beneﬁt as effectively owned by those people. For 
revocable trusts, the grantor retains the power to revoke the trust and take the 
assets back during their lifetime. Conversely, however, and again generally, 
income and estate tax law align with Maine property tax law in not recognizing an 
individual who lives in a homestead that is held in an irrevocable trust as the 
owner of that property. 
LD 167 similarly expands the homestead exemption beyond the principle of 
ownership of residential property — here by including “life leases,” a type of rental 
agreement where the lessee is not an owner of the property. The proposed 
expansion in both these bills goes beyond direct ownership of a homestead and 
represents a signiﬁcant shift in policy for the homestead exemption. 
Both these proposals create inconsistency between the ownership eligibility 
requirements in other taxpayer beneﬁt programs, such as: 
0 The property tax exemption for veterans 
0 The property tax exemption for legally blind persons 
0 The Deferred Collection of Homestead Property Taxes program 
~ The Municipal Property Tax Assistance program 
0 The Property Tax Fairness Credit 
Given the nature of these changes proposed by LD 149 and LD l67, and their 
inconsistency with key aspects of existing property tax relief programs, these two 
bills — and other proposed changes to the homestead exemption this session— 
should be considered Within the bigger picture of the other signiﬁcant property tax 
relief provisions offered by the State, including the Property Tax Fairness Credit 
and the new property tax stabilization program for seniors. Seemingly minor
changes in one tax relief program may have a signiﬁcant impact on other tax 
beneﬁt programs. We respectfully request that the Committee hold these two bills 
until later in the session so that they can be considered along with bills affecting 
other property tax relief programs that will be impacted by the changes proposed in 
these bills. 
Turning brieﬂy to more technical and tax administration concerns, the language 
under 36 M.R.S. § 683 of the homestead exemption provisions references 
ownership; accordingly, that provision would also need to be amended to 
accommodate holders of life leases. Similarly, conforming changes may need to 
be made to provisions regarding the sale of foreclosed property under §§ 943-C 
and 1283. 
It should also be noted that broadening the homestead program to include both 
direct ownership and non-ownership of a homestead (separate legal entity 
irrevocable trusts under LD 149 and life leases under LD 167) raises the risk ~ and 
confusion among both homeowners and municipal assessors — that an individual 
may claim a homestead exemption on more than one property. This will make it 
more difficult for both taxpayers in understanding and accessing the program and 
require a more involved review by municipal assessors and MRS. 
Finally, because the bill represents an expansion in eligibility for the homestead 
exemption, there will be a corresponding increase in costs to the State to reimburse 
the municipalities for a portion of the lost tax revenue under the statute and under 
other tax beneﬁt programs that refer to the same deﬁnition of homestead, such as 
the new property tax stabilization program for seniors. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on both bills; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional
3
information and respond in detail to the Co1nmittee ’s questions. I would be happy 
to respond to any questions you may have now.
