1February 7, 2023
Senator Nicole Grohoski, Chair
Representative Joe Perry, Chair
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
c/o Legislative Information Office
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation:
My name is Robert C. Dunn. My wife Barbara Dunn and I live at 8 Richards Way in Saco, 
Maine. We purchased our home in 2005, after moving to Maine from Connecticut. We are 
retired senior citizens, both in our eighties. We offer this testimony in support of LD 149, An Act 
to Amend the Definition of “Homestead” Under the Homestead Property Tax Exemption Laws.
We strongly support amending the definition of “Homestead” under the Homestead Property Tax
Exemption Laws and removing the requirement that a trust be “revocable” in order to qualify for 
the Homestead Exemption and the Property Tax Stabilization Program.
In September 2022, we looked into eligibility under the Property Tax Stabilization Program, and 
we found that we would not be eligible since we had an “irrevocable” trust. Because of this, we 
are not entitled to the Homestead Property Exemption. Only revocable trusts are covered.
We believe that the “Grantor” section of a trust should be key in determining whether the trust is 
eligible for a “Homestead Exemption,” regardless of the type of trust. The “Grantor” section 
provides the intent of the person or persons in setting up the trust and how the trust views the 
personal residence of the “Grantor.”
In 2018, My wife and I, working our elder attorney, updated our estate plan. This plan includes 
the following: wills, health directives, powers of attorney and setting up “The Dunn Family 
Realty Trust.” This trust is an irrevocable trust. Our residence at 8 Richards Way is our 
“Homestead.” We have the right to exclusive lifetime use and occupancy of the property, as long 
as either of us lives there, as specified in the “Grantor” section of our trust. It is our principal 
residence. We are required to pay all expenses of the property including taxes, maintenance, 
insurance, and any improvements. It is our principal residence and was set up as such in our 
irrevocable trust. Further, our irrevocable trust requires that upon the death of either us, all trust 
property be included under Chapter 11 of subtitle B of the Internal Revenue Code.
2My wife and I, like other seniors, are living on a fixed income. With property tax increases over 
the years, we have had to make adjustments to our lifestyles in order to keep up with rising 
property taxes. All we want is to live out our remaining years in our residence. Without the 
Homestead Exemption or the Property Tax Stabilization Program, we are not certain that we will 
be able to. It is our feeling irrevocable trusts such as the “Dunn Family Realty Trust” and other 
similar trusts should be eligible for the Homestead Exemption under Maine tax laws.
We urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 149.
Thank you for your consideration.
Respectfully,
Robert C. Dunn, Jr. 
Barbara Dunn
8 Richards Way
Saco, ME 04072
