131st Legislature
Senate 
of Maine 
Senate District 31 
Senator Donna Bailey
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0003
Office (207) 287-1515
Testimony of Senator Donna Bailey introducing
LD 149, An Act To Amend the Definition of “Homestead” Under the 
Homestead Property Tax Exemption Laws
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
February 7, 2023
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation, my name is Donna Bailey, and I proudly represent Senate District 31, which 
includes Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco. Today I am pleased to introduce my bill LD 
149, “An Act to Amend the Definition of ‘Homestead’ Under the Homestead Property Tax 
Exemption Laws.”
LD 149 would fix the Homestead Exemption Program so that older Mainers who are trying to 
stay in their homes can apply for both the Homestead Exemption Program and the Property Tax 
Stabilization Program, both of which currently exclude residences that have been put into 
“irrevocable” trusts. As someone who helps people with estate planning, this did not make sense 
to me.
I have the understanding that the Property Tax Stabilization Program was intended to be a 
lifeline for older Mainers who bought their homes decades ago and who live on fixed incomes 
but are not able to keep up with the increasing values of their homes, and the accompanying rise 
of their property taxes, in their neighborhoods. However, after the Property Tax Stabilization 
Program went into effect last year, I began to hear from constituents—including Mr. Dunn from 
Saco who you will hear from today—who told me that they were not eligible for the program 
because their property had been placed in irrevocable trusts. As it turns out, only “revocable” 
trusts qualify for the Homestead Exemption Program and, by extension, the Property Tax 
Stabilization Program— the latter which requires the applicant(s) to already be eligible for and to 
participate in the Homestead Exemption Program.
To fix this problem, LD 149 would simply amend the definition of “homestead” to include 
irrevocable trusts. If we are going to help Mainers age in place, then we need to ensure that 
people occupying their primary residence full time—whether they have an irrevocable or a 
revocable trust—can do so.
I would also add that, since my bill has been drafted, I have also heard from others who have told 
me stories of other older Mainers who have been excluded from homestead property tax relief 
because they own their property through a testamentary (through a Will) trust.  As you are 
probably aware, Maine does not recognize a Trust as a separate legal entity.  When I refer to a 
property owned by a “Trust” it is more accurate to say “property owned by a Trustee.”  Whether 
the Trustee is a Trustee of a revocable trust, irrevocable trust, testamentary trust or any other 
trust, the Trustee’s duties and responsibilities are exactly the same.  The Committee may want to 
simply amend the bill, and the statute, to include property “held in a trust for the benefit of the 
applicant.”
At this time, I would be happy to answer any questions.
Thank you for your consideration and time.
Donna Bailey
State Senator, Senate District 31
Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco
