‘ M I 
P E R S CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER BOARD OF TRUSTEES
I 
DATE: April 19, 2023 
TO: Senator Michael Tipping, Chair 
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair 
Members, ]oint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
FROM: Kathy]. Morin, Director, Actuarial and Legislative Affairs 
SUBJECT: Testimony on L.D. 1499 - An Act to Regarding Penalties for Early Retirement for Certain 
Members of the Maine Public Employees Retirement System 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Ioint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing. My name is Kathy Morin, and I am the Director of Actuarial and Legislative Affairs for the 
Maine Public Employees Retirement System. 
MainePERS is neither for nor against L.D. 1499. We are here to provide information and offer any 
assistance the Committee might need regarding this bill. 
MainePERS administers State-sponsored defined benefit plans including those for state employees and 
teachers. The majority of state employees and all teacher members are covered by the regular plan, 
which requires twenty-five years of service and / or attainment of normal retirement age of 60, 62 or 65. 
A member who reaches twenty-five years of service prior to reaching normal retirement age may retire 
with a reduction, 6% for most current state employees and teachers, for each year below normal 
retirement age. The reduction is not a penalty. It reflects that benefits will be paid to the retiree overa 
longer period of time. 
L.D. 1499 would permit certain state employees who retired between ]uly 1, 2011 and Ianuary 1, 2012 
and teachers who retired between Iuly 1, 2011 and ]uly 1, 2012 to have their benefits recalculated based 
on an early retirement reduction of 2.25% per year, rather than the 6% reduction that was applied based 
on the plan by which they were covered. This recalculation would be effective October 1, 2023. 
L.D. 1499 will have a fiscal impact because the Constitution does not allow the creation of new or 
additional benefits unless immediately and fully funded. New benefits are created under this bill 
because retirees would be receiving benefits higher than currently accounted for and funded, creating 
a new unfunded actuarial liability (UAL). During the 130*“ Legislature, the Committee considered L.D. 
548, which included the same proposal as L.D. 1499. At that time, MainePERS identified approximately 
115 retirees who would be impacted by the proposal and estimated the cost for the plan change to be 
approximately $6.7 million for a prospective recalculation of benefits for that group. We will work 
with our actuary to update these costs for L.D. 1499 if that information would be helpful to the 
Committee. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. I would be happy to answer your questions 
and will be available at your work session. 
www.mainepers.org LOCATION LOCAL FAX 
_ >§=t.‘
u 
MAILING ADDRESS TOLL-FREE MAINE RELAY" . -{l»i"< ./iii . :~.;~ H ‘ 
-ll‘ i'5"
