Abigail Deschaine
Augusta
LD 172
When the mandate was put into place, I was in the fall semester of my senior year of 
nursing school. I was working per diem at two jobs, one in a long-term dementia 
facility and the other in an ICU. I was very familiar with covid patients and taking 
care of them in both locations. I absolutely knew how severe covid could be and did 
not take precautions lightly. I performed regular testing and was vigilant about proper 
hygiene, contact, etc. When hearing about the mandate, it affected not only my 
employment but my spot in the nursing program. Me and several other nursing 
students quickly jumped to writing a petition to UMA Augusta pleading with them to 
honor the religious rights to refuse anything that goes against someone’s morals. I like
to think that being outspoken is the reason why vaccines are not mandated per UMA 
guidelines and exemptions are accepted. The tricky part was that the clinical sites for 
preceptorship required the covid vaccination and UMA had no say about that.
To finish my nursing degree that I had worked so hard to earn, I needed the covid 
vaccination to be incompliance with MaineGeneral to complete my preceptorship. 
There were 7 students who felt this vaccination infringed upon their morale beliefs. 5 
of them felt forced to receive it, and eventually did, as the debt they had accrued and 
the families they supported were dependent on the nursing career they were about to 
attain. The fifth, was booted from the program for incompliance and the 6th withdrew
herself.  Me the 7th, felt like I was in the position to fight the good fight and stand 
firm for those who couldn’t, due to financial and family responsibilities. I was debt 
free, lived at home, and had good savings. I looked at all my options and talked to a 
lot of people. Unfortunately, my strongly held moral beliefs were not enough, if I 
didn’t receive this one shot, I somehow was suddenly considered a danger to my 
patients and incompetent to care for others, despite my willingness to conform to any 
other method such as regular testing and PPE. The only other avenue was to receive a 
medical exemption which my doctor could not do. My doctor did refer me to a 
specialist as I do have a gynecological condition that at the time may have been 
considered worthy of an exemption. For the time being, my doctor wrote me a 
temporary exemption that stated that I was “exempt from the covid vaccine until I 
meet with a specialist and that I was to comply with regular testing and not be held 
out of my preceptorship or my job until the meeting with the specialist”. It was this 
temporary exemption that got me through my final semester of nursing school. I also 
was able to keep my job until I graduated. By some miracle I was able to work and 
finish my nursing degree all while being unvaccinated for almost a year after the 
mandate, and all because of the temporary medical exemption. I never received a 
formal exemption and the temporary exemption eventually expired.
Now that I had a nursing degree, I had to find a job. And trust me I asked around and 
it took a lot of patience. Togus is a federal agency and federal agencies accept 
religious exemption… well so I thought until after my application was in and I was 
given a job and then religious exemption were put on hold for being accepted until the
supreme court ruled on it. It took 6 months for me to start my job and I’m now 
officially a VA nurse. It’s a great job even though it’s not the type of nursing I always
dreamed to do.  I’m glad I fought the good fight, it was worth the tears and stress. I 
know I’m one of the very few that has managed to still be in healthcare. Should the 
ruling change, I would have the opportunity to work towards my dream nursing job 
and work at other healthcare facilities.
 
Truth be told, I would fight for any patient who had any belief, despite how different 
it was than mine because health is more than the body, it’s the mind and spirit too. 
Whether or not the choice to be unvaccinated is wrong, I still should have the right to 
bodily autonomy. If I would advocate for it for my patients, I need to advocate for 
myself first. I would also like to point out that I have absolutely no judgement 
towards anyone who considered the covid vaccinate to be the right choice for them 
nor do I feel that I can’t administer it or educate on it without my own beliefs 
interfering. I also want to say I do not feel as though I’m better than anyone else, it 
was simply personal choice and I was willing to accept what came of that decision.
Each person is unique so religious exemptions may look different for everyone, even 
if they are of the same belief system. Legally, a religious exemption is a strongly held 
moral belief that a person cannot, in good conscience go against, so it can honestly be 
many different things, but most quote the bible.
I feel a great sense of duty to provide safe, patient-centered care. My level of duty to 
others, however, does not go as far as to inject myself with something that violates my
religious beliefs and or personal values. No one should ever have to sacrifice these 
very things. With the proper PPE I have protected myself and others successfully. It is
with proper precautions, testing, and proper sanitation techniques that I keep me and 
my community members safe. 
I urge you to allow religious exemptions back into the healthcare system. Thank you 
for taking the time to read my testimony. 
Respectfully,
      Abigail Deschaine 
 
