DO UNVACCINATED HEALTHCARE WORKERS POSE A  
HEALTH/SAFETY RISK TO THEIR PATIENTS? 
 
Amber Richards, RN, BSN 
Buxton, ME 
The mandate implemented in October 2021 was based on the assumption that unvaccinated healthcare 
workers pose a health/safety risk to their patients. The logic is that unvaccinated healthcare workers do 
not have protection against COVID, meaning they are at a higher risk of getting COVID, and thereby have 
a higher risk of giving it to their patients. The mandate thereby created an untested hypothesis that 
vaccinated healthcare workers have greater protection from COVID than those who are not vaccinated. 
Science has proven that the mandate’s blanket statement is untrue in the current demographic of 
COVID immunity. A large survey completed in December 2022 estimates that 80% of Americans have 
immunity against COVID from either vaccination or prior infection. 2 Since this mandate was put into 
effect in October 2021, multiple individual studies and comprehensive studies have been completed 
that have found that those who have natural immunity (have had a prior COVID infection) have greater 
protection against COVID than those who are vaccinated and have not had COVID. 1 In which case, 
science is revealing that vaccinated healthcare workers who have not had COVID pose a greater 
health/safety risk to their patients than unvaccinated healthcare workers who have had COVID. If the 
heart of the mandate is to keep patients safe, it would logically follow that unvaccinated healthcare 
workers who have not had COVID should not be allowed to work until they have contracted COVID. 
Obviously, such a statement is absurd. But if that statement is absurd, why is it not equally absurd that 
healthcare workers with natural immunity are not permitted to take care of patients? The following will 
1) discuss scientific data and research that disproves the mandate’s assumption, 2) apply that data to a 
hospital scenario, and 3) consider practical answers to keeping patients safe.  
DATA AND RESEARCH 
According to the meta-analysis “Durability of Vaccine-Induced and Natural Immunity Against COVID-19: 
A Narrative Review,” the protection that vaccination provides wanes significantly in six months alone, 
whereas protection from natural immunity has only a slight decline starting at twelve months. 1 In order 
to comprehend the significance these findings, one must understand the nature of a meta-analysis. 
Meta-analyses and systematic reviews are the top tier of scientific research hierarchy. To give a 
comparison, randomized controlled studies (RCTs) have been and are still often considered the golden 
standard of research. An RCT is an individual study where randomization and blinding, among other 
factors, are used to prevent bias when determining cause and effect relationships, such as whether a 
treatment is effective or not. Clinical trials are one example of RCTs. While RCTs are the golden standard 
for conducting a single study, the strongest scientific research study is a meta-analysis or systematic 
review. A meta-analysis evaluates multiple studies at different research levels that address the same 
question. This meta-analysis includes 136 references to scientific literature and research studies, 
including multiple meta-analyses, systematic reviews, RCTs, and observational studies. With that being 
said, consider what the meta-analysis’ data compilation and comparison shows concerning vaccine 
effectiveness versus natural immunity in real-world conditions: 
Both the effectiveness and the efficacy of vaccines developed against SARS-CoV-2 have been 
extensively studied. Efficacy refers to the performance of the vaccines under ideal and 
controlled circumstances, for example clinical trials, compared with effectiveness, which 
measures vaccine performance under real-world conditions, such as observational trials. It is 
now well-established that the vaccine effectiveness of a primary series of SARS-CoV-2 
vaccination wanes over time, resulting in an increased risk of breakthrough infection. 1    
The protection provided by vaccination declines significantly and rapidly: 
Feikin et al.[ 10] found a 23% decrease in protection over 6 months post-vaccination, while 
Ssentongo et al.[ 11] found a decline in protection from 83 to 21% over 5 months. 1 
In comparison, natural immunity has high effectiveness in real-world conditions that lasts:  
Multiple systematic and pragmatic literature reviews have investigated the effectiveness of 
natural post-infection protection [ 12, 39–43]. Published meta-analyses show consistently high 
levels of protection (81.0–87.0%) provided by prior infection, even over 7 months post-initial 
infection (Table (Table2)2 ) [12, 41, 43]. One meta-analysis assessed the estimated protection 
provided by prior infection from either any reinfection or symptomatic reinfection and found 
similar levels of protection (~ 87.0%) [ 12]. None of the three meta-analyses reported an analysis 
by variant, which would be challenging to study, since variants of both the initial infection and 
the reinfection must be considered [ 12, 41, 43]. 1 
The protection provided by natural immunity remains for a significantly longer time: 
Five studies investigating the risk of reinfection over time found no statistically significant 
waning in protection from reinfection (Table (Table3),3 ), [28, 44–47] with the protection from 
reinfection at the final study follow-up estimated to range from 69.0 to 93.0%. The protection 
against reinfection at > 1 year was estimated to be 69.0% in the study with the longest follow-
up [28]. 1  
A single booster only provides a short burst of protection: 
Vaccination with a primary two-dose series of ChAdOx1, followed by a booster dose of 
ChAdOx1, provided protection against Omicron of only 46.7% (95% CI 34.3–56.7) at 5–9 weeks 
post-booster vaccination versus 52.9% (95% CI 52.1–53.7) and 60.9% (95% CI 59.7–62.1) at the 
same timepoint post-booster with BNT162b2 and mRNA1273, respectively [ 37]. 1 
Two boosters provide protection but its effectiveness also is short-lived: 
The advantages of a fourth booster dose of BNT162b2 against Omicron were investigated in a 
recent observational study in Israel [ 59]. While a two-fold increase in protection against 
confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection was seen at 4 weeks post-booster vaccination, the effect had 
waned by 8 weeks. 1 
Let’s consider some of these statistics that the meta-analysis stated in everyday terms: 1 
• The vaccine’s ability to prevent COVID infection went from 83% down to 21% in 5 months 
• At best the vaccine’s ability to prevent COVID infection drops 23% over 6 months 
• Natural immunity’s ability to prevent COVID infection remained at 81-87% even after 7 
months 
• According to the longest study, natural immunity’s ability to prevent COVID infection was 69% 
at even greater than a year 
• Boosters are effective for a short period of time, as little as 5-9 weeks 
 
HOSPITAL SCENARIO  
Consider a real world application of these statistics to a hospital setting. The nurses and patient in the 
following examples are fictional. Consider the following cases: Nurse Allison, Nurse Charity, and Nurse 
Bonnie are all excellent nurses that work at the same hospital in Maine. 
Nurse Case #1 
Nurse Allison was one of the first nurses in Maine to get her COVID-19 vaccine. She received her 
1st Moderna vaccine in December 2020 and her 2nd Moderna vaccine in January 2021. With the 
approaching holiday season, Nurse Allison decided to get a Pfizer booster in September 2021.  
Nurse Case #2  
Nurse Charity does not want to receive a COVID vaccine due to her sincerely held religious 
beliefs. Nurse Charity is a single mom with three kids in school. She has a mortgage on her 
house. Her mom helps her on the days she works by waiting for the kids to get off the bus and 
making them dinner. Nurse Charity can’t afford to lose health insurance for her family or move 
out of state in such a short time. Even if she could move, she would not have the family support 
she needs in another state. Under great duress, Nurse Charity receives her 1st Pfizer vaccine in 
October 2021 to support her family, keep their health insurance, and not lose her home or her 
family’s support as she tries to take care of her kids as a single mom. Nurse Charity receives her 
2nd vaccine in November 2021 to complete her series.  
Nurse Case #3 
Nurse Bonnie was working her last day of four shifts in a row and was ready to go home. One of 
her patients received the great news that he could go to rehab tomorrow. Per rehab protocol, 
her patient had to have a negative COVID swab completed with the results sent before they 
could set up transport. So Nurse Bonnie completed the COVID swab and sent it downstairs to 
the lab to process before she went home. Nurse Bonnie received the call the next morning from 
work stating that her patient she had taken care of for the past 4 days had asymptomatic COVID. 
Nurse Bonnie got COVID-19 in June 2021. Nurse Bonnie receives the news that vaccination 
would be mandated for healthcare workers in October. It is against her religious beliefs to 
receive the vaccine. Nurse Bonnie is single, has no kids, no mortgage, and has an emergency 
fund. She decides to give her resignation in October 2021 and apply to other healthcare jobs in 
Maine that did not fall under the mandate. But every organization she applied to stated they did 
not accept religious exemptions. Out of curiosity and in desperation, Nurse Bonnie signed up to 
get information about travel nursing, something she probably would have never considered 
because she loves Maine. She loves being with her family and friends. But if she wants to stay in 
healthcare, she would have to leave. Nurse Bonnie decides to become a travel nurse. 
Patient Case  
Bill had a heart attack in May 2022 and was waiting for insurance authorization to get 
discharged to rehab. During his time at the hospital, Bill found out that the floor was 
understaffed because COVID had been getting around. It wasn’t until today that he understood 
why. From his bed, he can see the door across the hall with an airborne precautions sign. But he 
doesn’t understand why he keeps seeing his nurse going in and out with a gown and face shield 
but no N-95, just a surgical mask. Bill is not a healthcare worker but has a niece who worked on 
a COVID floor. He knew she should be wearing an N-95 for that room. He then saw his CNA poke 
her head into that room with a surgical mask just to check in on the patient, but evidently, the 
patient needed something. The CNA went in with no face shield or gown and ended up being in 
the room for more than fifteen minutes. Bill had pressed his call bell earlier to get help to the 
bathroom and was now regretting it. The CNA came out of the room, used hand sanitizer, and 
came to help him. Bill works up the courage and asks his CNA why she didn’t put her gown or 
face shield on. She replies, “Oh, don’t worry. I’ve had my shots and my booster. I was only in 
there for a little while. No worries.” Bill did not feel reassured. He also got the news that he 
wouldn’t get discharged tomorrow. Bill tries to reassure himself thinking, “Maybe it’s Omicron 
going around. Supposedly, that’s not as bad. At least I will have a different nurse tomorrow.” If 
Bill had the choice of Nurse Allison, Nurse Charity, and Nurse Bonnie, which nurse would be the 
“safest” for him to have? It is May 2022.  
Considerations 
Nurse Bonnie would be the “safest” nurse for Bill to have. Unfortunately, she’s in Florida on a travel 
assignment and cannot work in Maine because of the mandate. Even though Nurse Allison got a booster 
in September 2021, statistics show the booster’s effectiveness diminished rapidly down to 52.9% in 5-9 
weeks. 1 The studies mentioned in this meta-analysis show the booster’s effectiveness declines quickly 
over time. More studies need to be completed and published to determine their effectiveness over a 
longer period of time and their effectiveness against different variants as new boosters are developed. 
Nurse Charity’s vaccine effectiveness declined significantly during the month of April. 
  
PRACTICAL ANSWERS 
I worked on a COVID floor for a year and a half in the beginning of the pandemic when it was the 
hardest. I masked. I put my N-95 on. I put my gown on. And I put my gloves on. Hand sanitizer. More 
hand sanitizer. Wiped everything down. Donning and doffing became a meticulous ritual for me. I was 
afraid of getting COVID at work and giving it to my family or getting it unknowingly and giving it to one 
of my patients. For about a year I was gripped by fear. Fear can be beneficial in certain instances, but 
fear can also be detrimental when it gets out of proportion. Fear can control people. If one lets it, fear 
will direct every decision that person makes. Money can also control people, and in some hospitals, 
money directs every decision they make, even to their patients’ detriment. Bias can control people’s 
thinking and direct their every decision as well. Pushing fear aside, money aside, and bias aside, what is 
truly the best for our patients? Research shows us that unvaccinated healthcare individuals who have 
had COVID are better protected than those with vaccination who have not had COVID. Boosters are 
effective for what seems to be a short time of 9 weeks, but more research is needed to be able to state 
that as fact. 1 Even if boosters became annual and even if they lasted 5 months, a vaccinated person 
could get COVID that very year. When that vaccinated person does get COVID, they then obtain hybrid 
immunity, which shows a little more effectiveness than natural immunity by itself. 1 One may then 
conclude that healthcare workers with natural immunity should get vaccinated because instead of 81-
87% immunity, they could have >90%. 1 But one may also suggest with the same logic that those who are 
vaccinated should get COVID so they have better immunity. But that’s absurd. What is a common sense 
answer to all of this? It seems that everyone is at risk for getting COVID annually with or without 
vaccinations. So how is any patient more or less safe with someone who is vaccinated or unvaccinated? 
Asymptomatic COVID infections can make a good percentage of COVID infections, which begs the 
question whether there are any unvaccinated individuals who have not had COVID. 3 Perhaps practical 
answers require simple practical questions. If one still after all of this data believes that the 
unvaccinated pose a health/safety risk to patients, one must ask the simple question: How do we keep 
our patients safe? The answer is easy. Unvaccinated workers with or without natural immunity can be 
even safer for their patients than those who are vaccinated by completing mandatory testing. Self-tests 
are cheap, fast, in abundant supply, and can be monitored and recorded by a staff member in a very 
short period of time. Healthcare has done this process before with PCR tests. It can do it again and 
cheaper. During the Omicron wave, asymptomatic infections made up 32.4% of all infections. 3 
Vaccinated individuals had a higher rate of asymptomatic infection than the unvaccinated, 3 meaning 
there were more vaccinated nurses exposing their patients to COVID without even knowing than those 
who were unvaccinated. That is a fact that makes patients feel “safe.” Doing mandatory testing would 
make the unvaccinated all across the board even more safe for patients than those who are vaccinated. 
If safety is the true concern, mandatory testing should be applied to all staff members that work with 
patients directly. 
 
CONCLUSION 
In the healthcare setting, a doctor often discusses the risks and benefits of a procedure or treatment. 
The patient gets to decide what risks he is willing to take and what benefits are worth taking the risk for. 
The mandate that was issued in October 2021 has lots of risks and few benefits. It is a multi-faceted 
mandate that affects many different people and potentially many generations to come. What are we 
willing to sacrifice or risk for the mild, if any, benefit of having a vaccinated nurse, EMT, paramedic, 
doctor, respiratory therapist, physical therapist, paramedic, radiologist, and other medical personnel? 
Are we willing to commit religious discrimination? Are we willing to have areas of Maine without enough 
manned ambulances? Are we willing to have understaffed hospitals? Understaffed nursing homes? 
Understaffed rehabs? Which would hurt the patient more: unvaccinated staff or all of these other 
issues? Are we willing to drive people from their homes? Are we willing to drive people from the job 
they dedicated two, four, eight, twelve years of education to? Are we willing to lose experienced 
healthcare workers who are waiting and praying for this mandate to be reversed? Everyone knows that 
vaccination does not prevent infection. It has become common knowledge. The meta-analysis of 
multiple RCTs, meta-analyses, systematic reviews, and observational studies has shown us with actual 
data how ineffective the vaccine is at preventing reinfection. If it cannot prevent infection, it cannot 
prevent people from giving COVID to others. The significant protective value that vaccination has is not 
protecting others but protecting oneself from severe symptomatic COVID infection, hospitalization, and 
death. In such case, how do unvaccinated healthcare workers pose a greater health/safety risk to 
patients than vaccinated healthcare workers? I became a nurse because I wanted to help people and 
make a difference in their lives. I want to be an advocate for my patients. I want to make my patients 
smile. I want my patients to feel safe and cared for. I want them to be safe. I imagine that you likewise 
went into your profession because you want to make a difference. You want to help people. I have 
discussed some of the risks and benefits of letting this mandate remain. What are you willing to risk? 
What are you willing to sacrifice? Is the benefit worth taking those risks and making those sacrifices? In 
my assessment, the risks outweigh the benefits and the sacrifices are far too high. But it is not my 
decision to make. The decision is in your hands to decide. As a Mainer, I would ask that you pass the bills 
to lift this mandate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
1. Pooley, Nick et al. “Durability of Vaccine-Induced and Natural Immunity Against COVID-19: A 
Narrative Review.” Infectious Diseases and Therapy, 12, no. 2 (Jan 9, 2023): 367-387. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9828372/  
2. Schulman, Jonathan et al. “A 50-State COVID-19 Survey Report #96: State of the COVID-19 
Pandemic.” The COVID States Project, report 96 (December 2022). https://osf.io/tz3a4/  
3. Shang, Weijing. “Percentage of Asymptomatic Infections among SARS-CoV-2 Omicron Variant-
Positive Individuals: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Vaccines (Basel), 10, no. 7 (June 
30, 2022): 1049. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9321237/  
 
 
