 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
In Opposition of LD 172 , An Act to Allow Health Care Workers to Return to Work by  
Reinstating Exemptions from Immunization Requirements  
 
Hearing Date:  April 2 4, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members  of the  Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is Ann Farmer and I am the Associate Director of the Division of Disease 
Surveillance at the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prev ention at the Department of Health and 
Human Services . I am here today to provide testimony on behalf of the Maine Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention and will be speaking against LD 172, An Act to Allow Health Care Workers to 
Return to Work by  Reins tating Exemptions from Immunization Requirements.    
 
This bill seeks to reinstate religious and philosophical exemptions from immunization requirements for 
health care workers. Maine CDC strongly opposes this bill . 
 
Public Law 2019 , chapter 154 was enacted for three reasons: keeping Mainers safe and healthy from 
unnecessary disease; ensuring safe schools, health care facilities, and childcare centers; and protecting 
vulnerable people against serious disease. The removal of religious and philosophical exemptions was 
decided through legislative process and upheld by a referendum vote in 2020 with 72% of Mainers in 
favor of this decision.  
 
Immunization is the most effective and efficient way to protect healthcare workers, their family 
members, and patients, particularly those who are immunocompromised, against serious, and sometimes 
deadly, vaccine preventable diseases. I t is the best interest of all Mainers to ensure healthcare  workers 
receive recommended Advisory Committee on Immunizati on Practices (ACIP) immunizations. When  
someone chooses not to vaccinate, that decision can jeopardize the health and safety of entire 
communities, especially the weakest and most vulnerable among us. Evidence shows that states that 
have tighter exemption laws have higher immunization rate s, and less disease.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC  opposes the proposed legislation.  Good public h ealth policy is data-driven 
and e vidence -based. Maine’s immunization requirement s are to ensure full protection of all Maine 
children and adults from vaccine -preventable disease. Reinstating exemptions will result in fewer  
vaccination s for vaccine -preventable diseases , statewide . The e vidence is overwhelming, sound, and 
supported by the professional medical community and majority of Maine voters ; vaccinations are proven 
to be safe and effective  for preventing  the spread of disease . 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and for the opportunity to provide testimony today. I can 
address questions from the Committee , and I will be available to participate in the work session.  
