Beth Hallowell
Pittston
LD 172
Good morning members of the Committee of Health and Human Services,
My name is Beth Hallowell and I am a registered nurse, advocate, mother, partner, 
daughter and respected member of our community.  It is really our duty to pass this 
bill. Because if we don’t stand for this, for the simple governance over our own 
bodies then what do we stand for at all?
I have been a nurse for 15 years. I’ve taught clinicals for universities in Maine. I have 
precept in many new nurses, I was a charge nurse. I have been trusted my entire 
career with the lives of women and their children. I have always been respected and I 
have always been one of the best. And I’m not someone who would ever have said 
that before but now I need to stand up for myself because no one will stand up for me.
This state lost so many assets when they passed this legislation. This state is hurting 
and the entire healthcare system is a tragedy. The hospital that I dedicated my entire 
nursing career to is falling apart. They are staffed by 50% travel nurses and spend 
millions of dollars on those contracts. And nothing is better, it’s only worse. And I 
can literally drive across the border to another state and not be a threat. I’m not 
dangerous in New Hampshire. I’m not dangerous and almost any other state in this 
country. I have never been infected with Covid nor have I ever given anyone Covid 
and yet here I am unvaccinated and seen as a dangerous person. Many of my old 
coworkers have been vaccinated and had Covid multiple times in the last three years 
and they’ve all been working. Who is the dangerous one? Why did I get singled out? 
Why did any of us who didn’t want an experimental medication need to be singled 
out? Why is a healthcare provider am I being denied the same rights that I give to my 
patients every day, to make decisions for themselves and for their children.
Medical exemptions are a unicorn. They don’t exist and even when they do exist the 
amount of hoops you have to jump through to even prove that you deserve one are 
atrocious.  And because of the nature of everything that’s happened over the last 
couple of years no physician is willing to take on any liability related to medical 
exemptions. It is become completely political and 0% about health, wellness, bodily 
autonomy, and informed consent.
I would like any of you that are considering voting are not to pass to look me in the 
eye today and tell me that I don’t deserve to work here. But I don’t deserve to be a 
nurse, that I don’t deserve to provide for my family, that I don’t deserve to give back 
to my state, that my kids don’t deserve to go to school here, that my kids are lepers, 
and dangerous. I want you to tell me that because that’s what you’re saying if you 
don’t pass this bill. It’s just black and white. And if you can sit there and feel like you 
can look me in the face in person and tell me that I don’t deserve any of those things 
then you should be ashamed. Because I deserve more than anyone to be able to do 
what I’ve done for the past 14 years. I’ve never been dangerous, I’ve never heard a 
patient, I’ve never put anyone at risk. But now I’m told that I don’t deserve to be here.
So forget political division, forget party lines, forget the implications of what it might 
mean when you vote a certain way and just be a human. And treat me like I am 
worthy and I am a person who deserves to be able to control my body and make 
medical decisions for myself. And just vote based on that alone. It doesn’t matter 
what Side of the aisle you sit on or what political beliefs you have or what people 
might say on the Internet behind a screen. It’s about freedom and educated decisions 
for yourself. Where will you draw the line?
“First they came for the socialists, and I did not speak out—because I was not a 
socialist.
Then they came for the trade unionists, and I did not speak out—because I was not a 
trade unionist.
Then they came for the Jews, and I did not speak out—because I was not a Jew.
Then they came for me—and there was no one left to speak for me.” 
So maybe you’re sitting there thinking well it doesn’t affect me because I think 
everyone should be vaccinated. I don’t think anyone deserves an exemption. But what
about when they come for you for something that you don’t agree with but you’ve 
never stood up before? Do you really think that there will be anyone there left to 
support you and stand up for you. I’m asking you to stand up for me. To stand up for 
my kids. To stand up for all these people in this room who deserve to be treated like 
everybody else. Just stand up. I urge you to do the right thing and vote to pass. Thank 
you

