Brian  Ingalls
Mulberry FL
LD 172
Hey. My real name is Brian Ingalls. Former Maine resident. I may be busy with 
patients tomorrow but this is what I wrote and submitted. Feel free to read it on my 
behalf if you don’t hear it. 
First off, i am a Christian who has a personal held religious belief that binds my 
conscience regarding certain actions and areas of my life. Also, I am a Mainer. I was 
born and raised in Maine. My parents were both born and raised in Maine. All my 
children were born in Maine. Professionally, I am a Registered Radiologic 
Technologist. I perform Xrays, CAT Scans, and MRIs. When religious and 
philosophical exemptions were removed, I knew that my career in Maine was on 
borrowed time. I began working in the community I grew up in in 2009 in this field. I 
knew my patients. They were neighbors, friends…family. They received personal 
care from someone local. I began working at an outpatient center in Topsham that was
joined with a cancer center, where I came to be very close with my patients. Once 
COVID began to be spoken of on a global front in late December of 2019, I saw the 
writing on the wall. A vaccine would be produced on a rapid basis and forced in a 
manner that would violate my conscience. So I made the hard decision to move. I still
perform my career but not in the state of Florida. In my field, I have seen many 
opportunities now pop up to do a travel healthcare position for a very generous pay. I 
recently tried to take a travel position both in old town as well as at CMMC. The 
recruiter asked regarding Covid vaccine status and I was denied the potion and 
opportunity due to my status. I’ve worked with many in this staff before in southern 
Maine. I was also an elder of a church at one point in Lewiston. To be able to perform
my skills toward people who I have grown up loving and knowing to be taken from 
me and given to some random person that doesn’t know these people due to my Covid
vaccine status, when that same status is received here in Florida with my religious 
exemption, is unacceptable and a disservice to the Maine people. I stand in favor of 
medical freedom and religious freedom.
