Ccandi Landry
Smithfield
LD 172
Hello, my name is Candi Landry. I always dreamed of following in my mother’s 
footsteps as a nurse. I eventually achieved my goal after raising a family and working 
hard through nursing school. I was so excited to begin my career in nursing that I 
went straight into the Emergency Department, as a new grad, wanting to see and learn
as much as I could. I enjoyed taking care of my patients who often came in to the ED 
filled with fear and anxiety of the unknown. Often times I was able to put them at 
ease and help them understand what was involved in their care. During this time in 
the ED I was able to work part-time in Interventional Radiology, a dream job that I 
was excited to hold and learn new skills to better take care for patients.  Eventually, I 
moved on to a Day Surgery Unit and PACU continuing my care of patients with 
compassion and understanding for those undergoing anesthesia.
I loved my job as a nurse, during the 18 months that I worked during the pandemic, I 
worked extra shifts when we were short staffed or for coworkers who had called out. I
did not mind doing this to make sure my coworkers had adequate coverage and 
patients were well taken care of. Each day that I went in to work during the pandemic 
we were given a brown paper bag with one face mask to wear all day from patient to 
patient. As a nurse and an advocate of good health, I was not afraid to go into work 
and take care of Covid patients. After studying Anatomy and Physiology in nursing 
school, how could I not be amazed at the immune system we have been created with? 
I have always been health conscious, taking care of my body by eating properly, 
exercising, adequate sleep and trusting in God.  
On October 29, 2021, I lost a profession I had dreamt of since I was a little girl. I 
now, voluntarily, help an elderly neighbor, who has no family to assist her. The home 
health agency that was assisting her with daily in-home care dropped her when they 
could not find staff to send into her home. This is unacceptable, especially when a 
large percentage of Maine’s population is elderly.
It is sad to hear the stories of people receiving subpar care in our hospitals and 
nursing facilities.  There was a nursing staff shortage before the pandemic and it has 
now been exacerbated by the mandate.
Being let go of a job I loved because I chose not to take the EUA Covid vaccine goes 
against everything that I was taught in nursing school about allowing a patient to 
choose their treatment/plan of care. I am thankful for those of you who are fighting 
this and pray this mandate gets overturned. 

