Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyer, and Distinguished members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services: 
 
My name is Elizabeth Caruso, and I live in Caratunk. I am testifying in support of these 
bills. 
LD 172, HP0113 An Act to Allow Health Care Workers to Return to Work by Reinstating 
Exemptions from Immunization Requirements 
LD 601, HP0378 An Act to Reduce the Shortage of Municipal Emergency Medical 
Services Personnel by Removing Certain Vaccination Requirements 
Due to this administration’s unlawful Covid mandate, our state and the Maine people are 
suffering through a severe healthcare crisis. Our health care system has been compromised by 
bad policy weaponized and discriminating against its own people. No one is benefiting from a 
Covid vaccine mandate – not the health care workers, patients, hospitals, nursing homes, or 
emergency services. 
 
Nursing homes have closed. Hospitals and care facilities can’t operate properly due to lack of 
staff. Sick Mainers are suffering through longer than ever wait times to be seen by a health care 
provider. The Maine citizenry is suffering.  
 
This Covid vaccine policy has cruelly abused healthcare’s most specialized workforce – our 
essential health care workers – who worked in overwhelmingly severe environments during the 
worst of Covid…only to have their livelihoods, quality of life, and contributions to society ripped 
away since this mandate came into effect. 
 
And for what? The vaccine does not even stop transmission, sickness or death.  Mockingly, the 
vaccinated healthcare workers are still contracting Covid and even come back to work 24 hours 
after a fever.  Keep in mind, our unvaccinated nurses can still work at the VA because there is 
no federal Covid mandate. Unvaccinated people surround us everywhere...both in and out of 
Maine. The state policy is senseless.  
 
A friend of mine with 35 years of nursing in the same hospital was forced to leave her job, her 
$120k salary, her family’s health insurance, her patients, co-workers, and OB unit.  This 
specialized, veteran nurse, once one our higher taxpayers, now qualifies for MaineCare, 
burdening others.   
 
Before she left, she had to train a fresh new nurse. The unit and the patients lost 35 years of 
excellence.  According to remaining nurses, the level of inexperience, shortage of staff, and 
decline in care within the unit has made for dangerous situations. You can fix this by voting for 
these bills. 
 
What about the rest of us?  This mandate hurts Maine patients who need timely medical care – 
which instead is not readily available or as high quality as it once was. 
 
It is not the government’s jurisdiction to mandate a substance into a citizen’s body – much less 
a controversial one.  The Declaration of Independence specifically states that we “are endowed 
by our Creator with certain unalienable rights, among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of 
happiness – that to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men..” The purpose 
of government is to secure/protect our liberties. 
 
Employers have no right to interfere with a citizen’s medical choices or beliefs. People have a 
right to privacy and individual automony. It’s THEIR BODY, THEIR LIVES. 
 
This attack from the government upon the people, violating their rights, is injuring them for years 
to come as their earned pensions have been eradicated.  
 
Please vote ought to pass these bills to stop the persecution and discrimination of Maine’s 
health care workers, relieve the health care crisis and restore the liberties, dignity and injustice 
done to the Maine health care worker. 
 
Thank you for your time and your service. 
 
 
Elizabeth Caruso 
Elizabeth Caruso 
Caratunk 
 
 
