Jeremy  Dockendorff
Hermon
LD 172
My name is Jeremy Dockendorff, I worked at Eastern Maine Medical Center as an 
Environmental Service Tech grade 2. When the plandemic hit I was making cheese 
over at Pineland Dairy Farm. I got a sore throat and wasn’t allowed back to work until
I got tested for Covid. I didn’t have insurance and the test would cost me three 
hundred dollars. Needless to say I looked for another job. Months later I got hired at 
the hospital. I enjoyed my work there, for those that don’t know an Environmental 
service tech is basically a janitor. I clean the floors the bathrooms, I go into patient 
rooms and tend to their simple needs. In the time I worked there I witnessed many 
things. Horrible things. I saw a lot of hopelessness. From patients. In the ICU unit A 
during November, I went into a Covid positive room, all dressed in my PPE gear and 
started cleaning. The patient looked like he’d been crying and I tried to cheer him up. 
He was shocked that I was even talking to him. Since his nurses wouldn’t even talk to
him. They just came in, took his blood, did some tests and left. All he wanted was to 
be treated as human. I was taken back as he took my hand and held it with a firm grip 
and thanked me. Just for talking with him. It broke my heart that this man felt like he 
wasn’t human. He wasn’t the last person I talked to either that felt that way. As an 
environmental service tech, we have certain times that the room must be cleaned. 
COVID rooms we could only be in there for fifteen minutes. I stayed with that patient
for half an hour. I didn’t my best to comfort but unfortunately he was convinced he 
was going to die in that room. I prayed for him and many others in my time there. I 
however never came down sick with Covid and I was exposed to many Covid positive
rooms. Later on in Environmental services, fewer people would work in Covid units. 
There were eight of us, then it came down to just two of us willing to go in and clean. 
Everyone was scared of getting Covid. My fear was getting it and passing it to my 
pregnant wife. Thankfully I never got it and we had a healthy baby boy. Then mid 
way through summer of 2021 we the unvaccinated were being threatened. Get the 
experimental jab or lose your job. I was never an anti vaccine person but this new 
vaccine that was only approved for EMERGENCY ONLY I wasn’t going to take. Not
until more studies showed up. Day by day they threatened us. As a single income 
family I was terrified of losing my job. They gave us documents for the vaccine 
hesitancy, they started labeling workers with stickers to let everyone know who was 
vaccinated and who wasn’t. I witnessed as new nurse’s were being trained that they 
were safe with other people with those vaccinated stickers. Those that didn’t they 
weren’t safe. The place became quite hostile. Then the patients listened to the media 
who were saying the same thing. That we were dangerous. That we were going to get 
the vaccinated killed. I was kicked out of a few rooms that didn’t want their room 
cleaned by an unvaccinated person. I wasn’t the only one. There were a few of us that 
held out for a while. I knew several co workers that got the experimental jab due to 
coercion. Some got it out fear. We were being discriminated against on a daily basis. 
My anxiety was going up through the roof. I went to my doctors to get it checked out. 
They helped me for a while until the northern light doctor saw that I was unvaccinated
and called me and my wife murders. I stopped going. I would have loved to get 
therapy help to deal with the trauma at work but who knows how they would have 
treated me as an unvaccinated individual. Later the hospital would fire me. I’ve got 
two videos of it. As they were doing a strange test for ONLY the unvaccinated. I’ve 
done swabs before but this was different. I was reading the information as it was 
labeled as “This is not informed consent.” Reading down the paper it stated that if I 
have a seizure and died they reserve the right NOT to resuscitate me. As a new father 
that’s terrifying. I refused to take this one test. Then went to hr to get a termination 
letter which they refused to give me. They told me I was fired and to leave the 
property. So I did. They had a security guard on my heels telling me to leave or they 
were going to call the cops on me. I was complying and making my way to my car 
and the security guard continued to yell at me to leave. I still have the video. I can’t 
watch it because it sends my anxiety through the roof. I later would receive a letter of 
the hospital declining my insurance due to me quitting. Sorry voluntary quitting. I 
have never been treated this way. If there are people that want to return work at that 
place God bless them. They have a better heart than I do. I’m terrified of going back. I
wouldn’t go back to work there. As much as I liked giving comfort to those in need, I 
can’t forgive them for how they treated me and others. They haven’t apologized and 
I’m so thankful I never took that jab. The men in my family have had an adverse 
reaction to this experimental jab. Our family never had these kind of problems before.
I do believe forcing people to get an experimental jab was a huge violation of our 
rights and we should have never had religious exemptions taken away. I hope 
someone is held accountable for the shameful atrocities that the healthcare workers 
went through. I hope one day, there are military tribunals that I can testify what I 
witnessed and the violations of the Nuremberg code. I loved the people I worked 
with, I loved bringing hope to those that needed it, but I don’t think I could work there
at Eastern Maine Medical Center again. May God bless the rest of the health care 
workers that will return.  
