Jessica Sobey
South Portland
LD 172
Good Morning and thank you all for your time today. I am submitting this from work 
where I have just a couple minutes where another nurse is watching my patients. I 
was born at Maine Medical Center,  and it was the greatest honor, aside from 
becoming a mother myself, to deliver babies at MMC.  For the last 13 years that I was
did.  I also worked on the pulmonary floor for years and was on the Special Infectious
Disease Team, the pandemic preparedness team. I literally was on the forefront of 
treating and caring for patients during Covid 19. I believe in science. I believe in 
medicine. I also believe in the Doctor/ patient relationship and informed consent. For 
years I had had a medical exemption from receiving the flu shot  at MMC. I wore a 
mask with my patients during flu season and found it completely was a nonissue. In 
the fall of 2019 MMC changed the exemption form for the flu shot, coincidentally the
same week of the Union Vote ( of which I was a huge proponent of). Most of the staff
that had previously declined the shot based on religious or philosphical beliefs were 
told they would loose their jobs and their declinations that had formerly been accepted
were now being denied. On my unit there was a huge outcry by the nurses and the 
morning before the Union vote, when 18 nurses on my unit said they would leave 
MMC if their exemptions were not respected, Jen McCarthy, the new COO came to 
the unit and told us all that are declinations were in fact GOING to be honored. Every 
calmed down and for that fall all the exemptions on my unit that had previously 
always been exempted and then had been denied that fall were then last minute 
accepted. Great. Done. Fast forward to the COvid Mandate. Now of course, no one 
could have a religous or philosophical  exemption but now even are medical 
exemptions were taken away. I was one of them.  My closest colleagues were 
encouraging fake cards, making up exagerated reactions to get someone to accept my 
medcial exemption. The thing was is EVEN if I had known anaphylaxis Maine 
medical Center was not accepting that exemption because from the words of Dora 
Mills herself it was next to impossible for anyone to have anaphylaxis to all 3 vaccine
options. It was impossible to have a medical exemption and ask you to find out how 
many nurses recieved one at MMC. You will find very few. I was lucky to have a 
situation where my health insurance came from my spouse. I had friends, coworkers, 
literally crying as they got their shots against their will. They got the shot despite 
having clotting disorders, stroke history, cardiac history, immune suppression, 
pulmonary hypertension, anaphylaxis, Guillian Barre syndrome, bells palsy.... the list 
goes on. These are the stories you do not hear about. I know you want to keep 
communities safe. But you have to understand that with out true trust and consent 
these mandates will and have backfired. I lost my identity when you took my job from
me. I work in another state that accepted my exemption. I am heart broken. I feel 
embarrased and intruded upon. My health care choices are not for the world to know 
but these laws have violated my right to privacy and authority of my own body. I cry 
every single day still at the loss of my community, my political party, my colleagues, 
my home. I travel to work. I pay taxes twice I have to pay for people to care for my 
home and pets while I am away. I cried when I saw the National Guard going into 
MMC, when my friends, fully vaccinated but with COvid were told to work as long as
they were not symptomatic
You Democrats on this committee, I ask, no beg, you to not see this as a political 
divide. there are many who would have been on your team until their dying day, but 
you deserted us and not only that criminalized and marginalized people that had 
legitimate concerns. Please look at us and see us as more than what you are seeing us 
for now.
