John Lewis
Cape Elizabeth
LD 172
Dear Respective Members of the Health and Human Services Committee,
I am writing to submit public testimony in support of LD 172: An Act to Allow 
Health Care Workers to Return to Work by Reinstating Exemptions from 
Immunization Requirements. At a time when we were already experiencing a 
workforce shortage, and we needed them the most, our health care heroes answered 
the call of duty. 
Throughout 2020 and 2021 our doctors and nurses and the many others in supporting 
roles received well-deserved praise and adoration. Then, in the fall of 2021 it all 
changed. The very people who set their fears aside to be there for our community 
were kicked to the curb.
Forcing employees to have to choose between their livelihood and their ability to 
provide for their family or an experimental medical intervention is the antithesis of 
informed consent. Not only is informed consent ethical, it is a legal obligation. 
Coercion is not consent. From the beginning, the scientific evidence was lacking on 
whether the COVID vaccines would prevent infection or transmission. Yet, this was 
the very reason health care workers were told why they must get the shots and why it 
must be mandated.
As a result, thousands of Maine health care workers were forced from the workforce 
exacerbating the labor shortage. Already prolonged wait times in the emergency 
departments got longer. Available beds became sparse. The reason was not because 
the beds were taken, but because there was lack of workers to staff the beds. Response
times for EMT services, especially in rural parts of the state, suffered. The quality of 
the health care system in Maine took a nose dive. All for what? An experimental 
medical intervention that isn't producing the results we were promised.
It didn't take long for the hospital systems to acknowledge the negative impact this 
policy had on their ability to care for patients. Immediately, travel nurses were hired 
at astronomical pay rates to backfill those who were forced from their jobs. Outbreaks
in multiple units continued despite the high vaccination rate amongst staff. The shift 
from COVID patients being majority unvaccinated to majority vaccinated occurred 
swiftly. And finally, things became so desperate the state violated any public interest 
argument by allowing COVID-positive employees to treat patients - the very people 
the mandate was "supposed to protect". According to an article from WMTW, in 
January of 2022 St. Mary's Hospital in Lewiston permitted COVID-positive 
employees to return to work because of the severe workforce shortage exacerbated by 
the law.
If the last few years teaches us anything, it is the fact that science is not absolute and 
there will always be a risk. It is not up to the government to decide what is acceptable 
risk for an individual. When there is risk, there must be choice. Adverse risk to the 
COVID vaccines, or any other vaccine, can not be denied.
Finally, just within the last few days Rochelle Walensky, the director of the national 
CDC admitted the COVID vaccine does not stop transmission. It is well past time the 
state of Maine follow the science and remove this mandate. At the very least, it must 
restore the ability for health care workers to exempt themselves from immunization 
requirements, whether that is for medical, religious, or philosophical reasons. It is for 
all the above I am urging a vote of Ought to Pass.
Thank you,
John Lewis
Cape Elizabeth, ME
