KImberly Topar
Scarborough
LD 172
4/25/2023
To whom it may concern,
I am asking the committee to please vote “ought to pass” LD 172 - “An Act to Allow 
Health Care Workers to return to work by Reinstating Exemptions from 
Immunization Requirements” as I am in full support of this bill.
I am a single mother, head of household with a mortgage and bills to pay with very 
little  money coming into my home due to this current vaccine mandate and by 
removing the religious exemption which I have been allowed previously. Being fired  
only based on my sincerely held religious beliefs was shocking to my soul and 
mentally and financially devastating.
My financial livelihood has been stripped from my life only to be reduced to a 
significantly lower income due to my healthcare career choice. Being so specifically 
trained in my field, I am still unable to find a position in any field for $20.00+  LESS 
AN HOUR.
I had to cash out money from my retirement twice so far, with HUGE penalties just to
keep my home and make ends meet.
Prior to 10/29/2021, I was a self-sufficient ,financially stable, valued and respected 
employee and coworker as well as a good law abiding citizen and community 
volunteer.
Now, my child is worried the bank will take away our home. Why should this be 
when I am able and willing to work in my chosen career to help others? The medical 
community is suffering from lack of skilled staff and filling positions with warm 
bodies who are burnt out and care is lacking.
My own mother was rushed to a hospital from a nursing home in Lewiston from 
neglect resulting 
In dehydration. They didn't even have time to notice she wasn't eating or drinking and
fell 3 times there.They were constantly short staffed and many on staff were 
miserable and short with the residents. She lost 15 lbs.-20 lbs in less than 3 months.I 
have God to thank for the last incident as we had her transferred to a “ better” facility 
and she is thriving. 
Please vote “ought to pass” on LD172 so I can make my skilled contribution to the 
healthcare community once again and earn a wage that will fill out financial needs 
once again. I love Maine and do not want to move out of the state just for better 
employment opportunities.
With sincere gratitude,
Kimberly Topar 
Nuclear Medicine Cardiology Technologist (for 31 years)
C.N.M.T. (N, CT)  A.A.R.T (N)

