Lisa Dresser
Sangerville, Maine
LD 172
Written testimony for April 24th, 2023 LD 172 - An Act to Allow Health Care 
Workers to Return to Work by Reinstating Exemptions from Immunization 
Requirements
Good morning, 
My name is Lisa Dresser, and I am a nurse of 32 years. My husband, an experienced 
paramedic, and I, came to this state in 2016 with 4 children, while I was expecting 
twin boys. We came to Maine because of my brother and sisters-in-law’s 
recommendation while they were living in Houlton and practicing as MD’s. 
I worked long term care here in Maine until September of 2021, when it was 
explained to me that I could not continue my employment as a nurse unless I accepted
the Covid injection while it was still under an emergency use authorization (EUA). I 
was the full-time evening and night nurse for the Somerset Rehabilitation & Living 
Center in Bingham, where I was working 16-hour shifts Thursday through Monday to
care for our elderly. I worked every shift that I was needed for, I took every PCR test 
offered, I wore masks and face shields without break for entire shifts, I personally 
scrubbed down our building, and I happily followed every policy that the state and 
upper management put forth in order to protect these older people I loved.  
My co-workers and I put our lives on hold. This amazing group of nurses, nursing 
assistants, kitchen workers, and housekeeping did not even go out to stores, we 
ordered our groceries through Sysco via the facility kitchen. Our residents never got 
Covid. They were torn apart by the separation between them and their families. They 
were depressed, scared, and in tears. We were their family; and they were a part of 
ours. It is a part of my life I will never forget, we did so much, with so little.. there 
were so few of us..
Somerset Rehab in Bingham had to close its doors, because the majority of the 
workers refused the Covid injection. We all had different reasons; it was 
experimental, we all saw people were having side effects, Bell's Palsy, and strokes.. 
We didn’t know the long-term effects then, but we know them now. Myocarditis and 
other heart issues that cannot be undone, the risk of clotting,.. Most of my coworkers, 
myself included, hold biblical and moral objections to the shot, we could not accept 
the use of aborted fetal cells that we knew then were used in the testing and 
production of these injections. We did not want to go against our faith. 
Somerset Rehab found homes for the residents, many of them passing away within 6 
months from something described to me as "transplant shock.” It was awful to learn 
of that. These wonderful older people had begged us to 'take the shot and stay with us,
please don't leave us." None of you will ever know how awful and haunting that was 
for us all..
Since then, I have struggled to find jobs where I could work as a nurse without the 
Covid injection, and not having a stable job has meant intermittent, or sometimes no 
health insurance for our family. We have been paying out of pocket for our youngest 
son's doctor's appointments every 12-weeks. He needs abdominal scans on a routine 
basis for cancer monitoring. It has been tough on us all, but we are able to cover the 
bills. 
There are 2 long-term care facilities within a 7-mile radius of our home desperate for 
nursing care that I cannot work for because of the mandate. I have had to work private
care jobs when I could find them, and I have worked in Corrections, something I had 
never done before, but had to do to support my family. 
I have seen many families move out of State, because many, like us, are EMS/Nursing
families, and we have limited, and most often no way, of filling medical care needs 
because of this Covid injection mandate. 
My oldest son was offered free tuition to enter the Eastern Maine Logging program 
last year, but they denied him as they also required the Covid injection, even as the 
majority of training was outside working with heavy equipment, and very little 
classroom time. He is taking online classes now, as well as working a full-time job at 
19 years of age. He is also a firefighter for our small town of Sangerville but cannot 
pursue any career in Medical or EMS as they too require a covid injection. We have 
seen many good Nursing Fire, and EMS people leave because of the Covid mandate, 
making them unable to serve, and new workers be turned away because of their 
religious objections. 
This is wrong.
It is my understanding some "religious groups and churches" have approved the use 
of the Covid vaccine, but that is not our belief, which rests solely in God's laws and 
teachings. One church saying something is fine does not mean that it applies to all 
churches. It does not matter which "Religions” approve of fetal cell use, or allows for 
you to go against your conscience. The Bible, our ultimate authority, Gods word, 
prohibits the taking of innocent life. 
The bible says we are “fearfully and wonderfully made." Every person, from the 
womb to the tomb, as human beings who bear the image of God, are included in this. 
Each of us began with God, being uniquely designed, and made in His image. MRNA
injections were never supposed to interfere with our DNA, science is showing that it 
in fact, does. 
All of these concerns apply to our family. Our 6-year-old son, who lost his twin 
brother during the pregnancy, was born with Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome. He is 
at high risk for embryonal tumors and cancer. My husband and I, our family, do not 
want to take anything experimental, should he need blood, a kidney, or anything else 
from us. There is no exemption, medical or otherwise for this. There is no MD willing
to give us any medical exemption, for fear of being questioned on their medical 
license...That is truth. 
In as much, we are required by our consciences to be rightly informed by the word of 
God. If we follow our consciences into sin, we are guilty of sin, committing an act we
know to be evil. The exemption for our steadfast faith in Christ was taken away, and 
no exemption from an experimental injection we felt was wrong to take, was put in to 
replace it. 
The bible teaches us that God's people are to be humble, peaceful, and desirous of a 
tranquil and quiet life (1 Timothy 2:2), and to do all we can to be at peace with others 
(Romans 12:18). To do anything less means we fear men more than we fear God. We 
pray for one another that we might have the courage and faith to stand in these hard 
times. 
We just want to work.. We brought our children, and babies to this state, bought a 
Farm, work hard, and raise wonderful children to stay true to themselves and the ones 
that they love while serving the community and their God. 
Please.. Please let us go back to work.. This injection does not stop transmission- it is 
not 100% effective, and it does have side effects., I have personally seen it. We have 
lost so many to 'Sudden Adult death," not from Covid, and at unspeakable young 
ages.. 
Please show mercy on us, on the people of this state and give them back the love and 
care of Christian healthcare workers who bring so much, and ask so little. Please 
allow us to work and help to bring EMS, and Nursing levels back to where they 
should be. 
We are the silent, peaceful ,forgotten backbone of Maine healthcare, Fire and EMS. 
We are harming no one.
In Christ,
Mrs. Lisa Ann Dresser 
 
Admin. (2022). Abortion, the human fetal cell industry and vaccines. A Voice for 
Truth. 
https://avoicefortruth.com/abortion-the-human-fetal-cell-industry-and-vaccines/ 
 Healy, M. (2021, November 9). Study shows dramatic decline in COVID vaccine 
effectiveness - Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles Times. 
https://www.latimes.com/science/story/2021-11-04/study-shows-dramatic-decline-in-
effectiveness-of-covid-19-vaccines 
 MHCA. (2023). https://www.mehca.org/resources 
 Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine Reactions & Adverse Events | CDC. (2022). 
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-19/info-by-product/pfizer/reactogenicity.html#1
8-serious-adverse-events
