 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate  
 
DATE:  April 24, 2023 
 
OPPOSE– LD 172 , An Act to Allow Health Care Workers to Return to Work by Reinstating 
Exemptions from Immunization Requirements and; LD 1598 , An Act to Allow an Exception 
to Immunization Requirements for Health Care Workers for Vaccines Approved Under 
Emergency Use Authorization 
 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the esteemed members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health and 
Government Affairs Associate for the Maine Medical Association and I live in Windham. The 
MMA appreciates the opportunity to provide the following comments in opposition to LD 172 
and LD 1598, which would allow for health care workers to have an exemption from 
immunization requirements.  
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
 
Maine has been a leader in the nation for our response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our 
communities, health care professionals, and health facilities worked together to provide access 
to vaccines and quality care. Our advancements in telehealth helped to serve our rural state 
and our diligent immunizations helped to protect the public health. Despite having the highest 
proportion of rural residents in the country and the second highest proportion of people 65 and 
older, Maine’s ability to provide widespread access to vaccination and our response to a 
dynamic situation has ensured the health and safety of our people.  
 
In 2019, the Maine Legislature passed LD 798 to repeal exemptions to vaccinee requirements 
for religious and philosophical reasons. The legislature also ensured the availability of medical 
exemptions to a health care professional or parent who provides a written statement from a 
licensed physician, nurse practitioner or physician assistance that  determined, in their 
professional judgement, that immunizations against one or more diseases may be medically 
inadvisable. The requirement that health care workers be vaccinated protects vulnerable 
Mainers and the people who care for them. Immunization is a critical public health tool.  
 
In July 2021, more than 50 health care professional societies and organizations including the 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 American Medical Association, American Hospital Association, the American College of 
Physicians, the American Academy of Family Physicians, and the American Public Health 
Association issued a joint statement in support of COVID-19 vaccine mandates for all workers 
in health and long-term care. A few months after the statement was released 30 more 
organizations had signed on as proponents to the joint statement, bring the list of proponents 
to 88. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services requires health care providers and supplies 
from several facilities to have the COVID-19 vaccination.  
 
Immunization amongst healthcare workers is essential to protect their health and the health of 
their patients and colleagues. Vaccination serves as a valuable tool to protect public health, “A 
50% increase in daily vaccine doses administered to previously unvaccinated individuals is 
projected to prevent 30,727 hospitalizations and 11,937 deaths.” It is for these reasons that 
Maine Law requires Each Designated Healthcare Facility to require all employees who do not 
work exclusively remote to have a Certificate of Immunization, or Proof of Immunization, 
against: Rubeola (measles), Mumps, Rubella (German measles), Varicella (chicken pox), 
Hepatitis B, Influenza, and COVID-19.  
 
For these reasons, the Maine Medical Association opposes providing religious and 
philosophical exemptions from immunization requirements and an exemption from 
immunization requirements if the only available vaccine for a disease is FDA approved under 
an emergency use authorization.   
 
We thank the Committee for considering our comments and welcome any questions. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Mikenzie Dwyer 
(mdwyer@mainemed.com) 
