Rachel Driscoll
Scarborough
LD 172
Dear distinguished members of the Health and Human Services Committee.  I am 
writing in support of LD172.  My name is Rachel Driscoll, I am an RN of 19 years, 
and I was drastically affected by the Covid 19 vaccine mandate.  I worked as an RN at
MMC for 17 years.  I dedicated my entire nursing career to MMC, worked through 
the pandemic, was deployed to short staffed units, including the covid unit for many 
months during the pandemic, and it all came to an end on October 29th 2020 when I 
was forced out of my job due to not accepting the Covid 19 vaccine.  This time was a 
very difficult time in my life but I understood that I had a duty to patients and a 
unique skillset that was formed over 17 years that was needed among the floors of the
hospital.  I can attest that before I was forced out of my job, the units in the hospital 
were already short staffed and dangerous.  Patients were already suffering due to lack 
of staff.  The mandates have caused irreparable damage to our already fragile 
healthcare system.  The mandates have driven out thousands of medical professionals 
and other essential healthcare workers away from healing and helping patients.  There
is no good reason to continue the mandates, especially given there is little to no 
evidence that they are having an impact on infections or onward transmission.  The 
mandates are causing harm without benefit.  There are extremely limited amount of 
healthcare jobs available for unvaccinated medical professionals in the state of Maine.
Almost no facilities hire unvaccinated healthcare workers because there are no 
exemptions left in the state of Maine who carries one of the harshest mandates in the 
country without exemption.  Healthcare workers are fleeing the state or their 
profession in order to find work.  We have lost the talents of an untold number of 
highly dedicated, compassionate frontline healthcare givers and I fear they will never 
return.  Our healthcare system sits on the edge of a precipice and I fear we are on the 
verge of a serious collapse.   Please vote to restore exemptions and begin to repair our
healthcare system. 
