122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
        
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association in Opposition to:  
LD 59: An Act to Prohibit Inclusion of the COVID -19 Vaccine in the Universal Childhood Immunization 
Program  
LD 172: An Act to Allow Health Care Workers to Return to Work by Reinstating Exemptions from 
Immunization Requirements  
LD 601: An Act to Reduce the Shortage of Municipal Emergency Medical Services Personnel by  
Removing Certain Vaccination Requirements  
LD 1382: An Act to Establish the Guiding Public Health Principles of Focused Protection for Pandemics  
of a Highly Infectious Respiratory Disease  
LD 1547: An Act to Temporarily Prohibit the State from Mandating COVID -19 Vaccinations  
LD 1598: An Act to Allow an Exception to Immunization Requirements for Health Care Workers for  
Vaccines Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization  
 Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Room 209, Cross State Office Building Monday, April 24, 2023  Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive 
director of Maine Public Health Association.  
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, a nd 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied 
to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that 
responsibility seriously. 
 We believe these bills would roll -back and unde rmine Maine’s strong vaccine laws, lower vaccine confidence, 
and threaten public health , and write today in opposition to LD 59, LD 172, LD 601, LD 1382, LD 1547, and 
LD 1598. 
 
We are only as healthy as the world around us, which is why strong immunization laws are one of the most 
effective ways to improve the health of our communities. Data from immunization surveys indicate that 
states with stronger immunization laws have higher immunization rates and sufficient herd immunity to 
prevent outbreaks. There are many different policy options for improving immunization rates, such as 
improving access to vaccines, implementing immunization registries, requiring provider and parent 
education, improving reporting requirements, and increasing funding for vaccine res earch and development. 
Public health requirements for healthcare and emergency service workers, including immunizations, are also 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  essential to protecting the medically vulnerable patients they care for, as well as their colleagues and 
community.  
 
Data consistently show that vaccines are safe, effective, and necessary for good public health. Maine has safely administered more than  3,266,862 COVID -19 vaccines to more than 76% of the state’s  population. COVID- 19 
is a serious disease. Contracting COVID -19 can cause pneumonia, chronic fatigue, injury to organs, including 
the heart, liver, and kidneys, Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome, septic shock, blood clots, and death. Unvaccinated patients who contract COVID -19 are more likely to have more serious  disease, and to be more 
expensive to provide care to than vaccinated patients: An unvaccinated Mainer is 8 times more likely to be hospitalized than someone who is vaccinated, at an average cost of $71,036 for noncomplex cases and $302,704 for complex cas es.  
 
The COVID -19 vaccine is not a required vaccine for school -entry . Prohibiting it from being included would 
reduce vaccine access and increase financial burden for Maine families who choose to immunize their 
children against this deadly disease.  Furthermore, i n Maine, if a patient has a valid medical exemption for a 
required vaccine, health care providers issue such an exemption.  
 
All major medical and public health organizations have issued policy statements in support of eliminating 
non-medical exemptions,1 and other states and Congress are discussing ways to strengthen immunization 
laws to protect and uphold the rights of all – to keep everyone safe, including those who cannot protect 
themselves. Maintaining  our strong, existing immunization laws is the fas test, most cost -effective way to 
increase and maintain high immunization rates in Maine communities  now and for generations to come.  
 
Vaccine hesitancy due to false information and myths has grown so large, that the World Health Organization 
listed vaccine hesitancy as one of the top ten threats to global health in 2019. We are concerned about the threats to public health posed by these bills, and respectfully request  you to please vote LD 59, LD 172, LD 
601, LD 1382, LD 1547, and LD 1598 “Ought Not to Pass.” Thank you for considering our testimony. 
 
 
1 Immuniz e.org. State Laws and Mandates by Vaccine . 
