Robert Craig
LISBON FALLS
LD 172
My name is Robert Craig. I live in Lisbon Falls. Until September 30th 2021 I had 
worked as an Occupational Therapy assistant at the same health care facility here in 
Maine for the past 14 years.
I am positive that I contracted a flu/virus or what is referred as covid-19 very early in 
the year 2020, before anyone really thought that it was around. Before it was really 
even a topic of everyday discussion or in the news cycle every day. The year went on 
and slowly the virus was an everyday thing and then the mandates came, to society 
and to
the community at my health care facility.
Though it was very sad to see the residents unable to physically be with their loved 
ones (window visits only), I was very proud of my coworkers in Rehab as well as all 
the other staff in our building. It was very stressful working under the conditions 
asked of us. No covid came into our building all of 2020 ie not a single resident was 
labeled as covid positive. Then in January of 2021 the majority of residents and staff 
got their covid injections. In the weeks that followed these injections I noticed 
something different about the residents. Many of
them had started to exhibit a rapid type of functional neuro decline. Their previous 
abilities and level of mobility and self care skills dropped. It was astounding! And 
then the deaths. I stopped counting at 8. It was distressing to witness these events. I 
asked the Nurse Manager if these were reported to VAERS. She had no knowledge of
VAERS. I briefly explained to her what it was and suggested she might want to 
educate herself.
 My employer (per state and federal mandates) requested on very short notice that I 
provide a covid-19 vaccination card or a copy of a medical exemption in order to 
maintain employment. A couple of years ago my personal care physician did not 
respect my request for a spiritual exemption for the yearly flu shot when the state of 
Maine still honored them. I took the flu shots in order to maintain employment. I am 
not anti-vax per say but I do believe in medical autonomy, a right to be fully informed
and choose what goes in our bodies.
The Occupational Therapy profession has a set of core beliefs. One of them is: 
"Freedom indicates valuing each person's right to exercise autonomy and demonstrate
independence,
initiative, and self-direction". The service recipient's right and desire to guide their 
interventions is extremely important. Likewise, that freedom is and should be allowed
to all of us including me as a provider. If I don't have that, what type of clinician am I 
representing? If I am to espouse this belief in my patient but not afforded the same, 
the validity of my profession becomes compromised.
I had built up a substantial amount of PTO during these times while I worked straight 
through the so called pandemic. My Rehab employer stated that I would recieve these 
earned PTO funds only If
I signed a letter of resignation. I would not sign this letter under those draconian 
circumstances. I chose to work until they terminated me. I did not recieve these 
earned PTO funds nor did I recieve unemployment benefits as the governor of Maine 
dictated that those that refused the injections would not qualify for unemployment 
benefits. This created a financial burden for me.
I was forced to leave not only a job I loved, but the profession I love by the unfair 
vaccine mandate.
I had worked in healthcare for more than 35 years with the last 20 as an Occupational 
Therapy practitioner. I loved what I did. I had always approached my patients as a 
whole person, respecting where they are at physically, emotionally, intellectually, and
spiritually and have been very succesful at providing treatment interventions that 
bring about positive change one way or another in most cases. 
I did not want my health care career to end at that time. For me, maintaining my core 
beliefs regarding health and wellness and my own spiritual integrity far outweighed 
the questionable efficacy of an expiremental injection and the long term ramifications 
of them.
Truthfully, Robert B Craig 
