 
 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Opposition to LD 172, “An Act to Allow Health Care Workers to Return to 
Work by Reinstating Exemptions from Immunization Requirements” 
Monday, April 24, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Sarah Calder, Senior Government Affairs 
Director at MaineHealth, and I am here to testify in opposition to LD 172, “An Act to Allow 
Health Care Workers to Return to Work by Reinstating Exemptions from Immunization 
Requirements.” 
MaineHealth is a non-profit health care system that provides the full continuum of health care 
services to the residents of eleven counties in Maine and one in New Hampshire through its nine 
acute care hospitals, physician practices, lab, home health care services, and an integrated 
continuum of inpatient and community-based behavioral health services. Every day, 
MaineHealth’s 22,000 care team members work tirelessly to support our vision of “Working 
together so our communities are the healthiest in America,” by providing safe, high-quality care 
to the residents in our service area.  
As part of that work, and in an effort to deliver on our values of excellence, respect, and being 
patient-centered, MaineHealth has made a promise to our communities to consistently deliver 
safe and high-quality patient care. In order to achieve this goal, we must do everything we can to 
prevent the spread of disease, including getting vaccinated.  
In 2019, MaineHealth was a strong supporter of LD 798 (now Chapter 154), which removed the 
philosophical and religious exemptions from immunization requirements for students in schools 
and health care workers. And it is important to note that the law passed by the 129th Legislature, 
includes the availability of medical exemptions to a parent or health care professional who 
provides a written statement from a licensed physician, nurse practitioner or physician assistance 
that determined, in their professional judgement, that immunizations against one or more 
diseases may be medically inadvisable. 
In 2020, the Maine voters overwhelming supported Maine’s vaccine law. In fact, 73% of voters 
chose to uphold Chapter 154 and the elimination of the religious and philosophical exemptions to 
the State’s vaccine requirements. Maine voters have spoken – they support public health and 
ensuring our most vulnerable are protected from the threat of vaccine-preventable diseases.  
Almost four years after LD 798 became law – and one pandemic later – MaineHealth is still a 
strong supporter of the law because we know that vaccinations protect both our care team 
members and those they interact with, including patients, co-workers, loved ones, and the 
communities in which they live. 
Restoring the religious and philosophical exemptions to the State’s vaccine requirements would 
undermine the tremendous progress made due to the passage of Chapter 154. I urge you to listen 
to Maine voters and reject any legislation that seeks to restore the religious and philosophical 
exemptions to the State’s vaccine requirements. 
Thank you for your time and consideration and I would be happy to answer any questions you 
may have.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
