Stacy McCracken 
Bryant Pond 
LD 172 
 
Dear Members of the Health and Human Services Committee, State Legislators and 
fellow citizens of the State of Maine, 
I want to thank you for your service and your attention on this most important Bill. I am 
writing today in support of LD 172, an Act to Allow Health Care Workers to Return to 
Work by Reinstating Exemptions from Immunization Requirements, and the other bills 
that support vaccine-choice being heard today. 
I have been a Registered Nurse for 28 years, all but two of them working full time and 
carrying our families health insurance, as my husband is self-employed.  We have had 
property in Maine for almost 20 years, visiting regularly, and finally were able to move 
permanently here almost 5 years ago!  I went to work full time for Central Maine Medical 
Center in March, 2020, just days before the pandemic really “hit Maine”.  I worked 
during the pandemic – masking, Covid testing, overtime, etc. (They called us heroes 
then.)  I lost my job in October, 2021 due to the Covid vaccine mandate.  I did not 
accept the Covid vaccine, as there was not enough information about it in order for me 
to truly give my informed consent.  It also violated my religious and philosophical beliefs.  
I requested a religious exemption from my employer, but that was not accepted.  My 
family and I have suffered significant financial loss in the past 1 ½ years that I have not 
been able to work as a full time nurse.  We have not had health insurance for the past 1 
½ years.  No benefits.  
When I became a nurse I never expected in a million years that I would ever be without 
a nursing job.  Everyone needs nurses. This isn’t a field that’s overflowing with 
employees.  There’s always a nursing shortage!  It was never a worry for me, even 
during the pandemic!  I’ve wanted to be a nurse since I was 8 years old, and I still want 
to be a nurse.  I’d love to be a nurse in Maine, where I live.  We have considered 
moving to a state that does not mandate the EUA Covid vaccine, but were waiting to 
see if things would turn around.  We have to make a decision soon, as I financially 
cannot continue to NOT work in my chosen profession. 
Please support LD 172 and let me, and others like me, return to work and take care of 
patients.  That’s what we do.  I’m good at it too, and love it.  Please reinstate 
exemptions from immunization requirements for health care workers and let us get back 
to work. 
Thank you, 
Stacy McCracken, RN, BSN, CCM 
 
 
