Stephanie Langley
Kennebunkport
LD 172
Hello and thank you for reading what I have to say. My name is Stephanie Langley 
and I have been a Nurse for 5 years. I grew up in Kennebunk and went to school at 
the University of Southern Maine and got my Bachelor’s in Nursing. I love living 
here and I was very excited to care for this community. Right now I am forced to care 
for a community in NH which I very much enjoy, however is farther away from 
home. Back when Covid hit I was working at Maine Medical Center, and even though
I had only been a nurse for 2 years at that time I saw so much change in medicine and 
our nursing profession. When people started to get vaccinated I had my own 
reservations because of my past medical history as well as my own beliefs. Like 
everyone else, I have my own medical history that is my responsibility to advocate 
for. I have dealt with a lot of health issues and I worked night shifts as a nurse so that 
only made things worse. I also had gotten covid pretty early on, and didn’t see a 
reason as to why I needed to get vaccinated right away. After making this decision I 
felt as though I had many on my side, but that quickly changed. I felt as though I 
couldn’t speak up anymore, and all the other staff were often having discussions 
about how “dumb” the unvaccinated were. I had heard two nurses talking about how 
dumb one of our patients family was who had gotten covid and were not vaccinated. I 
felt as though my colleagues were bullying people and creating a hostile work 
environment. I couldn’t believe that fellow nurses who I had thought so fondly of 
were treating people this way. People who are suppose to be unbiased and caring, as 
we are taught to be in nursing school. I was embarrassed to be one of these nurses. It 
became such a toxic work environment that I left in September 2021, a month and a 
half before the covid vaccine mandate went into effect. This was a very difficult 
decision for me because I really enjoyed the care I was providing and I was proud to 
work at MMC, but I couldn’t handle the negative work environment anymore and I 
would’ve been fired a month later anyway. I am asking for you to please reconsider 
this mandate so that I can work in the state that I grew up in and love. I am asking you
to reconsider this because it has created such a divide within our healthcare system 
that we cannot see past our own biases or beliefs. I am asking you to reconsider this 
because people deserve to be able to make choices about what goes in their own 
bodies. Thank you for your consideration. 
