  MAINE AFL-CIO  
A Union of Unions Standing for Maine Workers 
21 Gabriel Drive, Augusta, Maine 04330 
Tel. (207) 622-9          
(207) 622-9675 
Visit our website: www.maineaflcio.org  
 
President 
Cynthia Phinney Vice President 
Pat Carleton Secretary Treasurer 
Doug Born 
 
 
Testimony of Maine AFL-CIO Legislative & Political Director, Adam Goode, in Support of LD 1964, 
"An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical 
Leave Benefits Program” 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
my name is Adam Goode. I’m the Legislative and Political Director of the Maine AFL-CIO. We represent 40,000 
working people in the state of Maine. We work to improve the lives and working conditions of our members and 
all working people. We testify in support of LD 1964. 
 
Our Maine AFL-CIO Executive Board has spent considerable time looking at Paid Family Medical Leave (PFML) 
including the proposed Citizen’s Initiative, the bill in the 129th legislature and the current bill before you today. 
Our board has been clear that the Maine AFL-CIO supports the right of working people to paid leave. We think 
that it is a fundamental human right and that it is essential that people can access paid leave to care for a new born 
child, a serious health condition, military caregiving needs and more.  
 
Working people, whether black, brown or white, deserve time away from their job in order to care for themselves 
or a loved one. It is not possible to expect people to be able to do this without being paid. Life is better for a 
newborn child if their parents take leave in order to form a critical initial bond with them and to bring them to the 
pediatrician for a regular check-up or immunization. The 178,000 older adults who live in Maine are better able 
to recover from injury and illness when cared for by family members and for most of us that can happen only if 
we have wage replacement to do so. All working people should be able to have the dignity, respect and peace of 
mind in the workplace to be able to provide care for their family and an income for their family. 
 
Currently working people in Maine often must choose between caring for themselves or family members and 
making a living. All people in our state should be able to both earn a living and have a life. We know that currently 
most working people, particularly those not in a union, do not have access to paid family or medical leave and for 
those that do have access it is often for an insufficient period of time. 
 
In addition to this most fundamental reason - that people should not have to choose between their economic 
livelihood and taking care of a newborn or a loved one - we support Paid Family Medical Leave for 3 additional 
reasons. First, we believe in social insurance models as a humane and rational way to meet basic human needs. 
We have fundamental human rights to things like healthcare, education and leave and we should create strong 
public systems to equitably provide those needs. Secondly, we know that these kinds of systems reduce inequality 
both in terms of who can access such leave and in terms of overall economic inequality. That is a good thing for 
all of us. Third, paid leave promotes gender equity in the workplace and society. Leave systems encourage men 
to take leave and to play a larger caretaking role. They also better facilitate the possibility to return to work after 
childbirth and help balance work histories between women and men, thus contributing to closing the gender wage 
gap. 
Printed In House with Union 
Labor

 
 We also support the current approach where the program is equitably financed. PFML is a shared social 
responsibility that has benefits for both the employee and the employer. It is not the individual responsibility of 
the worker. The bill funds the program through an even split in funding between employers and employees. This 
wage contribution for the program is no more than 1% of an employee’s wages split between an employer and 
employee, which is .5% or less for the employee and employer. Employers should pay into the system and the 
financing should not fall to working people alone.  
 
Maine AFL-CIO Recommendations to Strengthen this Legislation 
This is an important and complex policy area and we recognize that the committee may make some changes to 
this bill. To that end, we recommend the following changes which are of importance to the labor movement. Some 
of these areas may already be addressed in the sponsor’s amendment and some may need further amendments to 
fix in the bill.  
 
1. We support the wage replacement provisions in this bill that prevent penalizing higher income wage earners. 
Setting the Average Weekly Wage (AWW) for wage replacement to up 120% of the state AWW ensures 
workers earning slightly more money do not experience significant wage loss when utilizing the system.  
The provisions in this bill that wage replacement can be up to 120% Maine’s AWW (currently $1,036.13) is an 
appropriate approach as it protects wages for working people who happen to make a higher wage. We encourage 
the committee not to lower this Average Weekly Wage percentage level. Someone who is working lots of 
overtime in order to catch up on car payments or help get their child through that first year of college should not 
have their wage dinged if both of their parents take a turn for the worse. 
 
As a concrete example, if you are an electrician working 60 hours a week or a mill worker working lots of overtime 
and you earn $70,000 per year, you would make $1,346 per week (pre tax). Under any proposal where the AWW 
is capped at 100%, you would lose more than $300 per week ($1346 - $1036) in wage replacement under the 
leave system given the cap. Most people live based on the income that they earn and we should do our best to 
fully replace wages folks earn. We encourage the committee to only pass a Paid Family Medical Leave bill that 
has a cap set at 120% of the AWW. 
 
Furthermore, the bill requires the Department of Labor to adjust the maximum rate in the future “as necessary.” 
We recommend that the bill be amended to say that the Commissioner adjust the maximum rate “in accordance 
with this section”. This provides a guarantee to workers that the AWW will be up to whatever 120% of the SAWW 
at the time. 
 
 
2. We feel strongly that the public system should not hurt other entities which have better plans and collectively 
bargained plans. We appreciate that the bill creates a floor for leave and permits other plans to supplement the 
leave provisions. The committee should work to ensure that the proposal before us increases the floor for 
everyone while respecting and not undermining entities with existing plans, whether collectively bargained 
or otherwise. The proposed ballot initiative had the best language on protecting collective bargaining and 
while the language in the bill mostly mirrors the language in the ballot initiative, one important subsection 
was left out of the bill. To help improve the bill, we would ask to include this language from the ballot initiative 
inserted into any amendment on the bill: 
6.  Employer policy may not diminish employee's right to benefits.  An employer policy adopted or 
retained after the effective date of this subchapter may not diminish an employee's right to benefits 
under this subchapter. Any agreement by an employee to waive the employee's rights under this 
subchapter is against public policy and is void and unenforceable.    
  
3. The collective bargaining section can be further improved by two additions. First, the bill should specifically 
prohibit the concurrent running of the benefits in PFML and any other leave benefits. The bill captures this 
concept with the “exhaust” phrasing, but we want to make sure that is totally protected in order to make sure 
that a worker won’t be expected to be using two benefits simultaneously. Second, denials or any other 
problems with PFML should be made subject to the grievance process. 
 
4. Lastly, the Authority established in this bill should have a position for a representative of at least one statewide 
labor organization. Labor’s experience working with PFML found in existing collective bargaining 
agreements, implementing PFML in the workplace and crafting successful social insurance programs that 
have stood the test of time will be helpful on the Authority.  
Every family faces major life events. Working people deserve the right to be fully present – and economically 
secure – during a major loss in their family or the exciting addition of a new person through birth, adoption or 
fostering of a child.  
 
We urge you to support and strengthen LD 1964 as outlined above. 
 
 
