 
 
Committee on Labor and Housing  Committee  
Sen.  Senator Tipping , Senate Chair  
Rep. Roeder , House Chair  
 
Dear Senator  Tipping , Representative Roeder , and members of the Labor and Housing  
Committee . 
 
The American Heart Association (AHA) is the nation’s oldest and largest voluntary organization  
dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke, whose mission is to be a relentless force for a 
world of longer, healthier lives. We are writing i n support  of LD 1964  “An Act to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits 
Program”. We support  policies that increase access to job -protected paid family & medical 
leave that can be used for cardi ovascular  treatments, survivorship care, and caregiving . The 
need for access to paid medical & family leave became clearer nationwide during the COVID -19 
Public Health Emergency. The availability of paid family and medical leave for people with and 
caring for individuals who have a serious  illness or health  condition is vital, as treatment for and 
recovery from serious illnesses and conditions are often  difficult and time consuming. The 
flexibility to balance treatment and employment is essential for patients and  caregivers.  Not all 
patients or caregivers have access to paid family and medical leave, and without it they risk  
financial hardship or not getting the care they or their loved ones need . 
 
The availability of paid family and medical leave for people with and caring for individuals who 
have a serious  illness or health condition is vital, as treatment for and recovery from serious 
illnesses and conditions are often  difficult and time consuming . The flexibility to balance 
treatment and employment is essential for patients and  caregivers. Not all patients or 
caregivers have access to paid family and medical leave, and without it they risk  financial 
hardship or not getting the care they or their loved ones need.   
 
Our organization  has long fought to ensure that patients have access to care to treat their 
serious illnesses  and health conditions. Being able to take time off work is fundamentally an 
access to care issue, and our  current patchwork system of paid and unpaid leave forces some  
patients and caregivers to choose between  treating their illness and keeping their job or having 
enough income to survive – while also exacerbating health  inequities.  For these reasons we 
urge you to  vote “ought to pass” on LD#1964. I would be happy to answer any questions you 
may have about this testimony.  
 
Sincerely  
Allyson Perron Drag   
American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  
Government Relations Director      
 

