Amanda  Berry
Stratton
LD 1964
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and esteemed members of the Labor and 
Housing Committee. I’m Amanda Berry, a family nurse practitioner from Stratton, 
here to testify in support of LD 1964 and a Paid Family & Medical Leave program.
In my professional life, I treat folks with opiate-use disorder. They face a lot of 
hurdles. And many of them also care for elderly parents or sick children. The 
consequences of not having guaranteed paid family leave for them are extreme. Many
are forced to quit their jobs to both get and give care; this derails their life. These 
folks often lose everything they’ve worked for—not just their job, but also their 
homes, their cars, their security. I had one patient tell me, “I’m giving up. I have to go
back to prison. It’s the only way I can get housing and food.” That’s how rough they 
have it. 
Lack of paid family leave does not just affect my patients—it touches all of us. I am 
no exception. Last August, my husband was diagnosed with cancer. We had to drop 
everything and go to Boston for treatment and surgery. I’m privileged to have a good 
job, health insurance, and paid time off. Yet it wasn’t enough when this crisis hit. 
Thankfully, my generous coworkers donated their paid time off, so that I could focus 
on my husband’s health. If my colleagues hadn’t stepped in to give what time they 
had, I don’t know how we would’ve done it.
Imagine how different things would’ve been if we had paid family leave. I’m lucky I 
had resources and support in a crisis; even with that, paid family leave would have 
made a difference. But what about the Mainers who don’t have those resources? 
Many of my patients are socially and physically isolated. They don’t have that kind of
support. They’re hanging on by a thread. 
Everybody gets sick. Everybody has family members who require care. We need to 
take time to help our families—and ourselves—without fear of risking our 
livelihoods. If paid family leave were to pass, people wouldn’t have to sacrifice their 
jobs to care for ailing loved ones. Paid family leave would make our workforce 
stronger, more stable, more humane. This policy would change not just our economy, 
but our communities for the better. It’s past time to pass this bill. Thank you. 

