  
 
  
May  25, 2023  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Amanda Cost, and I am the Executive Director of Partners for Peace. On 
behalf of our organization and the survivors we serve, I urge you to support paid safe leave for survivors 
of domestic abuse and violence in Maine.  
Partners for Peace is a domestic violence resource center that has been advocating for survivors of 
domestic abuse for fifty years. A member of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence, we are 
proud to be Maine’s first domestic violence resource center  and the nation’s third oldest of its kind. It is 
our mission to engage individuals and the community to end domestic violence in Penobscot and 
Piscataquis Counties in Maine. We provide support, advocacy, and safety planning to anyone affected by 
domestic abuse. We foster safe and healthy relationships through prevention, education, and training. 
Together with our community we recognize the nature of abuse, respond to it, and change the 
conditions which lead to it. We believe that every person deserves to l ive in peace and equality, and that 
just and respectful relationships can change the world.  
Some of the many support services provided by Partners for Peace include: 24 -hour helpline, safety 
planning, crisis and emotional support, one on one advocacy, sup port and education groups, civil justice 
advocacy, criminal justice advocacy, court accompaniment, healthcare advocacy and hospital 
accompaniment, emergency shelter and housing services, transitional housing services, and children's 
services.  
Our five dec ades of experience and expertise inform our viewpoint that our services are just one piece 
of a complex and dynamic puzzle made up of many individuals, organizations, and systems necessary to 
end domestic abuse and support survivors. We strongly support Sa fe Leave as a missing puzzle piece and 
essential response to helping survivors access safety and security.  
Seeking safety from abuse is time -intensive labor that may require survivors to take countless hours 
away from work. Examples include taking time to  call our Helpline or meet with an advocate to safety 
plan, communicate with law enforcement, complete paperwork to submit a protection from abuse 
order, attend court hearings, navigate housing options, and access healthcare. These activities are even 
more  time -intensive for survivors who live in rural areas and may not have access to transportation or 
internet/technology. Many survivors contact us needing gas money, taxi fare, or financial support for car 
  
 
  
repairs. While we can often connect them with resou rces to address these barriers, they also need Safe 
Leave to protect their jobs and income.  
People who experience domestic abuse have high rates of post -traumatic stress disorder. With access to 
treatment and other supports, healing is possible, but may t ake months or even years. Safe Leave can 
help to remove one of the many barriers that can impede healing and promote increased health and 
well-being.   
We can also share our perspective as a small nonprofit employer with 26 full -time staff. In addition to 
parental leave for childbirth, several staff have faced unexpected health challenges in the past year, 
resulting in the need for paid leave. In spring 2022, we were excited to begin offering an employer paid 
short -term disability insurance plan for all our  employees. This plan provides 60% of income for up to 12 
weeks, depending on the nature of the illness. Employees can then use other accrued paid sick and PTO 
leave to make up the difference in income. This short -term disability plan has provided some ben efit but 
has not provided the level of protection our employees truly need and deserve. For example, 
uncomplicated labor and delivery only merits six weeks of disability payments and a standard c -section 
delivery covers eight weeks. Moreover, this policy d oes not offer any support for other types of parental 
leave, including for adoption, or for employees who need to care for sick family members. As an 
organization that values all of our employees and their families, universal paid family leave is essential .  
Thank you for the opportunity to share our support for universal paid family leave and, in particular, the 
ability of survivors to have paid leave while they accomplish the tasks essential to keeping them and 
their children safe.  
 
 
