 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
in support  
LD 1964 , An Act to Implement  the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop  a Paid Family and Medical Leave 
Benefits Program  
 
May  25, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Committee on Labor and Housing: My 
name is Amy Winston and I live in Edgecomb. I am testifying in support of LD 1964 on behalf of Coastal 
Enterprises, Inc. (CEI) , a c ommunity development  corporation (CDC) and community development  
financial institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick.  Founded in 1977 , CEI’s mission is to build just, vibrant , 
and climate -resilient futures for people and communities in Maine and rural regions. We do this by 
integrating finance, business expertise and policy solutions in ways that make the economy work more 
equitably .  
 
CEI embraces a  seven -part  Good Jobs  Framework  as a benchmark that we use to inform our investment 
decisions , advise employers,  and establish our policy priorities. Good Jobs are quality jobs that provide 
living wages and basic benefits , including paid time off , that provide economic stability, a fair and 
engaging workplace, and opportunities to advance in a career and build wealth . Companies that met 
these metrics were associated with a 47% increase in  revenue in 2018 and 2019,  illustrating  economic 
value beyond staff loyalty for employers that  create quality jobs.1 Establishing a PFML system in Maine 
aligns with a good jobs strategy. Creating good jobs requires good public policy.  
 
PFML is a necessary  and fundamental benefit that improves workforce sta bility for employers and 
economic  stability for workers.  Maine is currently the only state in New England without a paid 
family/medical leave policy .2 With this bill, Maine  would  join 11 other states, including our New England 
neighbors, in providing employees an option  to take paid leave in the event of a qualifying circumstance – 
welcoming a new child, recovering from an illness or caretaking a family member . As it stands now , many 
Maine workers must choose between  their job and  family or even their own wellbeing when faced with a 
significant family or medical event. A national study found that  the two -thirds of workers who did not 
take needed family and medical leave reported that they could not afford to take unpaid leave.3 The US is 
the only developed nation without paid family and medical leave .4 Without a federal paid family and 
medical leave program, state  level involvement  is needed .  
 PFML  is especially  valuable in helping low-income workers and women  stay in the workforce. PFML 
programs have been shown to significantly reduce the rate at which people leave the workforce, 
particularly women. It is  estimated that nationally, 30% of working women  quit their jobs after giving 
birth.
5 Allowing for paid leave, without fear of reprisal, would help prevent this same exodus of working 
 
1 Betsy Biemann, Good  Jobs as a Stepping Stone to an Equitable Economic Future , Impact Entrepreneur (Oct. 2, 2021)  
https://impacte ntrepreneur.com/good -jobs -as-a-stepping -stone -to-an-equitable- economic- future/ .  Data  from C EI Ventures, Inc. 
(CVI), CEI’ s venture capital investment subsidiary.   
2 Sierra Whaley, Sen. Mattie Daughtry Talks Paid Family and Medical Leave at Bangor Conference, WABI 5 (Apr. 10, 2023), 
https://www.wabi.tv/2023/04/10/sen -mattie -daughtry -talks -paid -family -medical -leave -bangorconference/   
3 Kathleen Romig and Kathleen Bryant, A National Paid Leave Program Would Help Workers, Families , Center on Budget and Policy 
Priorities (Apr. 27, 2021), https://www.cbpp.org/research/economy/a -national -paid -leaveprogram -would -help -workers -families  
4Antonia DeB ianchi, What Other Countries Offer Workers that the US Just Doesn’t , Today (Mar. 31, 2021).  
5 Romig, supra  note 1.  
 
mothers from Maine’s labor force. Continued workforce participation increases the lifetime earnings and 
savings of  women while also reducing the male -female pay gap.6  
 
Workers earning minimum wage are far less likely to have access to private PFML insurance t hrough 
their employer; and they are more likely to lose pay or employment  as a result of taking unpaid leave.7 As 
such, it is a way to attract and retain workforce. Improving the ability of employees to take paid family or 
medical leave,  when necessary,  benefits businesses as well as employees.8 CEI’s workforce solutions team 
has observed that businesses we have worked with appre ciate the tangible benefits that earned paid time 
off has brought to their businesses. With thoughtful design and careful implementation, broadening 
access to paid family and medical leave can benefit businesses and their employees, increase workforce 
part icipation , worker productivity, and foster business and economic growth.  
 Business owners are concerned about the added expense of a PFML program and the impact this will 
have on their bottom line. For small businesses operating on thin margins, Maine’s proposed PFML 
program caps the employer’s share of the cost  at 1.0% of empl oyee wages  to ensure that  it is affordable . 
Research shows that businesses in states with PFML programs spend less to  recruit, hire , and train new 
staff than they do to support this benefit as a result of  the increase in employee retention that is 
associated with  state PFML programs.
9 Additionally, this proposal provides a carve -out exemption 
making the program voluntary  for businesses with fewer than 15 employees.  
 This is not to say that even seamless  implementation  of a carefully designed PFML policy will be simple 
or straightforward  for Maine’s small businesses. In advance of this hearing, CEI heard concerns from 
several businesses related to the expense and impact that PFML is likely to  have on  their  operations. , 
including the costs to establish and maintain a solvent  program and staff reliability being the key t hemes . 
In addition, there are philosophical arguments related to perverse incentives in distributing a statewide 
benefit that not everyone will  need to use.  The commission has carefully researched the  economic 
challenges  and opportunities  associ ated with this bill and determined that it represents a step forward 
for our state. A robust PFML program in Maine would help the state  reach its target of growing  Maine’s 
workforce by 75,000 workers by 2030.
10 PFML may incentivize  workers who already live in Maine and 
have stepped out of  the labor force for social and medical reasons and at the same time, attract new 
workers with their families  from out of  state.  
 Lastly , we feel that i t is important t hat this committee and Maine  carefully consider a uniform threshold, 
across state policy, for exemptions that apply to small businesses, to help businesses more easily ad just 
and manage  as new regulations take effect. Perhaps this could be the work of a future commission or the 
 
6 Heather Boushey, Ann O'Leary, & Alexandra Mitukiewicz, The Economic Benefits of Family and Medical Leave Insurance, 
Center for American Progress (December 12, 2013), 
http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/economy/report/2013/12/12/81036/the -economic- benefits -of-family -andmedical -leave-
insurance/  
7 Scott Brown, et al., Employee and Worksite Perspectives of the Family and Medical Leave Act: Results from the 2018 Surveys, 
Abt Associates (Jul. 2020), 
https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/OASP/evaluation/pdf/WHD_FM LA2018SurveyResults_FinalReport_Aug2020.pdf   
8 Elizabeth L. Aguilera, The Best Interests of Families and Employers: The Best Interests of Families and Employers: Why the 
Family and Medical Insurance Leave Act is the Best  Hope for Easing Work -Family Tension for American Parents and Children, 
84 UMKC L. Rev. 155, 166 (2015). 
9 Romig, supra  note 1.  
10 Maine Department of Economic and Community Development , Maine Economic Development Strategy 2020 -2029 : A Focus on Talent 
and Innovation. (Nov. 15, 2019),  https://www.maine.gov/decd/sites/maine.gov.decd/files/inlinefiles/DECD_120919_sm.pdf   
 
IDEA committee. For these reasons we encourage the committee to support  the amended version of  LD 
1964 . Thank you for considering our testimony .  
 
 
