  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso , on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
In Support of LD 1964 : “An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop  
a Paid Family and M edical Leave Benefits Program ” 
Thursday, May 25, 2023  
  
Senator  Tipping , Representative  Roeder , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Labor and Housing , I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)1 in support of LD 1964 .  
 
With the creation of paid family leave, a single change in state policy has the potential to 
strengthen economic supports, reduce the family discord that may arise over financial insecurity, and 
provide greater opportunity to empower women to remain in and  advance in the workplace – all of 
which have been shown to positively affect rates of intimate partner violence. A 2011 study found 
that women who worked in early pregnancy who qualified for paid maternity leave had significantly 
reduced odds of reporting  combined physical and emotional abuse in the first twelve months post -
partum when compared with women who did not have access to paid leave.1   
  
We strongly support paid family leave because we see time and time again how the absence 
of paid family and m edical leave in Maine means that survivors must rely on the income of the 
person abusing them, which compromises their options and resources to advance their safety needs. 
Paid leave can create the space for a survivor to pursue support for their own safet y and trauma 
healing needs, as well as those of their children, without impacting the household budget, which 
better enables them to keep their jobs and advance in the workforce, which can ultimately make the 
difference in the creation and long -term mainte nance of an independent household – separate from 
the abuser.   
  
You would be hard pressed to find an advocate in our state who hasn’t helped a survivor 
with a safety plan in which the survivor desperately wanted to separate from their abuser but was 
about to give birth and knew that separating would mean going back to work immediately. It would 
mean accomplishing the near impossible task  of finding realistically affordable childcare willing and 
appropriate to take a newborn before they were six weeks old. You would face a similar challenge in 
finding an advocate in our state who hasn’t helped a survivor create a safety plan in which the 
survivor knew that staying with their abuser was dangerous, and yet the survivor had a major 
surgery coming up (sometimes due to an injury caused by their abuser) that would keep them out of 
work and with no income for an extended period of time. These are just two examples of barriers to 
 
1 MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across Maine as 
well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more than 
12,000 survivors of domestic abuse and violence a nd their children in  our state , this included sheltering more 
than 261 children with their parents in our network of emergency shelters.  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
safety that survivors face due to their abusers’ behavior exacerbated by restrictive workplace 
policies. These are fellow Mainers who are highly vulnerable at these points in their lives.   
  
We appreciate th e inclusion of Safe Leave in this proposal and encourage you to support it  so 
that s urvivors can access paid family leave when t hey need to temporarily relocate as a result of 
domestic violence. The window of time immediately after separation is the most dangerous time for 
survivors and their children. Many survivors temporarily relocate after separating from abusers in 
order to construct the safety net that is necessary for them to build an independent household. 
While this will often be geographically close enough for them to continue to work, that is not always 
the case. So metimes it is hours, or even several states away if that is where their most supportive 
contacts happen to be. Additionally, even if they stay close enough to reasonably commute to work, 
often their place of employment is the obvious and easiest place for an abuser to then find them, 
and so there are safety concerns for both the survivor and the workplace when survivors do not 
have the ability to take the time they need to attend to their safety.    
  
For most survivors, having the ability to take a few days  off over the course of separating 
and/or navigating their way through a path to safety is adequate, but for some – those whose 
abusers present particularly high levels of risk – a paid family leave of several weeks could be a life -
saving option, providing  three essential things: time, money, and long -term economic stability. We 
could use this opportunity to help survivors in our state struggle less to stay safe. This is one area of 
need unique to domestic violence survivors, and it would make a difference in the lives of many 
survivors in our state if family leave could accommodate their typically short term but vital need for 
time off without compromising their economic and job security. This aligns directly with the purpose 
of creating paid family medical  leave.     
  
Domestic violence will impact as least 1 in 4 women in Maine. With approximately half of 
Maine’s charged assaults and homicides the result of domestic violence, there may not be a greater 
public health issue facing our state. For those who cau se that harm - abusers who use psychological, 
physical, and economic tactics to control and victimize their intimate partners - the lack of practical 
support for those they victimize contributes to a community framework that is collusive with 
abusers’ harm ful intent.    
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our support for  the creation of a paid family  and 
medical leave benefits program in Maine . If MCEDV or any of our member programs can be of any 
assistance to the Committee in your discussions on this issue , please do not hesitate to let us know.  
 
 
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Public Policy Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 650-4356   
Email:  andrea@mcedv.org    
