Barry Chase
Wells
LD 1964
I ask that you support small businesses, the backbone of our economy, by opposing a 
paid leave mandate. As a small business owner who provides jobs to the people of 
Maine, I simply cannot afford this costly and burdensome legislation.
In a pandemic-recovering, inflation-stricken environment and facing a worker 
shortage crisis, I work hard to create jobs and opportunity, support the community, 
and take care of my employees. Some people like to say that mandating paid leave is 
being family focused, but what they fail to realize is that our small business is like a 
family. We already work with our employees to provide leave and time off because 
we value them. A paid leave mandate and its rules will only decrease flexibility to 
meet my employees' needs.
It is hard enough to find any workers, let alone qualified employees. This legislation 
will only amplify that struggle by allowing employees to be gone for months and 
knowing they have a job guaranteed for them. How can I be expected to find willing, 
qualified, temporary employees? What will this do to other workers who may risk 
getting burned out? And what happens if a person on leave for 3 to 4 months decides 
in the end not to come back?
The overall annual cost of payroll taxes to finance the proposed program is estimated 
to ultimately cost over $400 million a year. This is much larger than unemployment 
taxes and exceeds workers compensation premiums, making a paid leave mandate law
the largest and most expensive employee benefit entitlement program in Maine. 
Furthermore, to date, only 11 states have a paid leave law, yet the proposal in Augusta
would be among the most generous of those states, also making Maine the most 
geographically isolated state with such a law.
I simply cannot afford a paid family leave mandate. This legislation would increase 
the difficulty and cost of staffing my business, lead to higher costs and reduced 
services for customers, and make my business more vulnerable to larger companies 
that have greater staff flexibility.
I urge you to please oppose this ill-designed and unaffordable legislation. Keep small 
businesses in Maine strong - oppose the paid leave mandate.
Thank you for your consideration.

