 
  
 
 
 
Good afternoon , Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder , and members of the Committee  on 
Labor and Housing .  My name is Brian Parke and I am the President and CEO of the Maine 
Motor Transport Association and a resident of Brunswick.  The Association  is comprised of 
more than  1,700 member companies, whose employees make up a large portion of the 
34,000 people who make their living in the trucking industry in Maine.    
 
I am here today to testify in opposition to  LD 1964  due to the increased costs on Maine 
employees and employers , the detrime ntal impact on Maine bus inesses compe ting reg ionally 
and nationally , and because  it would intensify  an al ready challenging workforce shortage felt 
by the  trucking in dustry  and other blu e-collar industries in our state .   
 
MMTA would like to add its v oice to the chorus of others objecting to this bill  by adopting 
many of the pract ical objections that have been outlined .  But we would also like to remind 
the committee of the  recent  supply chain crisis  that was at least in large part caused by a 
workforce shortage  at ou r ports.   Will adopting a  mand atory paid family and medical leave in 
Maine create shortages of baby formula, toilet paper, electronics and semi -cond uctors  like 
what hap pened in the recent supply c hain crisis ?  Maybe n ot.  But creating a program that 
offers signifi cant am ounts of paid time off will certainly  make staff ing an effective and 
predictable  distribution n etwork more difficult, it will make  it less efficient and more prone to  
complications  that will have real worl d consequences .  Maine has a serious shortage of truck 
drivers now.  Passing LD 1964 wi ll make it worse.  
 
While the emotional appeals from  those advocating for paid FML should not be minimized, 
there may be ways to go a bout implementing a version of this b ill that w e might be more 
inclined to support.  If it was pu rely voluntary, or if a paid  component  was added to Maine ’s 
existing FML law, we mi ght feel diff erently about it.  But with the study commission ’s findings, TESTIMONY OF  
Brian Parke  
L.D. 1964 , “An Act to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Commission to 
Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave 
Benefits Program ”   

the published bill , the printed amendments  and the concept ual amendments being thro wn 
around – all of this is a mo ving t arget that make s our support impossible.  
 
Thank you for your consideration and for allowing me to testify .  I would be happy to answer 
any questions the committee has now or  at the Work Session.  
