Carlyssa  Baker
Mexico Maine
LD 1964
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing,
My name is Carly Baker and I live in Mexico, Maine. I write today in support of  LD 
1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a 
Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program.
It is with great excitement that I have recently learned that LD 1964 has been 
announced. For over a year now, I have been involved in powerful conversations with
folks about the importance and impact of having a secure Paid Family and Medical 
Leave system. Health related issues and major life changes leave families unable to 
afford to care for themselves and loved ones while supporting themselves financially. 
When I was twelve, my parents purchased a small general store in Roxbury, and we 
moved to Maine. Shortly after our move my dad was diagnosed with cancer. Because 
my father was self-employed, he was unable to access paid leave and he found 
himself undergoing a series of intense medical procedures and appointments while 
running a store alongside my mom. Since then, I’ve talked with friends and others 
around the state and I’ve learned that my family’s story is not unique. I’ll be 
graduating from Mountain Valley High School in Rumford in a month and it’s 
shocked me to learn that so many of my friends have also needed extended time off to
care for themselves or their family members.
If this bill is passed, it will provide families like mine with flexibility in times of 
hardship to be able to care for themselves, break down barriers along racial and 
gender lines by providing those most affected with the resources they need, and 
provide small businesses with the funds to take part in paid leave. Thousands of 
families in Maine suffer because our state doesn’t have a comprehensive paid family 
and medical leave system. All people deserve to be able to have paid time off when 
we need it, whether that’s because of welcoming a new baby, or because they need 
cancer treatment, or any other reason. 
It has been analyzed in recent years that 70% of Mainers feel it is time to implement a
Paid Family and Medical Leave system. The numbers do not lie, it is clear that there 
is overwhelming support for this bill. Therefore, I urge the committee to support LD 
1964. Thank you for your time and consideration on this important issue.

