 53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202 | Portland, ME 04101 Phone: 866-554-5380 | Fax: 207-775-5727 | TTY: 877-434-7598 aarp.org/me | me@aarp.org | twitter: @aarpmaine facebook.com/aarpmaine | instagram.com/aarpme   May 24, 2023  Senator Tipping, Representative. Roeder and esteemed members of the Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Carl Bucciantini, I live in Greene and I am the Volunteer State President for AARP Maine. I am writing today on behalf our more than 200,000 members statewide, to provide testimony in support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program. Paid family and medical leave, which allows for prolonged leaves of absence, can be used in a variety of situations. Employees may take time to bond with a new child, focus on a serious illness, or care for a family member. Paid leave for caregiving is a critical component of labor force participation especially for women, because caring for loved ones disproportionately falls on them. Paid and job-protected time off from work helps people balance work demands with the need to take care of themselves and family members. Paid family and medical leave increases employee loyalty and retention, which often saves an employer money by avoiding separation costs, as well as the costs of recruiting, hiring, and training new workers. In Maine we have nearly 166,000 unpaid family caregivers who support their loved ones. They provide nearly 155 million hours of care, valued at 2.9 billion dollars annually. Simultaneous to supporting their loved ones, many of these caregivers work full or part time jobs. Many working caregivers have reported experiencing emotional stress balancing caregiving and work. Family caregivers who do not have workplace benefits, such as paid time off, are at risk of experiencing heightened financial and emotional strain. National studies have found that of family caregivers who work:  19% quit their job  44% reduced their hours  Having access to a paid leave benefit can help workers remain in their jobs.  Having a statewide paid family and medical leave program would help keep businesses stable. Paid leave also keeps people employed. Businesses with paid leave retain employees longer and save on turnover costs. A statewide paid leave program helps Maine’s small businesses compete with larger companies when it comes to hiring and benefits. When all employers can offer the same kind of paid family and medical leave, we level the playing field and support Maine's small businesses. 

AARP Maine is fighting to support working family caregivers because caring for a loved one shouldn’t mean losing your pay or your job. On behalf of our 200,000+ members and the 166,000 unpaid family caregivers in Maine, I encourage you to stand with us by recommending to the entire legislature that LD 1964 be swiftly enacted into law.  Carl Bucciantini AARP Maine Volunteer State President 
