 
 
Committee on Health and Human Services  
Cross Building, Room 209  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME  04333  
c/o Karen Thomas, Committee Clerk  
 
May 23, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1964 – An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and 
Medical Leave Benefits Program  
 
Dear Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder  and esteemed members of the Committee on Labor and Housing , 
 
As President of the Board of Directors of the National Association of Social Workers  (NASW) , Maine Chapter, I 
am testifying in support of LD 1964  to establish Paid Family Medical Leave for Mainers.  This bill is good for 
Maine’s economy, good for Mainer’s emotional and physical health, and can decrease participation in Mainer’s 
participation in traditional welfare programs.  If not passed, the financial, emotional,  and physical strains on 
family care givers will continue, if not worsen.  
 
Over my 30+ year career providing clinical services, I have witnessed the physical, emotional,  and economic toll 
that has been put on  family’s, mostly women, in caring for loved one’s in times of need , whether that be  for 
infants, children, spouses , or elderly family members.   Two -thirds of Mainers do NOT have access to Paid Family 
Medical Leave. The Family Medical Leave Act that was passed in 1993 has been helpful for professional women, 
yet disproportionately exclude s low -income workers.   
 
Economic Impact:  Eleven States, including Colorado, Oregon, Maryland, and Connecticut, plus Washington, 
D.C., have passed paid family and medical leave programs. Costs have been lower than expected, employers 
have seen increa sed retention and improved morale, and workers can care for their loved ones without risking 
their jobs.  Other research is beginning to show that states with Paid Family Medical Leave have seen decreases 
in participation in TANF (Ybarra , 2023 ) and nutriti on supplement (SNAP) programs ( Bellisle, 2022 ) for new 
mothers.  
 
Emotional Impact: Dozens of studies have found that family members caring for ill relatives are more prone to 
developing depression than their same -age peers who aren’t caregiving.  The risk of depression increases the 
longer the stint of caregiving is nee ded.   I have witnessed caregivers in my family and my clients, slowly 
decreasing participation in  social activities, missing,  or not scheduling their own medical appointments, or  
exercising (Jacobs).   
  
Health Impact:  Paid Family Medical Leave is associ ated with a greater likelihood for breastfeeding in new 
mothers , decreased likelihood of Post -Partum Depression in mothers on Medicaid  (Perry ,2023) , decreased risk 
for hospitalization of women and infants and higher odds of doing well with exercise and str ess management  
(Jou, 2018) .  At the other end of the lifespan , I witnessed my own mother’s health deteriorate as she cared for 
my father , whose  multiple strokes  that began 10 years prior to his death impacted his ability to talk and care for 
 
 himself.  The baby boomer generation is reaching their 80’s and with this burgeoning elderly population, 
physical needs and dependence will be increas ing, producing stress and strain on their adult children.  
 
NASW Maine urges you to support LD 1964  and ensure  that all working Mainers have access to Paid Family 
Medical Leave.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Julie M. Schirmer, LCSW  
President of the Board  
Chair, Policy Committee  
NASW Maine Chapter  
 
References  
 
Bellisle, D., Paid Leave A vailability and Public Health and Nutrition Program Participation.  Abstract, Society for 
Social Work and Research. January 2018. https://sswr.confex.com/sswr/2018/webprogram/Paper3 1271.html  
 
Jou, J., Kozhimannil, K.B., Abraham, J.M., Blewett, L.A., McGovern, P.M., Paid maternity leave in the United 
States: associations with maternal and infant health.  Maternal Child Health Journal. 2018; 22(2):21 6-225. doi: 
10.1007/s10995 -017-2393 -x. PMID: 29098488.  
 
Jacobs, B. J., The Emotional Survival Guide for Caregivers: Looking After Yourself and Your Family While Helping 
an Aging Parent. The Guilford Press.  New York, New York.  2006.  
 
Perry, M.F., Trasatti , E., Yee, E.M., Feinglass, J.M., State Family and Medical Leave and Outcomes.  America 
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. January, 2023:S39 -40.  
 
Ybarra, M. Implications for Paid Family Medical Leave.  Citing Ybarra, M., Stanczyk, A., and Bellisle, D. Does paid 
leave availability reduce enrollment in public health and nutrition programs following a birth? Social Work 
Research. 2023.  
http://www.socialworkblog.org/nasw -publications/2014/01/implications -of-paid -family -leave -for-welfare -
participants/  
 
