Craig Bramley
Portland
LD 1964
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing,
My name is Craig Bramley and I live in Portland. I am writing in support of the 
passage of LD 1964.
I am a part owner and the Managing Director of a law firm that employs over sixty 
people in Maine. I have had a chance to carefully read the bill and comments from 
supporters and opponents. I believe that my experience in our business demonstrates 
how this would benefit Maine’s workers. 
Our firm offers paid family and medical leave benefits that generally exceed those LD
1964 would offer. What I have seen over the last decade is that these benefit work not
only to help our employees in their times of need, but to the advantage of our firm. 
Successful businesses like ours depend on and must invest in the skills of our 
employees. Our business runs better when we have low turnover and the knowledge 
of long term employees is put to use and passed on to new hires. When a skilled 
employee leaves our firm unexpectedly, productivity declines because knowledge, 
skill, and experience are lost. 
Providing paid family and medical leave helps us attract great employees and retain 
them when they faces challenges in their personal lives. We all encounter medical and
family challenges that make it difficult or impossible for us to work. In those 
situations, we can either try to ignore the health or family issue or miss time at work. 
When paid leave is available, we can address the personal issue and then get back to 
work. If paid leave is not available, we face difficult choices and consequences. We 
may put off important medical care, fail to help a loved one in need, or find ourselves 
in financial straights. My experience is that employees who take advantage of paid 
leave are able to address their issues and then return to work. They feel supported by 
the firm and return as productive employees. 
I believe that LD 1964 can bring these benefits to the vast majority of Maine’s 
workforce and give Maine an advantage over other states. The investment in paid 
medical and family leave will improve workforce retention and productivity. As a 
state, Maine will enhance its reputation as a great place to live and work. To achieve 
these benefits, the up front cost is a smart investment.
For these reasons, I strongly support the passage of LD 1964 and urge the Committee 
to report it out of committee with unanimous support. 

