  
 
1015 15th Street NW, Suite 450 , Washington,  DC 20005  | (202) 828 -8357   www.smallbusinessmajority.o rg 
STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD  BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON LABOR AND HOUSING  ON LD 1964 : ACT TO IMPLEMENT 
RECOMMENDATIONS TO DEVELOP A PAID FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE 
BENEFITS PROGRAM  
May 25, 2023  
David Chase  
Vice President, Policy & Advocacy, Small Bu siness Majority  
Thank you Senator  Tipping , Representative  Roeder  and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committ ee: 
My name is David Chase and I am the Vice President of Policy and Advocacy at Small Business 
Majority, a national small business organization that empowers America’s  diverse entrepreneurs to 
build a thriving and equitable economy.  We engage our network of more than 85,000 small businesses 
and 1,500 business and community organizations to advocate for public policy solutions and deliver 
resources to entrepreneurs that promote equitable small business growth.  
As a representative of man y of Maine’s  small bu sinesses, I am pleased to offer testimony on LD 1964 , 
legislation to implement the recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and 
Medical Leave Benefits  Program in Maine. Enacting this program would allow Mainers and local small 
businesses to access and offer this benefit for their employees, helping them overcome obstacles in 
attracting and retaining a ready workforce.  
We know from our research that smal l businesses want to offer robust benefits like paid family and 
medical leave, they ofte n can’t afford to do so  on their own, putting them at a competitive disadvantage 
with larger companies. In fact, a Small Business Majority survey  found that 73% of small business 
owners  nationwide  support providing access to  paid medical leave and 67% support access to parental 
leave.  And a recent survey by Pan Atlantic Research  report ed that 89% of Maine small business 
owners/managers support the creation of the state -run program.  
While our n ation has yet to pass a comprehensive national paid family and medical leave program, 
many states are creating  their own programs to fulfill the needs of their small businesses and workers . 
In fact, 13 states and Washington, D .C. have already  created  these  programs . The vast majority of 
small employers in states where these program s were  implemented  reported positive effects on 
productivity and increased employee morale. Businesses  in these states  also reported an increase in 
employee retention once their e mployees gained  access to paid family leave , as employees are now less 
likely to quit their job  to handle a medical or family issue. Keeping employees employed means 
businesses do not have to spend additional time and money recruiting and training new empl oyees. 
Lastly, paid leave has boosted labor force participation , which is important now given ongo ing 
workforce shortages.  
A state -administered paid family and medical leave program in Maine  would provide up to 16 weeks of 
family and medical leave with par tial wage replacement. This program would address the unique needs 
of local Maine small busi nesses  and set a mode st contribution fee of 1% in premiums, which can be 
equally split between employers and employees. Small businesses with less than 15 workers  are not 
required to pay the premium at all, which would  benefit nearly 98% of all small businesses in Maine, 
including the self -employed . In addition, self -employed Mainers can elect to participate in the 
program and would only pay 0.5% of the required prem ium fee.  
 
 
 
Small Business Majority   2 www.smallbusinessmajority.org  The Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program you are discussing today is one of th e most 
small -business friendly paid leave programs in the nation, and we are encouraged by your ongoing 
support of making this proposal a  reality. Enacting th is sensible paid family leave program will make it 
easier for small businesses to afford and implement this benefit into their overall compensation offers 
and help level the playing field by allowing them to compete on more equal footing with larger 
busine sses that typically have  the resources to offer robust benefits.  
We urge you to pass this legislation to support Maine’s entrepreneurs in their efforts to  operate  on a 
level playing field . 
Sincerely,  
David Chase  
Vice President , Policy & Advocacy  
Small Busi ness Majority  
