Dean Martin
Friends of Fort Knox
LD 1964
Concerns:
-  Our organization is a small business existing 30 years, currently employing 25 FT 
& PT seasonal staff with an average wage of $16/hr during a 26-week season. 
-  If there is no small business exemption, LD 1964 would place increased financial 
burden on our business in addition to the past 7 years of minimum wage increases, 
resulting increases in Unemployment and Worker’s Comp Insurance premiums and 
claim expenses, Earned Paid Leave expenses and the pending Mandatory Retirement 
legislation (although not mandated employer matching, resulting increased payroll 
services costs).
 
-  Since 2016, our annual payroll expenses increased from $215K to $315K (8 years). 
Our organization’s payroll expenses in 2016 and before were 31-35% of annual 
revenues but has steadily increased to 39-42% (2020 was an outlier at 73% of income 
before PPP). 
Questions:
-Will there be a wait period like EPL for new employees?
-Would businesses with less than year-round operations still pay FMLA beyond 
their seasons?
-Would retirement benefits, EPL and/or vacation time accrue while on FMLA?
-If the employee works at two or three businesses, who would inherit the FMLA 
expense (all?)
-Presuming the business would have to keep the position open for the FMLA 
employee, wouldn’t businesses also incur increased labor expenses for the temporary 
substitute/replacement staff?
-How would FMLA Wage Replacement Wages be calculated for PT staff (some 
only 8-10hrs/week, most 20-24hrs/week)? 
Conclusions:
-  Much of Maine’s identity and appeal is the iconic sole lobsterman, Mom & Pop 
corner store or family-owned restaurants. In time, only Maine businesses that are 
corporate owned/operated will survive if LD 1964 is passed.
-  Long term second and third order effects to such a generous benefit program (12 
weeks, no exemptions, 75-90% of SAWW wage replacement, 100% benefit cap) will 
drive businesses from Maine 
-  The definition of “Family Member(s)” is so loose (eg …is like a family 
relationship, regardless of biological or legal relationship.”, that everyone will qualify
to take FMLA to care for practically anyone.
-  LD 1964 is too costly for small businesses to absorb in such a short period of time. 
Small/seasonal businesses cannot raise prices or costs of services fast enough to keep 
pace with current labor laws and recent decisions by Maine legislators to increase 
employment benefits.
-  Our business is Against LD 1964 without provisions for small and/or seasonal 
businesses exemptions.  

