 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Testimony in Opposition  to LD 1964-An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the 
Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
May 25, 2023 
 
Senator  Tipping , Representative  Roeder, and members of the Committee  on Labor and Hous ing, 
 
I am Quincy Hentzel , President and CEO  of the Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce. On behalf of our 
1,300 member businesses , employ ing over 65,000 hardworking Mainers , I present  this testimony  to express our 
opposition to  LD 1964 . 
 
Approaching the Commission’s process with an open mind, we actively followed the Commission’s meetings, 
shared their employer survey with our members, and carefully reviewed their final report and actuarial analysis. 
While a few of our members currently of fer some version of a paid medical and/or family leave benefit , the 
majority do not. Nevertheless, we remained willing to explore a state -level solution that would provide a 
comprehensive program accessible to all our members and their employees, regardles s of size or industry. Our 
Advocacy Committee diligently deliberated on the report and the legislation before you today. We met with the 
sponsors, held informative sessions with numerous members to gauge their thoughts and concerns, and 
organized a town ha ll with the sponsors and our membership to provide businesses an opportunity to express 
their concerns directly. Additionally, we consulted the Delaware Chamber of Commerce, which stands as the 
only Chamber in the country to not testify in opposition to PF MLA legislation. At every step, our aim was to 
find workable common ground. Regrettably, despite these steps, we have concluded that the current proposal 
fails to adequately address the concerns voiced by many of  our members.  
 
Our opposition was not an in evitable outcome . Since the release of the Commission report, both the business 
community and the administration have consistently raised core concerns, which could have been readily 
addressed. However, there seemed to be little inclination to resolve thes e issues. Furthermore, we have been 
waiting for months for this bill to be printed hoping that this committee would invest the necessary time  to 
foster consensus. Unfortunately, the bill was only released last week, followed by an unofficial release of the  
sponsor’s amendment. Consequently, we are now compelled to discuss the most substantial change to Maine’s 
employment landscape in decades, with only a few weeks remaining in the first session. Our members 
acknowledge the importance of addressing family an d medical leave for employees, but as it stands, this 
proposal represents an unworkable and costly appr oach to achieving that goal. Without significant 
modifications to the legislation before you, Maine’s workforce and economy will suffer.  
 
Concerns Raise d by Our Members  
 
Employee Absenteeism in Small Businesses: Throughout our discussions with members, one issue 
consistently emerged as the top concern —the impracticality of extended employee leave, particularly 
for small businesses and those employing individuals with highly specialized skills and certifications. 
Maine is a small business state, and the proposed benefit level and leave duration would undeniably 
undermine the operation al capacity of many businesses. Seasonal employers face an e ven more acute 
challenge, as an employee taking leave could miss an entire season’s worth of work. To address these 
well-founded concern s, comprehensive exemptions should  be incorporated into an amendment to this 
bill, especially for employers who have nev er been subject to the existing  state leave law.  
 
 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Eligibility: Another major concern expressed by our members pertains to the exceedingly low 
threshold for qualifying for leave under this proposal. Presently, Maine’s unpaid leave law necessitates 
12 cons ecutive months of an employment with a specific employer, while federal FMLA mandates 
1,250 hours worked for an employer to be eligible for leave. In Massachusetts, an employee must have 
earned $5,700 plus 30 times the benefit to qualify under their PFMLA law. Similarly, Rhode Island 
requires employees to have earned $14,700, while Maryland requires 680 hours of work. Under 
Delaware’s PFMLA law, an employee must have worked for an employer for 12 consecutive months 
for at least 1,250 hours.  
 
However, under  this proposal employees could start a job and be eligible for 12 weeks of leave on day 
two if they made just $6,000 in the prior 12 months. This represents a radical change in eligibility , 
deviating from other progressive states, and exacerbating the conc erns about absenteeism outlined 
earlier.  
 
Affinity Relationships: The expansion of family leave benefits under the bill to include individuals 
defined under subsection 20 -G raises concerns about the potential for limitless expansion of this 
benefit. The bill states that eligibility can extend to “any individual with whom  the covered individual 
has a significant personal bond that is like a family relationship, regardless of biological or legal 
relationship.” This subjective determination would allow an employee to take leave to care for virtually 
anyone which we feel is t oo broad of a category to cover under a paid leave benefit program.   
Furthermore, the expansive definition leaves room for abuse, and we have not heard sufficient 
evidence from other states where affinity relationships are eligible for family leave to prov e that this 
does not lead to an increase in benefit abuse.  
 
It is easy to think of many individuals in all our lives who would meet this standard. Employees 
determined to take a full 12 weeks of paid leave annually would have little trouble identifying el igible 
individuals with whom they have an “affinity”. The absence of guidance in this text on how an eventual 
administrator could establish appropriate guardrails around this provision raises concerns about 
potential overuse, fraud and abuse.  
 
Hardship Ex emption: The exemption granted to small employers fails to address the concerns our 
members have raised regarding the job protection components of the legislation. Under this proposed 
language, small employers would face a lengthy and costly appeals proces s at both the administrative 
and judicial levels. This process is not feasible for the types of smaller employers this section aims to 
protect. The terms defining permissible exemptions are broad and subjective, making it doubtful that 
any employer would f eel confident in taking advantage of the exemption given the cost and time it 
would take to go through the appeals process. Language that fully exempts these employers without 
qualification is of paramount importance to our small business members.  
 
Penalt ies: The penalty for covered individuals who willfully make false statements or mis -
representations in pursuit of benefits is incredibly light, consider ing the concerns outlined above about 
opportunities for fraud and abuse. The penalty of only one year of  ineligibility for benefits does not 
serve as an effective deterrent to fraudulent claims. While penalties for employers are left to the broad 
discretion of the administrator, the penalty for covered individuals is proscribed in a manner that lacks 
effecti veness in deterring fraud.  
 
 
 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
 
 
Composition of the PFMLA Authority: We have serious concerns regarding the composition of the 
PFMLA Authority, which currently includes only three employers out of its 13 -person membership. 
This lack of proportional representation for employers is problematic considering the disproportionate  
burdens and responsibilities that will fall on them in managing the implementation of this program. 
For this program to be successful, it is crucial to ensure the active involvement and support of 
employers in its administration and implementation. Unfort unately, the current composition does not 
achieve this objective.   
 
Suggested Alternatives   
 
Expansion of Maine’s Existing FMLA Program: As we explore alternatives to this proposed 
legislation, we strongly believe the best starting point is to enhance Ma ine’s existing family medical 
leave requirement in Title 26 by adding a paid benefit component. This existing program is familiar to 
employers and provides a framework that addresses many, if not all, of the concerns we raised above. 
Under the existing law , employees are entitled to up to 10 weeks of family medical leave every two 
years after having worked for an employer for 12 consecutive months. Additionally, it exempts 
employers with fewer than 15 employees. By introducing a paid component to this law, we can offer a 
meaningful benefit to thousands of Maine workers while ensuring that employers can practically 
implement and comply with the parameters.  
 
Adoption of a Voluntary Program: Absent an expansion of the existing family medical leave law in 
Maine , we suggest the committee consider our Northern New England neighbors, Vermont1 and New 
Hampshire2, which both have voluntary PFMLA programs. A voluntary program allows employers  – 
of any size - to proactively offer this benefit in an affordable manner.  Over time, if this program proves 
to be the workforce attract ion imperative that supporters  of this bill believe it to be, more and more 
employers will recognize the need to adopt such a state -sponsored voluntary benefit.  
 
We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers , and we ask that given the current form of this 
legislation the committee vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1964.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
Quincy Hentzel  
President & CEO  
 
1 https://governor.vermont.gov/press -release/governor -phil-scott -launches -voluntary -paid-family -and-medical -leave -
program   
2 https://www.paidfamilymedicalleave.nh.gov/   

