Elek Pew
Gray
LD 1964
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing: My name is Elek Pew and I live in Gray. 
I write today in support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of 
the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program.
I recently turned thirty. My friends are starting to have kids. My parents are turning 
seventy this year. There are big life changes happening all around me. I have very 
candid conversations with my parents about them getting older. What are the plans if 
they cannot physically, emotionally, and financially support themselves? My sister 
and I are a team, but we are also young and are trying to make future plans of our 
own.
Without a strong, statewide, paid family and medical leave program, making those 
plans will be extremely difficult. Although I am fortunate enough to have a job that 
provides paid vacation & paternity leave, which I am seriously grateful for, if I 
needed to take extended time off I would have to file for FMLA. This means that I 
would be taking unpaid leave, but who can afford to take unpaid leave in this day and 
age?
I think a lot about what’s to come, and not just for me. I think about everyone else 
who may not be as fortunate and doesn’t have a modest safety net. If someone’s 
parents get sick, I want them to be able to spend as much time as possible with their 
loved ones. If two partners decide to have kids, I want them to be able to spend time 
bonding with their newborn. People need to be able to take the time to care for loved 
ones without worrying about paying the bills.
This past November, I stood outside my polling location in Gray talking to voters 
about Paid Family and Medical Leave, collecting signatures to put this program on 
the ballot if needed. So many Mainers expressed the need for a PFML program. They 
told me about their children, the health scares of their loved ones, and the fear they 
had about making ends meet. 
This is a popular program. Our state needs it. Mainers need it. Maine needs a strong 
Paid Family and Medical Leave program. 
Thank you,
Elek Pew
