 
 
Testimony of Elise Joh ansen   
In Support of L.D.  1964   
“An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission  
to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program ”  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labo r and Housin g  
 
Senator Tipping, R epresentative Roeder, and th e distingui shed members of the Joint Standing  
Committ ee on Labor and Housing, my name is Elise Johansen, and I am writing on beha lf of Safe 
Voices* in support of L .D. 1964 . 
 
Enacting this proposal  will help make  Maine a safer pl ace for all . Creating  public poli cy that  
enhances support for  survivors of domestic viole nce, the majority of whom are women and 
mothers,  is a crucial way to have  immediate  positive  impact  on the lives of so many Mainers 
including  tens of thousands of Main e children. By providing access t o paid safe leave  under this 
legislation , survivors of dome stic violence w ill be able to access pay for time off needed that is 
directly related to their need for safety . Maslow’s Hierarchy  of Needs asserts that without saf ety, 
the ability to thrive or ev en surviv e is severely  reduced.   
 
In addition to many other ta ctics of abuse  such as physical vi olence and isolation,  many  survivors  
experienc e economic  abuse by an abusive  partner . Survivors  are often  not permitted to acces s 
household bank accounts , obtain , or maintain a job,  attend  school, own a car , or own  property or 
have their name  listed on a  lease . Some even have their cre dit destroyed by the abuser  there by 
reducing their fina ncial resources or safety nets . Survivors ’ access to financial  support  and 
resources is already limited due to th e common  tactic s of economic abuse a nd isolation from 
natural supports . For so many  Maine rs, taking time off work to attend to any needs relating to their 
victimization  means days withou t pay.  And not earning money mean s loss of basic needs.  So many 
Mainers live paycheck to paycheck  so missing a few hours of work can make the difference 
between a survivor bei ng able to afford gas for their car, food for their children, or covering  the 
costs of their medication  and perhap s even  having to  face eviction . 
 
These truth s mean  that  a survi vor’s safety is significantly complicated  by the very real financial 
constraints that taking time off  work creates. During the moments of seeking safety , or fle eing 
from an abuser,  the way forw ard is confusing, arduous  and the risk of the m being harmed by the 
abuser increases drastically.  These realities, coupled with the  real danger  of having to take t ime off 
work  without pay fo r someone who is already ex perienc ing hardships  is enough for them to not 
proceed with the necessary  steps to seek safety.  
 
The advocates at Safe Voices work with over 2,000  survivors each year , and we hear from  the 
majority of  survivors  that because of the domestic abuse , coupled with  the viol ence and fear,  they 
are expe riencing  significant  food insecurity, housing instability,  and lack of connections to natural 
supports  which all impacts the ir ability to be safe .   
 
This legislation  will remove  the barrier survivors  have currently when e mployers are not able to 
access a family leave benefit  that  would  allow for surviv ors to receive  paid time off to be able to 
attend court, meet with an advocate or attorney to file for a  Protection from Abuse , provide 
evidence to a detective, allow for  time to flee to a shelter , or pack up  and move, or simply  be able 
to wait at home for a handy  person to come and change the locks , or even go to the hospital  for 
their injuries  from an assault . 
 
The work in supporting survivors o f domestic violence  and their children  requires many systems, 
sectors,  and stakeholders to do their part , and this bill will dovetail seamlessly  with other 
protections in Maine . It will  allow survivors to have one less thing to worry about in the midst of 
seeking safety  or rebuilding t heir lives . 
 
 
*Safe Vo ices is t he domestic viole nce and huma n traffick ing r esource center serving Androscoggin, 
Franklin and Oxford Counties in Maine . 
 
 
 
 
 
