Testimony in support of Paid Family and Medical Leave in the State of Maine  
Elisabeth Poling Maberry  
Resident of Bangor, ME  
 
I am writing today in support of Paid Family and Medical Leave for the State of Maine. I am 
not only a mother of two, but have over a decade of e xperience supervising staff and 
managing budgets in higher education. I have  a B.S. and M.Ed. from the University of Maine, 
and worked at several colleges and universities on the eastern seaboard before returning 
to Maine in 2019.  
I believe that p aid family and medical leave is a necessity if we hope to attract and retain 
employees and residents  in our state . The benefits to the child, wor king parent, and 
economy are significant and well known. Here are two resources that outline these 
benefits:   
https://www.apa.org/monitor/2022/04/feature -parental -leave    
https://www.jec.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/646d2340 -dcd4 -4614 -ada9 -
be5b1c3f445c/jec -fact-sheet ---economic -benefits -of-paid -leave .pdf  
 
We have a responsibility to provide safe, nurturin g environments for our children and 
equity i n our workplaces. Lack of paid family leave disproportionately impacts women , and 
has well documented negative impacts on children and families . Many employers allow 
employees to utilize sick and vacation time during unpaid FMLA, but this outdated practice 
is not a replacement for paid leave .  
I will share my own experience here to illustrate how this practice plays out in reality:  
I gave birth to my second child last summer. My employer allows staff to utili ze their 
accrued sick and vacation time during FMLA - however, my maternity  leav e was still largely 
unpaid - after all, pregnancy requires many doctor ’s appointments even in the bes t 
circumstances , and if you experience a high risk pregnancy you are subject to even more 
testing and monitoring , all of which require use of one ’s paid time off (P TO). I also had to 
use some of my annual leave time to cover COVID daycare closures for my older child, 
times when he was sick, etc. There is a false assumption that standard paid time off is 
an acceptable replacement for paid FMLA - however, life goes on - it is not feasible to 
save a ll of your PTO for a future FMLA need, even if you plan for a pregnancy.  These 
impacts are compounded when you take into account lack of affordable, high quality 
childcare in much of our state.   
Lack of paid family leave  created  a hardship for my  famil y. After exhausting my paid time 
off to cover basic expenses and my  family ’s health insurance  during my leave , I was left 
with  little time to use for follow -up medica l appointments for myself, follow -up 
appointments for my baby, or time to take care of her when she inevitably g ot sick after 
starting daycare. As an individual with a history of post -partum depression and anxiety, 
access to counseling and follow -up care was critical to my wellbeing, my child ’s wellbeing, 
and my ability to perform my job well. All of these things are at risk when an individual  is 
expected to use up their standard PTO while on FMLA. I’m fortunate to have found a way 
forward, albeit  with far less in my savings account, but many cannot. Returning to w ork is 
challenging enough  after circumstances that necessitate FMLA . The lack of paid leave 
creates situation s where individuals have to consider whether it makes sense for them to  
continue working at all , a plight working parents, es pecially mothers, know all too well . 
Many loyal, hardworking  Mainers would prefer to return to jobs t hey love and are 
dedicated to after the birth of a child, caring for a loved one with significant illness, or other 
life changes, but are forced to make hard decisions after exhausting their savings in order 
to provide basic care for the mselves and/or family members  during a necessary leave . This 
is not only detrimental to the individual and their family, but to our society as a whole - 
business lose employees, and children face negative outcomes when it comes to health, 
wellbeing, and educational attainment , parents face increased anxiety and financial str ess 
when they are most vulnerable . We are the oldest state in the nation - we should b e doing 
everything we ca n to create a qualit y of life that fits our motto - the way life should be - so 
that our citizens and economy can thrive now and in the future .  
