Elizabeth Arruda
Kennebunk
LD 1964
This bill would put small, seasonal hospitality businesses like mine out of business 
very quickly. My 12-room B&B employs 2 full-time year round, 2-3 others very 
part-time year-round as needed, and about 4 seasonal employees May - October, who,
by the way, are EXTREMELY difficult to find and hire every year. Some return, 
others do not. For seasonal employees to receive benefits like those described in this 
bill, employers like myself could be terribly taken advantage of. Not to mention 
having to PAY to fund this ridiculous legislation! Imagine hiring your desperately 
needed seasonal staff in May, getting them trained for the season, only to have one or 
more of them leave for 3 months with full pay because someone close to them needed
care? Really??  This is so over the top, it's absurd! Such enormously generous 
benefits should be an OPTION for employers who can afford to provide them for 
their full time year round employees. Standard practice is for medical benefits and 
vacation pay to be offered and earned only after a 90 day probation period. Standard 
practice is for extended leaves of absense only to be partially paid. Standard practice 
is for small employers to be exempt from such costly requirements because they 
typically don't have sufficient financial or human resources to be able to manage it. 
Standard practice is for seasonal employees to be excluded from most if not all such 
benefits because they're a part of the organization only transiently and it doesn't make 
logistical or financial sense to be bringing them on and off benefits.  Seasonal 
employment is the workers' choice. If people WANT to work year round, they most 
certainly have plenty of opptortunity to do so. There are far more open positions than 
people looking for work.   
The costs of wages, food, linens other supplies and especially mortgage INTEREST 
rates have risen at least 25% over the last two years.  My own mortgage interest rate 
will be increasing from 4.75% to 8% or more in August. This alone is going to 
increase my mortgage payment, my largest expense, by more than 35%!  Do you 
think my guests would tolerate a rate increase of 25 - 35%??? They won't. If Maine 
businesses have to increase their prices and rates to cover the cost of this increased 
burden, Maine will no longer be an affordable place for people to visit and vacation.   
I began offering medical benefits to my year round employees last year, which 
increased my total payroll costs by 10%. I'm the first owner of this property to offer 
medical benefits to employees and I'm very happy to be able to do it.  This FMLA 
benefit is NOT something most businesses can afford. Paying people for NOT 
working during the pandemic (when they COULD HAVE BEEN working) created 
disastrous effects that are still being felt, particularly throught the hospitality and 
retail sectors. This FMLA proposal seems to be a continuation and amplification of 
that. Long term care insurance is something workers can purchase if they want to. 
Employers should NOT be mandated to pay for it, or to allow employees extended 
leave when there are so few employees to support the business in the first place. 
PLEASE look at what other states are doing, think about what the reasons may be 
behind that, and try to understand what something like this would do to Maine 
businesses..  You put employers out of business, you create thousands of unemployed 
people, lose tax revenue, etc. etc. You also create a huge barrier for anyone 
considering opening a business in Maine, and any company considering moving their 
business to Maine.  PLEASE do not allow this to happen. 
