Emily Elting
Portland
LD 1964
Today is the first day of my maternity leave - if I weren't anticipating labor any 
moment I would love to be there in person!  
If you've had children, I don't have to explain to you why parental leave is necessary.  
We all know that taking care of a newborn is a demanding full time job for many 
months (and arguably years).  We all know that recovering from birth can be a terrible
ordeal - it was two months before I could manage walking to the end of my street due 
to perineal tearing.  We all know that bearing and raising children is a life changing 
miracle that is a central, powerful experience that connects us all as humans.  
So how can we still be a state that does not have paid family and medical leave?  The 
basic fact is that parents in Maine work and our paychecks matter to our families and 
communities.  I live in Portland so I see the impact that the lack of financial support 
can ultimately have on our community, with families overflowing from shelters and 
living in cars and tents.  The economic argument for this policy is easy - you support 
people when they need it most to prevent dropping into poverty, which ends up 
costing the government and businesses more.  And when you consider that Maine is 
the oldest state in the nation, we really are staring down (and already experiencing) a 
demographic catastrophe if we don't do something about it.  This is an easy 
investment in our state.
Now, I'm about to have my second maternity leave supported by my private employer
and I want to make something clear - parity for all parents and caregivers with the 
types of benefits covered by private employers would be a good start, but it's not 
enough.  When I returned to work last time, I was exclusively breastfeeding, which 
has tremendous benefit to babies and is cheap and reliable compared to formula.  I 
lasted two weeks pumping, even working remotely.  Then a year ago with the high 
cost of childcare and hard work of caring for a toddler with another on the way my 
husband and I decided it was best for him to leave the workforce for a while.  Even 
for us with financial privilege, some of the best benefits available in Maine, and 
grandparents nearby, it's not enough.  Working parents are struggling and the system 
is still built around archaic ideas of gender roles and placing no economic value on 
caregiving.  All caregivers in Maine need help and this should be just the start of that 
if we want thriving families and a growing economy.  Thank you.  
