Gary Friedmann
Bar Harbor
LD 1964
Gary Friedmann
T​​estimony in Support of LD 1964
Joint Committee on Labor & Housing
Public Hearing: May 25, 2023
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Committee,
 
My name is Gary Friedmann and I live in Bar Harbor, where I own an organic 
vegetable farm with my wife and another partner.  We would like to voice our support
for LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to 
Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program.
On our farm, we employ three full-time staff for eight months, with an additional four
to five part-time employees at the height of our season.  As a small business, we truly 
value our employees, but we cannot provide private paid family and medical leave 
benefits because we simply do not have the capital, nor the volume of employees to 
afford a private policy that provides the support that we and our employees need.
Most people, at some point in their lives, will experience a major medical issue or life
event that will require them to take extended time away from their jobs or businesses, 
such as a surgery or the birth of a child.  And many people will experience having to 
provide care to a loved one such as supporting a spouse through cancer treatments or 
providing end-of-life care to an aging parent. Events like these are a part of life but 
without access to paid leave, many people are faced with very difficult choices 
between taking care of themselves or family, and losing their income, job, or 
business.
One of our full-time employees is having a baby this fall. We are really stretching to 
give her six weeks of paid time off, but this essentially means the rest of the crew has 
to cover her responsibilities.  We simply cannot afford to pay her time off and hire 
another person after she leaves to care for her child.
A state paid family and medical leave program will provide small business owners 
and their employees with much-needed flexibility and financial security to deal with 
major life events without putting their livelihoods or businesses in jeopardy.
Please vote to support LD 1964 to establish  a comprehensive paid family and 
medical leave program – Maine’s small business owners and working families need 
stability.  Thank you.
Sincerely,
Gary and Glenon Friedmann, Partners
Rose Avenia, Partner
Bar Harbor Farm
