Hannah  Lord
Portland
LD 1964
Senator Breen, Representative Pierce and Members of the Appropriations and 
Financials Affairs Committee; and Senator Daughtry, Representative Sylvester, and 
Members of the Labor and Housing Committee,
My name is Hannah Lord. I am writing to share my support of LD 1964. I am a 
resident of Portland, a single mother and a small business owner of Peony Doula Co., 
LLC. My business is as a full spectrum doula meaning I support clients through 
pregnancy loss, fertility treatments, pregnancy, birth and postpartum. 
I am also a certified lactation counselor supporting families through exploring all the 
ways to ensure an infant is healthy and fed. Improving breastfeeding/chestfeeding 
rates through policies such as Paid Family Leave should be a public health priority. 
The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Support Breastfeeding states specific steps 
people can take to support parents and babies who are breastfeeding/chestfeeding. 
Action Thirteen is to work toward establishing paid maternity leave for all employed 
mothers. Their reasoning around how unpaid leave is not enough or equitable for all 
Americans, 
Unpaid leave is usually not an option for lower-income mothers, who are 
disproportionately women of color. Therefore, paid leave is necessary to reduce the 
differential effect of employment on breastfeeding among disadvantaged racial, 
ethnic, and economic groups, which in turn would allow disadvantaged populations to
benefit from the health effects of breastfeeding (Surgeon General’s Call to Action).
 I support new parents through some of the most intimate moments of their life. I have
witnessed the benefits of Paid Family Medical Leave for my clients who have access. 
I have also seen the impact on clients who lacked Paid Family Medical Leave. Many 
of them within marginalized communities such as single parents or BIPOC parents. 
According to Andres, single and black mothers are significantly less likely to take the 
unpaid leave they qualify for after having a baby. Single or low-income mothers 
simply may not be able to afford to take the time off. High-income or married 
mothers are more likely to have the ability to access family medical leave by taking 
unpaid time away from work if they are able to benefit from their partner’s income. 
(Andres, 36). In countries where maternity leave is paid, there is a reduction in 
poverty among single parents (Plotka et al., 183). 
Access to Paid Family Medical Leave should be accessible to all Maine families. 
According to Andres, families who have access to Paid Family Leave are shown to 
have infants with higher and healthier birth weights. There is a decrease in premature 
birth and infant mortality for married, highly educated women. There are health 
disparities among infants whose low-income families do not have the benefit of Paid 
Family Medical Leave (Andres, 42). Infants whose families are below the poverty 
line are thirty percent less likely to receive the vaccines needed between ages 19-35 
months (Foster, N). It is a public health issue that parents who need to return to work 
earlier are less likely to be up-to-date with their infant’s immunizations (Andres, 41). 
This may be because infants whose parents return to work sooner than twelve weeks 
are more likely to miss regular medical checkups in the first year of their infant's life 
which can lead to health and developmental problems (Sholar, 91).
 Marginalized communities are at higher risk of Postpartum Mood Disorders. 
According to Postpartum Support International, single mothers are twice as likely to 
experience symptoms of depression, anxiety, and stress compared to married parents. 
On average 31% of Black mothers suffer from postpartum depression and 17-59% of 
Hispanic mothers experience postpartum depressive symptoms. Native American and 
Alaska Native women experience a rate of postpartum mood disorders of 14-29.7% 
while Asian women 4.6%. (Christopher-Holloway, Kristy, et al.). Low-income 
gestational parents are at higher risk for postpartum depression (Newkirk et al., 770). 
According to Chatterji and Markowitz's research on maternal health, returning to 
work later is associated with a five to six percent reduction in depressive symptoms 
(Chatterji and Markowitz, 23). Length of leave that is less than six weeks is 
associated with a higher risk of depression impacting marital issues (Andres, 42). 
Thank you so much for your time. I hope to see Paid Family Medical Leave become
a reality for families in Maine. As you can see the benefits greatly will impact the 
clients I serve. This bill also greatly benefits other single parents such as myself. . 
Works Cited:
Andres, Ellie. Maternity Leave Utilization and Its Relationship to Postpartum 
Maternal and Child Health Outcomes. 2015. George Washington University, Ph.D. 
dissertation. ProQuest Central
Chatterji, Pinka, and Sara Markowitz. "Does the Length of Maternity Leave Affect 
Maternal Health?" Southern Economic Journal, vol. 72, no. 1, 2005, pp. 16-41. 
ProQuest Central, 
www.proquest.com/scholarly-journals/does-length-maternity-leave-affect-maternal/d
ocview/212128368/se-2.
Christopher-Holloway, Kristy, et al. "Perinatal Mood Disorders: Components of 
Care." Postpartum Support International, 8 Dec. 2022, Online. Lecture.
Foster, Niesha. "Addressing Disproportionate Childhood Vaccination." Pfizer, 
www.pfizer.com/news/articles/addressing_disproportionate_childhood_vaccination#:
~:text=An%20article%20published%20in%20Health,ages%2019%20to%2035%20m
onths. Accessed 1 May 2023.
Newkirk, Katie, et al. "Lessons from the Field. Workplace Policies and Perinatal 
Depressive Symptoms among Low-Income Single and Partnered Working Mothers." 
Family Relations, vol. 69, no. 4, 2020, pp. 770-78. ProQuest Central, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/fare.12471.
Plotka, Raquel, and Nancy A. Busch-rossnagel. "Can Single Mothers and Their 
Infants Benefit from Maternity Leaves in the United States?" The International 
Journal of Interdisciplinary Social and Community Studies, vol. 16, no. 1, 2021, pp. 
181-93. ProQuest Central, https://doi.org/10.18848/2324-7576/CGP/v16i01/181-193.
Sholar, Megan Anne. Getting Paid While Taking Time: The Women's Movement and 
the Development of Paid Family Leave Policies in the United States. Philadelphia, 
Temple UP, 2016.
"The Surgeon General's Call to Action to Support Breastfeeding." National Library of
Medicine, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK52691/#acallto.s28. Accessed 1 May 
2023.
