 James Slotnick  
VP, Government Relations  
 Sun Life U.S. 
110 T hames Street  
Portland , ME 04101  
Scrab  
 
 
 
May 25, 2023  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta , ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family 
and Medical Leave Benefits Program  
 
On behalf of Sun Life  and our 500 employees who live in Maine, we respectfully submit this statement 
regarding  the Committee’s hearing on LD 1964.  
 
With Governor Walz scheduled to si gn le gislation  in M innesota this  afternoon, ther e are now  12 states 
and the District  of Col umbia with statutory  Paid Family and Medical Leave ( “PFML ”) programs. While 
these 1 3 pro grams have common ele ments, they are  uniquely designed to meet the particular need s of 
each state ’s workf orce. The New Engla nd region is a good example of the differences that can exist in 
PFML  programs, with  Connecticut , Massac husetts , and Rhode Island all running  comprehensive 
programs  that have significant differences in the number of week s of leave , the income rep lacement 
scales, and payroll tax components.  
 
Sun Life has a un ique perspec tive on PFML, be ing both a  large employer in Maine and  a leading 
employee benefits insurer . As an emplo yer, we offer a comp rehensive PFML ben efit to all our 
employees across  the country, regardless of where they live or work . As an employee benefits insurer, i n 
states with PFML requirements , we partner with  employer s to offer  “private plan s,” allowing an  
employer to provide PFML  benefits  to the ir employees that either meet or exceed the statut ory 
requirem ents. 
 
We view the  Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program  (“the 
Commission ”) as having delivered on its mandate . The Commission had open dialogue  with both 
advocates  and the business  committee  while also consider ing lessons learned from other state programs. 
We found it noteworthy that the Commission endorsed a n umber  of best practices from other state 
PFML programs, incl uding the inclusion of private plans.  For those  Maine businesses already offering 
PFML type bene fits, this private pl an option will reduce t heir administrative  compliance burdens.  
 
In our experience, t he most successful statutory PFML program s are d esigned through collaboration  
among  advocates, the business committee, employee benefit insurers, and elected officials.  The 
Commission has followed that mo del, and this work is  reflected in their proposal.  
 
We view today ’s hearing as a key step  in the legislative process, but not as the end of the road. We 
support  creating a PFML program  for Maine , and look forward to continued di scuss ions with all 
interested parties.  
 
 
Thank  you, 
 
 
James Slotnick  
VP, Government Relations  
  
 

