Testimony of Jason P. Clay  
In opposition to LD 1964, “An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop 
a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program ”  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing.  
May 2 5, 2023  
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder,  and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing. My name is Jason Clay, and I am the CEO of Governor’s Restaurants and serve on 
the Board of Directors of the Bangor Region Chamber of Commerce. I am testifying before  you today in 
opposition LD1964, “An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid 
Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program .”  
I’m in opposition to t he way this bill is written, but I am not in opp osition to the concept of paid leave  
and supporting our workforce in general . I’ve worked hard over the last few years in my own business to 
support our workforce. Specifically,  I’ve implemented programs such as a 401k retire ment plan  and 
short -term  disability insurance program for our team members , along with p roviding constant wage 
increase s and flexible schedules as I st rive to create more value for employees in their work place. Th ese 
programs are not cheap, but in today ’s workplace it  is necessary to retain our long -term  employees and  
attract the best  applicant s. There are some specific reason s why I’m concerned about this bill which I will 
outline, alo ng with some potential solutions.  
First , this program adds a nother burdensome  cost to businesses.  Representative  Scott Landr y (D-
Farmington)  was quoted in the Bangor Daily News on 5/23/ 23 about t his program: “It’s going to be an 
expensive pro ject. I ’m just worried about small businesses. ” And I would agree with Rep. Landry. The cost 
of th is program does not exist in a vac uum.  Just in this legislative session, I ’ve submitted testimony about 
LD 1190 concerning restrictive scheduling that would add potential cost s to businesses and  have testi fied 
in person about LD 1214 concerning PFAS which would tweak a n existing law set to potentially have 
huge costs for businesses in many sectors regarding  testing products for PFAS or using potentially more 
expen sive components that do not contain forever chemicals  (Which everyone agrees 
reducing /eliminating PFAS  is a good thing .) LD 1964 propos es a payroll tax not to exceed 1% with half of 
that borne  by the employer. To put this into some p erspective, last year my b usiness paid just under 4% 
of revenue to payroll taxes. In a good year, profits ma y be 2% of reven ue. Adding more cost  only hastens 
the tipping point where business es wil l become unprofitable  and cease doing business in Maine or at all.  
Currently for this bill there is no Fiscal Estimate according to the same Bangor Daily News article, but 
costs are projected to be 400 million do llars at least. If this cost i s above t his amount, the tax on 
employe rs and employees is bound to be increased above 1%. 
Additionally , while year over year inflation is slowing, we are still facing elevated cost s of doing bu siness 
in Maine. The standard offer of electricity increased signifi cantly again in 2023. The minimum  wage is 
tied to C PI and increas ed 8% in 2023 , pushing all wages higher. This is set to increase annually as you 
know . The cos t of raw materials  and insurance  is not decreasing. We are finally at a point where we are 
starting to receive push  back from guests about high er prices. Being able to pass along increase d costs is 
less possible. Again, a tipping  point where we will begin to see less customers  able to afford to patronize  
our business.  
And while we are in a better place as far as available labor is concerned  than the last few years, There is 
still an “available labor ” crisis. According to Amanda Rector, the state economist in speaking to the 
Bangor Region Cham ber membership on 5/24 /23, current unemploy ment in ma ny counties of the state 
is at 2.0% of the population  or below. We ’re already short handed in many industries. In my industry  the 
amount of reven ue produced correlates  directly with the amount of team members able to work. Simp ly 
put, if we are short -staffed , we must do less bus iness because the other team members are at capacity. It 
will be a huge chal lenge to fill an open position for someone  on leave. Not to menti on if more than one 
employee requests leave at the same time. Our company already offers P aid Time Off in accordance with 
state law, along with vacation  benefits above  and bey ond, and flexible schedules that are not the 
traditional work week.  
 I’m a believer in bringing solutions t o the table when problems are identified. So how can this bill be 
adjusted to work better for everyone? Here would be my suggestions:  
• There are too many variables as far as cost is concerned. We need a fiscal estimate, and a cap on 
costs for fu ture years of the program.  
• Right now,  the language surrounding who qualifies  as a member of a family for someone to take 
family leave is too vague.  It needs to be more specific.   
• Also as written the program provides for 12 weeks of medical leave and 12 weeks of family 
leave , not to ex ceed 16 weeks in total for a n annual period. I would recommend this be limited 
to 12 weeks total . 
• I’m happy to see that there will be a state administrative piece to this  program. Enforced rules 
need to be strict for qualifying  events and  providing notice  for leave for anything other than a 
medical emergency . A Medical emergency should require some documentation  as far as care 
needed.   
Thank you for your time today and the o pportunity to share my thoughts  and concerns. We know that 
there most likely will be a paid leave law enacted, and I implore you to craft  a bill that wor ks for 
everyone. Should you require any further information or would like to discuss it  in more detail, please do 
not hesitate to reach out to me.  
 
Sincerely,  
Jason Clay  
CEO, Governor’s Management Company  
Member, Bangor Region Chamber Board of Directors  
