Jean Ginn Marvin 
81 Nonantum Way Scarborough, Maine 04074 
§§_3f%@§"¥%?%§if§§.i~i €7i“%i”€§;@§.@§Q.§%3. 207 329-1310 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and Members of the 
Labor and Housing Committee 
My name is Jean Ginn Marvin and I reside in Scarborough. I am 
here today to speak in opposition to LD 1964. 
My family owns the Nonantum Resort in Kennebunkport. I have 
been employed there for the past 25 years. We have a year- 
round staff of 20 and a seasonal staff of 200. 
We have a trophy case full of awards in our lobby that includes 
being named to the coveted "Best Places To Work In Maine" for 
the past 7 years in a row. Governor Mills gave us the Governor's 
Award for Tourism Leadership and Growth, The Institute for 
Maine Family Business named us The Business of the Year and 
we have been chosen for literally dozens of others honors. We 
are very serious about our role in the community and the state. 
We are one of the very few hospitality businesses to be fully 
staffed. The reasons for this are many but the bottom line of the 
story is we take care of our employees. 
I want to give you an example from last winter. One of our 
banquet captains was rushed by ambulance to the hospital 
completely unexpectedly. He is a 30 year old man and at the
time had two babies and a crazy dog. His wife (who also works 
at The Nonantum) went to the hospital to be at his side. She 
stayed without hesitation sleeping in a chair in his room for 
days because she knew, without a doubt, The Nonantum Family 
had her back. Each day an army of people showed up to assist. 
We held babies, walked the dog, cleaned the house, kept up 
with the laundry and the shoveling and ﬁlled the fridge with 
food. 
Even after they came back home, we hovered, to make sure 
their needs were taken care of. The diagnosis was Crohn’s andI 
am happy to say it is under control. He came back to work when 
he was ready. He worked short days to start. She came back to 
work when she was ready. She also worked some short days as 
she did not want him home alone and she needed time with 
her children. 
The government did not tell me what to do. I just did the right 
thing. And I am sure you are thinking "well not everyone is like 
you" . And that is certainly true. But the very vast majority of 
employers in Maine ARE like me. They care about their people 
and they take good care of them. They do not need the 
government to set standards for them. 
I would also say the very vast majority of employees are great 
people. They do their best everyday and it is due to their efforts 
that Maine is known as Vacationland. Without them, we have 
no hospitality industry. That is certainly one of the reasons the 
employers take such great care of their employees.
It seems to me to be a huge overreach of government to tell 
great employers how to take care of their own. lnstead of 
telling most of our employers how to do their job, why not set 
up a system that allows the very few who do not do the right 
thing to be assisted by government. A pool of money could be 
set aside to support the employees in need who work at a place 
that cannot or won't take care of their team. My guess is nearly 
all of them cannot afford to do it or they would. Just as there 
are a few bad apples on the employer side, there are also a few 
bad apples on the employee side. But lets not legislate for the 
few. Lets create laws that support folks who do the right thing, 
not the wrong thing. 
It would certainly be far cheaper and easier to only be 
concerned with the very few in need instead of putting together 
a set of rules that penalize people who are doing the correct 
thing. 
l am in no way suggesting that families do not deserve paid 
leave in time of crisis or change. Of course they do. I am the 
mother of 3 and the grandmother of 6. My youngest child was 
born while I was a seated Legislator. I did not miss a single 
Legislative Day meaning that my daughter was born Saturday 
night December 31 and l was in my seat in time for quorum call 
on the ﬂoor of the Maine House Wednesday morning January 4. 
That certainly is not the way a maternity leave should go but at 
the time we did not seem to know any better. We know better 
now and we should do better.
I think we need to go back to the drawing board with this 
proposal and see what the best way to make it work for 
everyone would be. As there are only 11 other states with this 
type of law on the books, we will not have a lot of data to work 
with, but we will have enough to rework this in to a win/win for 
us all. 
Why not create a law we can all be proud of? Let's make Maine 
a place that is known for business and government that works 
together to create opportunity for us all? I strongly urge you to 
vote no on this bill. 
Thank you for your attention and l would be happy to take any 
questions.
