 
 
Written Testimony of Jena Jones  on Behalf of  
The Maine Council on Aging  
To Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
 
In Favor of LD 1964 – An Act to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family 
and Medical Leave Benefits Program  
  
Testimony Provided on May 25, 20 23 
 
 
 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder  and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing :  
 
My name is Jena Jones,  and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at  the Maine Council on 
Aging (MCOA).  The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of more than 1 35 
organizations, businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we 
can all live he althy, engaged,  and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home 
and in community settings. I am writing in support of LD 1964.  
 
The benefits and supports offered in a  Paid Family & Medical  Leave  program are  good for  
working family caregi vers who provide care to older family members , for older people, and for 
direct care and support professionals who often earn low wages and have no paid time off to 
handle  family emergencies.  It enables  everyone who is working, including older adults, to take 
care of themselves and their families  without the stress and worry of losing wages or a job .   
 
Caring for a loved one can be challenging, particularly when you’re working full -time.  A family 
caregiver may need to take time off from work to take a parent to a medical appointment or to 
stay at home wh en a homecare worker isn’t available that day.  The same caregiver may have to 
take several weeks off if a loved one falls and has a serious injury that requires in -home rehab 
and care.  From a public policy standpoint, we want family members to step up an d provide this 
informal care, but we never want that to be at a cost to their job.   
 
This is especially true as the informal family caregiver burden is not equally shared . Women are 
almost 3  times more likely to be impacted by family caregiving obligation s than men.  A recent 
Maine report finds that  3 in every 5 five caregivers are women , and that 38% of caregivers 
experience a negative financial impact because of the caregiving .1  Specifically, if a family 
caregiver is forced to leave the workforce, she no longer pays into social security nor a 
retirement savings account.  She’s likely to be challenged to re -enter the workforce, and may not 
be able to have the same earnings  over he r lifetime  if she was absent for several years.  
 
1 2021. Snow, Gattine, MacKinnon. The Economic Security of Older Women in Maine.  

Ultimately, this impacts the financial security of women later in life, as they earn less social 
security and have fewer retirement benefits.   
 
Supporting family caregivers is one of our top priorities and with good reason. Informal family  
caregivers are the backbone of our long -term supports and services system – without them, our 
system  of caring for older adults would collapse. It’s estimated that Maine would have to spend  
$2.8 billion annu ally to provide the same level of care. The care informal caregivers provide 
reduces needed home care  hours, keeps people healthy and out of hospitals , and delays entry into 
assisted living and nursing home  care. This remarkable collective contribution is fueled by our 
shared value that we take care of our own.  
 
We want to encourage family members to take responsibility for caring for older relatives who 
can no longer live independently. We also want to make sure that Maine’s working caregivers 
remain activ e in our shrinking workforce. Workers need to know that they can take the time they 
need to support a loved one with a serious health condition  without jeopardizing their jobs or 
plunging themselves into financial insecurity . 
 
We also  support LD 1 964 because our professional caregiver workforce is woefully insufficient 
to meet the current demand for care.  Thousands of older people who are entitled to care through 
state and federally funded programs are not getting care because of this  workforce shortage.  We 
cannot afford for these workers to leave the workforce because they cannot get paid time off to 
care for themselves or their family members .  Paid family and medical leave can help these 
critical workers stay in the workforce , providing essential care to those who need it.   
 
While we fully support this bill, we urge an amendment.  As mentioned above, we have a severe 
and pervasive direct care worker shortage in Maine causing  tens of thousands of older people, 
people with disabiliti es, including intellectual disabilities, and people with behavioral health 
challenges go without care and support every single day.  The workforce shortage is partially due 
to the undervaluing of this workforce over many decades.  We live in a market -drive n economy. 
When government pays less than market rates for services, this puts businesses that rely on 
govern ment contracts at a competitive disadvantage. Currently, care providers are serving all of 
the people they can with the funding being provided.  If this bill passes and MaineCare rates are 
not increased to compensate providers for the employer premium they will have to pay, they will 
have to reduce pay to workers, and the workforce will continue to shrink,  not grow.  
 
We urge an amendment to amend Sec. 3.  22 MRS § 7402(2) to require that, as of  July 1, 2025, 
the reimbursement rate must also include an amount necessary to reimburse the provider for 50 
percent of the total premium contribution as required in the Paid Family and Medical Leave 
Program.   Without this language, much of the good this bill attempt s to do will cause actual harm 
to an entire sector of providers.  
 
With the amendments we suggest, w e urge you to vote in favor of LD 1 964.  Thank you.  
 
