NOTE: To use this template, go to ‘File’, choose ‘Make a copy’, and then 
rename your new, personal copy. Fill it out, and delete everything 
highlighted in yellow.  
 
Testimony In Support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the 
Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program 
 
Jane Doe (Name) 
Anytown, Maine (Town, State) 
May 25, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing,  
 
My name is XXXXXX and I live in XXXXX. I am testifying in support of paid family and medical 
leave for Maine.  
 
Heart (what we feel)  Share your personal connection or story related to the issue. 
 
Head (what we think) Share a connection to the broader issue, trends, or facts (be short - you 
don’t need to do research!  
 
Hands (what we do) Directly connect your personal story to the policy. What would be different 
for you and others if this law passed?  
 
 
I hope you will support LD 1964. Thank you for listening, I’m happy to answer any questions.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Your Name Here 
 
 
Jill Barkley Roy
South Portland 
LD 1964
Testimony In Support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the
Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program
Jill Barkley Roy
South Portland, Maine 
May 25, 2023 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
My name is Jill Barkley Roy and I live in South Portland. I am testifying in support of
paid family and medical leave for Maine. 
On a Wednesday in October in 2021, my wife came home for lunch and casually 
asked “what would happen if we got ‘the call’ today?” And I replied, “I think we 
could say ‘yes’”. Later that night, I’d pick up the phone to a caseworker from the 
Department of Health and Human Services on the other line, asking if we were ready 
for our first placement. An hour later, Amy and I said yes. The next morning, we were
first time foster moms to a newborn. 
For me, because of my employer’s paid family leave policy, I called my boss after we
said yes that night almost two years ago. I didn’t think twice about what she would 
say or how my colleagues would adjust to this sudden life change for me and my 
family. As a foster parent, I was included in our fully paid twelve week leave policy 
and knew that would come with a tremendous amount of flexibility as a new working 
mom. 
As it turns out, I needed that time off to care for a newborn who remained 
hospitalized for the first two weeks we were her guardians - and I’ve needed that 
flexibility to be able to juggle parenting and all the additional appointments foster 
care can bring! However, I know that a lot of my fellow foster parents have neither 
the paid time off or flexible and supportive work environment I do. At best, this 
creates additional challenges for them to truly meet the needs of the child or children 
in their care - at worst, it can prevent them from agreeing to welcome a child or 
children into their homes in the first place. 
The number of foster parents in Maine is growing – according to the Casey 
Foundation, there are almost 800 more kids in Maine’s foster care system now than 
there were in 2017, bringing the total number of children in foster care to over 2,300. 
In a state where there are not enough foster homes available to meet the need, we 
must do what we can to support foster parents so that these kids can have the best care
possible. 
We have a unique opportunity to bring foster parents a long-lasting gift: a strong Paid 
Family and Medical Leave (PFML) program. 
PFML guarantees time for employed foster parents to bond with a foster child who 
was placed in the past year or when beginning a formal kinship care arrangement – 
when the child is placed with a family relative. 
This time is crucial in helping foster kids develop and maintain positive beliefs about 
themselves, which serve as protective factors later in life. All of us want kids to be 
and feel safe, cared for, and loved. The foster care system can help to accomplish this 
for many children, by providing a safe haven while biological parents work toward 
reunification or by providing permanency through adoption when deemed necessary. 
Any parent welcoming a new child into their home should be able to solely focus on 
that child and have time to fully adjust to such a huge transition. Paid family and 
medical leave gives Maine people the time, flexibility and security to manage life's 
biggest events without jeopardizing our families' financial stability, employment, or 
health insurance. It allows foster families like mine to keep saying yes. 
I hope you will support LD 1964. 
Sincerely, 
Jill Barkley Roy

