John White
Greene
LD 1964
John White
Greene, Maine
May 25, 2023
Testimony In Support of LD 1964, 
An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid 
Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing,
My name is John White and I live in Greene. I am writing in support of LD 1964 
which seeks to
implement the recommendations of the commission to develop a Paid Family and 
Medical Leave benefits program. 
Too many Mainers must make the difficult decision of how to provide care for a 
loved
one when they are working without the benefit of paid time off. 
I know from first hand experience how difficult the situation is for families who have 
to navigate the end of life decisions that have to be made. Especially so when the only
option they may have is to  provide whatever care they can give and lose their job.
When my father was suffering from terminal cancer, the only available caregiver he 
had was my mother. Although they had both worked all their lives, and raised four 
children, they weren’t able to afford in-home nursing care for him. The pain and 
stress that my mom went through during that time was heartbreaking. For the last 
couple of months of his life, as his condition and pain worsened, she had to leave him 
alone during the day. She had no options - she couldn’t stay home to be with him. To 
do so would have cost her her job and her own livelihood. The guilt she felt for doing 
it was just painful to witness.
Although my parents have since passed on there are, I’m sure, countless other 
families in Maine that are going through similarly difficult circumstances and making 
similarly difficult decisions every day. 
As you ponder this bill and debate its merits as well as its costs, I urge you to keep in 
mind the people whose lives are most affected by the personal and financial security 
the protections this bill would provide. These people already find themselves in 
extremely difficult and emotionally wrenching situations -  the loss of their job 
shouldn’t have to be the dominating factor in their decisions about how to provide 
care for a loved one.
I urge you to pass LD 1964. 
Thank you for your time.
